
NOTE INDENTURE
made as of February 15, 2007
Between
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
as issuer
and
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY OF CANADA
as trustee
Relating to the issuance of
11.5% SECURED NOTES
Due February 16, 2012
cmmw PROSPECTUS DEC 06\Z358V12


TABLE OF CWTENTS
1.1 1
1.2 Meaning of “outstanding” for Certain Purposes  14
1.3 Interpretation Not Affected by Headings  14
1.4 Extended  15
1.5 Day No! a Business Day 15
1.6 Currency 15
1.7 Other  15
1.9 Invalidity of  15
1.10 Applicable  15
2.1 Designation and Issuance of Notes  16
2.2 Description of the  16
2.3 Form of Notes  16
2.4 Notes to Rank Pari Passu  17
2.5 Book Entry Only  17
2.6 Signatures on  18
2.7  19
2.8 Concerning Interest  19
2.9 Issue of Substitutional Notes  20
2.10 Option of Holder as to Place of  21
2.11 Record ofPayments  21
2.12 Surrender for Cancellation 21
2.13 Right to Receive  21
SECTION 3 REGISTRATION, TRANSFER, EXCHANGE AND
3.1  21
32 Transfer 22
3.3 Restrictions on Transfer of Global Notes  22
3.4 Transferee Entitled to Registration..,....................,........,..,,........... 23
3.5 Closing of Register; Recording of Certain Transfers 23
3.6 Exchange of Notes  24
3.7 Ownership and Entitlement to  24
3.8 Evidence of  24
3.9 No Notice 0125
3.10 Charges for Transfer and  25
3.11 Restrictions on Transfer of Notes Under US. Securities
SECTION 4 ISSUE AND DELIVERY OF NOTES  28
4.1 Issuance of Notes  28
4.2 No Notes to be Issued During  28
SECTION 5 REDEMPTION AND PURCHASE OF NOTES  28
CMDQQSSOZWOP PROSPECTUSle WSSEV I?


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
5.1  28
5.2 Redemption on Change of  29
5.3 Notice to Trustee and Partial Redemption ofNotes  29
5.4 Notice of  29
5.5 Notes Due on Redemption Date 30
5.6 Purchase of 30
5.7 Cancellation of Notes  31
SECTION 6 CHANGE OF CONTROL PURCHASES 31
6.1 Change of Control  31
6.2 Change of Control Notice 31
6.3 Purchase  32
6.4 Procedures for Exercising Change of Control Purchase.............. 33
6.5 Consummation of Purchase  33
6.6 Withdrawal ofPurchase Notice  33
6.7 Notiﬁcation by Trustee 34
6.8 Deposit of Change of Control Purchase Price  34
6.9 Notes Purchased in Part 34
6.10 Covenant to Comply with Securities  34
SECTION 7 WITHHOLDING  34
SECTION 8 PREPAYMENT  35
8.1 Cash  35
8.2 Cumulative  35
SECTION 9 COVENANTS OF THE CORPORATION 35
9.1 General  35
9.2 Restrictive Covenants of the Corporation in respect of
Mercator Holdings and Mineral  37
9.3 Positive Covenants of the Corporation in respect of
Mercator Holdings and Mineral  38
9.4 Maintenance of Ofﬁces or Agencies 38
9.5 Money for Payments to Be Held in Trust 39
9.6 Trustee’s Remuneration and  40
9.7 Not to Extend Time for Payment of  40
9.8 Examination and Audit  41
9.9 No Change of Domicile  41
9.10 Trustee May Perform Covenants  42
9.11 Certiﬁcates Relating to Compliance and  42
9.12 Financial  42
SECTION 10 DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES
10.1 Events of Default  42
CMDQQSSOZXPOF PROSPECTUS WC ()6\2353V12


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)

Page
10.2 Notice ovaent ofDefault  44
10.3 Acceleration
10.4 Waiver of Event  44
10.5 Enforcement by the  45
10.6 Suits by Noteholders  46
10.7 Application 01'47
10.8 Distribution of Proceeds 48
10.9 Remedies Cumulative 48
10.10 Judgment Against the 48
10.11 Immunity of Shareholders, Directors and Ofﬁcers 
SECTION 11 CANCELLATION, DISCHARGE AND 49
11.1 Cancellation and  49
11.2 Payment of Amounts Due on  49
11.3 Repayment of Unclaimed  49
11.4 
11.5 
SECTION 12 MEETINGS OF  52
12.1 Right to Convene Meetings  52
12.2 Notices of Meetings  52
12.3 Chairman 52
12.4 Quorum 52
12.5 Power to  53
12.6 Show of  53
12.7  53
12.9 Regulations  54
12.10 Corporation and Trustee May Be RepreSented  54

12.11 Powers Exercisable by Noteholders by Extraordinary
Resolution 54
12.12 Meaning of Ordinary  56
12.13 Meaning of Extraordinary Resolution  57
12.14 Powers
12.15 
12.16 Instrumentsin 
12.17 Binding Eﬁ'ect of  58
12.18 
13.] Notice to the  58
13.2 Notice to  59
13.3 Notice 39 tile Trustee  59

CMDYZOKSOZWOP PROSPECTUS DEC DﬁESSSVl 2


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
13.4 When Publication Not  59
13.5 Waiver  59
SECTION 14 CONCERNING THE 
14.1 Corporate Trustee Required 
14.2 Certain Duties and Responsibilities of Trustee 
14.3 No Conﬂict of Interest  60
14.4 Conditions Precedent to Trustee’s Obligation to  61
14.5 Resignation and Removal; Appointment of 61
14.6 Acceptance of Appointment by Successor  63
14.7 Trustee May Deal in Notes  63
14.8 No Person Dealing with Trustee Need Inquire.m....i............,....... 63
14.9 Investment of Money Held by  63
14.10 Trustee Not Required to Give  64
14.11 Trustee Not Required to Possess Notes 64
14.12 Evidence of Compliance  64
14.13 Form ovaidence  64
14.14 Certain Rights of 65
14.15 Merger, Conversion, Consolidation or Succession to
14.16 Action by Trustee to Protect Interests  66
14.17 Protection 0166
14.13 Trustee Not Liable in Respect of Depository..,............,................. 68
14.19 Global  69
14.20 Trustee Appointed Attorney  69
14.21 Acceptance of  69
14.22 No Liability for Certain Deposited  69
14.23 Third Party Interests  70
14.24 Trustee Not Bound to  70
14.25 Privacy Laws 70
15.1 Corporation’s Security  70
15.2 Registration of the  71
15.3 After Acquired Property and Further  71
15.4 Partial
SECTION 16 SUPPLEMENTAL INDENTURES 
16.1 Supplementallndentures
16.2 Effect ofSupplemental  72
16.3 Execution of Supplemental Indentures 72
SECTION 17 EVIDENCE OF RIGHTS OF  73
17.1 Evidence of Rights of Noteholders.....................................,............ 73
CMD\2985OZ\POP PROSPSZ'TUS DEC MVSSSVIZ


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
SECTION 18 EXECUHDN ANDFORMAL  73
18.1 
18.2 Formal Date 73
cumymmv mospscmswcamzsssm


NOTE INDENTURE

THIS INDENTURE is made as of February 15, 2007,
BETWEEN :

MERCATOR MINERALS LIMITED

a corporation existing under the laws of British Columbia

(the “Corporation”)

and

COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY OF CANADA

a mist company existing under the laws of Canada,

(the “Trustee”)

RECITALS

A. The Corporation is authorized and wishes to create and issue Notes in the moner
provided in this lndenmre (as hereinafter deﬁned).

B. All necessary resolutions of the Directors have been duly passed and other
proceedings taken and conditions complied with to make this Indenture valid and
binding on the Corporation.

. C The foregoing recitals are made as representations and statements of fact by the
Corporation and not by the Trustee.
NOW THEREFORE THIS NOTE INDENTURE WITNESSES and it is hereby _
covenanted, agreed and declared as follows.

SECTION 1 INTERPRETATION

1.1 Deﬁnitions
In this lndenture and in the Notes, unless there is something in the subject matter

or context inconsistent therewith, the following expressions have the following meanings:
“Affiliate” has the meaning given thereto in the Securities Act
“Afﬁliate Transaction” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 91(1)
“Agents” means Jennings Capital Inc, Laurentian Bank Securities Inc, TD
Securities Inc, and Acumen Capital Finance Partners Ltd,

“Applicable Law" means. at any time, with respect to any Person, property,
transaction, event or other matter. as applicable, alt laws, rules. statutes,
earnest-mm? Psosmacms Decoevzssvtz


2
regulations, meaties, orders, judgments and decrees, and all ofﬁcial requests,
dmctives, rules, guidelines, orders, policies. practices and other requirements of
any Governmental Authority relating or applicable at such time to such Person,
property, transaction, event or other matter, and also includes any interpretation
thereof by any Person having jurisdiction over it or charged with its
administration or interpretation.
“Assignment of Debt Agreement” means the Notice and Direction (in the form
attached in Schedule “A") provided by the Corporation to Mineral Park and
assigning to the Trustee (i) the net proceeds of the offering of the Notes under this
lndenture and (ii) the loan agreement dated February 15, 2007 between the
Corporation and Mineral Park (in the form attached in Schedule F);
“Assignment of Rights Agreement" means the Assignment of Rights agreement
(in the form attached in Schedule “C”) pursuant to which the Corporation has
agreed to assign rights under the Unanimous Shareholder Agreement of Mercator
Holdings dated February 15, 2007 to the Trustee upon title to the common shares
in the capital of Mercator Holdings transferring to the Trustee under the
enforcement provisions of this Indenture;
“Authorized Investment” means a short term, interest-bearing or discount debt
obligation assigned a rating not lower than R-l (mid) by Dominion Bond Rating
Service Limited (or equivalent rating by its successor) or an equivalent rating by
Standard and Poor‘s Corporation (or its successor).
“BEO Participants“ means institutions that participate directly or indirectly in
the Depository’s book entry registration system for Notes.
“Board” means the board of directors of the Corporation.
“Bonds” means together the Aquifer Protection Bond and the Land Reclamation
Bond of the Corporation. being interest-bearing bonds required for land
reclamation and environmental protection by US regulatory authorities.
“Book Entry Only Notes" means Notes that are to be held only by or on behalf
of the Depository.
"Business Day“ means each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday
which is not a day when banking institutions in Vancouver. British Columbia are
authorized or obligated by law or regulation to Close.
“Calculation Date" has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 2.8.
“Capital Lease" means, with respect to a Person. a lease or other arrangement in
respect of real or personal property that is required to be classiﬁed and accounted
for as a capital lease on a balance sheet of the Person in accordance with GAAP.
cmounsom PROSPECTUS DEC octanth


3

“Capital LeaSe Obligation" means, with respect to a Person, the obligation of the
Person to pay rent or other amounts under a Capital Lease.
“CDS” means the Canadian Depository for Securities Limited and its successors
“Certiﬁed Resolution" means a copy of a resolution certiﬁed by a senior ofﬁcer
of the Corporation to have been duly passed by the Directors and to be in full
force and effect on the date of such certiﬁcation.
“Change of Control" means a Corporation Change of Control or a Project
Change of Control.
"Change of Control Notice“ has the meaning ascribed to such term in
Section 6.2.
“Change of Control Purchase Date“ means the date specified in a Purchase
Notice as the date on which the purchase of Notes pursuant to a Change of
Control will be completed.
“Change of Control Purchase Price” has the meaning ascribed to such term in
Section 6.].
“Closing Date“ means February 15, 2007 or such other date as agreed to between
the Corporation and the Agents.
“Contingent Liabilities" means with respect to a Person, any agreement.
undertaking or arrangement by which the Person guarantees, endorses or
otherwise becomes or is contingently liable upon (by direct or indirect agreement,
contingent or other, to provide funds for payment, to supply funds to, or otherwise
to invest in, a debtor, or otherwise to assure a creditor against loss) the obligation,
debt or other liability of any other Person (other than by endorsements of
instruments in the course of collection), or guarantees the payment of dividends or
other distributions upon the shares of any Person. The amount of any contingent
liability will, subject to any limitation contained therein, be deemed to be the
outstanding principal amount (or maximum principal amount, if larger) of the
obligation, debt or other liability to which the contingent liability is related.
"Corporate Trust Oﬂice" means either of the principal trust ofﬁces of the
Trustee at which, at any particular time, its corporate trust business relative to this
lndenmre is administered. At the date hereof, the Corporate Trust Offices of the
Trustee are located at 510 Bunard Street, 3“1 Floor, Vancouver, BC. V6C 389
and at 100 University Avenue, Toronto, ON. MS} 2Y1.
“Corporation” means Mercator Minerals Ltd. and its successors and assigns.
"Corporation Change of Control” means the occurrence of any of the following
events:

CMDDOBSDQWOP PROSPETUS DEC UGYJ358VIZ


4
(a) there is a report ﬁled with any securities commission or securities
regrlatory authority in Canada, disclosing that any offeror (as the term
“offeror” is defined in Section 92(1) of the Securities Act for the purpose
of Section 111 of the Securities Act, or any successor provision to either
of the foregoing), other than the Corporation, any Subsidiary of the
Corporation or any employee beneﬁt plan of either the Corporation or any
Subsidiary of the Corporation, has acquired beneﬁcial ownership (within
the meaning of the Securities Act) of, or the power to exercise control or
direction over, any voting or equity shares of the Corporation, that
together with the offeror‘s securities (as the term “offemr’s securities“ is
defined in Section 92(1) of the Securities Act or any successor provision
thereto in relation to the voting or equity shares of the Corporation and for
greater certainty, excludes any securities exercisable or convertible into
Voting Shares which have not been exercised or converted,
notwithstanding the provisions of Section 95 of the Securities Act) would
constitute Voting Shares of the Corporation representing more than 50%
of the total voting power attached to all Voting Shares of the Corporation
then outstanding; or
(b) there is consummated any amalgamation, consolidation, statutory
arrangement (involving a business combination) or merger of the
' Corporation (1) in which the Corporation is not the continuing or
' surviving corporation or (2) pursuant to which any Voting Shares of the
Corporation would be reclassiﬁed, changed or converted into or
exchanged for cash. Securities or other property, other than (in each case)
an amalgamation. consolidation, statutory arrangement or merger of the
Corporation in which the holders of the Voting Shares of the Corporation
immediately prior to the amalgamation, consolidation, statutory
arrangement or merger have, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the
Voting Shares of the continuing or surviving corporation inunediately
after such transaction.
“Corporation Counsel" means, at any time, legal counsel retained by the
Corporation, and accepmble to the Trustee, acting reasonably.
“Corporation’s Auditors" means, at any time, a firm of charmed accountants
duly appointed as auditors of the Corporation.
“Debt Account” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 112.
“deemed year” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 28.
“Defeasauce Option“ has the meaning ascribed to that term in Section 115.
“Deferred Purchase Price Obligation" means. with respect to a Person, an
obligation issued, incurred or assumed by the Person in connection with the
momentum? mosescrus DEC osmssvrz


5

acquisition by the Person of an asset in respect of the deferred purchase price of

the asset.

“Depository” means CD5 or such other Person as is designated in writing by the

Corporation to act as depository in respect of the Notes.

“Directors” means the directors of the Corporation or, whenever duly empowered

by a resolution of the directors of the Corporation in accordance with Applicable

Law, a committee of the directors of the Corporation, and reference to action by

the Directors means action by the directors of the Corporation or action by any

such committee.

“EBITDA” means for any period and determined on a consolidated basis. the

eamings of the Corporation before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization

for such period as derived from the Corporation's consolidated ﬁnancial
statements for such period.

“Environmental Laws" means all federal, provincial, state. municipal, county,

local and other laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, by—laws, rules, regulations,

policies, guidelines, certiﬁcates, approvals, permits, consents, directions,
standards. judgments, orders and other authorizations, as well as common law,
civil and other jurisprudence or authority, in each case domestic or foreign,
having the force of law at any time relating in whole or in part to any

Environmental Matters and any permit, order, directions, certiﬁcate, approval,

consent, registration. licence or other authorization of any kind held or required to

be held in connection with any Environmental Matters.

“Environmental Matters" means:

(a) condition or substance, heat, energy, sound, vibration, radiation or odour
that may affect any component of the earth and its surrounding
atmosphere or affect human health or any plant, animal or other living
organism; and

(b) any waste, toxic substance, contaminant or dangerous good or the deposit,
release or discharge of any thereof into any component of the earth and its
surrounding atmosphere.

“Event of Default" has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 10.1.

“Existing Secured Equipment Debt” means for the purposes of this lndemure,

the existing secured equipment debt, details of which are as set forth in Schedule

1.

“Extraordinary Resolution” has the meaning ascribed to such term in

Section l2,13.

monomer)? PROSPECTUS DEC amassvn


6

“Financial Instrument Obligations” means, with respect to any Person,

obligations arising under:

(a) inwrest rate swap agreements, forward rate agreements, ﬂoor, cap orcollar
agreements, futures or options, insurance or other similar agreements or
arrangements, or any combination thereof, entered into or guaranteed by
the Person where the subject matter thereof is interest rates or the price,
value or amount payable thereunder is dependent or based upon interest
rates or ﬂuctuations in interest rates in effect from time to time (but
excluding conventional ﬂoating rate indebtedness):

(b) currency swap agreements, cross-currency agreements, forward
agreements, ﬂoor. cap or collar agreements, futures or options, insurance
or other similar agreements or arrangements, or any combination thereof,
entered into or guaranteed by the Person where the subject matter thereof
is currency exchange rates or the price, value or amount payable
thereunder is dependent or based upon currency exchange rates or
ﬂuctuations in currency exchange rates in effect from time to time; and

(c) any agreement for the making or taking of any commodity (including ooal,
natural gas. oil and electricity), swap agreement. floor, cap or collar

- agreement or commodity future or option or other similar agreement or
arrangement. or any combination thereof, entered into or guaranteed by
the Person where the subject matter thereof is any commodity or the price,
value or amount payable thereunder is dependent or based upon the price
or ﬂuctuations in the price of any commodity;

or any other similar transaction, including any option to enter into any of the

foregoing, or any combination of the foregoing, in each case to the extent of the

net amount due or accruing due by the Person under the obligations determined
by marking the obligations to market in accordance with their terms.

“Free Cash Balance” means, at a particular time, the cash and cash equivalents

of the Corporation and its subsidiaries determined on a consolidated basis and in

accordance with GAAP as of the most recently ended ﬁnancial quarter of the

Corporation, and for greater certainty, the following shall be included in cash

equivalents for this purpose (i) any evidence of indebtedness with a maturity of

180 days or less. (ii) certiﬁcates of deposit or acceptances with a maturity of 180

days or less. (iii) commercial paper with a maturity date of 180 day or less issued

by a corporation that is not an Afﬁliate of the Corporation, (iv) any money market
deposit accounts, and (v) any repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase
agreements.

“GAAP’” means, as at any date of determination, accounting principles generally

accepted as at such date in the jurisdiction in which the applicable Persons are

reported (which as at the date of this lndenture is Canada for the Corporation),
cMmsczxroP mospmos tree 0&5th


7

"General Security Agreement" means the general security agreement in the

form attached as Schedule “D”.

“Global Note” means a Note representing all or a portion of the aggregate

principal amount of the Notes issued in the name of the Depository in the form of

Schedule 2 hereto.

“Governmental Authority” means, when used with respect to any Person, any

government, parliament. legislature, regulatory authority, agency, tribunal.

department, commission, board. instrumentality, court, arbitration board or
arbitrator or other law, regilation or mlevmaking entity having or purporting to
have jurisdiction on behalf of. or pursuant to the laws of, Canada, the United

States or any country in which such Person is incorporated, continued,

amalgamated, merged or otherwise created or established or in which such Person

has an undertaking, contractual obligation. carries on business or holds property,
or any province, territory, state. municipality, district or political subdivision of
any such country or of any such province, territory or state of such country.

“Indebtedness” means, with respect to a Person, without duplication:

(a) all obligations of the Person for borrowed money, including obligations
with respect to bankers’ acceptances and contingent reimbursement
obligations relating to letters of credit and other ﬁnancial instruments;

(b) all Financial Instrument Obligations of the Person:

to) all Deferred Purchase Price Obligations of the Person;

(d) all Capital Lease Obligations and Purchase Money Obligations of the
Person; and

(e) all Contingent Liabilities of the Person with respect to obligations of
another Person if such obligations are of the type referred to in paragraphs
(a) to (d).

“Indenture Documents” means this Indenmre, the Security Documents, the

Notes and any ancillary documents executed by the Corporation Mercator

Holdings or Mineral Park in connection therewith.

“Interest Payment Date" means a date on which interest is due and payable in

accordance with the terms of the Notes.

“Lien” mums any mortgage, charge, security interest. pledge, lien (statutory or

otherwise) hypothec. tax lien, statutory lien, trust or deemed trust, adverse claim,

construction lien. materialsman‘s lien or charge or encumbrance of any kind
whatsoever.
mneme msrscms nccoeizsssvm


8

“Maturity Date" means, with respect to a Note, the date on which the principal
of such Note becomes due and payable as therein or herein provided, whether at
the Stated Maturity thereof or by declaration of acceleration, call for redemption
or otherwise.
“Mercator Holdings” means Mercator Mineral Park Holdings Ltd. a direct
wholly owned subsidiary of the Corporation incorporated under the laws of
British Columbia
“Mineral Park" means Mineral Park, Inc, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Mercator Holdings, incorporated under the laws of Delaware, which holds a
100% interest in the Mineral Park Project
“Mineral Park Acquisition Agreement" means the amended and restated
agreement dated February 18, 2003 between the Corporation, Equatorial Mining
North America. Inc and Mineral Park as amended by agreements dated
March 31, 2003. May 9, 2003. May 30, 2003 and June 18, 2003.
“Mineral Park Project” means the Mineral Park copper mine near Kingman,
Arizona.
“Note Indebtedness" means all present and future debts, liabilities and
obligations of the Corporation to the Noteholders under and in connection with
this Indenture and the Notes, including all principal money owing on the Notes,
the Premium. if any, interest (including interest on overdue principal, Premium. if
any and interest) and all fees paid and other money from time to time owing
pursuant to the terms of this Indentute and on the Notes.
“Noteholder’” or “Holder” means, at a particular time, a Person entered in the
Register as a holder of one or more Notes outstanding at such time.
“Noteliolders’ Request” means an instrument signed in one or more counterparts
by Noteholders holding not less than 25% of the aggregate principal amount of
the outstanding Notes requesting or directing the Trustee to take or refrain from
taking the action or proceeding speciﬁed therein
“Notes” means the secured notes of the Corporation issued or to be issued
pursuant to this Indenture.
“NPI” means the unsecured net profits interest in the Mineral Park Project of 5%
per quarter on cumulative gross revenues less cumulative cash operating
expenses, payable quarterly, to Equatorial Mining North America, Inc pursuant to
the Mineral Park Acquisition Agreement to a maximum aggregate amount of
U.S.$2,753,000.

cmmgssozwor PROSPECTUS oucosxzsssv i:


9

“Obligations” means, without duplication, with respect to a Petsm all items

which, in accordance with GAAP, would be included as liabilities on the liability

side of the balance sheet of the Person and all Contingent Liabilities of the

Person.

“Officer’s Certiﬁcate" means a certiﬁcate of the Corporation signed by one

ofﬁcer of the Corporation in his or her capacity as such ofﬁcer and not in his or

her personal capacity.

“Ordinary Resolution)” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 12.12.

“Paying Agent" means a Person authorized by the Corporation to pay the

principal amount, Premium if any, or interest payable in respect of any Notes on

behalf of the Corporation, and may include the Trustee.

“Permitted Afﬁliate Transaction” has the meaning ascribed to such term in

Section 9.10).

“Permitted Encumbranoes" means:

(a) any Purchase Money Mortgage or Capital Lease of Mineral Park to secure
Indebtedness to a maximum principal amount of U.S.$35.000,000 in the
aggregate. including encumbrances in respect of the Ex'mting Secured
Equipment Debt;

(b) any Security Interest or deposit under workers’ compensation, social
security or similar legislation or in connection with bids, tenders, leases,
contracts or expropriation proceedings or to secure public or statutory
obligations, surety and appeal bonds or costs of litigation where required
bylaw:

(c) any Security Interest or privilege imposed by law, such as builders’,
mechanics‘, materialman’s lien, carriers’, warehousemcn’s and landlords‘
liens and privileges; or any Security Interest or privilege arising out of
judgments or awards with respect to which, at the time an appeal or
proceedings for review is being prosecuted and with respect to which it
has secured a slay of execution pending such appeal or proceedings for
review; or any Security Interest for taxes, assessments or governmental
charges or levies not at the time due and delinquent or the validity of
which is being contested at the time in good faith; or any undetermined or
inchoate Security interest or privilege incidental to current operations that
has not been ﬁled pursuant to law against Mineral Park or that relates to
obligations not due or delinquent: or the deposit of cash or securities in
connection with any Security Interest or privilege referred to in this
paragraph (c):

(d) any right reserved to or vested in any municipality or governmentai or
other public authority by ﬁre terms of any lease, licence, franchise, grant

mummy mosemwsosc osumvrz


10
or permit held or acquired by Mineral Park, or by any statutory provision,
to terminate the lease, licence, franchise, grant or permit or to purchase
assets used in commotion therewith or to require armual or other periodic
payments as amndilion of the continuance thereof;

(e) any Security Interest or right of distress reserved in or exercisable under
any lease for rent to which Mineral Park is a party and for compliance
with the terms of the lease;

(i) any Security Interest created or assumd by Mineral Park or a Subsidiary
in favour of a public utility or any municipality or governmental or Omar
public authority when required by the utility, municipality or other
authority in connection with the operations of Mineral Park;

(g) any Security Interest cream! in relation to the Bonds;

(in) any reservations, limitations, provisos and conditions expressed in original
grams from any Governmental Authority; and

(i) any minor encumbrance, such as easements, ﬁghtsof—way, servimdes or
other similar rights in land granted to or reserved by other Persons,
rights-of—way for sewers, electric lincs‘ telegraph and telephone lines, oil
and manual gas pipelines and other similar purposes, or zoning or mixer
restrictions applicable to Mineral Park’s use of real property, that do not in
the aggregate materially detract from the value of the property or

I I I materially impairyits gase in the operation of the business of Mineral Park ,

“Permitted Indebtedness” means:

(a) Note Indebtedness;

(b) obligations in respect of the Bonds, performance and surely bonds and
completion guarantees provided by Mineral Park in the ordinary worse of
business;

(c) Purchase Money Obligations and Capital Lease Obligations of Mmeral
Park, including the Existing Secured Equipmni: Debt, to a maximum
principal mom: of U.Sr$35,009,000 in the aggregate;

(d) In the case of Mineral Park, advances from the Corporation in respect of
expenditures for tile copper and molybdenum expansion of the Mineral
Park Project in an amount not or exceed {1536.060900;

(e) Indebtedness in respect of the NPI; and

(f) Obligations or mounts owed to (rode creditors, suppliers and service
pmvitiers and accruals in relation thereto in the ordinary course of

Gammon? masrecms mac omssxm


ll

business, in each case due and payable or outstanding for less than one

Year;
“Person” means an individual, corporation, body corporate, limiwd partnership,
general partnership, joint stock company, association, joint venture, association,
company, trust, bank, fund, Governmental Authority or other entity or
organization, whether or not recognized as a legal entity.
“Preferred Shares" means shares in the capital of a corporation. which rank
prior, as to the payment of dividends or as to the distribution of assets upon any
voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding~up of the corporation,
to shares of any other class in the capital of the corporation
“Premium” means, with respect to a Note at a particular time, the excess, if any,
of the then applicable Redemption Price of such Note over the principal amount
of such Note
“Privacy Laws” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 14.21
“Project Change of Control" means the occurrence of any transaction as a result
of which the Corporation ceases to beneﬁcially own, directly or indirectly, at least
a majority interest in the Mineral Park Project
“Purchase Money Mortgage" means, with respect to a Person, any Security
Interest created or assumed by the Person to secure a Purchase Money Obligation
provided that such Security interest is limited to the asset ﬁnanced by such
Purchase Money Obligation and is created or assumed not later than three months
after such Purchase Money Obligation is issued, incurred or assumed.
“Purchase Money Obligation“ means, with respect to a Person, indebtedness of
the Person issued, incurred or assumed to ﬁnance all or part of the cost of
acquiring any asset for the Person, other than shares, bonds and other Securities,
or constructing, installing or improving any real property or ﬁxtures of the Person,
provided that the indebtedness is issued, incurred or assumed within 12 months
after such acquisition, construction, installation or improvement, and includes any
extension, renewal or refunding of any such indebtedness so long as the principal
amount thereof outstanding on the date of such extension, renewal or refunding is
not increased.
“Purchase Notice" shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 6.3i
“Record Date“ means the date for determining the Holders of Notes entitlel to
receive payment of interest on an Interest Payment Date, which date shall be the
tenth Business Day prior to such Interest Payment Date or such other date as shall
be speciﬁed in a Certiﬁed Resolution delivered to the Trustee.
“Redemption Date” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 52%

CMWQKSDMP PRUSPECFUSDECDeVSSSVlZ


12
“Redemption Price” means, in respect of a Note. the amount. excluding interest,
payable on the Redemption Date fixed for such Note.
“Redemption Price Calculation Dave” has the meaning ascribed to such term in
Section 54.
“Register” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 3.1.
“Registrar” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 11‘
"Regulation 8" means Regulation 5 promulgated under the US. Securities Act.
"Rule 144" mans Rule 144 promulgated under the US. Securities Act.
"Rule 144A" means Rule 144A promulgated under the US. Securities Act.
"Rule 903" means Rule 903 promulgated under the US. Securities Act,
"Rule 904" means Rule 904 promulgated under the US Securities Act,
“Secured Assets” means all of the pmpcny, assets and undertakings of the
Corpmalion now owned or hemafter acquired by the Carporation, including,
without limitation, the shares of Mercator Holdings and debt of Minimal Park held
by the Corporation, '

I _ I “Securities? means ystocyks. shares. units, instalment receipts, voting, trust
certificates, bonds, notes, other evidences of indebtedness, or other documents or
maul-[Lents commonly known as securities or any certiﬁcates of interest, shares
or panicipazions in temporary or interim certiﬁcates for, receipts for, guarantees
of. or wmants, options or rights to subscribe for, pumhase or acquim any of the
foregoing.

“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of British Columbia.
‘Security Documents" means the security documents including the Share Pledge
Agreement, the General Security Agreement, the Assignmem of Debt Agreement,
and the Assignment of Rights Agreement gaming security in favour of the
Trustee for the beneﬁt (if the Noteholders delivered pursuant t0 Section 15 of this
Indentme, draft forms of which are set out in Schedule 5 hereto;
“Security Interest" means any security interest. assignment by way of semriiy,
Wage, charge (whetlwr fixed or flaming), hypothec, pledge, lien or other
encumbrance an or interest in property or assets that secunes the payment of
Obligations.
“Share Pledge Agreement” means the share pledge agreement in the form
azmched as Scheéuje “E”;

mummy mosmusm imam/12


13

“Stated Maturity" means the date ﬁxed and speciﬁed in a Note as the date on
which the principal of such Note is due and payable.
“Subsidiary” has the meaning given thereto in the Securities Act.
“Supplemental Indenture" means an indenture supplemental to this Indenture
pursuant to which, among other things, the provisions of this Indenture may be
amended.
“TSX” means the Toronto Stock Exchange;
“Trustee” means the Person named as the “Trustee” in this Indenuue, until a
successor of such Person shall have become such pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this Indenture‘ and thereafter “Trustee” shall refer instead to such
successor Trustee.
“Trustee Counsel” means, at any time, legal counsel retained by the Trustee,
which may not be counsel to the Corporation.
“Unanimous Shareholder Agreement" means the Declaration of the
Shareholder dated February 15. 2007 (in the form attached in Schedule ‘13")
executed by the Comoration as sole shareholder of Mercator Holdings whereby
the Corporation assigned unto itself the rights, power and duties of the directors of
Mercator Holdings to the extent permitted under the British Columbia Business
Corporations Act
“United States" means United States as deﬁned in Rule 902(1) under Regulation
S.
"US. Note" means a Note issued to U.S. Purchasers in the form of Schedule 3
hereto bearing the US Private Placement Legend.
“U.S. Person" means a U.S. person as deﬁned in Rule 902(0) under Regulation S.
“US. Private Placement Legend" means the legend set forth in Section 3.110)),
which is required to be placed on all U.S. Notes issued under this Indenture.
“U.S. Purchasers" means any purchaser of Notes that is (a) a “US. person" as
defined in Regulation S under United States federal securities laws. (b) purchased
Notes on behalf, or for the benefit or account, of any “U.S. Person" or any person
in the United States, (c) any person that receives or received an offer of the
securities while in the United States, (d) any person that is in the United States at
the time the subscriber‘s buy order was made or executed or delivered the U.S.
Subscription Agreement.
 Securities Act" means the Securities Act of 1933‘ as amended

CMMSOQWOP mosvscrus net: osmssv :2


14

“us. Subscription Agreement” means the subscription agmemem between the

Comoraiion and any US. Purchaser under which such U.Sl Purchaser purchased

Notes

“Voting Shares" means shares in the capital of a corporation having voting

power under ordinary circumstances to vote in the election of directors of the

corporation
1.2 Meaning of “outstanding” for Certain Purposes

Every Note certiﬁed and delivered by the Trustee hencunder shall be deemed to be
outstanding until it is cancelled or delivered to the Trustee for cancellation or money for the
payment thereof has been set aside pmsuant to‘Secn‘on 11, provided that:

(a) if a new Note has boon issued in substitution for a Note that has been mutilated,
lost, stolen or destroyed, only the new Note shall be counted for the purpose of
devennining the aggregate principal amount of Notes outstanding;

([3) Notes that have been paiﬁaily redeﬁned or purchased shall be deemed to be
outstanding only to the extent of the unredeemed or unmanned pan of the
principal amount thereof; and

(c) for the puxpose of any provision of this Indenmre entitling Holdeis of outstandng

; Notes to vote, sign consents, requisitions or other instruments or take any other
action undor this lndenture or to constitute a quorum at any meeting of
_Notoholders, Notes [owned]  or indirealy by the (imputation of any I
V ' Affiliate of the Coxpozation shall be disregarded, provided that:

(i) for the purpose of determining Whether the Trustee shall be protected in
acting md relying on any such vote. consent. requisition or other
instmmem or action or on xhe Notebolders present or represented at any
meeting of Nomholders constituting a quorum, only the Notes which the
Trustee knows are so owned shall be so disregarded: and

(ii) Notes so owned that have been pledged in good faith other than to the -
Corporation or an Afﬁliate of the Corporation shall not be disregarded if
the pledgee shall establish to the satisfaction of the Trustee the pledgee’s
righz to vote, Sign mnsenis, requisitions or other instrumems or take such
other actions free from this control of the Corporation or any Afﬁliate of
the Cmporation.

1.3 Interpretation Not Aﬁ'ccted by Headings

The division of this lndennma into Sections and clauses, the provision of a table of
contents and the insertion of headings are for convenience of reference only and shall not affect
the construction or interpretation some:
cmwmmpmmsmc osmst


15
1.4 Extended Meanings
In this lndenture, unless otherwise expressly provided herein or unless the context
otherwise requires, words importing the singular number include the plural and vice versa; words
importing gender include the masculine, feminine and neuter genders; references to
“Indenture”. “this Indenture”. “hereto”, “herein”, “hereof”, “hereby”, “hereunder” and
similar expressions refer to this Indenture, and not to any particular Section, clause or other
portion hereof, and include all Schedules and amendments hereto, modifications or restatemcuts
hereof, and any and every Supplemental Indenture; and the expressions “Section”, “clause” and
“Schedule” followed by a number, letter, or combination of numbers and letters refer to the
speciﬁed Section or clause of or Schedule to this Indenture.
1.5 Day No! a Business Day
If any day on which an amount is to be determined or an action is to be taken
hereunder at a particular location is not a Business Day at such location, then such amount shall
be determined or such action shall be taken at or before the requisite time on the next succeeding
day that is a Business Day at such location.
1.6 Currency
Except as otherwise provided herein, all references in this Indenture to “Cdn,
dollars” or "Cdn.$" are to lawful money of Canada. All references in this Indenture to “U.S.$"
or “$” are to lawful money of the United States of America.
1.7 Other Currencies
For the purpose of making any computation under this lndenture. any currency
other than U.S,$ shall be convened into U.S.$ at the Bank of Canada noon rate of exchange on
the date on which such computation is to be made.
1.8 Statutes
Each reference in this Indenture to a statute is deemed to be a reference to such
statute as amended, revenaeted or replaced from time to time.
1.9 Invalidity of Provisions
Each provision in this Indenture or in a Note is distinct and severable and a
declaration of invalidity or unenforceability of any such provision by a coun of competent
jurisdiction shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other provision hereof or thereof,
1.10 Applicable Law
This lndenture and the Notes shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the Province of British Columbia and the laws of Canada applicable in the
Province of British Columbia and shail be treated in ail respects as British Columbia contracts.
WWW? PROSPECTUS Decomsszzvn


16
SECTION 2 THE NOTES
2.1 Designation and Issuance of Notes

The Notes shall be designated as the “11.5% Secured Notes due February 16,
2012", shall be issued on the Closing Date in U.S.$l.000 principal amount denominations or
integral multiples thereof. and shall bear interest at 115% per annum, accruing from the Closing
Date, payable semi‘annually in arrears, in equal instalments, on June 30 and December 31 of
each year, with the first payment being made on June 30, 2007‘

2.2 Description of the Notes

The aggregate principal amount of Notes that may be issued under this Indenture
is limited to U.S.$ 120,000. The Notes shall be direct secured obligations of the Corporation
dated February 15, 2007 (being their date of issue) and will become due and payable, together
with all accmed interest and unpaid interest thereon, on February 16, 2012. The Notes shall be
secured by a ﬁrst charge on the Secured Assets. subject only to Permitted Encumbrances.

2.3 Form of Notes

The Notes (other than the US. Notes) shall he in the form attached hereto as
Schedule 2.

The Notes may be engraved, lithographed, printed, mimeographed or typewritten,
or partly in one form and partly in another, as the Corporation may determine. provided that if a
Note is issued in mimeographed or typewritten form, the Corporation, on the demand of the
Holder thereof, shall make available within a reasonable time after such demand, without
expense to such Holder, an engraved, lithographed or printed Note in exchange therefor.

The US Notes shall be in the form attached hereto as Schedule 3 Each U.S. Note
shall be in fully registered form shall be issued to the beneﬁcial owners of such Notes or their
nominees; provided that in no event shall the US. Note be exchanged by the Corporation or the
Trustee for Global Notes unless (a) such exchange or transfer is effected pursuant to an effective
registration statement under the us. Securities Act; (b) such exchange or transfer is (i) effected
in accordance with Rule 904 of Regulation S and in compliance with applicable local laws and
regulations and (ii) the restrictions on transfer contained herein and the US. Private Placement
Legend are not required in order to maintain compliance with the US Securities Act; (e) such
exchange or transfer is (i) being effected pursuant to and in accordance with Rule 144 under the
US. Securities Act and in compliance with the transfer restrictions contained herein and any
applicable securities laws. (ii) the restrictions on transfer contained in this Indenture and the US.
Private Placement Legend are not required in order to maintain compliance with die US.
Securities Act, and (iii) the Registrar receives an opinion of counsel in form reasonany
acceptable to the Registrar to the effect that such exchange or transfer is in compliance with the
US. Securities Act; or ((3) such exchange or transfer is (i) being effected pursuant to and in
compliance with an exemption from the registration requirements of the US Securities Act,
other than Rule £44 or Rule 904, and in compliance with the traosfer restrictions contained
herein and any applicable securities laws, (ii) the restrictions on transfer contained in the
Indenture and the US. Private Placement Legend are not required in order to maintain
cmmassonmp msrncmsoec massavxz


17
compliance with the US. Securities Act and (iii) the Registrar receives an opinion of counsel in
form reasonably acceptable to the Registrar to the effect that such exchange or transfer is in
compliance with the Us Securities Act and that the restrictions on transfer contained herein and
in the US. Private Placement Legend are no longer required in order to maintain compliance
with the US. Securities Act.

The Corporation in issuing the Notes may use "CUSIP" and "ISIN" numbers (if
then generally in use), and, if so. the Trustee shall use "CUSIP" and “ISIN” numbers in notices
of redemption as a convenience to Holders; provided that any such notice may state that no
representation is made as to the correctness of such numbers either as printed on the Notes or as
contained in any notice of redemption and that reliance may be placed only on the other
identiﬁcation numbers printed on the Notes, and any such redemption shall not be affmted by
any defect in or omission of such numbers The Corporation shall promptly notify the Trustee of
any change in the "CUSIP" or “ISlN'” numbers
2.4 Notes to Rank Peri Pusan

The Notes shall rank pari passu (equally and rateably with each other) and shall
be secured obligations of the Corporation
2.5 Book Entry Only Notes

The Notes (other than Notes issued to or for the account or beneﬁt of a US.
Person or person in the United States) shall be issued as Book Entry Only Notes represented by
one or more Global Notes Each Global Note authenticated in accordance with this lndenture
shall be registered in the name of the Depository designated for such Global Note or a nominee
thereof and delivered to such Depository or a nominee thereof as custodian therefor, and each
such Global Note shall constitute a single Note for all purposes of this Indentute. Beneﬁcial
interests in the Global Note will not be shown on the Register or the records maintained by the
Depository but will be represented through book-entry accounts of EEO Participants on behalf of
the beneﬁcial owners of such Global Note. None of the Corporation, the Trustee and any other
Paying Agent shall have any responsibility or liability for any aspects of the records relating to or
payments made by any Depository or any BEO Panicipant on account of the beneﬁcial interest
in any Global Note Except as provided in this Section 2.5, owners of beneﬁcial interests in any
Global Note shall not be entitled to have Notes registered in their names and shall not receive or
be entitled to receive Notes in deﬁnitive form.

Notwithstanding any other provision in this lndenture, no Global Note may be
exchanged in whole or in part for Notes registered, and no transfer of a Global Note in whole or
in part may be registered. in the name of any Person other than the Depository for such Global
Note or a nominee thereof unless:

(a) the Depository notiﬁes the Corporation that it is unwilling or unable to continue
to act as depository in connection with the Global Note and the Corporation is
unable to locate a qualified successor;

CMD\293502\P0P mosrecrus DEC osmssvn


13
(b) the Corporation determines that the Depository is no longer willing, able or
qualiﬁed to discharge properly its responsibilities as Holder of the Global Note
and the Corporation is unable to locate a qualiﬁed successor;
(c) the Depository ceases to be a clearing agency or otherwise ceases to be eligible to
be a depository and the Corporation is unable to locate a qualiﬁed successor;
(d) the Corporation determines that the Notes shall no longer be held as Book Entry
Only Notes through the Depository;
(e) the Depository determines to transfer the Global Notes in accordance with
subsection 3.3(d): or
(f) such right is required by Applicable Law. as determined by the Corporation and
the Corporation Counsel;
following which Notes in fully registered form shall be issued to the beneficial owners of such
Notes or their nominees.
Subject to the provisions of this Section 25, any exchange of a Global Note for
Notes which are not Global Notes may be made in whole or in part in accordance with the
provisions of Section 2.9, mutatis mutandis. All such Notes issued in exchange for a Global
Note or any portion thereof shall be registered in such names as the Depository for such Global
Note shall direct and shall be entitled to the same benefits and subject to the same terms and
conditions (except insofar as they relate speciﬁcally to Global Notes) as the Global Note or
portion thereof surrendered upon such exchange.
Every Note authenticated and delivered upon registration of transfer of a Global
Note, or in exchange for or in lieu of a Global Note or any portion thereof, whether pursuant to
this Section 2.5 or otherwise, shall be authenticated and delivered in the form of. and shall be, a
Global Note, unless such Note is registered in the name of a Person other than the Depository for
such Global Note or a nominee thereofl
2.6 Signatures on Notes
All Notes shall be signed (either manually or by facsimile signature) by one of the
following ofﬁcers of the Corporation: the chairman of the Board, the vice—chairman of the Board,
the chief executive officer, the president, a vice-president, the chief financial ofﬁcer and the
corporate secretary. A facsimile signature on any Note shall for all purposes of this lndenture be
deemed to be the signature of the individual whose signature it purports to be and to have been
signed at the time such facsimile signature was reproduced, and each Note so signed shall be
valid and binding upon the Corporation notwithstanding that the individual whose signature
(either manual or facsimile) appears on a Note is not at the date of this Indenture or at the date of
the Note or at the date of the certiﬁcation and delivery thereof an officer of the Corporation.
cmmgssozwop PROSPECTUS DEC osmssvn


19
2.7 Certiﬁcation

No Note issued shall be obligatory or entitle Lite Holder thereof to the benefit
thereof until aceniﬁcate thereon has been signed by or on behalf of the Trustee substantially in
the form set out in the form of Note attached as Schedule 2 or in the case of the US. Notes in the
form of (5.5. Note attached as Schedule 3 or in some other form acceptable to the Trustee. Such
certiﬁcate on any Note shall be conclusive evidence that such Note has been duly issued
hereunder and is a valid obligation of the Corporation.

The certiﬁcate of the Tmstee signed on a Note shall not be construed as a
representation or warranty by the Trustee as to the validity of this Indenune or of such Note or its
issuanm, and the Trustee shall not be liable for the use made of such Note or the W of
issuance thereof. The certiﬁcate of the Trustee signed on any Note shall. however, be a
representation and warranty by the Trustee that such Note has been duly certified by or on behalf
of the Trustee pursuant to the provisions of this Indemure.

2.8 Concerning Interest

Each Note, whether issued originally or in exchmge or in substian for
previously issued Notes, shall bear interest from and including the later of (i) its date of issue;
and (ii) the last Interest Payment Date to which interest shall have been paid or made available
for payment on the outstanding Notes. Interest on the principal amount of each Note shall be
payable semi-annually in arrears in equal instalments on June 30 and December 31 (collectively,
the "Calculation Dates”) of each year and shall be payable, commencing June 30, 2007. on each
Interest Payment Date For greater certainty, the ﬁrst interest payment on the Notes will be

, payableon June 30, 2007 in the amount of US$42.53 per US$1.00!) principal amounted notes
and will represent accrued interest payable from and including February 15, 2007 to but
excluding June 30, 2007. For greater certainty, in calculating interest under this Indenmre or
under a Note for any period, unless otherwise speciﬁcally stated. the ﬁrst day of such period
shall be included and the last day of such period shall be excluded.

Interest shall be computed on the basis of a yearof 365 days or 366 days in a leap
year, as the case may be. For the purposes of this Indenture, whenever interest is computed on
the basis of a year (the “deemed year") which contains fewer days than the actual number of
days in the calendar year of calculation, such rate of interest shall be expressed as a yearly rate
for purposes of die Interest Act (Canada) by multiplying such rate of interest by the actual
number of days in the calendar year of calculation and dividing such product by the number of
days of the deemed year.

Subject to accrual of any interest an unpaid interest from time to time, interest on
each Note shall cease to accrue from the earlier of the Mariuin Date of such Nose and, if such
Note is called for redemption, the Redemption Date ﬁxed for such Note, unless, inverse): case,
upon due presentation and surrender of such Note for payment on or after such Maturity Date or
Redemption Date, as the case may be, such payment is improperly withheld or refused.

Wherever in this lndenrure or a Note there is mention. in any context, of the
payment of interest, such mention is deemed to include the payment of interest on amounts in
cmszsozmp massacres DEC musssvtz


20
default to the extent that, in such context, such interest is, was or would be payable pursuant to
this lndenture or such Note, and express mention of interest on amounts in default in any of the
provisions of this Indentute shall not be wnsmlcd as excluding such inmost in those provisions
of this Indenture in which such express mention is not made.

If the date for payment of any amount of principal, interest or Premium, if any, in
respect of a Note is not a Business Day at the plane of payment, then payment shall be made on
the next Business Day at such place and the Holder of such Note shall not be entitled to any
further interest or other payment in respect of the delay.

The Corporation shall pay the interest due upon the principal amount of a Note
(except interest payable on maturity or redemption of such Note which, at the option of the
Corporation, may be paid only upon presentation of such Note for payment) by forwarding or
causing to be forwarded by same day delivery at least three (3) Business Days prior to the
applicable Interest Payment Date, a cheque for such interest (less any tax required by law to be
deducted or withheld) payable on the applicable interest Payment Date to the Paying Agent to be
sent to the Holder of such Note on the Record Date for such payment at the Holder‘s address
appearing on the Register unless otherwise directed in writing by such Holder or, in the case of
joint Holders. payable to all such joint Holders and addressed to one of them at the last address
appearing in the Register and negotiable at par at each of the places at which interest upon such
Note is payable. The forwarding of such cheque shall satisfy and discharge the liability for the
interest on such Note to the extent of the sum represented thereby (plus the amount of any tax
deducted or withheld) unless such cheque is not paid on presentation at any of the places at

' which such interest is payable. in the event of the non-receipt of such cheque by the applicable
Noteholder or the loss. theft or destruction thereof, the Corporation or the Paying Agent, upon
beingrfumishedr with evidence- of such nonvreeeipt, loss, ﬂasher destruction and indemnity
reasonably satisfactory to it, shall issue or cause to be issued to such Noteholder a replacement
cheque for the amount of such cheques Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Corporation, at its
option, may cause the amount payable in respect of interest to be paid to a Noteholder by wire
transfer to an account maintained by such Noteholder or in any odier manner reasonably
acceptable to the Trustee.

If payment of interest is made by cheque, such cheque shall be forwarded at least
two Business Days prior to the applicable Interest Payment Date, and if payment is made in any
other manner, such payment shall be made in a manner whereby the recipient receives credit for
such payment on the applicable Interest Payment Date, provided the Trustee and the Faying
Agent shall only forward such cheques upon receipt of the full amount of interest being paid in
immediately available funds pmsuant to Section 9.5.

2.9 Issue of Substitutions! Notes

If any Note issued and certiﬁed hereunder becomes mutilated or is lose destroyed
or stolen, the Corporation, in its discretion, may issue, and thereupon the Trust shall certify
and deliver, a replacmem Note of like date and tenor as the one mutilated, lost, destroyed or
stolen in exchange for and in place of and upon cancellation of such mutilated Note or in lieu of
and in substitution for such lost. destroyed or stolen Note. The substituted Note shall he in
substantially the form of Note attached as Schedule 2 to this lndentuae‘ shall be reasonably
CMMZQEW mosmems DEC amassvx z


21

approved by the Trustee and shall be entitled to the beneﬁt hereof and rank equally in accordance
with its terms with all other Notes The applicant for a replacement Note shall bear the cost of
the issue thereof and in case of loss, destruction or theft shall. as a condition precedent to the
issue thereof, furnish to the Corporation and to the Trustee such evidence of ownership and of
the loss, destruction or theft of the Note so lost, destroyed or stolen as shall be satisfactory to
each of the Corporation and the Trustee in their discretion, and such applicant shall also furnish
an indemnity and surety bond, in amount and form satisfactory to each of the Corporation and
the Trustee in their discretion, and shall pay the reasonable charges and expenses of the
Corporation and the Trustee in connection therewith.

2.10 Option of Holder as to Place of Payment

Except as herein otherwise provided, all amounts which at any time become
payable on account of any Note or any interest or Premium, if any, thereon shall be payable at
the option of the Holder at any of the places at which the principal and interest in respect of such
Note are payable.

2.11 Record of Payments

The Trustee shall maintain accounts and records evidencing each payment of
principal of and Premium, if any, and interest on Notes, which accounts and records shall
constitute, in the absence of manifest error, prima facie evidence thereof.

None of the Corporation, the Trustee, any other Registrar and any Paying Agent
shall be liable or responsible to any Person for any aspect of the records related to or payments
made on account of beneficial interests in any Global Note or for maintaining, reviewing, or
supervising any records relating to such beneﬁcial interests.

2.12 Surrender for Cancellation

If the principal amount due upon any Note shall become payable before the Stated
Maturity thereof. the Person presenting such Note for payment shall surrender the same for
cancellation to the Corporate Trust Office and the Corporation shall pay or cause to be paid the
interest accrued and unpaid thereon (computed on a per diem basis if the date fixed for payment
is not an Interest Payment Date).

2.13 Right to Receive Indenture

Each Noteholder is entitled to receive from the Corporation a copy of this
lndenture on written request and upon payment of a reasonable copying charge.

SECTION 3 REGISTRATION, TRANSFER, EXCHANGE AND

OWNERSHIP 0]? NOTES
3.1 Registers

"the Corporation shah cause to be kept at the Corporate Trust Office. or at such
other piace and by such other Person as shall be agreed by the Corporation and the Trustee, a
CMm’QﬁSOZ‘LPOPPROSW DEC osusssvn


22

central register (the “Register”) (the Trustee or other Person maintaining the Register being
hereinafter referred to as the “Registrar”) in which shall be entered the names and last known
addresses of Holders of Notes and the other particulars. as prescribed by law, of the Notes held
by each of them and of all transfers of such Notes. Such registration shall be noted on such
Notes by the Registrar. The Registrar from time to time shali, when requested in writing so to do
by the Corporation or by the Trustee, furnish the Corporation or the Trustee, as the case may be,
with a list of are names and last known addresses of the Holders of Notes entered on the
Register, showing the principal amount and serial numbers of the Notes held by each of them.

The Corporation shall. or shail cause the Registrar to, furnish to the Tmstee, in
writing at least seven Business Days before each Interest Payment Date and at such other times
as the Trustee may request in writing. a list in such form and as of such date as the Trustee may
reasonably require of the names and last known addresses of Noteholders.

The Register shall at all reasonable times and upon prior written request be open
for inspection by the Corporation. the Trustee and any Noteholder.
3.2 Transfer of Notes

A Holder of a Note may at any time and from time to time, subject to Section 3.5,
have sud: Note transferred at the place at which the Register is kept pursuant to the provisions of
Section 3.1.

No transfer of a Note shall be effective as against the Corporation unless:

_ H I I I (a), such transfer is made by the Holder of the Note or the executor, administrator or
other legal representative of, or any attorney for, the Holder, duly agpoinaed by an
instrument in form and execution satisfactory to the Registrar, upon surrender to
the Registrar of the Note and a duly executed form of transfer;

02) such transfer is made in compliance with Applicable Law;
(0) such transfer is made in compliance with requirements as the Registrar may
prescribe;
(d) such transfer has been noted on the Register by the Registrar; and
(e) such transfer is made in compliance with Section 3.3 or 3.11. as applicable
3.3 thrictions on Transfer of Global Notes
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenmre, a Global Note registered in
the name of the Eepository or a nominee of the Depository may not be transferred by the
Depository or such nominee except in the following circumstances:
(a) such Global Note may be transferred by the Depository to a nominee of the
Depository or by a nominee of the Depository w the Depository or to another
momma? mamas necesmssv :2


23
nominee of die Depository or by the Depository or its nominee to a successor
Depository or its nominee;
(15) such Global Note may be transferred at any time after the Depository for such
Global Note has notiﬁed the Corporation or the Corporation determines that the
Depository is unwilling or unable or no longer eligible to continue as Depository
for such Global Note;
(c) such Global Note may be transferred at any time after the Corporation has
determined, in its sole discretion, that the Notes represented by such Global Note
shall no longer be held as Book Entry Only Notes; and
(d) such Global Note may be transferred at any time after the Trustee has determined
that an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing with respect to the Notes
issued in the form of such Global Note, provided that at the time of such transfer
such Event of Default has not been waived in accordance with the provisions of
this Indenturei
3.4 Transfer-cc Entitled to Registration

The registered transferee of a Note shall be entitled, after the appropriate form of
transfer is lodged with the Registrar and upon compliance with all other conditions in that regard
required by this Indenture or by law, to he entered on the Register as the Holder of such Note
free from all equities or rights of setoff or counterclaim between the Corporation and the
transferor or any previous Holder of such Note, except in respect of equities of which the
Corporation is required to take notice by statute or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
3.5 Closing of Register; Recording of Certain Transfers

The Corporation shall not have the power to close the Register.

Neither the Corporation nor the Registrar shall be required to:

(a) effect transfers or exchanges of Notes on any Interest Payment Date or during the
10 preceding Business Days, provided that such transfer restriction shall not affect
the ability of the Noteholders to trade the Notes on the TSX, or

(b) effect transfers or exchanges of Notes:

(i) from the day of any selection by the Trustee of Notes to be redeemed until
the day on which notice of redemption is given pursuant to Section 5.4, or
(ii) that have been selected or called for redemption in whole or in part unless,
upon due presentation thereof for redemption, such Notes are not
redeemed
wousssoemp mosmcms Dec osvissv: z


24
3.6 Exchange of Notes

Subject to Section 3.5, Notes in any authorized form or denomination may be
exchanged upon reasonable notice for Notes in any other authorized form or denomination, any
such exchange to be for an equivalent aggregate principal amount of Notes. carrying the same
rate of interest and having the same Maturity Date other than exchange of U3. Notes for Global
Notes.

Notes may be exchanged at the Corporate Trust Ofﬁce or at such other place or
places as may be speciﬁed in the Notes and at such other place or places as may from time to
time be designated by the Corporation pursuant to Section 9.4. Any Notes tendered for exchange
shall be surrendered to the Trustee. The Corporation shall execute and the Trustee shall certify
all Notes necessary to carry out such exchanges All Notes surrendered for exchange shall be
cancelled.

3.7 Ownership and Entitlement to Payment

The Person in whose name a Note is registered shall be deemed to be the
beneﬁcial owner thereof for all purposes of this lndenture and payment of or on account of the
principal of and Premium, if any, and interest on such Note shall be made only to or upon the
order in writing of such Person. and each such payment shall be a good and sufﬁcient discharge
to the Corporation, the Trustee, any other Registrar and any Paying Agent for the amount so
paid.

If a Note is registered in the name of more than one Person, the principal,
Premium. if any, and interest from time to time payable in respect thereof may be paid to the
order of all such Persons and each such payment shall be a good and sufﬁcient discharge to the
Corporation, the Trustee. any other Registrar and any Paying Agent for the amount so paid.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Indenture, all payments in respect of
Notes represented by a Global Note shall be made to the Depository or its nominee for
subsequent payment by the Depository or its nominee to BBC Participants,

The Holder for the time being of a Note shall be entitled to the principal,
Premium, if any, and interest evidenced by such Note, free from all equities or rights of setoff or
counterclaim between the Corporation and the original or any intennediate Holder thereof except
in respect of equities of which the Corporation is required to take notice by statute or by order of
a court of competent jurisdiction. The receipt by any such Holder of any such principal,
Premium, if any, or interest shall be a good and sufficient discharge to the Corporation, the
Trustee, any other Registrar and any Paying Agent for the amount so paid. and none of the
Corporation. the Trustee. any other Registrar and any Paying Agent shall be bound to inquire
into the title of any such Holden
3.8 Evidence of Ownership

The Corporation and the Trustee may treat the Holder of a Note as the beneficial
owner thereof without actual production of such Note for the purpose of any Notcholders‘
cmxzsusonpor mosrm DEC musssvrz


25
Requesu requisition, direction, consent, instrument or other document to be made, signed or
given by the Holder of such Note.
3.9 No Notice of Trusts
Neither the Corporation nor the Trustee nor any other Registrar nor any Paying
Agent shall be bound to take notice of or see to the perfonnance or observance of any duty owed
to a third Person (whether under a trust, express, implied, resulting or constructive, in respect of
any Note or otherwise) by the beneﬁcial owner or the Holder of a Note or any Person whom the
Corporation or the Trustee treats. as permitted or required by law, as the beneﬁcial owner or the
Holder of such Note, and the Corporation, the Trustee or any other Registrar may transfer any
Note on the direction of the Person so treated or registered as the Holder thereof, whether named
as trustee or otherwise, as though that Person was the beneﬁcial owner of such Note.
3.10 Charges for Transfer and Exchange
For each Note exchanged or transferred, the Trustee or other Registrar, except as
otherwise herein provided, may charge a reasonable amount for its services and in addition may
charge a reasonable amount for each new Note issued (such amounts to be agreed upon by the
Trustee or other Registrar and the Corporation from time to time), and payment of such charges
and reimbursement of the Trustee or other Registrar for any stamp taxes or governmental or
other charges required to be paid shall be made by the Person requesting such exchange or
transfer as a condition precedent thereto.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no charge (except a charge to reimburse the
Trustee or other Registrar for any stamp taxes or governmental or other charges) shall be made to
a Noteholder:
(a) for any exchange or transfer of Notes applied for within a period of 45 days from
the date of the first delivery of Notes;
(19) for any exchange of any Note that has been issued pursuant to Section 2.9: or
(c) for any exchange of any Note resulting from a partial redemption pursuant to
Section 5.3.
3.11 Restrictions on Transfer of Notes Under US. Securities Law
(a) The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the US. Securities Act
or under any United States state securities laws. The US. Notes may be offered.
sold or otherwise transferred only, (i) to the Corporation, (ii) outside the United
States in accordance with Rule 904 of Regulation S under the US. Securities Act
and in compliance with applicable local laws and regulations; (iii) Within the
United States in compliance with the exemption from registration under the US
Securities Act provided by Rule 144 or Rule 144A thereunder, if applicable, and
in compliance with any applicable state securities iaws: or (iv) in a transaction
that does not require registration under the US. Securities Act or any applicable
United States state laws and regulations governing the offer and sale of securities,
cmmsssozwor mospacws DEC oeczsevn


26
and. the undersigned has furnished to the Corporation an opinion of counsel of
recognized standing in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
Corporation and Trustee to such effect.

(b) Each U.S. Note originally issued under an applicable exemption from the
registration requirements of the US Securities Act to a US. Purchaser shall bear
the following legend (the “US. Private Placement Legend”) until such time as
the same is no longer required under applicable requirements of the US.
Securities Act or applicable state securities laws:

THE SECURITIES REPRESENTED HEREBY HAVE NOT

BEEN AND WILL NOT BE REGISTERED UNDER THE

UNITED STATES SECURITIES ACT OF I933, AS AMENDED

(THE “US. SECURITIES ACT”). THESE SECURITIES MAY

BE OFFERED, SOLD, PLEDGED OR OTHERWISE

TRANSFERRED ONLY (A) TO MERCATOR MINERALS LTDI

(THE “COMPANY"), (B) OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES IN

COMPLIANCE WITH RULE 904 OF REGULATION S UNDER

THE US SECURITIES ACT, (C) IN COMPLIANCE WITH

THE EXEMPTION FROM THE REGISTRATION

REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE US. SECURITIES ACT

PROVIDED BY RULE 144 OR RULE 144A THEREUNDER. IF

AVAILABLE, AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE

STATE SECURITIES LAWS, OR (D) IN A TRANSACTION

THAT DOES NOT REQUIRE REGISTRATION UNDER THE

US. SECURITIES ACT OR ANY APPLICABLE STATE

SECURITIES LAWS, PROVIDED THAT, IN THE CASE OF

TRANSFERS PURSUANT TO (C) OR (D) ABOVE. THE

HOLDER HAS. PRIOR TO SUCH TRANSFER, FURNISHED

TO THE COMPANY AN OPINION OF COUNSEL OR OTHER

EVIDENCE OF EXEMPTION, IN EITHER CASE

REASONABLY SATISFACTORY TO THE COMPANY.

DELIVERY OF THIS CERTIFICATE MAY NOT CONSTITUTE

“GOOD DELIVERY“ IN SETTLEMENT OF TRANSACTIONS

ON STOCK EXCHANGES IN CANADA."
provided, that if securities are being sold outside the United States in accordance
with Rule 904 of Regulation S and in compliance with applicable local laws and
regulations, and provided that the Corporation is a “foreign issuer" within the
meaning of Regulation S at the time of sale. the legend my be removed by
providing a declaration to the Trustee to the effect set forth in Schedule 4 hereto
(or as the Corporation may prescribe from time to time) together with such other
documentation that the Corporation and the Trustee may prescribe including, but
not limited to, an opinion of counsel or other evidence of exemption, in either
case reasonably satisfactory to the Corporation and the Trustee to the effect that
the sale of the Notes is being made in compliance with Rule 904 of Regulation S;
and provided further. that if any such securities are being sold within the United

CMWQSSWWOP PROSPECTUS DEE 06\2358VIZ


27
Stem in compliame with the exemption from registration under the US.
Securities Act proviﬁed by Rule 144 (hereunder and in mm wizh
applicable stare laws and regulations, the legend may be removed by delivery to
the Trustee and the Corporaiion of an opinion of counsel, of recogizedszandjng
in form and subslmce satisfactory to the Corporation and Trustee, to the effect
that swab legend is no longer required under applicable requirements of the {3.5.
Securiries Act or state securities laws. If a Note is tendered for transfer-and bears
the legend set forth above and the holder thereof has no: obtained the prior written
consent of the Corporation, the Registrar shall not register such transfer unless the
holder complies with the requirements of this section.
(c) Transfer and Exchange of US. Notes to Beneﬁcial Interests in the Global
Notes. A Holder of a 13.3 Note may exchange such Note for a beneﬁcial interest
in a Global Note or transfer such {3.8. Note to a Person who takes ecliva thereof
in the form of a beneﬁcial interest in a Global Note only if:
(i) such exchange or transfer is effected pursuant to the an effective
' registration statement under the us. Securities Act:
(ii) such exchange or transfer is (i) effected in accordance with Rule
904 of Regulation 8 under the US. Securities A0: and in
compliance with applicable local laws and regulations and (ii) ihe
restrictions on transfer contained herein and the US. Private
Placemem Legend are not required in order to maintain
» compliance with the U.S. Securities Act; or
(iii) such exchange or transfer is (i) being effecred pursuant to and in
accordance with Rule 144 under ﬁre 13.5. Sean‘iﬁes Act and in
compliance with the transfer restrictions contained herein and any
applicable securities lows, (ii) the restrictions on transfer contained
in this lndenture and {he US. Privam Placement Legend are not
required in order to maintain compliance with the Us, Securities
Act, and (iii) ﬂue Registrar receives an opinion of wines! in fem]
reasonably acceptable to the Regisuar m the effect the: such
exchange or transfer is in compliance wirh xhe US. Securities Act;
or
(iv) such exchange or mansfer is (i) being effected pmuam {o arid in
compliance with an exemption from the registration requirements
of the US. Securities Act, other than Rule 144 or Rule 964, and in
comglianm with the transfer restrictions contained 1mm and any
applicable securities laws. (ii) she restrictions on mask: contained
in the Indenmre and {be US. Private 1’le Legend are not
ragaired in order to mainmn oomgliance with the us. Seem-ﬂies
Aer and (iii) the Registrar receives an opinion aim} in {arm
mommy acceptable to the Registrar re the eﬁ'ect that such
exchange or transfer is in compliance with {be US Securities Aer
CMWW mms Dec mam/x2


28
and that the restrictions on transfer contained herein and in the
US. Private Placement Legend are no longer required in order to
maintain compliance with the US. Securities Act.
Upon satisfaction of the conditions of any of the subparagraphs in this Section
3.11(c), the Trustee shall cancel the US. Note and increase or cause to be
increased the aggregate principal amount of the Global Note,
SECTION 4 ISSUE AND DELIVERY OF NOTES
4.] Issuance of Notes
The Corporation may issue, and the Trustee shall certify and deliver to or to the
order of the Corporation. Notes issuable under this lndenture, but only upon receipt by the
Trustee of the following on the Closing Date:
(a) a Certiﬁed Resolution authorizing the issuance and requesting the certiﬁcation
and delivery of a speciﬁed principal amount of the Notes;
03) an Officer‘s Certiﬁcate stating that no default exists in respect of any of the
covenants, agreements or provisions of this lndenture or, if any such default
exists, Specifying the mature thereof and the action. if any, being taken by the
Corporation to remedy such default;
(c) an order of the Corporation for the certification and delivery of such Notes
specifying the principal amount requested to be certiﬁed and delivered; and
(d) an opinion of Corporation Counsel to the effect that all legal requirements in
respect of the proposed issue of such Notes have been satisfied.
4.2 No Notes to be Issued During Default

No Notes shall be certiﬁed and delivered hereunder if. at the time of such
certiﬁcation and delivery. the Corporation, to the knowledge of the Trustee, is in default
hereunder, or would immediately after such issuance be in default hereunder, provided that in
each case the Trustee may certify and deliver Notes notwithstanding such knowledge if the
Trustee shall be satisﬁed. relying on the advice or opinion of Trustee Counsel or other
appropriately qualiﬁed experts that such default is not material and that the Corporation is taking
appropriate action to remedy such default.
SECTION 5 REDEMPTION AND PURCHASE OF NOTES
5.1 General

The Corporation when not in default hereunder. at any time that is three (3) years
after the Closing Date, may at its option redeem the Notes in whole at any time or in part from
time to time, on giving not more than 60 nor less than 30 days’ prior notice to the Holders of the
cmousssozwor PROSPECWS oecosusssvxz


29
Notes, at a redemption price which is equal to U.S.$l,0‘50 per U.S,$1.000 principal of each Note
plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date ﬁxed for redemption.
5.2 Redemption on Change of Control
The Corporation may redeem the Notes, in whole but not in part, for cash in U.S.$
if a Change of Control occurs, pursuant to the conditions set forth in Section 6 of this Indenture.
5.3 Notice to Trustee and Partial Redemption of Notes
If any Notes for the time being outstanding are to be redeemed, the Corporation
shall, at least 15 days and not more than 60 days before the date upon which notice of
redemption is to be given to Holders of such Notes, notify the Trustee in writing of the
Corporation’s intention to redeem Notes and of the aggregate principal amount of Notes to be
redeemed. if less than all of the Notes for the time being outstanding are to be redeemed, the
Notes to be redeemed shall be selected by the Tmstee on a pro rata basis (to the nearest multiple
of 13.351000) in accordance with the principal amount of Notes registered in the name of each
Holder or by such other means as the Trustee may deem equitable and expedient. For this
purpose, the Trustee may make regulations with regard to the warmer in which such Notes may
be so selected, and regulations so made shall be valid and binding upon all Noteholders,
Certiﬁcates representing Notes in denominations in excess of U,S,$l,000 may be selected and
called for redemption in part only (such part being U.S.$l,000 or an integral multiple thereof)
and, unless the context otherwise requires, reference to Notes in this Section 5 shall be deemed to
include any such part of the principal amount of Notes which shall have been so selected and
called for redemption. The Holder of any Note called for redemption in part only. upon
surrender of such Note for payment, shall be entitled to receive, without expense to such Holder.
one or more new Notes for the unredeemed part of the Note so surrendered, and the Trustee shall
certify and deliver such new Note or Notes upon receipt of the Note so surrendered.
5.4 Notice of Redemption
Notice of intention to redeem any Notes shall be given by or on behalf of the
Corporation to the Holders of the Notes which are to be redeemed and to the TSX, not more than
60 days and not less than 30 days prior to the date ﬁxed for redemption (the “Redemption
Date”). in the manner provided in Section 13.2, Every notice of redemption shall specify the
Stated Maturity of the Notes called for redemption, the Redemption Date, the Redemption Price
(or, where applicable only. the date upon which the Redemption Price shall be calculated in
connection with the Notes called for redemption (the “Redemption Price Calculation Date")),
and the place or places of payment. and shall state that all interest thereon shall cease from and
after the Redemption Date. In addition, unless all the outstanding Notes are to be redeemed. the
notice of redemption shall specify
(a) in the case of a notice mailed to a Holder, the distinguishing letters and numbers
of the Notes, if applicable, which are to be redeemed (or of such thereof as are
registered in the name of such Holder);
{h} in the case of a published notice, the distinguishing letters and numbers of the
Notes which are to be redeemed, if applicable, or, if such Notes are selected by
cmnmssmor prosmcws DEC oauassvrz


30

terminal digit or other similar system, such particulars as may be sufficient to

identify the Notes so selected;

(c) in the case of Book Entry Only Notes, that the redemption shall take place in such
manner as may be agreed by the Depository. the Trustee and the Corporation; and
(d) in all cases, the principal amount of each Note to be redeemed or, if any such

Note is to be redeemed in part only, the principal amount of such part.

If a notice of redemption specifies a Redemption Price Calculation Date for any
Notes, the Corporation shall deliver to die Trustee, not later man the ﬁfth Business Day prior to
the Redemption Date for such Notes, an Ofﬁcer‘s Certiﬁcate that speciﬁes the Redemption Price
of such Notes.

5.5 Notes Due on Redemption Date

Upon notice of redemption having been given as specified in Section 54, all the
Notes so called for redemption shall thereupon be and become due and payable at the
Redemption Price and on the Redemption Date specified in such notice, in the same manner and
with the same effect as if such date was the Stated Maturity speciﬁed in such Notes, anything
therein or herein to the contrary notwithstanding, and from and after such Redemption Date, if
the money necessary to redeem such Notes shall have been deposited as provided in Section 11.2
and afﬁdavits or other proof satisfactory to the Trustee as to the publication or mailing of such
notice shall have been lodged with the Trustee, such Notes shall not be considered as outstanding
hereunder and interest upon such Notes shall cease.

If any question shall arise as to whether any notice has been given as required or
any deposit has been made, such question shall be decided by the Trustee, whose decision shall
be ﬁnal and binding upon all parties in interest.

5.6 Purchase of Notes

The Corporation may, at any time when it is not in default hereunder, purchase all
or any of the Notes in the open market (which shall include purchase from or through an
investment dealer or a ﬁrm holding membership on a recognized stock exchange), by tender or
by private contract, at any price, in compliance with any applicable securities regulations and
stock exchange rules All Notes so purchased shall forthwith be delivered to the Trustee and
shall be cancelled by it and. subject to the following paragraph of this Section 56, no Notes shall
be issued in substitution therefor.

if upon an invitation for tenders. more Notes are tendered at the same lowest price
than the Corporation is prepared to accept, the Notes to be purchased by the Corporation shall be
selected by the Trustee, in such manner (which may include selection on a pro rata basis, random
selection by computer or any other method) as the Trustee deems equitable and expedient, from
the Notes tendered by each tendering Noteholder who tendered at such lowest price For this
purpose the Trustee may make. and from time to time amends regulations with respect to the
manner in which Notes may be so selected, and regulations so made shall be valid and binding
upon all Noteholdcrs, notwithstanding the fact that, as a result thereof. one or more of such Notes
CMD’tZWMZW‘OP PROSPECTUS DE£ ObVSSSVIZ


3 1
become subject to purchase in part only. The Holder of a Note of which a part only is puechased,
upon surrender of such Note for payment, shall be entitled to receive, without expense to such
Holder, one or more new Notes for the unpurchased part so surrendered, and the Trustee shall
certify and deliver such new Note or Notes upon receipt of the Note so surrendered,
5.7 Cancellation of Notes

Subject to the provisions of Sections 5.3 and 5.6 as to Notes redeemed or
purchased in part, all Notes redeemed or purchased in whole or in part by the Corporation shall
not be reissued or resold and shall be forthwith delivered to and cancelled by the Trustee. and no
Notes shall be issued in substitution therefor.

SECTION 6 CHANGE OF CONTROL PURCHASES
6.1 Change of Control Purchase

If a Change of Control occurs, the Corporation may redeem the Notes in whole
for cash on giving not more than 60 nor less than 30 days” prior notice to the Holders of the
Notes, at a redemption price which is equal to U.S.$1,050 per U,S,$l,000 principal of each Note
plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date fixed for redemption. In the event that
the Corporation decides to redeem the Notes further to a Change of Control, it shall redeem, and
the Noteholders shall offer to sell, all of the issued and outstanding Notes in accordance with the
procedure set out in section 5 mutatis mutandis.

If the Corporation does not notify the Trustee of its intention to redeem the Notes
in whole within 15 Business Days of the Change of Control. the Corporation shall make an offer
to redeem the Notes for cash at a price (“Change of Control Purchaso Price“) equal to the
principal amount of the Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the Change of
Control Purchase Date in accordance with the procedures set out in this Section 6.

6.2 Change of Control Notice

Within 20 Business Days after the occurrence of a Change of Control:

(a) the Corporation shall deliver a written notice of Change of Control (the “Change
of Control Notice") to the Trustee;

(h) following receipt by the Trustee of the Change of Control Notice, the Trustee
shall mail a copy of the Change of Control Notice to each Holder in accordance
with the provisions of Section 13.2; and

(c) the Corporation shall cause a copy of the Change of Control Notice to be
published in the national edition of The Globe and Mail or other daily newspaper
of national circulation in Canada
The Trustee shall be under no obligation to ascertain the occurrence of a Change

of Control or to give notice with respect thereto other than as provided above upon receipt of the
cmmqssoawor mosmus nocosnssxm


32

Change of Comml Notice. The Tum may conclusively assume, in the absmce of written
notice to the contrary from the Corporation, that no Change of Comml has oecuned.

The Change of Como] Nmiee shall state, among other :hizlgs the date of the
Change of Conml arm, describe briefly the events camitg the Change of Control.
6.3 Purchase Notice

The Change of Control Notice shall be accompanied by a written notice (the
‘Tmchase Malice”) offering to purchase all of the Holder’s Notes at any time prior to the close
of business on the Change of Camel Pamhase Date, which Purchase Notice shall state, among
other things:

(a) the date and time by which the Purchase Notice must be completed and returned

by the Holder if such offer is ﬂammable to the Holder;

()3) the Change of Control Purchase Date;

(c) theChange of Control Purchase Price;

(d) the name and address of the Trustee;

(e) that the Notes must be surrendered to the Trustee at Corporate Trust Ofﬁce to
collect payment;

(1’) that the Change of Control Purchase Price for the Notes as to which a Purchase

» w w r H ' Notioe'has been dulyg‘wenandnm withdrawn, togeﬁnerwiﬂa accrued and’mpaid ' "'
interest thereon, will be paid promptly follom'ng the later of the Change of ’
Control Purchase Date and the time of surrender of the Notes as described in
ngraph (e);

(g) the precedures that the Holder must follcw to exemise rights under Sectian 6 and
a brief descﬁptien of those dghix;

(11) that any Holder delivering 10 the Trustee a signed Purchase Notice shall have the
right to withde that Purchase Miller: at anytime prior to the close of business
on the date that is a: least we Business Days prior to the Change of Control
Purchase Date by delivery of a written malice of withdrawal to the Trustee in
aemniance with Swim 6.6;

(i) the: interest en those Notes in respect of which a Purchase Notice has been given
and not withdrawn shall cease to accrue from and aﬁet the Chmge of Control
thase Date; and

(j) that the Notes shall he purchased on the Change of Control Purchase Date
pursuant to the applicable provisions of this lndenmre.

cmxzessmxmp Pxosmus DEC camazm 2


33
M Procedures for Exercising ﬂange of Control Purchase
A Holder may eXemise its rights specified in Section 6.3 upon delivery to the
Trustee of a signed Purchase Notice at any time prior to the close of business on the Change of
Contra! Purchase Date that includes she following infommim:
(a) the certiﬁcate numbers of the Notes {hid the Holder will deliver to be purchBSed;
and
(b) the principal amount of the Notes the: the Holder will deliver to be purchased,
which amount must be U.S.$l,000 or an integral multiple themsf.
The delivery of such Notes (together with all necessary endorsemenm as set out £11
Section 6.9) m the Trustee prior w, on oa- aﬂer the Change of Control Purchase Date shall he a
condition to the receipt by the Holder of the Change of Control Purchase Price merefor; pmovided
: that such Change of Control Purchase Pﬁce shall be paid only if the Notes so delivew 10 the
1 Trustee coan in all respects to the description thereof set forth in the relaxed Purchase Natioe.
6.5 Consummation of Purehme
Upon receipt by the Trustee of a Purchase Notice, the Holder of the Notes in
respect of which such Purchase Notice was given shall (unless such Purchase Notice is
withdrawn in accordance with Section 6.6) thereafter be entitled to meive solely the Change of
Control Purchase Price. The Change of Conuol Purchase Price shall be paid to such Holder as
, promptly as is reasonably practical in the circumstances following the later of:
  " ' * ' m 'ﬂie Business Day fonm‘v’ing the Change of CoﬁﬁolPurclzaEye Date (pm/idea the " ‘
00nd, Mons in Section 6.4 have been satisﬁed); and
0:) the time of delivery of such Nolas to the Trustee by lhe Holder :1in in the
manner required by Section 6.4.
6.6 Withdrawal of Purchase Notice

A Purchase Notice may be withdrawn at any time prior: to the close of busimess on
the Business Day before the Change of Control Purchase Date, by means of 21 mm notice of
withdrawal delivered by the Holder to the Trustee specifying:

(a) the certiﬁcate number of the News in respect of which such mace of Millde
is being submiited;

(b) the principal amount of the Notes (which shall be (1.5.3130!) at an integral
multiple thereof) with respect to which such notice of withdrawal is being
submitted; and

(c) the principal amount of the Notes, if any, to remain snbjeel m the original
Purchase Malice, Maid: amount must be US$300 or an integral multiple
thereof. ’

mamasme mosm Dec (massv 1 2


34
The Trustee shall promptly return to the respective Holders thereof any Notes
with respect to which a Purchase Notice has been withdrawn in compliance with this Indenture.
6.7 Notiﬁcation by Trustee
The Trustee shall promptly notify the Corporation of the receipt of any Purchase
Notice and of any written notice of withdrawal thereof.
6.8 Deposit of Change of Control Purchase Price
No later than 12 p.m., Vancouver, British Columbia time, on the Business Day
prior to the Change of Control Purchase Date, the Corporation shall deposit with the Trustee by
wire transfer an amount of cash sufficient to pay the aggregate Change of Control Purchase Price
of all the Notes or portions thereof that are to be purchased as of the Change of Control Purchase
Date, together with accrued and unpaid interest thereon.
6.9 Notes Purchased in Part
Any Notes that are to be purchased shall be surrendered to the Trustee at the
Corporate Trust Ofﬁce (with due endorsement by. or a written instrument of transfer in form
satisfactory to the Corporation and the Trustee duly executed by, the Holder thereof or such
Holder’s attorney duly authorized in writing) and the Corporation shall execute and the Trustee
shall certify and deliver to the Holder of such Notes, without service charge, a replacement
certificate representing a Note or Notes, of any authorized denomination as requested by such
Holder in an aggregate principal amount equal to, and in exchange for, the portion of the
principal amount of the Notes so surrendered that is not purchased.
6.10 Covenant to Comply with Securities Laws
In connection with any offer to purchase or purchase of Notes under this Section 6
the Corporation shall comply with all applicable Canadian federal and provincial securities laws,
all applicable US Securities laws. and any requirements of any stock exchange on which the
Notes are then listed. so as to permit the rights and obligations under this Section 6 to be
exercised to the greatest extent practicable in the time and in the manner specified in this Section
6.
SECTION 7 WITHHOLDING TAXES
All payments made by the Corporation with respect to the Notes shall be made
free and clear of and without deduction for or on account of any present or future tax, duty, levy,
impost, assessment, or other govermnentai charge imposed or levied by or on behalf of the
Government of Canada or the United States, as well as any other government or authority.
province, state or territory thereof or by any authority or agency therein or thereof as well as any
other government or authority having power to tax a Noteholder, unless the Corporation is
required to withhold or deduct Taxes by law or by the interpretation or administration thereof if
the Corporation is required by such laws or by the interpretation or administration thereof to
withhold or deduct any amount from any payment with respect to the Notes (including without
limitation, any payments for principal. interest, capitalized interest, Premium, if any,) for or on
cunwssozwor PROSPECTUS oncosuasswz


35

account of any Taxes. the Corporation shall make such withholding or deduction and remit the
full amount deducted or withheld to the relevant authority in accordance with Applicable Law.

The Corporation will furnish to the Holders of the Notes, within 30 days after the
date that the payment of any Taxes is due pursuant to Applicable Law, copies of receipts
evidencing such payment by the Corporation.
SECTION 8 PREPAYMENT OBLIGATIONS
8.1 Cash Sweep

In the event the Corporation's EBlTDA in any ﬁscal quarter beginning after
March 31, 2009 does not exceed interest expenses under the Notes for that ﬁscal quarter, the
Corporation will be obliged to repay to Noteholders the lesser of its Free Cash Balance and 25%
of the then outstanding principal balance of the Notes, such payment to be made within 60 days
of the end of such quarter Notice of such event shall be given by or on behalf of the
Corporation to the Noteholders and to the TSX not more than 45 days (or if the 45“1 day does not
fall on a Business Day, not later than the next following Business Day) of the end of such
quarter
8.2 Cumulative Repayments

The total of all amounts repayable under this Section 8 shall not exceed 25% of
the original total principal of the Notes, and the 25% limit shall apply on a cumulative basis
durinia7 the term of die Notes.
SECTION 9 COVENANTS OF THE CORPORATION
9.1 General Covenants

The Corporation hereby covenants and agrees with the Trustee for the beneﬁt of
the Trustee and the Noteholders as follows:

(a) the Corporation shall duly and punctually pay or cause to be paid to each Holder
of Notes the principal thereof, interest accrued thereon and Premium, if any,
payable thereon on the dates. at the places. in the currency, and in the manner
specified herein or as otherwise provided in such Notes;

(b) subject to the express provisions hereof, so long as any of the Notes are
outstanding, the Corporation shall carry on and conduct or shall cause to be
carried on and conducted its business and the business of Mercator Holdings and
Mineral Park in a reasonably proper and efﬁcient manner and shall keep or cause
to be kept proper books of account and make or cause to be made therein true and
faithful entries of all its dealings and transactions in relation to its business and
the business of Mercator Holdings and Mineral Park1 as the case may be, all in
accordance with GAAP for itself. Mercator Holdings and Mineral Park. and each
of Mercator Holdings and Mineral Park shall continue to be a direct or indirect
wholly—owned subsidiary of the Corporation;

CMD\29K502\POP PROSPECTUS DECWSﬁBVlZ


36

(c) so long as any Notes are outstanding, the Corporation shall furnish to the Trustee
aoopy of the consolidated ﬁnancial statements, whether annual or interim, of the
Corporation and any report of the Corporation‘s Auditors thereon at substantially
the same time as such ﬁnancial statements are filed with securities regulatory
authorities:

(d) subject to the express provisions hereof, so long as any of the Notes are
outstanding, the Corporation shall, and shall cause Mercator Holdings and
Mineral Park to. at all times maintain its respective corporate existence, carry on
and conduct its respective business in a reasonably proper, efﬁcient and
businesslike manner and in accordance with good business practice and diligently
maintain, use and operate its respective properties so as to preserve and protect
the earnings, incomes, rents, issues and proﬁts thereof;

(e) the Corporation shall, and shall cause Mercator Holdings and Mineral Park to,
from time to time pay or cause to be paid all taxes, rates, levies, assessments
(ordinary or extraordinary). government fees or dues lawfully levied, assessed or
imposed upon or in respect of its respective property or any part thereof or upon
its income and proﬁts as and when the same become due and payable and to

‘ withhold and remit any amounts required to be withheld by it from payments due
to others and remit the same m any government or agency thereof, and it shall
exhibit or cause to be exhibited to the Trustee, when requested, the receipts and
vouchers csmblishing such payment and shall duly observe and conform to all
applicable requirements of any Governmental Authority relative to any of the
property or rights of the Corporation and of Mineral Park and all covenants, terms
and conditions upon or under which any such property or rights are held;
provided, however, that the Mineral Park shall have the right to contest in good
faith and diligently by legal proceedings any such taxes, rates, levies,
assessments, government fees or dues, and during such contest, may deliver or
defer payment or discharge thereof;

(0 the Corporation shall use its best efforts to obtain and its commercially reasonable
best effort to continue the listing of the Notes on the TSX;

(g) the Security Documents will constitute valid and, upon registration in the
appropriate registry, perfected charges or security interests upon the applicable
assets of the Corporation free and clear of all Liens except Permitted
Encumbrances;

(h) the Corporation shall not directly or indirectly issue. incun assume or otherwise
become liable for or in respect of any Indebtedness other than Permitted
Indebtedness;

(i) the Corporation shall not create, incur. assume or suffer to exist any Security
Interest. other than Permitted Encumbranoes. on or over any of the Secured
Assets;

cmmsssozwor mosrncrus one uneassvtz


37
(j) the Corporation will not, convey. sell, lease, assign. transfer or otherwise dispose
of any Secured Assets other than for purposes related to the Permitted

Encumbranees or in the ordinary course of business;

(it) the Corporation shall not permit a Subsidiary to issue any Preferred Shares other
than to the Corporation: and

(l) the Corporation shall not, nor permit any Subsidiary to, make any payment to, or
sell, lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of any of its properties or assets to, or
purchase assets from, or enter into or make or amend any transaction, contract.
agreement. understanding. loan, advance or guarantee with, or for the beneﬁt of,
any Afﬁliate of the Corporation, Mineral Park or Mercator Mineral Park Holdings

(each, an “Afﬁliate Transaction") other than an Afﬁliate Transaction (a

“Permitted Afﬁliate Transaction") which is not material to the Corporation on a

consolidated basis.

9.2 Restrictive Covenants of the Corporation in respect of Mercator Holdings
and Mineral Park
The Corporation hereby covenants and agrees with the Trustee for the beneﬁt of the Trustee and
the Noteholders that it will not permit Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park to:
(a) directly or indirectly issue. incur, assume or otherwise become liable for or in
respect of any Indebtedness other than Permitted Indebtedness;
(b) create, incur, assume or suffer to exist any Security Interest, other than Permitted

Encumbrances;

(c) convey, sell, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of arty of its assets except
that:

(i) Mineral Park may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of used or surplus
equipment, vehicles inventory and other assets in the ordinary course of
business: and

I (ii) Mineral Park may sell or discount without mourse accounts receivable
arising in the ordinary course of business in connection with the
compromise or collection thereof:

(d) declare or pay any dividend or make any distribution or payment of any kind (on
or in respect of any shares in the capital of Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park);

(e) issue. purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire for cash or retire for value any
shares in the capital of Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park or any warrants, rights
or options to purchase or acquire shares in the capital of Mercator Holdings or

Mineral Park;

CMD\2985M\POP PROSPECTUS DFXZ MVESSVIZ


38
(f) make any principal payment on, purchase, defease. redeem, prepay, decrease or
otherwise acquire or retire for value, prior to any scheduled final maturity,
scheduled repayment or scheduled sinking fund payment, any Indebtedness of
Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park other than Permitted Indebtedness;
(g) repay any Indebtedness to the Corporation, except Permitted Indebtedness and
such Indebtedness as is used to repay the Note Indebtedness.
except to the extent in the case of subsections (c), (d), (e) and (i), above, that such declaration,
dividend, distribution, payment, purchase, redemption, acquisition, retirement, defeasance,
prepayment or decrease is used by the Corporation to repay or purchase the Note Indebtedness.
9.3 Positive Covenants of the Corporation in respect of Mercator Holdings and
Mineral Park
The Corporation hereby further covenants and agrees with the Trustee for the beneﬁt of the
Trustee and the Noteholders that it will:
(3) advance the net proceeds received by the Corporation from the issuance of the
Notes to Mineral Park;
(b) cause Mineral Park to amend its certificate of incorporation to provide that the
directors of Mineral Park will not issue any equity, approve any share transfer,
incur any Indebtedness, other than Permitted Indebtedness, or approve any
transaction outside the ordinary course of business, without the consent of
Mineral Park’s shareholder, Mercator Holdings;
(c) enter into the Unanimous Shareholder Agreement, as the shareholder of Mercator
Holdings whereby the Corporation will assign unto itself the rights, power and
duties of the directors of Mercator Holdings to the extent permitted under the
British Columbia Business Corporations Act; and
(d) execute and deposit the requisite special resolution to amend the articles of
Mercator Holdings to permit the Corporation to assign unto itself the rights,
power and duties of the directors of Mercator Holdings to the extent permitted
under the British Columbia Business Corporations Act as contemplated by the
Unanimous Shareholder Agreement.
9.4 Maintenance of Offices or Agencies

The Corporation shall maintain, in Vancouver and in Toronto, an ofﬁce or agency
where Notes may be presented or surrendered for payment, where Notes may be surrendered for
registration of transfer or exchange and where notices and demands to or upon the Corporation in
respect of the Notes and this Indenture may be served. The Corporate Trust Ofﬁce shall be such
ofﬁce or agency of the Corporation, unless the Corporation shall designate and maintain some
other office or agency for one or more of such purposes, The Corporation shall give prompt
notice to the Trustee of any change in the location of any such office or agency. if at any time the
Corporation shall fail to maintain any such required ofﬁce or agency or shall fall to furnish the
CMDQQW PROSPECTUS DEC (X3\23$8Vl2


39
Trustee with the address thereof, such presentations, surrenders. notices and demands may be
made or served at the Corporate Trust Ofﬁce, and the Corporation hereby appoints the Trustee as
its agent to receive all such presentations, surrenders, notices and demands.

The Corporation may from time to time designate one or more other ofﬁces or
agencies (in or outside of Vancouver) where the Notes may be presented or surrendered for any
or all such purposes, and may from time to time rescind such designation provided, however, that
no such designation or rescission shall in any manner relieve the Corporation of its obligation to
maintain an ofﬁce or agency in Vancouver for such purposes. The Corporation will give prompt
written notice to the Trustee of any such designation or rescission and any change in the location
of any such office or agency.

9.5 Money for Payments to Be Held in Trust

If the Corporation shall at any time act as its own Paying Agent, it shall. on or
before each due date of the principal and Premium, if any, and interest on any of the Notes,
segregate and hold in trust for the beneﬁt of the Persons entitled thereto a sum sufﬁcient to pay
the principal and Premium. if any, and interest so becoming due until such sums shall be paid to
such Persons or otherwise disposed of as herein provided, and shall promptly notify the Trustee
of its action or failure to so act.

Whenever the Corporation shall have one or more Paying Agents for the Notes, it
shall, no later than 3 Business Days on or before each due date of the principal of, and Premium,
if any, and interest on, any Notes, deposit with a Paying Agent a sum in same day funds
sufﬁcient to pay the principal, Premium, if any, and interest so becoming due, such sum to be
held in trust for the beneﬁt of the Persons entitled to such principal, Premium, if any. or interest
and (unless such Paying Agent is the Trustee) the Corporation shall promptly notify the Trustee
of such action or any failure so to act,

The Corporation shall cause each Paying Agent other than the Trustee to execute
and deliver to the Trustee an instrument in which such Paying Agent shall agree with the
Trustee, subject to the provisions of this Section that such Paying Agent will:

(a) hold all sums held by it for the payment of the principal of and Premium, if any,
and interest on Notes in trust for the beneﬁt of the Persons entitled diet-etc until
such sums shall be paid to such Persons or otherwise disposed of as herein
provided;

(1:) give the Trustee notice of any default by the Corporation (or any other obligor
upon the Notes) in the making of any payment of principal, Premium, if any, and
interest: and

(c) at any time during the continuance of any such default, upon the written request
of the Trustee, forthwith pay to the Trustee all stuns so held in trust by such
Paying Agent.

The Corporation may at anytime, for the purpose of obtaining the satisfaction and
discharge of this Indenture or for any other purpose, pay, or by an order of the Corporation direct
CMD\298502\PO‘P PROSPECTUS D£C06Q358Vl2


40
any Paying Agent to pay, to the Trustee all sums held in trust by the Corporation or such Paying
Agent. such sums to be held by the Trustee upon the same trusts as those upon which such sums
were held by the Corporation or such Paying Agent; and, upon such payment by any Paying
Agent to the Trustee, such Paying Agent shall be released from all further liability with respect
to such money.

Any money deposited with the Trustee or any Paying Agent, or then held by the
Corporation, in trust for the payment of the principal, Premium, if any, and interest on any Note
and remaining unclaimed for six years after such principal, Premium, if any, and interest has
become due and payable shall be paid, on written request of the Corporation, to the Corporation,
or (if then held by the Corporation) shall be discharged from such trust; and the Holder of such
Nom shall thereafter, as an unsecured general creditor, look only to the Corporation for payment
thereof, and all liability of the Trustee or such Paying Agent with respect to such trust money,
and all liability of the Corporation as trustee thereof, shall thereupon cease.

9.6 Trustee’s Remuneration and Expenses

The Corporation shall pay the Trustee reasonable remuneration for its services as
trustee hereunder and shall pay or reimburse the Trustee upon its request for all reasonable
expenses, disbursements and advances incurred or made by the Trustee in the administration or
execution of the trusts hereby created (including the reasonable compensation and the
disbursements of Trustee Counsel and all other advisers and assistants not regularly in its employ
who have been retained by the Trustee) both before any default hereunder and thereafter until all
the duties of the Trustee shall be firmly and fully performed except any such expense,
disbursement or advance as may arise from failure to perform its obligations hereunder in
accordance with Section 14.2. Any amount due under this Section 96 and unpaid 30 days after
request for such payment shall bear interest from the expiration of such 30 days at a ran: per
annum equal to the then current rate charged by the Trustee from time to time. payable on
demand. After default, all amounts so payable and the interest thereon shall be payable out of
any funds coming into the possession of the Trustee or its successors in the trusts hereunder in
priority to any payment of the principal of, or interest or Premium, if any, on, the Notes. Such
remuneration shall continue to be payable until the trusts hereof shall be ﬁnally wound up,
whether or not the trusts of this Indenture shall be in course of administration by or under the
direction of a court
9.7 Not to Extend Time for Payment of Interest

Subject to the provisions of Section 1211 or l2.12, in order to prevent any
accumulation after maturity of unpaid interest, the Corporation shall not directly or indirectly
extend or assent to the extension of time for payment of interest upon any Notes or directly or
indirectly be or become a party to or approve any such arrangement by purchasing or funding
interest on the Notes or in any other manner,

If the time for the payment of any interest shall be so extended, whether or not
such extension is by or with the consent of the Corporation, notwithstanding anything herein or
in the Notes contained such interest shall not be entitled in case of default hereunder to the
CMutz9ss<>2ti>oP mosaacms nacosusssvtz


4 l

beneﬁt of this lndenture until such time as payment in full has been made of the principal of all
the Notes and of all interest on such Notes the payment of which has not been so extended.
9.8 Examination and Audit

The Corporation shall annually, within 90 days (or such other period prescribed
by Applicable Laws) after the end of its fiscal year, have an audit of the Corporation’s
consolidated ﬁnancial statements made by the Corporation’s Auditors.
9.9 No Change of Domicile

The Corporation shall not, directly or indirectly through a Subsidiary, enter into a
transaction or series of transactions, other than a transaction or series of transactions involving a
Change of Control, in which all or substantially all of the undertaking, property and assets of the
Corporation and its Subsidiaries would become the property of any other Person, whether by
way of reorganization, consolidation, amalgamation, arrangement, merger, transfer, sale, lease or
otherwise, unless the Corporation will be the continuing corporation or:

(a) the Person is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Canada or a
province or territory thereof or of the United States of America or a state thereof
or of the District of Columbia and expressly assumes, by a Supplemental
lndenture satisfactory in form to the Tmstee and Trustee Counsel and executed
and delivered to the Trustee, all the covenants and obligations of the Corporation
under this lndenture and all Norm; the Corporation's counsel shall provide a legal
opinion that effect;

(b) at the time of and after giving effect to the reorganization, consolidation,
amalgamation, arrangement, merger, transfer, sale, lease or other transaction, no
Event of Default or event that. with the passing of time or the giving of notice or
both, would constitute an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing;

(c) the Corporation shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officer’s Certiﬁcate stating
that the conditions precedent in this Section 9.9 have been satisfied; and

(d) neither the Corporation nor the Person, either at the time of or immediately after
the consummation of any such transaction and after giving full effect thereto, or
immediately after compliance by the Person with the provisions of Section 9.9(8),
will be insolvent or generally fail to meet, or admit in writing its inability or
unwillingness to meet. its obligations as they generally become due
Whenever the conditions of this Section 99 have been duly observed and

performed, the Person shall possess and from time to time may exercise each and every right and
power of the Corporation under this Index-store, in the name of the Corporation or otherwise, and
any act or proceeding required by any provision of this Indenture to he done or performed by any
Directors or ofﬁcers of die Corporation may he done and performed with like force and effect by
the directors or ofﬁcers of the Person.

CMDMSOZWOP PROSPECiDS DEC OGQSSSVIZ


42

9.10 Trustee May Perform Covenants

If the Corporation fails to perform any covenant on its part herein contained, the
Trustee may perform any such covenant capable of being performed by it and, if any such
covenant requires the payment or expenditure of money, the Trustee may make such payment or
expenditure with its own funds or with money borrowed by or advanced to it for such purpose,
but shall be under no obligation to do so. All sums so expended or advanced shall be repayahle
by the Corporation in the manner provided in Section 96, but no such performance or payment
shall be deemed to relieve the Corporation from any default or continuing obligation hereunder,
9.11 Certiﬁcates Relating to Compliance and Default

So long as any Notes are outstanding, the Corporation shall deliver to the Trustee
within 60 days after the end of each of the ﬁrst three ﬁscal quarters in each of its fiscal years and
120 days after the end of each of its ﬁscal years, and at any other time if so requested by the
Trustee, an Ofﬁcer's Certiﬁcate stating that the Corporation has complied with all covenants.
conditions or other requirements contained herein, noncompliance with which would. with the
giving of notice or the lapse of time or otherwise. constitute an Event of Default or, if such is not
the case. specifying all relevant particulars thereof, the period of existence thereof and the action
the Corporation is taking or proposes to take with respect thereto, For purposes of this
Section 9.11, compliance by the Corporation with the covenants. conditions or other
requirements of this lndenture shall be determined without regard to any period of grace or
notice requirement under this lndenture.
9.12 Financial Statements

I Following receipt of consolidated financial statements of the Corporation by the

Trustee pursuant to this lndcnture, the Trustee shall, while such statements are current, maintain
custody of them and make them available for inspection by Noteholders upon reasonable written
request No obligation shall rest with the Trustee to analyze such statements, or evaluate the
performance of the Corporation as indicated by such financial statements, in any manner
whatsoeverr
SECTION 10 DEFAULTS AND REMEDIES
10.] Events of Default

Each of the following events shall be an “Event of Default" in respect of the
Notes:

(a) failure to pay principal or Premium, if any, on any Notes when due:

(b) failure to pay interest on any Notes when due if such failure continues for a period
of 10 Business Days;

(c) the sale. transfer, lease or other disposition, or the seizure. condemnation or other
expropriation in excess of $500,000, in a transaction or series of transactions, of
any of the Secured Assets, other than as permitkzd hereby;

CMWQBSOZWDP PROSPKTUS DEC 06\Z358V12


43

(d) failure to observe or perform any other covenant or condition contained in this
Indenture or a Supplemental Indenture, provided that if such covenant or
condition is capable of rectiﬁcation, then such failure will be an Event of Default
only if such failure continues for a period of 30 days after written notice thereof
has been given to the Corporation by the Trustee or the Holders of at least 25%
aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding;

(e) failure by the Corporation. Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park to observe or
perform any provision of any agreement under which Indebtedness is created, if
such failure has the eﬁect of causing more than $10 million of such Indebtedness
in the aggregate at such time to become due and payable or to be mquired to be
redeemed or repurchased before its Stated Maturity;

(t) the rendering by a court of competent jurisdiction of one or more judgments
against the Corporation or any Subsidiary in an aggregate amount of more than
$20 million if the judgments remain undischargcd or unstayed for more than 30
days:

(g) proceedings are commenced for the winding~up, liquidation or dissolution of the
Corporation, Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park (except as otherwise permitted
under this Indenture), unless the Corporation or such Subsidiary in good faith
actively and diligently contests such proceedings, decree, order or approval,
resulting in a dismissal or stay thereof within 60 days of commencement;

(h) a decree or order of a court of competent jurisdiction is entered adjudging the
Corporation, Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park to be bankrupt or insolvent, or a
petition seeking reorganization, arrangement or adjustment of or in respect of the
Corporation Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park is approved under Applicable
Law relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or relief of debtors;

(i) the Corporation, Mercator Holdings or Mineral Park makes an assignment for the
beneﬁt of its creditors, or petitions or applies to any court or tribunal for the
appointment of a receiver or trustee for itself or any substantial part of its
property, or commences for itself or acquiesces in any proceeding under any
bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, arrangement or readjustment of debt law
or statute or any proceeding for the appointment of a receiver or trustee for itself
or any substantial part of its property, or suffers any such receivership or
twsteeship;

(j) a resolution is passed for the winding~up or liquidation of the Corporation except
in the course of carrying out or pursuant to a transaction in respect of which the
conditions of Section 9.9 are duly observed and performed;

(k) the Corporation‘s EBITDA on a consolidated basis for each of ﬁve consecutive
ﬁscal quarters beginning after March 31. 2009 does not exceed interest expenses
under the Notes for each of the corresponding quarters; or

cmmsssozxror mosrecrus mac 06\23§8V12


44
(I) this lndenture shall for any reason cease in whole or in any material part to be a

legal, valid, binding and enforceable obligation of the Corporation.
10.2 Notice of Event of Default

If an Event of Default shall occur and be continuing, the Trustee shall, within 10
Business Days after it becomes aware of the occurrence of such Event of Default, give notice of
such Event of Default to the Noteholders in the manner speciﬁed in Section 13.2; provided,
however, that, except in the case of a default in the payment of the principal of, (or Premium, if
any) or interest on, any Note, the Trustee shall be protected in withholding such notice if and so
long as the Trustee in good faith determines that the withholding of such notice is in the best
interests of the Noteholclers and the Trustee so advises the Corporation in writing.

If notice of an Event of Default has been given to Noteholders and such Event of
Default is thereafter remedied or cured prior to the acceleration of the Indebtedness of the
Corporation hereunder pursuant to Section 10.3, notice that such Event of Default is no longer
continuing shall be given by the Trustee to the Persons to whom notice of such Event of Default
was given pursuant to this Section 10.2. such notice to be given within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 10 days, after the Trustee becomes aware that such Event of Default has been remedied
or cured during such period of time.
10.3 Acceleration _

If an Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the principal amount of, the
Premium if any, and accrued and unpaid interest on, all Notes then outstanding shall be due and
payable immediately without any declaration or other action by the Trustee or the Holders.

Notwithstanding anything contained in this lndenture or the Notes to the contrary,
if the principal amount and the Premium, if any, and any accrued and unpaid interest on Notes
are due and payable automatically or by a declaration pursuant to this Section 10.3, the
Corporation shall pay to the Trustee forthwith, for the benefit of the Noteholders of the affected
Notes, the amount of principal of and Premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest
(including interest on amounts in default) on those Notes and all other fees and expenses payable
in regard thereto under this Indenture, together with interest thereon at the rate home by such
Notes from the date that such amounts are due and payable automatically or by declaration
pursuant to this Section 10.3 until payment is received by the Trustee. Such payments, when
made, shall be deemed to have been made in discharge of the Corporation’s obligations under
this lndenture,
10.4 Waiver of Event of Default

Upon the happening of an Event of Default:

(a) the Holders of Notes then outstanding with respect to which an Event of Default
shall have occurred and be continuing, pursuant to an Extraordinary Resolution
shall have the power, exercisable by requisition in writing, to histmct the Trustee
to waive such Event of Default and to cancel any declaration made by the Trustee
pursuant to Section 10.3, and the Trustee shall thereupon waive such Event of

CMDYZQSEOZWOV PROSPECTUS DECW35$V l 2


45

Default or cancel such declaration upon such terms and conditions as shall be
prescribed in such requisition; and

(b) the Trustee, so long as it has not become bound to declare the principal of and

Premium, if any, and interest on the Notes then outstanding to be due and

payable, or to obtain or enforce payment thereof, shall have the power to waive

any Event of Default which has been remedied or cured or in respect of which. in
the opinion of the Trustee, relying, if necessary on the opinion of Trustee's

Counsel or other expert, adequate satisfaction has been made.

No delay or omission of the Trustee or of die Noteholdets in exercising any right
or power accruing upon the occurrence of an Event of Default shall impair any such right or
power or shall be construed to be a waiver of such Event of Default or acquiescence therein, and
no act or omission, either of the Trustee or of the Noteholders, shall extend to or be taken in any
manner whatsoever to affect any subsequent Event of Default or the rights resulting therefrom.
10.5 Enforcement by the Trustee

Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, the Trustee shall exercise the rights
and powers vested in it under this lndenture.

Subject to the provisions of Section 10.4 and to the provisions of any
Extraordinary Resolution, if the Corporation fails to pay to the Trustee, forthwith after the same
shall have been declared to be or has automatically become due and payable under Section 10.3,
the principal of and Premium, if any, and interest on the affected Notes together with any other
amounts due hereunder, the Trustee shall, upon receipt of a Noteholders' Request on behalf of

V the Holders of the affected Notes and upon being sufficiently indemniﬁed and funded to its
reasonable satisfaction against all costs, expenses and liabilities to be incurred, proceed in its
name as Trustee hereunder to obtain or enforce payment of such principal of, and Premium, if
any, and interest on, those Notes together with any other amounts due hereunder by such
proceedings authorized by this lndenture or by suit at law or in equity as the Trustee in the
Noteholders’ Request shall have been directed to take. or if the Noteholders’ Request contains no
such direction, then by such proceedings authorized by this lndenture or by suit at law or in
equity as the Trustee shall deem expedient.

The Trustee shall be entitled and is hereby empowered. either in its own name or
as trustee of an express trust, or as attomey—in-fact for each of the Holders of die Notes, or in any
one or more of such capacities, to file such proof of debt, amendment of proof of debt, claim,
petition or other document as may be necessary or advisable in order to have the claims of the
Trustee and some or all of the Holders of the Notes allowed in any insolvency, bankruptcy,
liquidation or other judicial proceedings relative to the Corporation or its mitors or relative to
or affecting its property, The Trustee is hereby irrevocably appointed (and the successive
respective Holders of the Notes by taking and holding Notes shall be conclusively deemed to
have so appointed the Trustee) the true and lawful attomeydn-fact of the respective Holders of
the Notes with authority to make and file in the respective names of the Holders of the Notes or
on behalf of the Holders of the Notes as a class, subject to deduction from any such claims of the
amounts of any claims ﬂied by any of the Holders of the Notes themselves, any proof of debt,
mmsmwor mosescrus oncomassvu


46

amendment of proof of debt claim, petition or other document in any such proceedings and to
receive payment of any sums becoming distributable on account thereof, and to execute any such
other documents and to do and perform any and all such acts and things, for and on behalf of
such Holders of the Notes. as may be necessary or advisable. in the opinion of the Trustee acting
on the advice of Trustee Counsel, in order to have the respective claims of the Trustee and of the
Holders of the Notes against the Corporation or its property allowed in any such proceeding. and
to receive payment of or on account of such claims, provided that nothing contained in this
Indenture shall be deemed to give to the Trustee. unless so authorized by Extraordinary
Resolution any right to accept or consent to any plan of reorganization or otherwise by action of
any character in such proceeding to waive or change in any way any right of any Noteholder.

The Trustee shall also have power at any time and from time to time to institute
and to maintain such suits and proceedings as it may be advised shall be necessary or advisable
to preserve and protect its interests and the interests of some or all of the Noteholders.

All rights of action hereunder may be enforced by the Trustee without the
possession of any of the Notes or the production thereof at the trial or other proceedings relative
thereto. Any such suit or proceeding instituted by the Trustee shall be brought in the name of the
Trustee as trustee of an express trust, and any recovery of judgment shall be for the rateable
beneﬁt of the applicable Holders of the Notes whose rights are enforced subject to the provisions
of this Indenture. In any proceeding brought by the Trustee (and also in any proceeding in which
a declaratory judgment of a court may be sought as to the interpretation or construction of any
provision of this Indenture to which the Trustee shall be a party), the Trustee shall be held to
represent all the Holders of the Notes whose rights are enforced. and it shall not be necessary to
make any Holders of the Notes parties to any such proceeding.

10.6 Suits by Noteholders

No Holder of any Note shall have any right to institute any action, suit or
proceeding at law or in equity for the purpose of enforcing payment of the principal oft or any
Premium, if any, or interest on, the Notes or for the execution of any trust or power hereunder or
for the appointment of a liquidator or receiver or for a receiving order under the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act (Canada) or to have the Corporation wound up or to ﬁle or prove a claim in any
liquidation or bankruptcy proceeding or for any other remedy unless:

(a) the Noteholders, by Extraordinary Rmolution or by Notcholders‘ Request, shall
have made a written request to the Trustee and the Trustee shall have been
afforded reasonable opportunity either itself to proceed to exercise the powers
conferred upon it or to institute an action, suit or proceeding in its name for such
Purim“;

(b) the Noteholdcrs or any of them shall have furnished to the Trustee, when so
requested by the Trustee, funding and indemnity satisfactory to the Trustee with
respect to the costs, expenses and liabilities to be incurred therein or thereby;

(c) the Trustee shall have failed to act within a reasonable time after such
notiﬁcation, request and provision of indemnity; and

mmsssozmv mosrecrus oocomssavrz


47
(d) no direaion inconsistent with such written request has been received by the
Trustee from Holders of a majority in principal amount of the outstanding Notes.
If a Noteholder has the right to institute proceedings under this Section 10.6, such
Noteholder, acting on behalf of itself and all other Noteholders, shall be entith to commence
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction in which the Trustee might have commenced
proceedings under Section 10.5, but in no event shall any Noteholder or combination of
Noteholders have any right to seek any other remedy or institute proceedings out of court No
one or more Noteholders shall have any right in any manner whatsoever to enforce any right
under this Indenture or under any Note, except in accordance with the conditions and in the
manner provided in this Indenture.
10.7 Application of Money

Except as herein otherwise expressly provided, any money received by the
Trustee or a Noteholder pursuant to the provisions of this Section ll or as a result of legal or
other proceedings against the Corporation pursuant hereto, or from any trustee in banlmrptcy or
liquidator of the Corporation, shall be applied, together with other money available to the Trustee
for such purpose. as follows:

(a) ﬁrst, in payment or in reimbursement to the Trustee of its fees, costs, charges.
expenses, borrowings, advances or other amounts furnished or provided by or at
the request of the Trustee in or about the administration and execution of its trusts
under, or otherwise in relation to, this Indenture, with interest thereon as herein
provided;

(b) second, subject to the provisions of Section 97 and this Section 107, in payment
of the principal of, and Premium, if any, and accrued and unpaid interest and
interest on amounts in default on, the Notes which shall then be outstanding in the
priority of principal ﬁrst and then Premium, if any, and then accrued and unpaid
interest and interest on amounts in default unless otherwise directed by an
Extraordinary Resolution in respect of the Notes, and in that case in such order or
priority as between principal, Premium, if any, and interest as may be directed by
such Extraordinary Resolution; and

(c) third, in payment of the surplus if any, of such money to the Corporation or its
assigns;

provided, however, that no payment shall be made pursuant to Section 10,7(b) in respect of the
principal of. or Premium, if any, or interest on, any Note which the Trustee knows is held,
directly or indirectly, by or for the beneﬁt of the Corporation or any Affiliate of the Corporation
(other than any Note pledged for value and in good faith to a Person other than the Corporation
or any Afﬁliate of the Corporation, but only to the extent of such Person’s interest therein) until
the prior payment in full of the principal of and Premium, if any, and interest on all News which
are not so held.

mmsmwor massacres nacmnassvn


48
1043 Distribution of Proceeds
Payments to Noteholdets pursuant to Section 10.7(b) shall be made as follows:
(a) at least 15 days’ notice of every such payment shall be given in the manner
speciﬁed in Section 13.2, specifying the time and the place or places at which the
applicable Notes are to be presented and the amount of the payment and the
application thereof as between principal, Premium, if any, and interest;
(‘0) payment in respect of any Note shall be made upon presentation thereof at any
one of the places speciﬁed in such notice and any such Note thereby paid in full
shall be sm‘rendered, but the Trustee may in its discretion dispense with
presentation and surrender or endorsement in any case upon such indemnity being
given as the Trustee shall consider sufficient;
(c) from and after the date of payment speciﬁed in such notice, interest shall accrue
only on the amount owing on each Note after giving credit for the amount of the
payment specified in such notice unless the Note in respect of which such amount
is owing is duly presented on or after the date so speciﬁed and payment of such
amount is not made: and
(d) the Trustee shall not be required to make any payment to Noteholdcrs unless the
amount available to it for such purpose, after reserving therefrom such amount as
the Trustee may think necessary to provide for the payments referred to in
Section 10i7(a}, exceeds two per cent of the aggregate principal amount of the
Notes in default then outstanding.
10.9 Remedies Cumulative

N0 remedy herein conferred upon or reserved to the Trustee or upon or to the
Noteholders is intended to be exclusive of any other remedy, but each and every such remedy
shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to every other remedy given hereunder or now
existing or hereafter to exist by law.
10.10 Judgment Against the Corporation

in case of any judicial or other proceedings to enforce the rights of the
Noteholders. judgment may be rendered against the Corporation in favour of the Noteholders or
in favour of the Trustee, as trustee for the Noteholders. for any amount which may remain clue in
respect of the Note Indebtedness.
10.11 Immunity of Shareholders, Directors and Ofﬁcers

The Noteholdet’s and the Trustee hereby waive and release any right cause of
action or remedy now or hereafter existing in any jurisdiction against any past, present or future
incorporation shareholder, director or ofﬁcer of the Corporation for the payment of the principal
of, or Premium, if any. or interest on, any of the Notes or on any covenant. agreement
representation or warranty by the Corporation herein or contained in the Notes.
mssmxpor PROSPECTUS Dec mussavn


49
SECTION 11 CANCELLATION, DISCHARGE AND DEFEASANCE
11.1 Cancellation at“! Destruction
All Notes surrendered to the Corporation, a Registrar or a Paying Agent for any
pmpose shall be delivered to the Trustee as soon as reasonably peactieable. Each such Note and
each Note surrendered to the Trustee shall be cancelled by the Tmstee forthwith after all
payments required in tespmt thereof to the date of surrender have been made. Subject to
Applicable Law, all Notes cancelled or required to be cancelled under this or any other provision
of this lndemure shall be destroyed by the Trustee in accordance mm the Trustee’s ordinary
practice, and the Tmstee shall, at the request of the Corporatiom ﬁnish to it a cancellation or
destruction certiﬁcate in respect of the Notes so cancelled or destroyed.
11.2 Payment of Amounts Due on Maturity
The Corporation shall establish and  with the Tmstee a seng trust
account (“Debt Amount”) for the Notes. The Debt Amount shall be maintalmd by and be
' subject to the camel of the Trustee for the purposes of this Mixture. Prior to 9:09'a.m.,
Vancouver, British Columbia time, on each Maturity Date for outstanding Notes, the
Corporation shall deposit in the Debt Account an mount sufﬁciem to pay the amount payable in
respect of the Notes on the Maturity Date (less any taxes required by law to be deducted or
withheld}. The Tmstee shall use the ftmds deposited in the Debt Account to pay, to the Holder
’ of a Note entith to receive payment on the Maturity Date, the principal amount of. accrued and
unpaid interest if any, and Premium, if any, on such Note upon smender of such Note at the
Corporate Trust Ofﬁce or at such other place as shall be designated for such purpose from time
, , _ ,. to time by the Corporation and theTmsxee. 'ﬂte deposit of sudiamomttto theDebt Account , -
shall satisfy and dimge'dae liability of the Corporation for the Notes to which the deposit
relates to the extent of the mount deposited (plus the amount of any taxes seun by
Applicable Law to be deducted or withheld) and thereafter such Notes shall not to that esteem be
considered to be outstanding at to have any interest accrue thereon for the beneﬁt of the Holders
and the Holders shall have no right with xespect thereto other than to receive out of the amwm
so dqmsited the respective amounts to which the Holders are entitled upon surrender of snob
Notes, Failure to make a deposit as tequired pursuant to this Senior-r 11.2 shall constimte default
in payment on the Notes in respect of which the deposit was required to have been made.
11.3 Repayment of Unclaimed Money
Subject to Applicable Law, any amormt deposited pursuant to Section 11.2 and
not claimed by and paid to the Holders of Notes as provided in Section 11.2 within six yeats
after the later of the date of such deposit and the applicable Mammy Date shall be repaid to the
Coxporation by the Tmstee on written demand, and thereupon the Tmstee shall be released from
all ﬁrrtber liability with respect to sueh amount and themafter the Holders of the Notes in resoect
of which such amount was so repaid to the Corporation shall have no rights in respect thereof
and the Corporation shall be discharged from its obligations in resgsect thereof.
cmwwsamvrmsmsmcwsssm


50
11.4 Discharge
Upon proof being given to the Trustee that the principal of all the Notes and the
Premium, if any, thereon and interest (including interest on amounts in default) thereon and other
amounts payable hereunder have been paid or satisﬁed. or that all the outstanding Notes have
matured or have been duly called for redemption and such payment or redemption has been duly
and effectually provided for by payment to the Trustee or otherwise, and upon payment of all
costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by the Trustee in relation to this Indenture and all
‘mterest thereon and the remuneration of the Trustee, or upon provision satisfactory to the Trustee
being made therefor, the Trustee shall, at the written request and at the expense of the
Corporation, execute and deliver to the Corporation such deeds or other instruments as shall be
required to evidence the satisfaction and discharge of this Indenture and the Security Documents
and to release the Corporation from its covenants herein contained other than those relating to
the indemniﬁcation of the Trustee.
11.5 Defeasance
The Corporation shall have the right (the “Defeasance Option") to be released
from the terms of this Indenture relating to the outstanding Notes if requested by the Corporation
in a written notice to the Trustee, and upon receipt of such notice the Trustee shall, at the request
and expense of the Corporation, execute and deliver to the Corporation such deeds and other
instruments as shall be necessary to release the Corporation from the terms of this Indenturc
relating to the Notes. except those relating to the indemnification of the Trustee, subject to the
following:
(a) the Corporation shall have delivered to the Trustee evidence satisfactory to the
Trustee that the Corporation has irrevocably, pursuant to the terms of a trust
agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Corporation and the Trustee:
(i) segregated and deposited for the benefit of Holders of Notes sufﬁcient
funds for the payment of all principal, Premium, if any, interest and other
amounts due or to become due on the Notes to the Stated Maturity thereof;

(ii) segregated and deposited for the beneﬁt of the Trustee funds or otherwise
made provision for the payment of all remuneration and expenses of the
Trustee to carry out its duties under this Indenture in respect of the Notes;
and

(iii) segegated and deposited funds for the payment of present taxes owing
and any taxes arising with respect to all deposited funds or other provision
for payment in respect of the Notes;

0)) the Trustee shall have received an opinion or opinions of Corporation Counsel to
the effect that the Holders of the Notes will not be subject to any additional taxes
in Canada or the United States as a result of the exercise by the Corporation of the
Defeasance Option with respect to such Notes and that such Holders will be
subject to taxes, if any, including those in respect of income (including taxable
capital gains), on the same amount, in the same manner and at the same time or

CMDVDSSMWOP PROSPECTUS DEC 06\2358V12


51

times as would have been the case if the Defeasanoe Option had not been

exercised in respect of such Notes;

(o) no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing on the date of the
deposit referred to in Section 11.5(a);

((1) such release does not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a default
under, any material agreement or instrument to which the Corporation is a party
or by which the Corporation is bound;

(e) the Corporation shall have delivered to the Trustee an Officer’s Certiﬁcate stating
that the deposits referred to in Section 11.5(a) was not made by the Corporation
with the intent of preferring the Holders of the Notes over the other creditors of
the Corporation or with the intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding
creditors of the Corporation or others; and

(f) the Corporation shall have delivered to the Trustee an Ofﬁcer’s Certiﬁcate as
required pursuant to Sections 14.12 and 14.13. stating that all conditions
precedent provided for or relating to the exercise of such Defeasance Option have
been complied with.

The Corporation shall be deemed to have made due provision for the depositing
of funds if it deposits or causes to be deposited with the Trustee under the terms of an irrevocable
trust agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Corporation and the Trustee (each
acting reasonably), solely for the benefit of the Holders of the Notes, money or debt Securities
constituting direct obligations of Canada or an agency or instrumentality of Canada which will
be sufficient, in the written opinion of a ﬁrm of independent chartered accountants or an
investment dealer acting reasonably and acceptable to the Trustee. to provide for payment in full
when due of the Notes and all other amounts from time to time due and owing under this
Indenture which pertain to the Notes.

The Trustee shall hold in trust all money or Securities deposited with it pursuant
to this Section 1115 and shall apply the deposited money and the money derived from such
Securities in accordance with this lndenture to the payment of principal of and Premium, if any.
and interest on the Notes and, as applicable, other amounts

If the Trustee is unable to apply any money or Securities in accordance with this
Section 11.5 by reason of any legal proceeding or any order or judgment of any court or
Governmental Authority enjoining. restraining or otherwise prohibiting such application, the
Corporation‘s obligations under this Indenrure and the Notes shall be revived and reinstated as
though no money or Securities had been deposited pursuant to this Section 11.5 until such time
as the Trustee is permitted to apply all such money or Securities in accordance with this
Section 115, provided that if the Corporation has made any payment in respect of principal,
Premium, if any, or interest on any Notes or, as applicable, other amounts became of the
reinstatement of its obligations. the Corporation shall be subrogated to the rights of the Holders
of such Notes to receive such payment from the money or Securities held by the Trustee“
mmassmwop mosses-ms DEC 060358V12


52

SECTION 12 MEETINGS OF NOTEHOLDERS
12.1 Right to Convene Meetings

The Trustee may at any time and from time to time convene a meeting of
Noteholders, and the Trustee shall convene a meeting of Noteholders upon receipt of a request of
the Corporation or a Noteholders' Request and upon being funded and iriderrmiﬁed to its
reasonable satisfaction by the Corporation or by the Noleholders signing such request against the
costs which may be incurred in connection with the calling and holding of such meeting. If the
Trustee fails within 30 days after receipt of any such request and such indemnity and funding to
give notice convening a meeting, the Corporation or such Noteholdcrs. as the case may be‘ may
convene such meeting. Every such meeting shall be held in Vancouver. British Columbia, or at
such other place as may be approved or determined by such of the Trustee, the Corporation or
the Noteholders as convened the meeting in accordance with this Section 12.1.
12.2 Notices of Meetings

Notice of a meeting of Noteholdcrs shall be given to the Noteholders in the
manner speciﬁed in Section 13.2 at least 21 days prior to the date of the meeting, and a Copy of
any notice sent by mail to Noteholders shall be sent by mail to the Trustee (unless the meeting
has been called by it) and to the Corporation (unless the meeting has been called by it). A notice
of a meeting of Noteholders shall state the time and place at which the meeting is to be held and
shall state brieﬂy the general nature of the business to be transacted thereat. and it shall not be
necessary for any such notice to set out the terms of any resolution to be proposed or any of the
provisions of this Section 12.
12.3 Chairman

The Noteholders present in person or represented by proxy shall choose an
individual present to be the chairman of the meeting.
12.4 Quorum

Subject m the provisions of Section 12.12, the quorum for a meeting of
Noteholdcrs shall be the Holder or Holders, present in person or represented by proxy, of at least
25% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding If a quorum is not present
within 30 minutes from the time fixed for the holding of a meeting. the meeting, if convened by
the Noteholders, shall be dissolved, but in any other case the meeting shall be adjourned to the
same day in the next week (unless such day is not a Business Day, in which case it shall be
adjourned to the next following Business Day thereafter) at the same time and place, and no
notice shall be required to be given in respect of such adjourned meeting. At the adjourned
meeting, the Noteholders present in person or represented by proxy shall constitute a quorum and
may transact the business for which the meeting was originally convened notwithstanding that
they may not represent at least 25% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes then
outstanding.
cmoimsomr PROSPECTUS oeccauxssvn


53

125 Power to Adjourn

The chairman of a meeting at which a quorum of Noteholders is present may,
with the consent of the Holder or Holders of a majority of the aggregate principal amount of the
Notes present or represented thereat, adjourn such meeting, and no notice of such adjournment
need be given except such notice, if any, as the meeting may prescribe.
12.6 Show of Hands

Except as otherwise provided in this lndenture, every resolution submitted to a
meeting shall be decided by a majority of the votes cast on a show of hands, and unless a poll is
duly demanded as herein provided, a declaration by the chairman that a resolution has been
carried or carried unanimously or by a particular majority or lost or not carried by a particular
majority shall be conclusive evidence of the fact.
12.7 Poll

On every resolution proposed to he passed as an Extraordinary Resolution and on
any other resolution submitted to a meeting in respect of which the chairman of the meeting or
one or more Noteholders or proxyholders for Noteholders holding at least U.S.$10.000 principal
amount of Notes demands a poll, 3 poll shall be taken in such manner and either at once or after
an adjournment as the chairman of the meeting shall direct.
12.8 Voting

On a show of hands, every Person who is present and entitled to vote, whether as
a Noteholder or as proxyholder for one or more Noteholders or both, shall have one vote. On a
poll each Noteholder present in person or represented by a proxy duly appointed by an
instrument in writing shall be entitled to one vote in respect of each U.S.$l,000 principal amount
of Notes held by such Noteholder on the record date ﬁxed for the meeting. A proxyholder need
not be a Noteholder. In the case of joint Holders of a Note, any one of them present in person or
represented by proxy at the meeting may vote in the absence of the other or others, but if more
than one of them are present in person or represented by proxy, they shall vote together in
respect of the Notes of which they are joint Holders. Subject to the provisions of Section 12.9, in
the case of Notes held by a Person other than an individual. an ofﬁcer or representative of such
Person may vote the Notes held by it unless there shall be more than one ofﬁcer or representative
of such Person present at the meeting. and those ofﬁcers or individuals present do not agree on
how the Notes may be voted, in which case a written proxy shall be required to determine who
may vote the Notes and how such Notes are to be voted.

In the case of a Global Note, the Depository may appoim or cause to be appointed
a Person or Persons as proxies and shall designate the number of votes entitled to each such
Person, and each such Person shall be entitled to be present at any meeting of Noteholders and
shall be the Persons entitled to vote at such meeting in accordance with the number of votes set
out in the Depository’s designation.
concoursesz moseecrusoacosvsssvn


54
12.9 Regulations

The Trustee, or the Corporation with the approval of the Trustee, may from time
to time make and from time to time vary such regulations as it shall from time to time think fit
providing for or governing the following:

(a) voting by proxy by Noteholders, the form of the instrument appointing a
proxyholder (which shall be in writing) and the manner in which it may be
executed, and the authority to be provided by any Person signing a proxy on
behalf of a Noteholder;

(b) the deposit of instruments appointing proxyholders at such place as the Trustee,
the Corporation or the Noteholders convening the meeting, as the case may be.
may, in the notice convening the meeting, direct and the time, if any, before the
holding of the meeting or any adjournment thereof by which the same shall be
deposited; and

(c) the deposit of instruments appointing proxyholders at an approved place or places
other than the place at which the meeting is to be held and enabling particulars of
such instruments appointing proxyholders to be provided before the meeting to
the Corporation or to the Trustee at the place at which the meeting is to be held
and for the voting of proxies so deposited as though the instruments themselves
were produced at the meeting.

Any regulations so made shall be binding and effective and the votes given in
accordance therewith shall be valid and shall be counted. Except as such regulations may
provide, the only Persons who shall be recognized at a meeting as the Holders of any Notes, or as
entitled to vote or be present at the meeting in respect thereof, shall be registered Noteholders
and Persons whom registered Noteholders have by instrument in writing duly appointed as their
proxyholdersl
12.10 Corporation and Trustee May Be Represented

The Corporation and the Trustee, by their respective officers, directors and
employees, and the legal advisers of the Corporation and the Trustee may attend any meeting of
the Noteholders, but shall have no voting rights.

12.11 Powers Exercisable by Noteholders by Extraordinary Resolution

Subject to the provisions of Sections 104 of this lndenture, the following powers
of the Noteholders shall be exercisable from time to time only by Extraordinary Resolution:

(3) power to sanction any modification, abrogation, alteration. compromise or
arrangement of the rights of the Noteholders or any of them or‘ subject to the
Trustee’s prior consent, the Trustee against the Corporation or against its
property. whether such ring arise under this lrrdenture or the Notes or otherwise.
provided that such sanctioned actions are not prejudicial to the Trustee;

CMLAZQKSEmPOP PROSPHZ‘i'US Dec mosssvrz


55

({3} power to assent Lo any modiﬁcation of or change in or addition to or omission ‘
from the provisions contained in this Indeutuxe which shall be agreed to by the
Corporation and to authorize the Trustee to concur in and execute any
Supplemmal Indenmre embody/mg any mMiﬁcmim, change, addition or
omission;

(c) power to sanction any scheme for the Iecohstruclion or reorganization of the
Corpomion or for the consolidation, amalgamation or merger of the Corporation
with or imo any other Person or for the sale, leasing, transfer or other disposition
of the undertaking property and assets of the Corpomion or my pan ﬂiereof,
provided that no such sanction shall be necessary in resth of any transaction
which is not subject to any tesm‘ction in Section 9-,

(d) power to direct or authorize the Tomes to exercise any power. right, remedy or

' authority given to h by this lodenture in any mama: speciﬁed in any such
' Examordimry Resolution (subject to the Trustee being suﬁ'uﬁcmly funded and
indemniﬁed to its masonable satisfaction) or to refrain from exercising any such

power. rigln, remedy or mummy;

(e) power to waive and direct the Tmstoe w waive any Event of Defamr and to cancel
any declaration made by the Trustee pursuant to Section103 ciﬂuer
unconditionally or upon any condition speciﬁed in such Emordimry Resolution;

(1) power to restrain any Noteholder from taking or insting any suit. action or
proceeding for the pin—pose of enforcing payment of the principal of, or interest or

.i.  ,_ . , ,, _,Preinium. if, ammo, any Notes or for the, inmost: ofexecuting any  _ ,,,
' hereunder, ‘ y, I

(g) power to direct any Noteholder who, as such, has brought any action. suit or
proceeding to may or discontinue or ollrerwisc deal with the same upon payment,
if the taking of such sun, scrim: or proceeding shall have been permitted by
Section 10.6, ofthe costs, charges and expenses reasonably and woperly incurred
by such Notebolder in connection therewith;

(h) power to remove the Trustee at any time;

(i) pom to assent to any compromise or arranth with any creditor or medium
or any class or classes of creditors. whether sooner! or oﬁzemise, and with
holders ofamy shares or other Securities ofthe Corporation; and

(3) power so appoint a comm with power and authoriiy (subject to such
limitations, if any as may be inscribed in the resolution) to exercise and to
direct she Trustee to exercise, on behalf of the Noteholda's, such of the powers of
the Noieiwldeys as are exercisable by Extraordinary Resolution or otherwise as
shall be inciuded in the resolution appoith ihe commitxee. The xesoluiion
making such appoinimem may proviﬁe for payment of the expesses and
dis!)ch of and oomgemaxion to such committee and the Tmssee. Such
committee shall coosisz ofsoch amber of individuals as 3M1 be  in rho

cumsmmmr mosmvocmssxvu


56

resolution appointing it and the members need not be Noteholders. Every such

committee may elect its chairman and may make regulations respecting its

quorum, the calling of its meetings, the ﬁlling of vacancies occurring in its
number and its procedure generally. Such regulations may provide that the
committee may act at a meeting at which a quorum is present or may act by

minutes signed by the number of members thereof necessary to constitute a

quorum. All acts of any such committee within the authority delegated to it shall

be binding upon all Noteholders. Neither the committee nor any member thereof
nor the Trustee shall be liable for any loss arising from or in connection with any
action taken or omitted to be taken by them in good faith;

(It) reduce the principal amount at maturity of, extend the ﬁxed maturity of. or alter
the redemption provisions of, the Notes;

(1) change the currency in which the Notes or any Premium, if any, or interest
thereon is payable:

(in) reduce the percentage in principal amount at maturity outstanding of the Notes
that must consent to an amendment, supplement or waiver or consent to take any
action under this lndenture or the Notes;

(n) impair the right to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment on or with
respect to the Notes;

(0) waive a default in payment with respect to the Notes;

(p) reduce the rate or extend the time for payment of interest on the Notes;

(q) affect the ranking of the Notes in a manner adverse to the Holder of the Notes; or

(r) make any changes to this Indenture or the Notes that could result in the
Corporation being required to make any withholding or deduction from payments
made under or with respect to the Notes.

Except as otherwise provided in this lndenture, all other powers of and matters to
be determined by the Noteholders may be exercised or determined from time to time by Ordinary
Resolution
12.12 Meaning of Ordinary Resolution

The expression “Ordinary Resolution" when used in this lndenture means,
except as otherwise provided in this Indenture, a resolution proposed to be passed as an ordinary
resolution at a meeting of Noteholders, as the case may be, duly convened for the purpose and
held in accordance with the previsions of this Section 12 at which a quorum of Noteholders is
present and passed by the afﬁnnative votes of Noteholders present in person or represented by
proxy at the meeting who hold more than 50% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes
voted in respect of such resolution.
cmouvsscaror PROSPECTUS DEC mxsxv l2


57

12.13 Meaning of Extraordinary Resolution

The expression “Extraordinary Resolution" when used in this Indenture means,
except as otherwise provided in this lndenture, a resolution proposed to be passed as an
extraordinary resolution at a meeting of Noteholders, duly convened for the purpose and held in
accordance with the provisions of this Section at which the Holders of at [wt 51% of the
aggregate principal amount of the Notes then outstanding are present in person or represented by
proxy and passed by the afﬁrmative votes of Noteholders present in person or represented by
proxy at the meeting who hold not less than 66 213% of the aggregate principal amount of the
Notes voted in respect of such resolution.

If, at any such meeting, the Holders of at least 51% of the aggregate principal
amount of the Notes then outstanding are not present in person or represented by proxy within 30
minutes after the time appointed for die meeting, then the meeting. if convened by or on the
requisition of Noteholders, shall be dissolved, but in any other case the meeting shall stand
adjourned to such date. being not less than 21 not more than 60 days later, and to such place and
time as may be appointed by the chainnan of the meeting. Notice of the time and place that such
adjourned meeting is to be reconvened shall be given to the Noteholders in the manner speciﬁed
in Section 12.2 at least 10 days prior to the date the adjourned meeting is to be reconvened. Such
notice shall state that at the adjourned meeting the Noteholders present in person or represented
by proxy shall constitute a quorum, but it shall not be necessary to set forth the purposes for
which the meeting was originally called or any other particulars. At the adjourned meeting, the
Noteholders present in person or represented by proxy shall constitute a quorum and may
transact the business for which the meeting was originally convened. and a resolution proposed
to be passed as an extraordinary resolution at such adjourned meeting and passed by the requisite
vote as provided in this Section 12.13 shall be an Extraordinary Resolution within the meaning
of this lndenture, notwithstanding that the Holders of at least 51% of the aggregate principal
amount of the Notes then outstanding are not present in person or represented by proxy at such
adjourned meeting.
12.14 Powers Cumulative

Any one or more of the powers or any combination of the powers in this
Indenture stated to be exercisable by the Noteholders may be exercised from time to time, and
the exercise of any one or more of such powers or any combination of powers from time to time
shall not be deemed to exhaust the rights of the Noteholders to exercise the same or any other
such power or powers or combination of powers thereafter from time to time.
12.15 Minutes

Minutes of all resolutions and proceedings at every meeting of Noteholders shall
be made and duly entered in books to be from time to time provided for that purpose by the
Trustee at the expense of the Corporation. and any such minutes, if signed by the chairman of the
meeting at which such resolutions were passed or proceedings had, or by the chairman of the
next succeeding meeting of the Noteholders. shall be prime. facic evidence of the matters therein
stated and. unless the contrary is proved, every such meeting, in respect of the proceedings of
which minutes shall have been made, shall be deemed to have been duly held and convened, and
wmmtror PROSPH'PJSDEC 06\23SSV12


58
all resolutions passed thereat orprooeednigs had shall be deemed to have been duly passed and
had.
12.16 Instruments in Writing

All actions which may be taken and all powers which may be exercised by title
Noteholders at a meeting held as provided in this Section 12 may also be taken and exercised by
an instrument in writing signed in one or more counterparts by the Holders of more mm, in
the case of an Ordinary Resolution, or not less than 66 213%, in the case of an Extraordinary
Resolution, of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Notes. and the expressions
“Ordinary Resolulion" and “Extraordinary Resolution” when used in this Index-mire shall include
any instrument so signed.

12.17 Binding Effect of Resolutions
Every resolution passed in accordance with the provisions of this Section 12. at a
; meeting of Noteholdets shall be binding upon all the Noteholdcxs, whether present at or absent
from such meeting, and every instrument in writing signed by Noteholders in accordance with
Section 12.16 shall be binding npon all the Nobeholders, whwier signatories thereto or not, and
each and every Notebolder and the Trustee (subject to the provisions for its renwneration,
indemnification and protection herein contained) shall be bound to give effect aoo’exdingly to
every such resolution and instrument in writing.
12.18 Record Dates
1' ,_ , , ,__ ,, , __ , __ If , the, Cowmtion $11,311 WW , fmm, mt Holders my ,, WWSP- Siemda ,, , ,
' authorization, direction; notice, consent, waiver or other action, the Corporation may, at its
option, by or pursuant to a Certiﬁed Resolution, ﬁx in advance a record date for the
determination of such Holders emitled to provide such request, demand, authorization, direction,
notice, consent, waiver or other action, but the Corporation shall have no obligation to do so.
Any such record date shall be the record date speciﬁed in or pursuant to such Certiﬁed
Resolution.

If such a record date is ﬁxed, such request, demand, authorization, direction,
notice, consent, waiver or other action may be given before or after such record date, bat only the
Holders of record at the close of business on such record daze shall be deemed to he Holders for
the purposes of determining Whether Holders of the requisite proportion of Notes then
outstanding have amortized or agreed or consented to such request, demand, audloﬁwion,
direct'xm, notice, consent, waiver or other Act, and for this purpose she Notes then outstanding
shall be computed as of such record date.

SECTION 13 NOTICES
13.1 Notice to the Corporation

Any notice to the Corporation under the provisions hereof shall be valid and
effective if delivered to the Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of the Corporation or if sent by facsimile
transmission (with receipt omﬁnncd) [D the attention of the Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of the
wovmwmowmsmmvn


59

Corporation at Mercator Minerals Ltd. 1971 Sandcwn Place, North Vancouver, V7? SCB, fax:
(604) 960-9661, with a copy for informational purposes only to DuMoulin Black LLP, attention
Corey M. Dean, 10"1 Floor, 595 Howe Street, Vancouver, BC, V6C 2T5, fax: (604) 687-8772,
and shall be deemed to have been validly given at the time of delivery or transmission if it is
received prior to 4:00 p.m. (Vancouver time) on a Business Day, failing which it shall be deemed
to have been given on the next Business Day, The Corporation may from time to time notify the
Trustee of a change in address or facsimile number which thereafter, until changed by like
notice, shall be the address or facsimile number of the Corporation for all purposes of this
lndenture,
13.2 Notice to Noteholders

Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Indenture, any notice to Noteholders
under the provisions hereof shall be valid and effective if it is delivered, sent by electronic
communication or mailed postage prepaid, addressed to such Noteholders, at their addresses or
electronic communication numbers, if any, appearing in the Register and, subject as provided in
this Section 13.2, shall be deemed to have been received at the time of delivery or sending by
electronic oonununication or on the second Business Day after the day on which it was mailed,
Any notice made by delivery or sent by electronic communication on a day other than a Business
Day, or after 4:00 pm. (Vancouver time) on a Business Day, shall be deemed to be received on
the next following Business Day, All notices to joint Holders of any Notes may be given to
whichever one of the Holders thereof is named ﬁrst in the Register, and any notice so given shall
be sufficient notice to all holders of such Note. In the event of a postal disruption, notice to
Noteholders shall be given or sent by other appropriate means,
13.3 Notice to the Trustee

Any notice to the Trustee under the provisions hereof shall be valid and effective
if delivered to the Trustee at 510 Burrard Street, 3rd Floor, Vancouver, B.C., V6C 339,
Attention: Corporate Trust Department, fax no: (604) 6613403, or if sent by facsimile
transmission (with receipt conﬁrmed) to and shall be deemed to have been validly given at the
time of delivery or transmission if it is received prior to 4:00 pm, (Vancouver time) on a
Business Day, failing which it shall be deemed to have been given on the next Business Day.
The Trustee may from time to time notify the Corporation of a change in address or facsimile
number which thereafter, until changed by like notice, shall be the address or facsimile number
of the Trustee for all purposes of this Indenture.
13.4 When Publication Not Required

If at any time a notice is required by this lndenture to be published in a particular
city and no newspaper of general circulation is then being published and circulated on a daily
basis in that city, the Corporation shall not be required to publish such notice in that city.
13.5 Waiver of Notice

Any notice provided for in this lndenture may be waived in writing by the Person
entitled to receive such notice, either before or after the event, and such waiver shall be the
equivalent of such notice. Waivers of notice by Noteholders shall be filed with the Trustee, but
CMDVQBSDZWOP PROSPECTUS DECOOQSWV l 2


60
such ﬁling shall not be a condition precedent to the validity of any action taken in reliance upon
such waivers.
SECTION 14 CONCERNING THE TRUSTEE
14.1 Corporate Trustee Required Eligibility

The Trustee shall at all times be a corporation organized under the laws of Canada
or any province thereof and represents to the Corporation that at the date of exwution and
delivery by it of this Indenture, it is duly authorized and qualiﬁed to carry on the business of a
trust company in each of the provinces and territories of Canada, If at any time the Trustee shall
cease to be eligible in accordance with this Section 14, it shall resign immediately in the manner
and with the effect hereinafter speciﬁed in this Section 14.

14.2 Certain Duties and Responsibilities of Trustee

In the exercise of the rights. powers and duties prescribed or conferred by the
terms of this lndenture. the Trustee shall act honestly and in good faith and exercise that degree
of care, diligence and skill that a reasonably prudent trustee would exercise in comparable
circumstances, and shall duly observe and comply with the provisions of any legislation and
regulations which relate to the functions or role of the Trustee as a ﬁduciary hereunder. The
duties and obligations of the Trustee shall be determined solely by the provisions hereof and,
accordingly, the Trustee shall not be responsible except for the performance of such duties and

r obligations as they have undertaken herein. None of the provisions of this lndenture shall
require the Trustee to expend or risk its own funds or otherwise incur ﬁnancial liability in the
performance of any of its duties or in the exercise of any of its rights or powers nor shall the
Trustee be so compelled pursuant to any provisions contained in this Indeuture.

The Trustee. upon the, occurrence or at any time during the continuance of any
act, action or proceeding, may require the Noteholders at whose instance it is acting to deposit
with it any Notes held by them, for which Notes the Trustee shall issue receipts.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this lndenture to the contrary, every
provision of this Indenture that by its terms relieves the Trustee of liability or entitles the Trustee
to rely or act upon any evidence submitted to it is subject to the provisions of applicable
legislation. this Section 14.2 and Section 143.

No provision of this lndenrure shall operate to confer any obligation. duty or
power on the Trustee in any jurisdiction in which it does not have the legal capacity required to
assume, hold or carry out such obligation, duty or powers For the purposes of this Section l4.2,
legal capacity includes. without limitation. the capacity to act as a fiduciary in such jurisdiction.
14.3 No Conﬂict of Interest

(a) The Trustee represents to the Corporation that at the date of die execution and
delivery of this lndenture there exists no material conﬂict of interest in the

Trustee’s role as a fiduciary hereunder, it" at any time a material conﬂict of

interest exists in respect of the Trustee‘s role as a ﬁduciary under this indenturc
cmmgssozwor Paosrncrus oat mussxvn


61
that is not eliminated within 90 days after the Trustee becomes aware that such a
material conﬂict of interest exists, the Trustee shall resign from the trnsm under
this ludenture by giving notice in writing of such resignation and the nature of
such conflict to the Corporation at least 21 days prior to the date upon which such
resignation is to take effect, and shall on such date be discharged from all further
duties and liabilities hewunder. The validity and enforceability of this lndenture
and any Notes shall not be affected in any manner whatsoever by reason only of
the existence of a material conﬂict of interest of the Trustee.
(b) If at any time the Trustee fails to comply with the provisions of Section 143(3),
the Trustee shall within l0 days after the expiration of the 90—day period referred
to therein, transmit notice of such failure to the Holders in the manner provided
for notices to the Holders in Section 13.2
14.4 Conditions Precedent to Trustee’s Obligation to Act

The Trustee shall not be bound to give any notice or take any action or proceeding
unless it is required to do so under the terms of this Indenture. The Trustee shall not be required
to take notice of an Event of Default under this Indenture, other than in respect of payment of
any money required by any provision of this Indenture to he paid to it, unless and until the
Trustee is notified in writing of such Event of Default by any Noteholder or the Corporation, of
such Event of Default. In the absence of such written notice the Trustee may for all purposes of
this Indenture assume that no Event of Default has occurred.

The obligation of the Trustee to commence or continue any act‘ action or

, proceeding under this lndenturc shall be conditional upon its receipt of the following:

(a) an Extraordinary Resolution, Ordinary Resolution. Noteholders’ Request,
requisition in writing, or such other notice or direction as is required pursuant to
this Indenture. specifying the action or proceeding which the Trustee is requested,
directed or authorized to take;

(b) sufﬁcient ﬁunds to commence or continue such act, action or proceeding; and

(c) an indemnity satisfactory to the Trustee to protect and hold harmless the Trustee
against the costs, charges, expenses and liabilities to be incurred thereby and any
loss and damages it may suffer by reason meteor?

14.5 Resignation and Removal; Appointment of Successor

(a) No resignation or removal of the Trustee and no appointment of a successor
Trustee pursuant to this Section 14.5 shall become effective until the acceptance
of appointment by the successor Trustee under Section 14.6.

(b) The Trustee may resign at any time by giving 60 days’ written notice thereof to
the Corporation. If an instrument of acceptance by a successor Trustee shall not
have been deiivered to the resigning Trustee within 30 days after the giving of

mmsmmp PROSPECTUS arc mosssvn


62
such notice of resignation, the resigning Trustee may petition any court of
competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor Trustee.
(c) The Trustee may be removed at any time by an Extraordinary Resolution of the
Noteholders.
(d) If at any time:
(i) the Trustee shall fail to comply with the provisions of Section 14.3, or
(ii) the Trustee shall cease to be eligible under Section 14.1 and shall fail to
resign after written request therefor by the Corporation or by any Holder
who has been a bona ﬁde Noteholder for at least six months. or
(iii) the Trustee shall become incapable of acting or shall be adjudged as
bankrupt or insolvent, or a receiver of the Trustee or of its property shall
be appointed or any public officer shall take charge or control of the
Trustee or of its property or affairs for the purpose of rehabilitation.
conservation or liquidation,
then, in any case,
(A) the Corporation by a Certified Resolution may remove the Trustee,
or
(B) in the case of clause (i) above, a Noteholder and any other
interested party, and in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) above, any
Notcholder may, on behalf of himself and all others similarly
situated, petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the
removal of the Trustee and the appointment of a successor Trustee.
(e) If the Trustee shall resign. be removed or become incapable of acting, or if a
vacancy shall occur in the ofﬁce of the Trustee for any cause, the Corporation, by
a Certiﬁed Resolution. shall promptly appoint a successor Trustee. If, within one
year after such resignation removal or incapahiliry, or the occurrence of such
vacancy, a successor Trustee shall be appointed by Ordinary Resolution of the
Noteholders, the successor Trustee so appointed shall, forthwith upon its
acceptance of such appointment in accordance with Section 14.6, become the
successor Trustee and supersede the successor Trustee appointed by the
Corporation If no successor Trustee shall have been so appointed by the
Corporation or the Holders of the Notes and so accepted such appointment. a
Noteholcler may on behalf of himself and all others similarly slanted, petition any
court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a successor Trustee. Any
successor Trustee appointed under any provision of this Section 145 shall be a
corporation authorized to carry on the business of a trust company in all of the
provinces of Canada.
CMDUQSSOZWP PROSPECTUS DECOéQSSXVl’Z


63
(i) The Corporation shall give notice of each resignation and each removal of the

Trustee andeach appointment of a successor Trustee by mailing written notice of

such event by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the Noteholders as their names

and addresses appear in the Register. Alternatively, the Corporation may give

such notice pursuant to a bulletin issued by CDS. Each notice shall include the

name of the successor Trustee and the address of its Corporate Trust Office.
14.6 Acceptance of Appointment by Successor

Every successor Trustee appointed hereunder shall execute. acknowledge and
deliver to the Corporation and to the retiring Trustee an insn'ument accepting such appointment,
and thereupon the resignation or removal of the retiring Trustee shall become effective and such
successor Trustee, without any further act, deed or conveyance, shall become vested with all the
rights, powers. CRISIS and duties of the retiring Trustee; but, upon written request of the
Corporation or the successor Trustee, such retiring Trustee shall, upon payment of all amounts
due it under Section 9.6, execute and deliver an instrument transferring to such successor Trustee
all the rights, powers and trusts of the retiring Trustee, and shall duly assign, transfer and deliver
to such successor Trustee all property and money held by such retiring Trustee hereunder subject
to the claim provided for in Section 9.6. Upon request of any such successor Trustee, acting
reasonably. the Corporation shall execute any and all deeds, conveyances or instruments for
more fully and certainly vesting in and confirming to it such rights, powers and trusts.
No successor Trustee shall accept its appointment unless at the time of such acceptance such
successor Trustee shall be qualified and eligible under this Section 14.
14.7 Trustee May Deal in Notes

The Trustee may buy, sell, lend upon and deal in the Notes and generally contract
and enter into financial transactions with the Corporation or otherwise, without being liable to
account for any profits made thereby.
14.8 No Person Dealing with Trustee Need Inquire

No Person dealing with the Trustee shall be required to inquire as to whether the
powers that the Trustee is purporting to exercise have become exercisable, or whether any
amount remains due upon the Notes or to see to the application of any amount paid to the
Trustee.
14.9 Investment of Money Held by Trustee

Unless otherwise provided in this Indenture (including the provisions of
Section 14‘5), any funds held by the Trustee under the trusts of this lndcnture shall be deposited
in a trust account in the name of the Trustee, (i) in any Canadian chartered bank at the rate of
interest (if any) then current on similar deposits, or (ii) in the deposit department of the Trustee at
the Trustee‘s prevailing rate for all moneys held by it as may change from time to time. which
account shall be interest-bearing unless othenvise agreed by the Corporation. Upon the written
direction of the Corporation, the Trustee shall invest such funds in Authorized investments in its
name and in accordance with such d'mction. Any direction by the Corporation to the Trustee as
CMDQSSSOZWOP PROSPECTUS DEC’OGVS’SSV I2


64
to the investment of funds shall be in writing and shall be provided to the Trustee not later than
9:00 am. (Vancouver time) on the Business Day on which the investment is to be made Any
such direction received by the Trustee after 9:00 am. (Vancouver time) or received on a day
which is not a Business Day shall be deemed to have been given prior to 9:00 am. (Vancouver
time) on the next Business Day The Trustee shall not be held liable for any losses incurred in
the investment of any funds in Authorized hivestments.

All interest or other income received by the Trustee in respect of any investment
or deposit made pursuant to the provisions of this Section 149 shall belong to the Corporation,
and unless and until the Trustee shall have declared the principal of and Premium, if any, and
interest on the Notes to be due and payable, the Trustee shall pay over to the Corporation all such
interest and other income forthwith upon receipt thereof by the Trustee
14.10 Trustee Not Required to Give Security

The Trustee shall not be required to give any bond or security in respect of the
execution of the trusts and powers of this lndenture or otherwise in respect of this Indenture.
14.11 Trustee Not Required to Possess Notes

All rights of action under this Indenture may be enforced by the Trustee without
the possession of any of the Notes or the production thereof on any trial or other proceedings
relative thereto.

14.12 Evidence of Compliance

The Corporation shall furnish to the Trustee forthwith evidence of compliance
with the conditions specified in this lndenture relating to the issue, certification, authentication
and delivery of Notes hereunder, the satisfaction and discharge of this lndenture or the taking of
any other action to be taken by the Trustee at the request of or on the application of the
Corporation. Such evidence shall consist of:

(a) an Ofﬁcer‘s Certiﬁcate addressed to the Trustee stating that such conditions have
been complied with in accordance with the terms of this lndenture; and

(b) in the case of conditions, compliance with which are by this Indenture subject to
review or examination by Corporation Counsel, an opinion of Corporation

Counsel addressed to the Trustee that such conditions have been complied with in

accordance with the terms of this lndenture, including any statements required by

Applicable Law.
14.13 Form of Evidence

Evidence furnished to the Trustee, which relates to a matter other than the issue,
certiﬁcation and delivery of Notes or the satisfaction and discharge of this indenture or the
compliance with a particular term of the Indenture which speciﬁes more particularly the nature
of evidence required for compliance, may consist of or otherwise be in accordance with a report
or opinion of any solicitor, auditor. accountant, mgineer or appraiser or any other Person whose
CMDusssothor mosmcros nae oouassv 12


65
qualifications give authority to a statement made by such Person, but if such report or opinion is
furnished by a Director, ofﬁcer or employee of the Corporation it shall be in the form of a
statutory declaration or a certiﬁcate.
Evidence furnished to the Trustee pursuant to Section 1412 or this Section 14.13
shall include:

(a) a statement by the Person giving the evidence declaring that such Person has read
and understands the provisions hereof relating to the conditions precedent with
respect to compliance with which such evidence is being given:

(b) a statement describing the nature and scope of the examination or investigation
upon which the statements or opinions contained in the evidence are based;

(c) a statement declaring that. in the belief of the Person giving the evidence, such
Person has made such examination or investigation as is necessary to enable such
Person to make the statements or give the opinions contained or expressed
therein; and

(d) a statement permitting and acknowledging reliance thereon by Holders.

14.14 Certain Rights of Trustee
Subject to the provisions of Section 14.2.

(a) the Trustee may conclusively act and rely as to the truth of the statements and
correctness of the opinions expressed in, shall not be bound to make any
investigation into the facts or matters of, and shall be frilly protected in acting or
relying or refraining from acting upon, any resolution, certificate, statement,
statutory declaration, instrument opinion, report, notice, request, direction,
consent, order, bond, Note, note, other evidence of indebtedness or other paper or
document believed by it to be genuine and to have been signed or presented by
the proper party or parties:

(b) any request or order of the Corporation shall be sufﬁciently evidenced by a
request or order in writing and signed by any officer of the Corporation, any
resolution of the Directors shall be sufﬁciently evidenced by a Certiﬁed
Resolution, and the Trustee may conclusively act and rely on any such request.
order or Certified Resolution;

(c) whenever in the administration of this Indenture the Trustee shall deem it
desirable that a matter be proved or established prior to taking, suffering or
omitting any action hereunder, the Trustee (unless other evidence is herein
speciﬁcally prescribed) may, in the absence of bad faith on its part. rely and act
upon an Ofﬁcer's Certiﬁcate;

to) the Trustee at the expense of the Corporation may consult with Trustee Counsei
and such other experts and advisers as the Trustee believes are necessary to

CMDL’Y‘JKSOZWP PROSPECTUSDEC 0&2358V12


66
enable it to determine and discharge its duties hereunder, and the advice or
opinion of the Trustee Counsel, experts or advisers shall be full and complete
authorization and protection in respect of any action taken, suffered or omitted by
it hereunder in good faith and in reliance thereon; and
(e) the Trustee shall not be under any obligation to exercise any of the rights or
powers vested in it by this Indenture at the request or direction of any of the
Noteholders pursuant to this [ndenture unless such Notcholders shall have offered
to the Trustee sufﬁcient funding and indemnity against the costs, expenses and
liabilities which might be incurred by it in compliance with such request or
direction, and provisions of this Indenture relating to the conduct or affecting the
liability of or affording protection to the Trustee shall be subject to the provisions
of this Section 14. 14(e).
14.15 Merger, Conversion, Consolidation or Succession to Businm
Any corporation into which the Trustee may be merged or with which it may he
amalgamated or consolidated, or any corporation resulting from any merger, amalgamation or
consolidation to which the Trustee shall be a party, or any corporation succeeding to all or
substantially all the corporate trust business of the Trustee, shall be the successor of the Trustee
hereunder, provided such corporation shall be otherwise qualiﬁed and eligible under this Section
14, without the need for execution or ﬁling of any specific instrument or any further act on the
part of any of the parties hereto to evidence same.
14.16 Action by Trustee to Protect Interests
The Trustee shall have power to institute and maintain such actions and
proceedings as it may consider necessary or expedient to preserve. protect or enforce its interests
and the interests of the Noteholders.
14.17 Protection of Trustee
The Corporation hereby indemnifies and saves harmless the Trustee and its
directors. ofﬁcers and employees (each in this paragraph, an “Indemniﬁed Persons") from and
against all claims. demands, losses. actions, causes of action, costs, charges. expenses, damages,
taxes (other than income or capital taxes), penalties and liabilities whatsoever brought against or
incurred by the Trustee (collectively in this paragraph, “Claims"), including Claims arising
under or pursuant to Environmental Laws, which it may suffer or incur as a result of or arising in
connection with the performance of its duties and obligations under this lndenture, including any
and all legal fees and disbursements of whatever kind or nature, except that no Indemnified
Person shall be entitled to indemniﬁcation in respect of a Claim resulting from the gross
negligence, fraud. wilful misconduct or the failure of the Trustee to perform its obligations in
accordance with Section 142. This indemnity shall survive the removal or resignation of the
Trustee under this lndenture and the termination of this lndenture.
The Trustee shall not be liable for or by reason of any statements of fact in this
indenture or in the Notes (except for the representations contained in Sections 14.3 and in the
CMoccssozwor pnosmos oar: onzsssvn


67
certiﬁcate of the Trustee on die Notes) or required to verify such statements, and all such
statements are and shall be deemed to be made by the Corporation.

The Trustee shall not be bound to give notice to any Person of the execution of
this Indentute.

The Trustee shall not incur any liability or responsibility whatever or in any way
be responsible for the consequence of any breach on the part of the Corporation of any of the
covenants contained in this Indenture or in any Notes or of any acts of the agean or employees
of the Corporation

Neither the Trustee nor any Affiliate of the Trustee shall be appointed a meiver
or receiver and manager or liquidator of all or any part of the assets or undertaking of the
Corporation

Nothing in this Indenture shall impose on the Trustee any obligation to see to, or
to require evidence of, the registration or ﬁling (or renewal thereof) of this lndenture or any
instrument ancillary or supplemental to this Indemure in any jurisdiction.

The Trustee shall not:

(a) be responsible or liable for any debts contracted by it, for damages to persons or
property. for salaries, or for non—fulﬁlment of contracts in any period during
which the Trustee is managing or in possession of assets of the Corporation;

(b) be liable to account as mortgagee in possession or for anything other than actual
receipts or be liable for any loss on realization or for any default or omission for
which a mortgagee in possession may be liable;

(c) be bound to do, observe or perform or to see to the observance of performance by
the Corporation of any obligations or covenants imposed upon the Corporation; or

(d) in the case of any chattel paper, security or instrument, be obligated to preserve
rights against any other Persons.

and the Corporation waives any provision of Applicable Law permitted to be waived by it which
imposes higher or greater obligations upon the Trustee

The Trustee shall not be responsible or liable in any manner whatever for die
sufﬁciency, correctness, genuineness or validity of any security deposited with it.

The Trustee shall not incur any liability with respect to the delivery or non-
delivery of any certiﬁcate or certiﬁcates whether delivered by hand, mail or any other means.

The Trustee shall not be responsible for ensuring that the proceeds from the sale
of Notes are used in a manner contemplated by any prospectus pursuant to which such Notes
were offered or sold
CMD\293562\POP PROSPEXTI'US DECOéVlSSBVlZ


68
The Corporation hereby uidemniﬁes and holds harmless the Trustee, its directors,
othcers, employees, and agents, and all of their respective representatives. heirs, successors and
assigns (collectively in this and the next paragraph the "Indemnified Parties") against any loss,
expenses, claim, proceedings, judgment, liability or asserted liability (including strict liability
and including costs and expenses of abatement and remediation of spills or releases of
contaminants and including liabilities of the Indemnified Parties to third parties [including
governmental agencies] in respect of bodily injuries, property damage, damage to or impairment
of the environment or any other injury or damage and including liabilities of the Indemnified
Parties to third parties for the third parties' foreseeable and unforeseeable consequential
damages) incurred as a result of:
(a) the administration of the trust created hereby;
(b) the exercise by the Trustee of any rights hereunder or under the Security

Documents which create an interest in property (in this paragraph, “Mortgaged

Property”);

which result from or relate, directly or indirectly. to:

(i) the presence or release of any contaminants, by any means or for any
reason, on the Mortgaged Property. whether or not release or presence of
the contaminants was under the control, care or management of the
Corporation or of a previous owner. or of a tenant;

(ii) any contaminant present on or released from any contiguous property to

I ' the Mortgaged Property; or

(iii) the breach or alleged breach of any environmental laws by the
Corporation. a

For purposes of the previous paragraph. “liability” shall include (i) liability of an

Indemniﬁed Party for costs and expenses of abatement and remediation of spills and releams of
contaminants, (ii) liability of an Indemniﬁed Party to a third party to reimburse the third party for
bodily injuries, property damages and other injuries or damages which the third party suffers,
including (to the extent‘ if any, that the Indemniﬁed Party is liable therefor) foreseeable and
unforeseeable consequential damages suffered by the third party and (iii) liability of the
Indemniﬁed Party for damage suffered by the third party, (iv) liability of an Indemnified Party
for damage to or impairment of die environment and (v) liability of an indemniﬁed Party for
court costs expenses of alternative dispute resolution proceedings, and fees and disbursements of
expert consultants and legal counsel on a solicitor and client basis.

14.18 Trustee Not Liable in Respect of Depository

The Trustee shall not have any liability whatsoever for:

(a) any aspect of the records relating to or payments made on account of beneﬁcial

ownership interests in the Notes held by and registered in the name of a

Depository or any BEG Participant;

CMW9XSO‘N’OP mosracms mmnsvn


69

(b) maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to such beneﬁcial
ownership interests; or

(c) any advice or representation made or given by or with respect to a Depository and
made or given herein with respect to rules of such Depository or any action to be
taken by a Depository or at the direction of a BBC Participant,

14.19 Global Notes
Notes issued to a Depository in the form of a Global Note shall be subject to the
following:

(a) the Trustee may deal with the Depository as the authorized representative of the
beneﬁcial owners of such Notes;

(b) the rights of the beneﬁcial owners of such Notes shall be exercised only through

, such Depository;
(c) such Depository will make hook-entry transfers among the BBQ Participants and
will receive and transmit distributions of principal, Premium. if any, and interest
on the Notes to the BBC Participants: and
(d) the EEO Participants shall have no rights under this Indenture or under or with
respect to any of the Notes held on their behalf by such Depository, and the
Depository may be treated by the Trustee and its agents, employees. ofﬁcers and
directors as the absolute owner of the Notes represented by such Global Note for
all purposes whatsoever.
14.20 Trustee Appointed Attorney

The Corporation hereby irrevocably appoints the Trustee to be the attorney of the
Corporation in the name and on behalf of the Corporation to execute any documents and to do
any acts and things which the Corporation ought to execute and do, and has not executed or
done, under the covenants and provisions contained in this Indenture and generally to use the
name of the Corporation in the exercise of all or any of the powezs hereby conferred on the
Trustee, with full powers of substitution and revocation.
14.21 Acceptance of Trusts

The Trustee hereby accepts the trusts in this lndenture declared and provided for
and agrees to perform the same upon the terms and conditions set forth in this Indenture and in
trust for the Note-holders from time to time. subject to the terms and conditions of this Indenture
14.22 No Liability for Certain Deposited Monies

The Trustee will bear no liability for monies deposited other than with the
Trustee, The Trustee will disburse monies according to this lndenture only to the extent that
monies have been deposited with it.
CMD\295502\POP PROSPECTUS DECOGVSSSV I 2


70
14.23 Third Party Interests
Each party to this Indenturc hereby represents to the Trustee that any account to
be opened by. or interest to held by. the Trustee in connection with this Indenture, for or to the
credit of such party, either (i) is not intended to be used by or on behalf of any third party; or (ii)
is intended to be used by or on behalf of a third party, in which case such party hereto agrees to
complete and execute forthwith a declaration in the Trustee’s prescribed form as to the
particulars of such third party
14.24 Trustee Not Bound to Act
The Trustee shall retain the right not to act and shall not be liable for refusing to
act if, due to a lack of information or for any other reason whatsoever, the Trustee in its sole
judgment, determines that such act might cause it to be in non—compliance with any applicable
anti-money laundering or anti—terrorist legislation, regulation or guideline Further, should the
Trustee, in its sole judgment, determine at any time that its acting under this lndenttue has
resulted in its being in non-compliance with any applicable anti-money laundering or anti»
terrorist legislation, regulation or guideline, then it shall have the right to resign on 10 days
written notice to the other parties to this Indenture, provided (i) that the Trustee’s written notice
shall describe the circumstances of such non—compliance; and (ii) that if such circumstances are
rectiﬁed to the Trustee’s satisfaction within such 10 day period, then such resignation shall not
be effective.
14.25 Privacy Laws
The parties acknowledge that federal and/or provincial legislation that addresses
the protection of individuals’ personal information (collectively, “Privacy Laws”) applies to
obligations and activities under this Indenture Despite any other provision of this Indenture,
neither party shall take or direct any action that would contravene. or cause the other to
contravene, applicable Privacy Laws. The Corporation shall, prior to transferring or causing to be
transferred personal information to the Trustee, obtain and retain required consents of the
relevant individuals to the collection, use and disclosure of their personal information, or shall
have determined that such consents either have previously been given upon which the parties can
rely or are not required under the Privacy Laws. The Trustee shall use commercially reasonable
efforts to ensure that its services hereunder comply with Privacy Laws.
SECTION 15 SECURITY
15.1 Corporation’s Security
To secure the due payment of all Note Indebtedness. and the performance by the Corporation of
its obligations contained in the Indenture Documents to which it is a party. the Corporation shall
execute and deliver to the Trustee. for the beneﬁt of the Noteholders, the Security Documents
and shall grant a lien in the Secured Assets
CMD\29SS(72\PDP PROSPECTUS DEC 06\2358V12


71

15.2 Registration of the Security

The Corporation shall, at its expense, register, ﬁle or record or give notice of (or
cause to be registered, ﬁled, recorded or given notice of) the Security Documents in all ofﬁces
where such registration, ﬁling or recording is reasonably necessary or of reasonable advantage to
the creation, perfection and preserving of the security constituted thereby including, without
limitation, any applicable land or personal property registry offices The Corporation shall (at
the expense of the Corporation) renew or cause to be renewed such registrations, filings and
recordings from time to time as and when required to keep them in full force and effect until the
Maturity Date, The Trustee shall have the right to amend any such registrations, ﬁlings or
recordings to reﬂect any changes in Applicable Law, whether arising as a result of statutory
amendments, court decisions or otherwise, in order to confer upon the Trustee (for the beneﬁt of
the Noteholders) the Liens intended to be created thereby, except that in no event shall the
Trustee effect any such amendment if the result thereof would be to grant the Trustee or the
Noteholders greater rights than is otherwise contemplated herein.
15.3 After Acquired Property and Further Assurances

The Corporation shall. from time to time. upon the request of the Trustee (as
directed by an Ordinary Resolution), execute and deliver all such further deeds or other
instruments of conveyance, assignment, transfer, mortgage, pledge or charge as may be required
to ensure that any additional interests in any assets acquired after the date hereof are subject to
the security interests created pursuant to the Security Documents in the manner contemplated
hereby.
15.4 Partial Discharges

Upon the sale or transfer of any assets permitted under this Indenture, the Trustee
shall, at the request and expense of the Corporation, execute and deliver to the Corporation such
deeds or other instruments as may be necessary to release such asset from the Liens created by
the Security Documents provided that such deeds or other instruments are in form and substance
satisfactory to the Trustee and the Trustee Counsel. both acting reasonably
SECTION 16 SUPPLEMENTAL INDENTURES
16.1 Supplemental Indentures

From time to time the Trustee and, when authorized by a resolution of its
Directors, the Corporation may, without the consent of any Noteholder, and they shall when
required by this Indenture, execute, acknowledge and deliver by their proper ofﬁcers
Supplemental lndentures. which thereafter shall form part of this lndenture, for any one or more
of the following purposes:

(a) adding to the covenants of the Corporation herein contained for the protection of
the Noteholders or providing for Events of Default in addition to those herein
speciﬁed;

CMD\298$02\POP PROSPECTUS DEC’OSQSSBVIZ


72

(b) making such provisions not inconsistent with this Indenture as may be necessary
or desirable with respect to matters or quwtions arising hereunder, including the
making of any modifications in the form of the Notes which do not affect the
substance thereof and which it may be expedient to make, provided that such
provisions and modiﬁcations will not adversely affect the intetests of the
Noteholders;

(c) evidencing the succession, or successive successions, of successors to the
Corporation and the covenants of and obligations assumed by any such successor
in accordance with the provisions of this Indenture; and

(d) giving effect to any Extraordinary Resolution or Ordinary Resolution.

The Trustee may also, without the consent or concurrence of the Noteholders. by
Supplemental Indenture or otherwise, concur with the Corporation in making any changes or
corrections in this Indenture or in any Supplemental Note which it shall have been advised by
Trustee Counsel are required for the purpose of curing or correcting any ambiguity or defective
or inconsistent provision or omission or mistake or manifest error contained herein or in any
Supplemental lndenture, provided that the rights of the Noteholders are in no way adversely
affected thereby
16.2 Effect of Supplemental Indentures

Upon the execution of any Supplemental Indenture relating to some or all Notes,
this Indenture shall be modified in accordance therewith, such Supplemental lndenture shall
form a part of this Indenture for all purposes in relation to such Notes. and every Holder of such
Notes shall be bound thereby, Any Supplemental Indenture providing for the issue of Notes may
contain terms which add to, modify or negate any of the terms contained in this lndenture in
relation to the Notes to be so issued, and to the extent that there is any difference between the
terms of this Indenture and the terms contained in 3 Supplemental Indenture, the terms contained
in the Supplemental Indenture shall be applicable to the Notes unless otherwise indicated in such
Supplemental Indenture; provided that no provision in a Supplemental lndenture shall adversely
affect the rights of holders of Notes.
16.3 Execution of Supplemental Indentures

In executing, or accepting the additional mists created by, any Supplemental
lndenture permitted by this lndenture or the modiﬁcations thereby of the trusts Created by this
lndenture, the Trustee shall be entitled to receive, and shall be fully protected in acting and
relying upon, an opinion of Corporation Counsel stating that the execution of such Supplemental
Indenture is authorized or permitted by this Indenturer The Trustee may, but shall not be
obligated to. enter into any such Supplemental lndenture which affects the Trustee’s own rights,
duties or immunities under this lndenture or otherwise.
CMmESSDmP PROSPECTUS DEC 0&2358V12


73

SECTION 17 EVIDENCE OF RIGHTS OF NOTEHOLDERS
17.1 Evidence of Rights of Noteholders

Any instrument which this lndenture may require or permit to be signed or
executed by the Noteholders may be in any number of concurrent instruments of similar tenor
and may be signed or executed by such Noteholders in person or by attorney duly appointed in
writing. Proof of the execution of any such instrument, or of a writing appointing any such
attorney or of the holding by any Person of Notes shall be sufficient for any purpose of this
Indenture if the fact and date of the execution by any Person of such instrument or writing are
proved by the certiﬁcate of any notary public or other ofﬁcer authorized to take
acknowledgements of deeds to be recorded at the place at which such certiﬁcate is made that the
Person signing such request or other instrument or writing acknowledged to him the execution
thereof, or by an afﬁdavit of a witness of such execution, or in any other manner which the
Trustee may consider adequate.

- The Trustee may, nevertheless, in its discretion, require further proof when it

deems further proof desirable or may accept such other proof as it shall consider proper.

The ownership of Notes shall be proved by the Register as herein provided.
SECTION 18 EXECUTION AND FORMAL DATE
18.1 Counterpart Execution

This Indenture may he executed in several counterparts, each of which when so
executed shall be deemed to be an original, and such counterparts together shall constitute one
and the same instrument
18.2 Formal Date

For the purpose of convenience, this Indenture may be referred to as hearing the
formal date of February 15, 2007, irrespective of the actual date of execution hereof.

[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]

CMmSOQWOP ROSPECI‘US DEC OGQSSBVIZ


74
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the paﬁies hereto have executed this Indcmure under
the hands of their proper signatories in that behalf.
MERCATOR MINERALS LIMITED
By: "Signed"
Authorized Signing Ofﬁcer
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY
OF CANADA
By: "Signed"
By: "Signed"
cmmvssozwov PROSPECTUS mm 062353V‘12


7S
SCHEDULE 1
EXISTING SECURED EQUIPMENT DEBT
As at December 31, 2006, the list of the Existing Secured Equipment Debt is as follows:
Mineral Park Inc Original Loan QB Balance Due Equipment Description
Secured Debt Amount
(USS)
SS
CiliCapilal Commercial 21950030 173,452.33 Konmsu 2cm WA380 Under 5n
Corp M3159 ~ Komalsu 2007 WB 146
Backhoe sn M3174
CitiCapital Commercial 45,425.00 36,! 36‘ l7 Imenmtional 4900 Field Pm
C . Mechanics Truck
Mohave State Bank 86267663 hlgcrsolbkand Blastllole DML
Drill
3,000,000,00 122170337 Four Terex 100 Ton Haul Trucks
Calerpillar Financial 1.584.] 16‘ IO 1,524,745.47 Caterpillar DlO Dow -
Sen/ice Ca ' illar 16H Grader
Caterpillar Financial 105693100 3016,] l0.98 RHI ZOE O K Shovel
Service
—  mums -
CMD\Z9SS()2\POP mosmcrus mac osmssvu


76
SCHEDULE 2 ‘
FORM OF NOTE
THIS NOTE IS A NOTE WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE NOTE INDENTURE AND
IS REGISTERED IN THE NAME OF A DEPOSITORY OR A NOMINEE THEREOF.
UNLESS THIS NOTE IS PRESENTED BY AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE 0F
TIE CANADIAN DEPOSITORY FOR SECURITIES LIMITED (“CBS”) T0 ' -
MERCA’I’OR MINERALS LTD. OR ITS AGENT FOR REGISTRATION OF
TRANSFER, EXCHANGE OR PAYMENT, AND ANY NOTE ISSUED IN RESPECT
THEREOF IS REGISTERED IN THE NAME OF CBS 8; (30., OR IN SUCH OTHER
NAME AS IS REQUESTED BY AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF CBS (AND
ANY PAYMENT IS MADE TO CBS & 00., OR TO SUCH OTHER ENTITY AS IS
REQUESTED BY AN AUTHORIZE!) REPRESENTATIVE 0!? CBS), ANY TRANSFER,
- PLEDGE OR OTHER USE IIEREOF FOR "VALUE OR OTHERWISE BY OR TO ANY
PERSON IS WRONGFUL SINCE THE REGISTERED HOLDER HEREOF, (IDS 3: CO.,
, HAS AN INTEREST HEREIN. THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED PURSUANT TO A

MASTER LETTER OF REPRESENTATIONS 0F MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. AS
SUCH LETTER MAY BE REPLACED 0R AMENDED FROM TIME TO TIME.

No.

- MERCA’I’OR MINERAIS LTD.
(Incorporated under the laws of British Columbia)
11.5% SECURED NOTE DUE FEBRUARY 16, 2012
Principal Amount U.S $1,000 (or an integral multiple
{1161601)

Imerest Rate Per Annum 11.5 % payable semi-annually in smears

Inxzeresx Payment Dates him 30 amd December 31 ineach year

Initial interest Payment Date June 30, 2007

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. (the “Cerporation") for value received hereby promises to
pay to (IDS & (10., the registered holder hereof (the ‘Tiolder"), on February 16, 2012 (the
“Stated Maturity”), or on such earlier date as the Principal Amount (or :1 90113011 memo?) may
become due and payable in accordance wk}: the provisions of the News Imienme (as deﬁned
below), on presentatim and surrde of this 11.5% seemed note due February 16, 2012 (the
“Note”; the Pﬁacipal Amwmt in lawful money of the United Staies at the ofﬁce of the Trustee
(as deﬁned below) at 510 Burrard Street, Ste! Floor, Vancouver, 8.13., VﬁC 3-139, and to accrue
interest from ﬁx: dam hereof (the "Issue Date”) and pay inwest on the Principal Amount at the
Interest Rate Per Arman}, at the address of the Home: Wing on the fegister of the Notes
maian by or m the direction 0f the Trustee {the “Ragishrﬂ, in iike money semi-Wally in
mean; in equai instalments an the lamest Payment Dams in each year, the ﬁrst such payment to
be payabic m the Iniﬁai- Interesx Payment Date, and if the Corporation at any time defauits in ﬁn:
cmmmmm mosmcmsbscmzsswu


7’7 '
payment of any principal, Premium, if any, or interest, to pay imcrest on the mom in default at
the rate set out in the Note Meme from and aﬁer the date of the Event of Default, in like
money on demand at the address of the Holder hereof appearing on the Register. The
Corporation will forward or cause to be forwarded by same day delivery at least two Business
Days prior to each Interest Payment Dale to the address of the Holder appearing on the Register
a cheque for interest due and payable in such Holder on such Interest Paymem Date, less any
taxes required by law to be deducted or withheld, made payable (0 the order of such Holder;
provided, however that in case of payment of interest at mamrity or redemption or as otherwise
provided in the Note Indenture, the time for payment of interest, less any such taxes. may a; the
option of zhe Corporation be detennined based on the time that die certiﬁcate representing this '
Note is presented and surrendered to the Trustee. The forwarding of such cheque will satisfy and
discharge the Iiabiliiy for inurest upon such Note to the extent of the sum represented thereby
(plus the amount of any taxes deducted or withheld as aforesaid) unless such cheque is not paid

_ or: presentation ' ,

- This Note is one of an auﬂwrized issue of Notes designated as 11.5% secured note due February
16* 2012 and issued pursuant to a more indenum: (the “Note Indenmre") made as of February
15, 2007, between Computershare Trust Company of Canada (the “'I‘nmee”). as Trustee, and ‘

' the Corporation. The Note Indenmre speciﬁes the terms and conditions upon which the Notes
are created and issued or may be created, issued and held and the rights of ﬁre registered holders
of the Notes, the Corpormion and the Tmstee, all of which terms and conditions, including those
provisions related to the ﬁrst ranking lien in the Secured Assets are incorpoer by reference in
this Note and to each of winch the Holder, by acceptance hereof. agrees. Capitalized terms used
herein and not otherwise deﬁned'shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Note lndenture,
To zhe extent there is any discrepancy between this Note and the Note lndentmre, the terms of the

 “Natemmshanwaﬂ, ,,    ,_,  ,,  , ,,  
The aggregate principal amour-n of Notes that may be created and issued under the Note
Indentnre is U.S.$120,000,000. Notes are issuable in denominations of {3.531.000 and integral
multiples thereof.

The Corporation may at its option redeem the Notes in whole or in pan, at any time aka: the 3“
anniversary of the Issue Date. for cash on giving not more than 60 not less than 30 days’ prior
nntice to the holders of the Notes, a: a redemption price which is equal to U.S.$1,050 per
U.S,$1,000 principal of and: Note plus accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding she date
ﬁxed for redemption. ‘

If a Change of Carmel occurs, the Corpcration may redeem we Notes in whole fer cash on
giving not mom than 603 nor less than 39 days’ prior notice we the holders of the Notes. 8% a
redemption price which is equal to 13,831,850 per U.Sl$l,000 principal of each Note plus
accrued and unpaid interest to but excluding the date ﬁxed for redemption. In the event that the
Corporation decides to redeem the Moles further to a Change of Control, it shall redeem, and the
Nobehnlders shall offer to sell, all of me issued and outstanding Notes in accordame with the
procedw‘e set out in section 5 of the Note lndenmre mama's mumndis.

If the Comrades does no; notify the Tmsiee of its intention to redeem the Notes in whole
within 15 Business ﬂays 0f the Change of Comml, the Corporation shall make an offer to
cmmmpmmusmommm


78
redeem the Notes for cash at a priceequal to the principal amount of the Notes plus accrued and
unpaid interest to but excluding the Clmnge of Control Purchase Date in accordance with the
procedures set out in Section 6 of the Note lndenturer
At any time when the Corporation is not in default under the Note Indenture, the Corporation
may, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Note Indenture, purchase Notes in the
open market, by tender or by private contract, at any price Notes purchased by the Corporation
shall be cancelled and not reissued.
The Principal Amount may become or be declared due before the Stated Maturity on the
conditions. in the manner. with the effect and at the times set forth in the Note lndenture.
The Note lndenturc contains provisions for the holding of meetings of registered holders of
Notes issued by the Corporation pursuant to the Note Indenture and the making of resolutions at
such meetings and the creation of instruments in writing signed by the registered holders of a
specified majority of Notes issued and outstanding pursuant to the Note Indenture. Such
resolutions and instruments will be binding on and may affect the rights and entitlements of all
holders of Notes issued by the Corporation pursuant to the Note Indenture. subject to the
provisions of the Note Indenture.
This Note, if a Global Note, may be transferred only upon compliance with the conditions
prescribed in the Note Indenture relating to the transfer of a Global Note (as deﬁned in the Note
lndenture) Further this Note may be transferred only upon compliance with such reasonable
requirements as the Trustee or other Registrar may prescribe, and such Iransfer shall be duly
noted hereon by the Trusme or other Registrant
' This Note shall not become obligatory for any purpose until it shall have been certiﬁed by the
manual signamre of the Trustee in accordance with the Note lndenturei
IN WITNESS WHEREOF MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. has caused this Note to be signed
by its duly authorized ofﬁcer as of the 15’1‘ day of February, 2007‘
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Authorized Signing Ofﬁcer
CMD\298502\POP msrncms uncommm


79
(FORM OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE)
TRUSTEE’S CERTIFICATE
This Note is one of the Notes referred to in the Note Indenture referred to above.
Dated as of the 15‘h day of February, 2007.
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY
OF CANADA
By:
cmmessomv PROSPFL‘RJS Decomssavn


80
ASSIGNMENT/TRANSFER FORM
TO: MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
c/o Computershaie Trust Company of Canada
510 Burrard Street, 3‘d Floor,
Vancouver, British Columbia. V6C 3139
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned hereby sells, assigns and transfers unto:
Name
Address
Social Insurance Number, Social Security Number, or Tax Identiﬁcation Number
USS of the principal amount of Note registered in the name of the
undersigned represented by the within certiﬁcate (which amount must be U.S.$I,000 or an
integral multiple meteof) and do hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint
attorney to transfer the said Note on the books of the Corporation with full power of substitution
in the premises.
DATED this 3 day orﬂ , j. I
Signature of Noteholder
guaranteed by:
Signature of Noteholder
Name of Noteholder (Please Print)
* Authorized Signature Number
*NOTICE: THE SIGNATURE TO THIS TRANSFER MUST CORRESPOND IN EVERY
PARTICULAR WITH THE NAME AS WRITTEN ON THE FACE OF THIS CERTIFICATE
AND THE ENDORSEMENT MUST BE SIGNATURE GUARANTEED, IN EITHER CASE,
BY A CANADIAN SCHEDULE 1 CHARTERED BANK, OR A MEMBER OF A
RECOGNIZED SECURITIES TRANSFER UNDERWRITERS MEDALLION PROGRAM
(STAMP). THE STAMP AFFIXED THEREON BY THE GUARANTOR MUST BEAR THE
CMD\Z98502\POP PROSPECTUS DF£ 06\1358Vl2


81
ACTUAL WORDS “SIGNATURE GUARANTEE". OR “SIGNATURE MEDALLION
GUARANTEED" OR IN ACCORDANCE WITH INDUSTRY STANDARDS.
CMD\298502\FOP 912mm DEC omsssvu


82
SCHEDULE 3
US. FORM OF DEFINITIVE NOTE

THE SECURITIES REPRESENTED HEREBY HAVE NOT BEEN AND WILL NOT BE
REGISTERED UNDER THE UNITED STATES SECURITIES ACT OF 1933, AS AMENDED
(THE “US. SECURITIES ACT”). THESE SECURITIES MAY BE OFFERED, SOLD,
PLEDGED OR OTHERWISE TRANSFERRED ONLY (A) TO MERCATOR MINERALS
LTD. (THE “COMPANY”), (B) OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES IN COMPLIANCE WITH
RULE 904 OF REGULATION S UNDER THE US. SECURITIES ACT, (C) IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THE EXEMPTION FROM THE REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
UNDER THE US. SECURITIES ACT PROVIDED BY RULE 144 OR RULE 144A
THEREUNDER, IF AVAILABLE, AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE STATE
SECURITIES LAWS. OR (D) IN A TRANSACTION THAT DOES NOT REQUIRE
REGISTRATION UNDER THE US. SECURITIES ACT OR ANY APPLICABLE STATE
SECURITIES LAWS, PROVIDED THAT, IN THE CASE OF TRANSFERS PURSUANT TO
(C) OR (D) ABOVE, THE HOLDER HAS, PRIOR TO SUCH TRANSIER, FURNISHED TO
THE COMPANY AN OPINION OF COUNSEL OR OTHER EVIDENCE OF EXEMPTION,
IN EITHER CASE REASONABLY SATISFACTORY TO THE COMPANY. DELIVERY OF
THIS CERTIFICATE MAY NOT CONSTITUTE “GOOD DELIVERY” IN SETTLEMENT OF
TRANSACTIONS ON STOCK EXCHANGES IN CANADA.

No.

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
(Incorporated under the laws of British Columbia)
115% SECURED NOTES DUE FEBRUARY 16, 2012
Principal Amount U.St$1,000 (or an integral multiple
thereof)

Interest Rate Per Annum 11.5% payable semi-annually in arrears

Interest Payment Dates June 30 and December 31 in each year

Initial Interest Payment Date June 30, 2007

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. (the “‘Corporation") for value received hereby promises to
pay to , the registered holder hereof (the “Holder”), on February 16. 2012 (the
“Stated Maturity"). or on such earlier date as the Principal Amount (or a portion thereof) may
become due and payable in accordance with the provisions of the Note Indenture (as deﬁned
below). on presentation and surrender of this 11.5% secured note due February 16, 2012 (the
*‘Note“), the Principai Amount in lawful money of Canada at the ofﬁce of the T mstee (as defined
below) at 510 Barnard Street, 3rd Floor, Vancouvcrt BC, V6C 339. and to eocme interest from
CMDQQXSUAPOP PROSPECTUS UK 06\2353V12


83
the dame hereof (the “Issue Bate”) and pay interest on the Principal Amount at the interest Rare
, Per Alumna, ax die address of die Holder appearing on the register of meNnies maintained by or
at the direction cf the Trustee {the “Register"), in iike money 'semi-annualiy in arrears in equal
instalments on the Interest Payment Dates in each year, the ﬁrst such payment to be payabie on
the Initial Interest Payment Data, and if the Corporation at any time defaults in the payment of
any principal, Premium, ifany, or interest, Lo pay imeresz on Lire ammmt indefauir at the mesa
out in the Note [mime from and after the dare of the Event of hermit. in like money on
demand at rhe address of tire Holder hereof appearing on the Register. The Corporation will
fin-mm er cause to be ferwarded by same day deiivery at least two Business-Days prior to each
Interest Payment Date in the address of the Holder appearing on the Regiger a cheque for
interest due and payable to such Holder an such West Payment Date, less any times required
by law to be deducted or withheld, made payable to the ordm of such ﬁelder; provided, however
that in case of payment of interest at maturity or redemption or as adrenwise provided in the Note
indenmre, the time for paymem of interest, less any such taxes, may at the apnea ef the
Corporation be determined based on the time that the ceﬂiﬁcaie representing this Note is
presented and surrendered to the Trustee. The forwarding of such cheque will 'sty and
discharge the liability for interest upnn such Note to the extent of ihelsum represemed thereby -
(plus the amount of any sexes deducted or withheld as aforesaid) unless such cheque is not paid
on presentatinn.
This Note is one of an authorized issue of Nines designated as 11.5% Secured News due
February 16, 2012 and issued pursuant to a note indenmre (the “Note Indenmre”) made as of
' February is, 2007, between Computersimre Trust Cumpmy of Canada (the “Trustee”), as
Tmswe, and the Corporation. The Note indenture specifies the terms and conditions upon which
the Notes are created and issued or may be created, issued and held and the rights of the
w r r I registered heideis of the  the Corpmarion and the Trustee,“ all of"  and   ,
conditions inciuding those provisions relared to rhe’ﬁrst ranking lien in me'Secmed Assets are
incorporated by reference in this Note and to each of which due Holder, by acceptance hereof,
agrees. Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise deﬁned shall have the meanings
ascribed drama in the Note indean To the extent there is any discrepancy between Eris Note
and the Note Indemure, the terms of the Note Indenture shall prevail.
The aggregate ginncipai amount of Notes that may be created and ‘ issued under the Note
hidemm’e is U.S,SIZ0,000.000. Notes are issuable in denominations of US$11“) and integral
mmnples thereof.
The Corpnmtion may at its option redeem the Notes, in whole or in part. at any Lime after the 3"i
anniversary 0f the issue Date, for cash on giving not more than 60mm less than 30 days’ prior
notice 10 the holders 5f the Notes, a: a redemption price which is equal in [3,831,050 per
[3.351900 principal 02‘ end: Nate plus accrued and unpaid interest to bur exclading the date
ﬁxed for redemption
If a (ﬂange of Control occurs. the Corporation may redeem the Notes in wlw‘ie for cash on
giving not more than 66 net iess than 30 days’ prior notice in the holders of the Notes, a; a
redemption price whieh is equal to [1,831,050 per (35.51900 principal sf reach Note plus
accrued and @236 irritates: to but excindirig the date ﬁxed for redemption. in the evear’that the
Cozporaxian decides to redeem the Notes further to a Change of Control, it shall redeem, and the
WWP memsmonmvxz


84

Noteholders shall offer to sell, all of the issued and outstanding Notes in accordance with the
procedure set out in section 5 of the Note lndenture mutatis mutandis.

If the Corporation does not notify the Trustee of its intention to redeem the Notes in whole
within 15 Business Days of the Change of Control, the Corporation shall make an offer to
redeem the Notes for cash at a price equal to the principal amount of the Notes plus accrued and
unpaid interest to but excluding the Change of Contml Purchase Date in accordance with the
procedures set out in Section 6 of the Note lndenture.

At any time when the Corporation is not in default under the Note lndenture. the Corporation
may, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Note lndenture, purchase Notes in the
open market, by tender or by private contract, at any price. Notes purchde by the Corporation
shall be cancelled and not reissued.

The Principal Amount may become or be declared due before the Stated Maturity on the
conditions, in the manner. with the effect and at the times set forth in the Note Indenture.

The Note Indenture contains provisions for the holding of meetings of registered holders of
Notes issued by the Corporation pursuant to the Note Indener and the making of resolutions at
such meetings and the creation of instruments in writing signed by the registered holders of a
specified majority of Notes issued and outstanding pursuant to the Note Indenture, Such
resolutions and instruments will be binding on and may affect the rights and mtitlernents of all
holders of Notes issued by the Corporation pursuant to the Note lndenture, subject to the
provisions of the Note Indenture.

This Note, if a Global Note, may be transferred only upon compliance with the conditions
prescribed in the Note Indenture relating to the transfer of a Global Note (as defined in the Note
Indenture). Further this Note may be transferred only upon compliance with such reasonable
requirements as the Trustee or other Registrar may prescribe, and such transfer shall be duly
noted hereon by the Trustee or other Registrar.

This Note shall not become obligatory for any purpose until it shall have been certiﬁed by the
manual signature of the Trustee in accordance with the Note Indenture.
CMD\29KSOZ\POP PROSRECTUS DF£ 06\Z358Vl 2


85
IN WITNESS WHEREOF MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. has caused this Note to be signed
by its duly authorized ofﬁcer as of the 15m day of February, 2007.
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Authorized Signing Ofﬁcer
By:
Authorized Signing Ofﬁcer
mumssozwoe pxosmus DEC osumvn


‘86
(FORM OF TRUSTEES CERTIFICATE)
TRUSTEE’S CERTIFICATE
This Note is one of the Notes referred to in the Note Indenture referred to above.
Dated as of the 15‘h day of February 2007.
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY
OF CANADA
By:
WWW? PROSPECTUS DEC OGQSSKVIZ


87
ASSIGNMENT/TRANSFER FORM

TO: MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.

c/o Computershare Trust Company of Canada

510 Burrard Street, 3'“ Floor,

Vancouver, British Columbia V6C BB9
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned hereby sells, assigns and transfers unto:
w“
Name
WW
Address
Social Insurance Number, Social Security Number or Tax Identification Number
USS of the principal amount of Note registered in the name of the undersigned
represented by the within certificate (which amount must be US$1.000 or an integral multiple
thereoi) and do hereby irrevocably constitute and appoint attorney to transfer the
said Note on the books of the Corporation with full power of substitution in the premises.
The undersigned hereby certiﬁes that the transfer of these securities is not being made to. or, for
the account or beneﬁt of, and the offer of these securities was not made to, or, for the account or
beneﬁt of, and the person named above is not, and is not acting for the account or benefit of, a
person in the "United States" or a “US person” (as such terms are deﬁned in Regulation S under
the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "US. Securities Act")), unless such
transfer is exempt from registration under the US. Securities Act.
(The following to be completed by the transferee)

The undersigned transferee hereby certiﬁes that (i) he/she/it is not a "US.
person" (as deﬁned in Regulation S under the US. Securities Act (a "US. Person")). (ii) at the
time of o'ansfer. he/she/it is not within the United States, and (iii) he/shejit is not acquiring the
Note(s) represented by this Certificate by or on behalf of any US. Person or person within the
United States; OR

The undersigned transferee acknowledges that the Notes are "restricted
securities" within the meaning of Rule 144 under the US Securities Act and may not be offered,
sold. or transferred absent registration under the US Securities Act or an exemption merefrom
AND the undersigned transferee is delivering herewith, if so requested by the Corporation, an
opinion of US counsel to the effect that this transfer of the Note(s) has been registered under the
US. Securities Act or is exempt from registration thereunder.

DATED the day of s 20wi
Cit/11129850sz mosmcrus DEC newsswz


88
Signature of Transferee:
(Signamre of Transfeme)
Guaranteed by:
Auﬂiorized Signature Number
 NOTICE:
The signature to this trmsfer mum cemespund in every particular witia the name as shown on the
,' faeeofthiswtiﬁcaneandmeendoimemmustbesignatureguaranwed.ineiﬂiercasemya
Canadian Scheduie I Chartered Bank, or by a medallion signature guarantee frmn a member
recognized under the Signature Medallion Guatamee Program or from a similar entity in the
United Stakes. The stamp afﬁxed thereon by the guaranter must bear the actual wards “signature
guarantee”, OR “signatm‘e medallion guarantee” or in accordance with industry standards.
If die transfer is m, or for :11: account or beneﬁt of, a person in the United States, speciai
restrictions apply as set out in the Note Indmtune governing the Notes.
wwmmopmosm’smmsssvu


89
SCHEDULE 4
FORM OF DECLARATION FOR REMOVAL OF LEGEND
TO: Cornputershare Trust Company of Canada
as registrar for Notes of Mercator Minerals Ltd. (the "Corporation")
clo Computershare Trust Company of Canada
3rd Floor, 510 Bunard Street
Vancouver. BC. V6C 3139
The undersigned (a) acknowledges that the sale of the securities of the Company to which
this declaration relates is being made in reliance on Rule 904 of Regulation S under the
United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Us. Securities Act”) and (b)
certiﬁes that (I) the undersigned is not an “affiliate” of the Corporation (as that term is
defined in Rule 405 under the Us. Securities Act), (2) the offer of such securities was
not made to a person in the United States or a “US. person” and either (A) at the time
the buy order was originated. the buyer was outside the United States, or the seller and
any person acting on its behalf reasonably believe that the buyer was outside the United
States or (B) the transaction was executed in. on or through the facilities of the Toronto
Stock Exchange, and neither the seller nor any person acting on its behalf lmows that the
transaction has been prearranged with a buyer in the United States, (3) neither the seller
nor any affiliate of the seller nor any person acting on any of their behalf has engaged or
will engage in any “directed selling efforts” in the United States in connection with the
offer and sale of such securities. (4) the sale is bona tide and not for the purpose of
“washing of!” the resale restrictions imposed because the securities are “restricted
securities” (as that term is defined in Rule 144(a)(3) under the US. Securities Act), (5)
the seller does not have a short position in the securities sold in reliance on Rule 904 of
Regulation S under the US. Securities Act and does not intend to replace such securities
with fungible unrestricted securities, and (6) the contemplated sale is not a transaction. or
part of a series of transactions, which, although in technical compliance with Regulation
S. is part of a plan or scheme to evade the registration provisions of the US. Securities
Act. Terms used herein have the meanings given to them by Regulation S under the US
Securities Act.
Dated:
Name of Seller

By:

Name:

Title:

CMW93502\POP PROSPECFUSDECMUSSXVIZ


9O

Broker's Certiﬁcation

Date:

Dear Sir/Madam:

Re: Sale of Notes Pursuant to SEC Rule 904

We have read the representation letter of (the "Seller") dated . 20__,

pursuant to which the Seller has requested that we sell. for the Seller‘s account, Notes in the

principal amount of (the "Notes") of Mercator Minerals Ltd. (the

"Corporation"). We have executed sales of the Notes pursuant to Rule 904 of Regulation S under

the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended. on behalf of the Seller. In that connection, we

hereby represent to you as follows:

(1) no offer to sell the Notes was made to a person in the United States;

(2) the sale of the Notes was executed in, on or through the facilities of The Toronto Stock
Exchange on w, 20 , and, to the best of our knowledge, the sale was
not be prearranged with a buyer in the United States;

(3) no "directed selling efforts" were made in the United States by the undersigied, any afﬁliate
of the undersigned. or any person acting on behalf of the undersigned; and

(4) we have done no more than execute the order or orders to sell the Notes as agent for the
Seller and will receive no more than the usual and customary broker’s commission that
would be received by a person executing such transaction as agent.

For purposes of these representations, "affiliate" means a person that directly, or indirectly through
one or more intermediaries, controls, or is controlled by. or is under common control with, the
undersigned. "Directed selling efforts" means any activity undertaken for the purpose of, or that
could reasonably be expected to have the effect of, conditioning the market in the United States for
the Notes. This would include, but not be limited to, the solicitation of offers to purchase the Notes
from persons in the United States. “United States" means the United States of Amerim. its
territories or possessions, any Suite of the United States, and the District of Columbia.

Legal Counsel to the Corporation shall be entitled to rely upon the representations warranties and

covenants contained in this letter to the same extent as if this letter had been addressed to them

If you have any questions regarding this transaction. please telephone the undersigned at

Yours truly,
CMWSOZWP PROSPSCI'BS DECOtSlZ3SSVlZ


_ 91
M”...
By: W
Tide:
mmsmm? mms mac messsm


92
SCHEDULE “A”
NOTICE AND DIRECTION
mmszmmy PROSPECWS DEC omzssvn


NOTICE AND DIRECTION
T0: Mineral Park Inc. (‘Mneral Park”)
RE: General Security Agreement dated as of February 15, 2007 (the “Security

Agreement”) between Mercator Minerals Ltd. (“Mercator”) and Computershare

Trust Company of Canada (the “Tnmtee’ﬁ

W

Mineral Park is obligated to pay to Mercator the inter—company debt, which will arise
from the loan by Mercator to Mineral Park of the net proceeds of the offering of the l 1.5% Secured Notes
pursuant to the Note Indenture between Mermtor and the Trustee dated February 15'“, 2007 (the
“Indebtedness"), such Indebtedness evidenced by the loan agreement dated Febwary IS, 2007 between
Mercator and Mineral Park (the “Loan Agreement") and the promissory note dated February 15‘ 2007 in
favour of Mercator issued by Mineral Park in accordance with the terms of the Loan Agreement,
including any promissory note issued in substitution therefor as contemplated thereby (the "Note").

Mercator has assigned the Indebtedness. the Loan Agreement and the Note to the Trustee
by way of security pursuant to the Security Agreement (the “Assignment”)

Mercator wishes to provide notice to Mineral Park of the Assignment and to authorize
and direct Mineral Park to pay any and all amounts owing under or in connection with the Indebtedness,
the Loan Agreement and the Note to the Trustee until such time as the Trustee directs Mineral Park
otherwise.

1. Mercator hereby provides notice to Mineral Park of the Assignment

2 Mercator hereby authorizes and directs Mineral Park to make any and all payments under
or in connection with the Indebtedness to the Trustee until such time as the Trustee directs Mineral Park
in writing otherwise and this shall be your full and sufﬁcient authority to do so

DATED this 11th day of Febmaﬂ 2007‘

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Name: Marc LeBlanc
Title: Corporate Secretary
ACKNOWLEDGED AND ACCEPTED
this ﬁg day of February. 2007.
MINERAL PARK INC.
By:
Name: Ray Lee
Title: Director
oM_'rommzmmm/2r394mm


93
SCHEDULE “B”
UNANIMOUS SHAREHOLDER AGREEMENT
WWW? msoscomzasmz


DECLARATION OF THE SHAREHOLDER dated as of the 15m day of
February 2007.

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD. (the “Shareholder”) makes the following
declaration pursuant to section 137 of the British Columbia Business Corporations Act (the
“Act”):

1. The Shareholder is the registered and beneficial owner of all of the issued and
outstanding shares of Mercator Mineral Park Holdings Ltd. (“Mercator Holdings”)

2. The powers of the directors of Mercator Holdings to manage or supervise the
management of the business and affairs of Mercator Holdings, whether such powers arise from
the Act. the notice of articles, or the articles of Mercator Holdings, or otherwise, are hereby
restricted to the fullmt extent pennin by law.

3. In accordance with the Act and paragraph 2 hereof, to die maximum extent
permitted by law, the Shareholder shall have all the rights, powers, duties and liabilities of the
directors of Mercator Holdings to manage or supervise the management of the business and
affairs of Mercator Holdings whether arising under die Act or otherwise, and the directors of
Mercator Holdings are hereby relieved of their duties and liabilities to the same extent.

4. The rights, powers and duties granted or transferred hereby to the Shareholder
shall be exercised or performed to the extent appropiiate, by instrument in writing executed by
the Shareholder and any transferee of any shares of Mercator Holdings registered in the name of
the Shareholder, Subject to the Act, any such transferee shall be deemed to be a party to this
Agreement and shall be governed hereby in the same manner and to the same extent as the ‘
Shareholder. The Shareholder shall cause a reference to this Declaration to be noted
conspicuously on any share certiﬁcate issued by Mercator Holdings.

5. This Declaration shall be governed in accordance with the laws of the Province of
British Columbia and the laws of Canada applicable therein.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Shareholder has duly executed this Declaration.
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Name:
Title:

CMDWQSSUZWOP PROSPECTUS DEC 06mm


94 _
SCHEDULE “C”
ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS
mmmm mospacws DEC msssvx:


ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS
T0: Computershare Trust Company of Canada (“Trustee”)
RE: Assignment of rights under the Declaration of Shareholder of Mercator

Mineral Park Holdings Ltd. (“Mercator Holdings”).

M

WHEREAS, pursuant to a Declaration of the Shareholder dated February 15‘h
2007, Mercator Minerals Ltd. ("Mercator") assigned unto itself the rights, power and duties of
the directors of Mercator Holdings to the extent permitted under the British Columbia Business
Corporations Act.

IT IS NOW AGREED AS FOLLOWS, as part of the security, and in
consideration for the Note Indenture, Mercator hereby grants all of the rights, which it holds by
virtue of the USA, to the Trustee upon title to the common shares in the capital of Mercator
Holdings transferring to the Trustee under the enforcement provisions of the note indenture
between Mercator and the Trustee dated February 15, 2007.

DATED this 15“ day of February 2007.

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Name:
Title:
ACKNOWLEDGED AND ACCEPTED
this day of , 2007.
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY
OF CANADA
By:
Name:
Title:
CMDQQKSOZU‘OP PmSPECl‘USDECﬂoQAl 3


9S
SCHEDULE “1)”
GENERAL SECURITY AGREEMENT
CMD\298502\POP PROSPECTUS DEC mussxwz


GENERAL SECURITY AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT made as ofthe 15‘h day ofFebruary 2007,
BETW‘EEN:

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD., a corporation existing under

the laws of British Columbia

(herein called the “Debtor”?

. and .

COMPUTERSHARE‘ TRUST COMPANY OF CANADA. a

trust company existing under the laws of Canada

(herein called the "Secured Party“)
WHEREAS:
Pursuant to a Note lndenture dated February 15, 2007 between the Debtor and the Secured Party
(as the same may be amended, supplemented or replaced from time to time, the "Indenture"),
the Debtor has decided to issue 115% secured notes due on February 16, 2012 for a total
principal amount of US$ 120 million (the “Notes”), and the Secured Party has agreed to serve as
trustee under the Indenture;
Pursuant to the terms of the Indenturet the Debtor has agreed to provide in favour of the Secured
Party a ﬁrst priority security interest in respect of all of its assets, as a security of repayment of
its Secured Obligations (as hereinafter deﬁned);
NOW THEREFORE for good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufﬁciency of which
are hereby acknowledged) the Debtor agrees with the Secured Party as follows:

ARTICLE 1
INTERPRETATION

1.1 Deﬁned Terms

All capitalized terms which are used herein which are not otherwise deﬁned
herein shall have the respective meanings ascribed thereto in the Indenture. In this agreement or
any amendment hereto. unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:

“Act” means the Personal Properly Security Act (British Columbia), as amended

from time to time and any regulations thereto.
DM "Il"("20IllO-OOOM)'213T)3<N 2


. 2 .

“Collateral” means all personal property, business and undertaking of the Debtor

now owned or hereafter acquired and any proceeds from the sale or other

disposition thereof, all of which is further described, without limitation, in

Section 2.2.

"Enforcement Date" means the date on which the principal amount of the Notes

is accelerated pursuant to Section l0.3 of the Indenture.

“Secured Obligations“ means (i) the principal money (ii) the Premium, if any,

(iii) interest (including interest on overdue principal, the Premium, if any. and

interest) and (iv) all fees and other money, in each case. from time to time owing

by the Debtor to the Noteholders under or in connection with the Indenture and

the Notes.
1.2 Other Usages

References to “this agreement”. “hereof”, “herein”, “hereto” and like references
refer to this General Security Agreement and the Schedules hereto, as the same may be amended,
modiﬁed, supplemented or replaced from time to time, and not to any panicular Article. Section
or other subdivision of this agreement. A reference in this agreement to another agreement refers
to that other agreement as it may be amended7 modiﬁed, supplemented, restated or replaced from
time to time, A reference in this agreement to a statute refers to that statute as it may be
amended and to any restated or successor legislation of comparable effect.
1.3 Number and Gender

Where the context so requires, the singular number shall include the plural, the
plural the singular, and the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders.
1.4 Headings

The insertion of headings in this agreement is for convenience of reference only
and shall not affect the construction or interpretation of this agreement.
1.5 Applicable Law and Attornment Clause

This agreement and all documents delivered pursuant hereto shall be deemed to
be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province of British Columbia
and the laws of Canada applicable therein. The parties hereby attorn to the courts of the
Province of British Columbia and agree that those courts shall have non-exclusive jurisdiction to
detemiine all disputes relating to this agreement.
1.6 Prohibited Provisions

In the event that any provision or any part of any provision hereof is deemed to be
invalid by reason of the operation of any law or by reason of the interpretation placed thereon by
a court. this agreement shall be construed as not containing such provision or such part of such
provision and the invaiidity of such provision or such part shall not affect the validity of any
UM lit)“, 2013 l thtKﬂNzZl 10303 1


. 3 .
other provision or the remainder of such provision hereof, and all other provisions hereof which
are otherwise lawful and Valid shall remain in full force and effect,
1.7 Time of the Essence
Time shall in all respects be of the essence of this agreement,
1.8 Schedules
Each and every one of the schedules which is referred to in this agreement and
attached to this agreement shall form a part of this agreement.
ARTICLE 2
SECURITY INTEREST
2.] Grant of Security Interest
As general and continuing security for the payment and performance of the
Secured Obligations. the Debtor hereby grants to the Secured Party a security interest in the
Collateral.
2.2 Description of Collateral
A security interest is taken in all of the present and after-acquired personal
property of the Debtor including, without limitation, a security interest in favour of the Secured
Party in the following:
(a) Aecnums
all debts, amounts, claims and moneys which now are, or which may at any time
hereafter be, due or owing to or owned by the Debtor, whether or not earned by
performance including, Without limitation, all intercompany loans and advances
made by the Debtor to its afﬁliates; all securities, mortgages, bills, notes and other
documents now held or owned, or which may be hereaﬁer taken, held or ovmed,
by or on behalf of the Debtor, in respect of the said debts, amounts, claims and
moneys or any part thereof; and all books, documents and papers recording,
evidencing or relating to the said debts, amounts, claims and moneys or any part
thereof, all ofwhich are herein called the "Accounts";
(b) Inventory
all goods or chattels now or hereafter forming the inventory of the Debtor,
including, without limitation, all goods, merchandise, raw materials, work in
process, ﬁnished goods, goods held for sale or resale or lease or that have been
leased or that are to be, or have been, furnished under a contract of service. and
goods used in or procured for packing or packaging, all of which are herein called
the “Inventory”;
UM loll/I‘ll 3 I [HJOI’MNQI titWIt 2


. 4 .

(c) Equipment
all equipment now owned or hereafter acquired by the Debtor, including, without
limitation all machinery, ﬁxtures, plant, tools, furniture, chattels, vehicles of any
kind or description including, without limitation, motor vehicles, parts,
accessories installed in or affixed or attached to any of the foregoing all
drawings, speciﬁcations, plans and manuals relating thereto, and any other ‘
tangible personal property which is not Inventory, all of which are herein called
the "Equipment";

(d) Intangibles
all intangible property now owned or hercaﬁer acquired by the Debtor and which
is not Accounts including, without limitation, all contractual rights, goodwill,
patents, trademarks. trade names. copyrights and other intellectual property of the
Debtor and all other choses in action of the Debtor of every kind, whether due or
owing at the present time or hereatter to become due or owing, all of which are
herein called the “Intangibles”;

(e) Documents of’Tille
any writing now or hereaﬁcr owned by the Debtor that purports to be issued by or
addressed to a bailee and purports to cover such goods and chattels in the bailce’s
possession as are identiﬁed or fungible portions of an identiﬁed mass, whether
such goods and chattels are Inventory or Equipment, and which writing is treated
in the ordinary course of business as establishing that the person in possession of
such writing is entitled to receive, hold and dispose of the said writing and the
goods and chattels it covers, and timber, whether such writing is negotiable in
form or otherwise, including bills of lading and warehouse receipts, all of which
are herein called the “Documents of Title”;

(t) Money
all money now or hereafter owned by the Debtor, whether such money is
authorized or adopted by the Parliament of Canada as part of its currency or by
any foreign government as part of its currency, all of which are herein called the
"Money";

(g) Chanel Paper
all present and future agreements made between the Debtor as secured party and
others which evidence both a monetary obligation and a security interest in or a
lease oi‘spcciﬁc goods, all of which are herein called the "Chattel Paper“;

(h) Instruments
ali present and future bills, notes and cheques (as such are defined pursuant to the
Bills of Exchange Act (Canada)) of the Debtor, and all other writings ot~ the

UM EUR/2012 mom»: H0303 2


. 5 .

Debtor that ew'denee a right to the payment of money and are of a type that in the
ordinary course of business are transferred by delivery without any necessary
endorsement or assignment and all letters of credit and advices of credit of the
Debtor proxided that such letters of credit and advices of credit state that they
must be surrendered upon claiming payment thereunder, all of which are herein
called the “Instruments”;

(i) Securilies
all present and future securities held by the Debtor, including shares, options,
rights, warrants, joint venture interests, interests in limited partnerships, trust
units, bonds, debentures and all other documents which constitute evidence of a
share, participation or other interest of the Debtor in property or in an enterprise
or which constitute evidence of an obligation of the issuer; including, without
limitation, any uncertiﬁcated securities and all substitutions therefor and, subject
to Section 26, dividends and income derived therefrom, all of which are herein
called the “Securities”;

(j) Documents
all documents, including, without limitation, all books, invoices, letters, papers
and other records, in any form evidencing or relating to the Collateral, all of
which are herein called the “Documents”;

(k) Proceeds
all personal property in any forni  directly  indirectly  any dealing
with the Collateral or the proceeds therefrom, including, without limitation,
property that indemniﬁes or compensates for the expropriation, destruction or
damage of the Collateral or the proceeds therefrom, all of which are herein called
the “Proceeds”;

(l) Leaseholds
subject to Section 25, all leases in respect of personal property, now owned or
hereaﬁer acquired by the Debtor as tenant (Whether oral or written) or any
agreement therefor, all ofwhich are herein called the “Leaseholds”; and

(in) Undertaking
all present and future personal property, business, and undertaking of the Debtor
not being Accounts, inventory, Equipment, Intangibles, Documents of Title,
Money, Chanel Paper, Instruments, Securities, Documents, Proceeds or
Leaseholds all of which are herein called the “Undertaking”.

DM ’I()R!'.‘Dl’lll1<l’10009 2l30393 Z


_ 6 A

2.3 Further Description of Collateral

Without limiting the generality of the description of Collateral as set out in
Section 2.2, for greater certainty the Collateral shall include all present and future tangible
personal property of the Debtor located on or about or in transit to or from the locations set out in
Schedule A hereto,
2.4 Attachment of Security Interest

The parties hereby acknowledge that:

(i) value has been given;

(ii) the Debtor has rights in the Collateral: and

(iii) the parties have not agreed to postpone the time for attachment of the

security interest created by this agreement.

The parties further agree that the security interests created to this agreement are intended to
attach to all Collateral in which the Debtor acquires an interest as a result of any amalgamation
arrangement or similar proceeding.
2.5 Exception re: Leaseholds and Contractual Rights

The last day of the term of any lease or sublcase in respect of any personal
property or agreement therefor is speciﬁcally excepted from the security interest created by this
agreement, but the Debtor agrees to stand possessed of such last day in trust for such person as
the Secured Patty may direct and the Debtor shall assign and dispose thereof in accordance with
such direction. To the extent that the security interest created by this agreement in any
contractual rights would constitute a breach or cause the acceleration of such contract, said
security interest in such contract shall not be granted hereunder but the Debtor shall hold its
interest therein in trust for the Secured Party, and shall grant a security interest in such
contractual rights to the Secured Party forthwith upon obtaining the appropriate consents to the
granting of said security interest.
2.6 Voting and Distributions re: Securities

At  time that the security hereby constituted is not enforceable, all interest,
cash dividends, income and revenue from Securities that have been delivered to the Secured
Party pursuant to Section 3.l(e) (but not the proceeds of disposition of such Securities) shall be
collected by and payable to the Debtor (and not the Secured Party), and such Securities shall be
voted by the Debtor. and all non-cash dividends paid on such Securities, if received by the
Debtor: shall be paid to. and held by, the Secured Party as Collateral. At any time while the
security hereby constituted is enforceable. all dividends paid on such Securities and all interests,
income and revenue from such Securities, if received by the Debton shall be paid to the Secured
Party, and the Secured Party shall be entitled to vote or not to vote such Securities as the Secured
Party sees tit.
DM IUR’IUlleHllWDQ/Z l3lli‘1h 2


r 7 _

2.7 Uncertiﬁcated Securities and Certain Other Investment Property

The Debtor will permit the Secured Party from time to time to cause the
appropriate issuers (and, if held with a securities intermediary, such securities intermediary) of
uncertiiicated Securities which are Collateral to mark their books and records with the numbers
and face amounts ot‘all such unccniticated Securities and all rollovers and replacements therefor
to reﬂect the security interest of the Secured Party granted pursuant to this agreement. The
Debtor will take any actions within its power to cause the issuers of uncertitioated Securities
which are Collateral to cause the Secured Party to have and retain control over such Securities

ARTICLE 3
WARRANTIES AND COVENANTS OF THE DEBTOR

3.1 Warranties and Covenants

The Debtor hereby warrants, covenants and agrees with the Secured Party as
follows:

(a) The tangible Collateral is now and will be located at the locations set out in
Schedule A hereto and at such other locations as may he reported to the Secured
Party in accordance with the lndenture, other than any such Collateral in transit to
and from such locations. In the event the tangible Collateral becomes located at
any location other than the locations set out in Schedule A, the Debtor shall
promptly notify the Secured Party in Writing of the details thereof. '1" he Debtor
shall, at the reasonable request of the Secured Party, mark such Collateral which
the Debtor owns to indicate clearly that it is subject to the security interests
created by this agreement

(b) The Debtor shall keep the Collateral in good condition and repair, reasonable
wear and tear excepted.

(c) The Debtor agrees to promptly notify the Secured Party in writing of the
acquisition by the Debtor of any personal property which is not of the nature or
type described by the deﬁnition of Collateral, and the Debtor agrees to execute
and deliver at its own expense from time to time amendments to this agreement or
additional security agreements as may be reasonably required by the Secured
Party in order that a security interest shall attach to such personal property.

((1) 'Ihe Debtor shall prevent any Collateral from becoming an accession to any
personal property not subject to this agreement, or becoming afﬁxed to any real
property, other than in the ordinary course of its business,

(e) The Debtor shall deliver to the Secured Party from time to time upon the request
of the Secured Party any items of Collateral comprising certiﬁcated Securities
Each such delivery shall be effected by depositing with the Secured Party all
certiﬁcates representing such Securities. All certiﬁcates so dcposited shall be
attached to duly executed powers ofartomey or forms of transfer.

UM TOR'ZOllet-MWNJIMBW 2


, 3 -

(f) The Debtor shall notify the Secured Party of any Collateral which constitutes a
claim against a government or any instrumentalin or agency thereof, the
assigiment of which claim is restricted or prohibited, and the details of such
restrictions or prohibitions.

(g) The Debtor shall deliver to the Secured Party upon the request of the Secured
Party from time to time all items of Collateral comprising Documents of Title,
Chanel Paper, lnstmments and Documents.

(h) The Debtor will not use or acquire for use any Collateral as consumer goods.

3.2 Performance of Covenants by the Secured Party
The Secured Patty may, in its sole discretion and upon notice to the Debtor,
perform any covenant of the Debtor under this agreement that the Debtor fails to perform and
that the Secured Party is capable of performing, including any covenant the performance of
which requires the payment of money, provided that the Secured Party will not be obligated to
perform any such covenant on behalf of the Debtor and no such performance by the Secured
Party will require the Secured Party further to perform the Debtor’s covenants nor operate as a
derogation of the rights and remedies of the Secured Party under this agreement.
ARTICLE 4
RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OR DISPOSAL OF COLLATERAL

4.1 Permitted Activities

LL Except’to the extent restricted by the Indenture, the Debtor they, at any time,
without the consent of the Secured Party:

(a) lease, sell, license, consign or otherwise deal with Collateral in the ordinary
course of business on commercially reasonable terms and any bonaﬁde purchaser
for value shall acquire rights to such Collateral free and clear of the security
interest created by this agreement, but (i) all rights of the Debtor as vendor, lessor,
licensor or consignor shall be subject to the security interest created by this
agreement and (ii) all proceeds of such sale, lease or other dealing shall be subject
to the security interest created by this agreement; and

(h) continue to collect, at its own expense. all amoimm due or to become due to the
Debtor under the Accounts; and in connection with such collection; take (and, at
the Secured Party‘s direction, shall take) such action as the Debtor or the Secured
Party, as the case may be, may deem necessary or advisable to enforce collection
ofthe Accounts; provided, however, that the Secured Party shall have the right at
any time while the security hereby constituted is enforceable to notify the account
debtors or obligors under any Accounts ofthe assignment of such Accounts to the
Secured Party and to direct such account debtors or obligors to make payment of
all amounts due or to become due to the Debtor thereunder directly to the Secured
Party and to give valid and binding receipts and discharges therefor and in respect
thereof and. upon such notiﬁcation and at the expense of the Debtor, to enforce

l)M/‘l’t)R,’ZNZlGﬁO\lﬂQ/2l30398 Z


. 9 .

collection of any such Accounts and to adjust, settle or compromise the amount

or payment thereof. in the same manner and to the same extent as the Debtor

might have done,

At any time while the security hereby constituted is enforceable,

(i) all money or other form of payment received by the Debtor in respect of
the Accounts shall be received in trust for the beneﬁt of the Secured Party
hereunder, shall be segregated from other funds of the Debtor and shall be
forthwith paid over to the Secured Party in the same form as so received
(with any necessary endorsement) to be held as cash collateral and applied
to repay the Notes in accordance with the Indenture: and

(ii) the Debtor shall not adjust, settle or compromise the amount or payment
of any Accounts, or release wholly or partly any account debtor or obligor
thereof. or allow any credit or discount thereon.

4.2 Release by the Secured Party

The Secured Party (i) may, at its discretion, at any time release from the security
interest created by this agreement any part or parts of the Collateral or any other security or any
surety for the Secured Obligations of the Debtor either with or without sufﬁcient consideration
therefor without thereby releasing any other part of the Collateral or any person from this
agreement; and (ii) shall release the security interest created by this agreement on any part or
parts of the Collateral that are sold or transferred pursuant to a third party pursuant to any
transaction permitted by the lndenture as provided therein
4.3 Proceeds Held in Trust

All Proceeds that are monies collected or received by the Debtor will be received
by the Debtor in trust for the Secured Party and will be forthwith paid to the Secured Party, The
Secured Party shall not exercise its righm under this Section 43A and the Debtor’s trust
obligations under this Section 4.3 need not be complied with, unless such Proceeds arise from a
disposition of Collateral which is not permitted hereunder or unless and until the security hereby
constituted is then enforceable.

ARTICLE 5
ENFORCEMENT

5.1 Enforcement

The Debtor shall be deemed to be in default under this agreement and the security
hereby constituted shall immediately become enforceable without tirrther notice of any kind,
which notice is expressly waived by the Debtor. to the extent permitted by applicable law, on or
after the Entbrcement Date.
0M“TOR/2012ltM‘Umg’Zl$0398 2


. 10 .
5.2 Remedies
At any time while the security hereby constituted is enforceable, the Secured
Party shall have the following rights, powers and remedies:

(a) to appoint any person to be an agent or any person to be a receiver, manager or
receiver and manager (herein called the “‘Receiver”) of the Collateral and to
remove any Receiver so appointed and to appoint another if the Secured Party so
desires; it being agreed that any Receiver appointed pursuant to the provisions of
this agreement shall have all of the powers of the Secured Party hereimder, and in
addition, shall have the power to carry on the business of the Debtor;

(b) to make payments to parties having prior charges or encumbrances on properties
on which the Secured Party may hold charges or encumbrances;

(c) to enter onto any premises where the Collateral may be located;

(d) to take possession of all or any part of the Collateral with power to exclude the
Debtor, its agents and its servants therefrom;

(e) to preserve, protect and maintain the Collateral and make such replacements
thereof and additions thereto as the Secured Party shall deem advisable;

(l) to enjoy and exercise all powers necessary or incidental to the performance of all
functions provided for in this agreement including, without limitation, the power

_ to purchase on credit, the power tohorrow inﬂthe Debtor’s name or in the name of
the Receiver and to advance its own money to the Debtor at snch'rat'es of interest
as it may deem reasonable, provided that the Receiver shall borrow money only
with the prior consent of the Secured Party, and to grant security interests in the

Collateral in priority to the security interest created by this agreement, as security

for the money so borrowed;

(g) to sell, lease or dispose of all or any part of the Collateral whether by public or
private sale or lease or otherwise and on any terms so long as every aspect of the
disposition is commercially reasonable, including, without limitation, terms that
provide for payment of credit: provided that:

(i) any such sale, lease or disposition shall be on commercially reasonable
terms, having regard to the circumstances;

(ii) the Secured Party or the Receiver will not be required to sell, lease or
dispose of the Collateral, but may peaceably and quietly take, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy the Collateral without molestation, eviction,
hindrance or interruption by the Debtor or any other person or persons
whomsoever for such period of time as is commercially reasonable;

{iii} the Secureii Party or the Receiver may convey, transfer and assign to a
purchaser or purchasers the title to any ofthe Collateral so sold; and

llMﬂ'IVURi zonmmnoazuowx l


. 31 -

(iv) the Debtor will be entitled to be credited with the actual proceeds of any
such sale, lease or other disposition only when such proceeds are received
by the Secured Party or the Receiver in cash or such other form of
compensation as may be acceptable to the Secured Party, in its sole
discretion;

(h) to enjoy and exercise all of the rights and remedies of a secured party under the
Act;

(i) to dispose of all or any part of the Collateral in the condition in which it was on
the date possession of it was taken, or after any commercially reasonable repair,
processing or preparation for disposition;

(j) to sell or otherwise dispose of any part of the Collateral without giving any notice
whatsoever where:

(i) the Collateral is perishable;

(ii) the Seemed Party or the Receiver believes on reasonable grounds that the
Collateral will decline speedin in value;

(iii) the Collateral is of a type customarily sold on a recognized market;

(iv) the cost of care and storage of the Collateral is disproportionately large
relative to its value;

I (V) every person entitled by law to receiVe a notice of disposition consents, in
writing to the immediate disposition'o’fthe Collateral; or -

(vi) the Receiver disposes of the Collateral in the course of the Debtor’s
business;

(k) to have Securities included in the Collateral registered on the books of the issuers
of such Securities in the name of the Secured Party or such nominee of the
Secured Party as the Secured Party shall direct;

(l) to commence, continue or defend proceedings in any court of competent
jurisdiction in the name of the Secured Parryt the Receiver or the Debtor for the
purpose of exercising any of the rights, powers and remedies set out in this
Section 5.2, including the institution of proceedings for the appointment of a
receiver, manager or receiver and manager of the Collateral; and

(m) at the sole option of the Secured Party, provided notice is given in the manner
required by the Act to the Debtor and to any other person to whom the Act
requires notice be given and the relevant provisions otherwise allow it, to elect to
retain all or any part ofthe Collateral in satisfaction of the Secured Obligations of
the Deotor.

DMDTUR/Zﬂlll(Milml‘iﬁl 303% 2


. 12 .

5.3 License

The Secured Party is hereby granted a license or other right to use. at any time
while the security hereby constituted is enforceable, without charge, the Debtor‘s labels, patents,
copyrights, rights of use of any name, trade secrets, trade names, trademarks, service marks,
customer lists and advertising matter, or any property of a similar nature, as it pertains to the
Collateral, in completing production of, advertising for sale, and selling any Collateral, and after
the security hereby constituted becomes enforceable, the Debtor’s rights under all licenses and
all franchise agreements shall inure to the Secured Party’s beneﬁt. In addition, the Debtor
hereby irrevocably agrees that the Secured Party may, at any time while the security hereby
constituted is enforceable, sell any of the Inventory directly to any person, including without
limitation, persons who have previously purchased the Inventory from the Debtor and in
connection with any such sale or other enforcement of the Secured Party’s rights under this
agreement, may sell Inventory which bears any trademark owned by or licensed to the Debtor
and any Inventory that is covered by any copyright owned by or licensed to the Debtor and any
Inventory that is covered by any copyright owned by or licensed to the Debtor and the Secured
Party may ﬁnish any work in process and afﬁx any trademark owned by or licensed to the
Debtor and sell such Inventory as provided herein.
5.4 Receiver as Secured Party

The Receiver shall be deemed to be the agent of the Debtor for the purpose of
establishing liability for the acts or omissions of the Receiver and the Secured Party shall not be
liable for such acts or omissions and. without restricting the generality of the foregoing, the
Debtor hereby irrevocably authorizes the Secured Party to give instructions to the Receiver
relating to the performance of its duties as set out herein.
5.5 Expenses of Enforcement

The Debtor shall pay to the Receiver the remuneration of the Receiver and all
reasonable costs and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable legal fees and
disbursements on a solicitor and his own client basis) incurred by the Receiver pursuant to its
appointment and the exercise of its powers hereunder, and shall pay to the Secured Party and the
Receiver as required all amounts of money (including interest thereon) borrowed or advanced by
either of them pursuant to the powers set out herein, and the obligations of the Debtor to the
Secured Party and the Receiver pursuant to this Section 5.5 shall be payable on demand and shall
bear interest at an annual rate equal to the published prime rate of any Schedule I Canadian bank
plus two percent (2%), which interest shall be calculated and compounded monthly and payable
on demand
5.6 Indulgences and Releases

Either the Secured Party or the Receiver may grant extensions and other
indulgences. take and give up securities, accept compositions, grant releases and discharges,
release any part of the Collateral to third parties and otherwise deal with the Debtor, debtors of
the Debtor, sureties and others and with the Coilateral and other security as the Secured Party or
UM l‘OR'ZOlZ lti-Otltitiq’lllfﬁ‘lﬂ 2


. 13 .

the Receiver may see fit without prejudice to the Secured Obligations ofthe Debtor or the right
of the Secuted Party and the Receiver to repossess, hold, collect and realize the Collateralt
5.7 No Liability for Failure to Exercise Remedies

The Secured Party and the Receiver shall not be liable or accountable to the
Debtor or to any other person for mty failure to exercise any of the rights, powers and remedies
set out in Section 52, and shall not be bound to commence, continue or defend proceedings for
the purpose of preserving or protecting any rights of the Secured Party. the Receiver, the Debtor
or any other party in respect of the same
5.8 Restriction on Debtor

Upon the Secured Party taking possession of the Collateral or the appointment of
a Receiver, all the powers, functions, rights and privileges of the Debtor or any ofﬁcer, director,
servant or Secured Party of the Debtor with respect to the Collateral shall. to the extent permitted
by law, be suspended unless speciﬁcally continued by the written consent of the Secured Party.
5.9 Rights Cumulative

All rights and remedies of the Secured Party set out in this agreement shall be
cumulative and no right or remedy contained herein is intended to be exclusive but each shall he
in addition to every other right or remedy contained herein or in any existing or future security
document or now or hereafter existing at law or in equity or by statute The taking of a judgment
or judgments with respect to any of the Secured Obligations of the Debtor shall not operate as a
merger of any of the covenants contained in this agreement
5.10 Care by the Secured Party

T he Secured Party shall be deemed to have exercised reasonable care in the
custody and preservation of any of the Collateral in the Secured Party’s possession if it takes
such action for that purpose as the Debtor requests in writing, but failure of the Secured Party to
comply with any such request shall not be deemed to be (or to be evidence of) a failure to
exercise reasonable care. unless any such failure to comply constitutes gross negligence or wilful
misconduct, and no failure of the Secured Party to preserve or protect any rights with respect to
such Collateral against prior parties, or to do any act with respect to the preservation of such
Collateral not so requested by the Dehtort shall be deemed a failure to exercise reasonable care in
the custody or presewation of such Collateral, unless any such failure or act constitutes gross
negligence or wilful misconduct
5.11 Standards of Sale

Without prejudice to the ability of the Secured Party to dispose of the Collateral in
any manner which is commercially reasonable, the Debtor acknowledges that a disposition of
Collateral by the Secured Party which takes place substantially in accordance with the following
provisions shall not be deemed to have been made in a commercially unreasonable manner solely
by reason thereof:
UM I‘OR'ZUDill-MMW/ZIEOEQE 2


. 14 .
(a) Collateral may be disposed of in whole or in part:
(b) Collateral may be disposed of by public sale following one advertisement in a
newspaper or trade publication having general circulation appropriate to the
public sale of such Collateral at least seven days prior to such sale;
(c) Collateral may be disposed of by private sale aﬁcr receipt by the Secured Party of
not less than three bunaﬁde written offers from arm’s length, unrelated parties;
(d) the purchaser or lessee of such Collateral may be a customer of the Secured Party,
provided that such customer acts at arm’s length with the Secured Party:
(e) the disposition may be for cash or credih or part cash and part credit; and
(r) the Secured Party may establish a reserve bid in respect of all or any portion of
the Collateral.
5.12 Securities of the Debtor

The Debtor recognizes that the Secured Party may be unable to effect a public
sale of any or all of the Securities that form part of the Collateral by reason of certain
prohibitions contained in the applicable securities laws or otherwise, but may be compelled to
resort to one or more private sales thereof to a restricted group of purchasers who will be obliged
to agree. among other things, to acquire such Securities for their own account for investment and
not with a View to the distribution or resale thereof. The Debtor acknowledges and agrees that
any such private sale may result in prices and other terms less favourable to the seller than if
such sale were a public sale and, notwithstanding such circumstances, agrees that any such
private sale shall not be deemed to have been made in a commercially unreasonable manner
solely by reason of its being a private sale The Secured Party shall be under no obligation to
delay a sale of any of the Collateral for the period of time necessary to permit the issuer of such
Securities to register such Securities for public sale under the applicable securities law, or
otherwise even if the issuer would agree to do so.

ARTICLE 6
GENERAL

6.1 Waiver

Any breach by the Debtor of any of the provisions contained in this agreement or
any default by the Debtor in the observance or performance of any covenant or condition
required to be observed or performed by the Debtor hereunder, may only be waived by the
Secured Party in writing. provided that no such waiver by the Secured Party shall extend to or be
taken in any manner to affect any subsequent breach or default or the rights resulting therefrom.
6.2 The Secured Party as Attorney

The Debtor hereby irrevocably appoints the Secured Party and any person further
designated by the Secured Party, with full power of substitution. to be the attorney of the Debtor
UM FOR/20DIii-00069213113982


_ 15 _

for and in the name of the Debtor to execute and do any deeds, documents, transfers, demands,
assignments, assurances, consents and things which the Debtor is obliged to Sign. execute or do
hereunder and. as of the Enforcement Date, to commence, continue and defend any proceedings
authorized to be taken hereunder and generally to use the name of the Debtor in the exercise of
all or any of the powers hereby conferred on the Secured Party, The power of attorney hereby
granted is coupled with an interest. is irrevocable and shall extend to the successor and assigns of
the Debtor. The Debtor agrees to be bound by any representations and actions made or taken in
good faith by the Secured Parry pursuant to this power of attorney in accordance with the terms
thereof and hereby waives any and all defences which may be available to it to contest, negate or
disafﬁrm the actions of the Secured Party taken in good faith under this power of attorney.
6.3 Further Assurances

The Debtor shall do. execute, acknowledge and deliver or cause to be done,
executed, acknowledged and delivered, such further acts, deeds, mortgages. transfers and
assurances and take all such further action or cause such further action to be taken as the Secured
Party shall reasonably require for the better assuring, charging. assigning and conferring unto the
Secured Party a security interest in the Collateral or property intended to be charged hereunder.
or which the Debtor may hereaﬁer become bound to charge in favour of the Secured Party, for
the purpose of accomplishing and affecting the intention of this agreement.
6.4 Continuing Security

The security interest constituted hereby shall be deemed to be a continuing
security for the Secured Obligations of the Debtor until all of the Secured Obligations of the
Debtor from time to time are paid and performed in full and this agreement is terminated.
6.5 No Obligation to Advance

Neither the execution nor delivery of this agreement shall obligate the Secured
Party to advance any moneys to the Debtor.
6.6 Consumer Goods

Notwithstanding any other clause in this agreement, in no event shall goods that
are used or acquired for use primarily for personal, family or household purposes form part of
the Collateral.
6.7 Notices

All notices or other communications provided for herein shall be in writing and
shall be personally delivered to an officer or other responsible employee of the addressee or sent
by telefacsimile. charges prepaid at or to the address or tclefacsimile number of the party set
opposite its name below or to such other address or addresses. teicfacsimile number or numbers
as either party may from time to time designate to the other party in such manner. Any
communication which is personally delivered as aforesaid shali be deemed to have been vaiidly
and ct‘tbctivcly given on the date of such delivery if such date is a Business Day and such
delivery was made prior to 4:00 pm. (Vancouver time); otherwise. it shall be deemed to have
DM TOR Zolllorlﬂh’ui‘? Z] M73012


_ 16 _
been validly and effectively given on the Business Day next following such date of delivery
Any communication which is transmitted by telefacsimile shall be deemed to have been validly
and effectively given on the date of transmission if such date is a Business Day and such
transmission was prior to 4:00 pm (Vancouver time); otherwise it shall be deemed to have been
validly and eifectively given on the Business Day next following such date of transmission,
In the ease of the Debtor:
Mercator Minerals Ltd.
1971 Sandown Place
North Vancouver, B.C.
V7P 3CB
Attention: Chief Financial Ofﬁcer
Telefax: (604) 960.9661
With a copy to DuMoulin Black LLP
Suite 1000, 595 Howe Street,
Vancouver, British Columbia
V6C 2T5
Attention: Corey Dean
Tclefax: (604) 687-1224
In the case oi‘tlie Secured Party:
Computershare Trust Company of Canada
510 Burrard Street, 3rd Floor
Vancouver, B.C.
V6C 3139
Attention: Manager, Corporate Trust
Telefax: (604) 661-9403
6.8 Successors and Assigns
This agreement shall enure to the beneﬁt of and shall be binding upon the parties
hereto and their respective successors and permitted assigns
6‘9 Entire Agreement
This agreement and the agreements referred to herein constitute the entire
agreement between the parties hereto and supersedes any prior agreementsr undertakings,
declarations representations and undertakings; both written and oral, in respect of the subject
matter hereof.
UM i4 IR, ZOi Zlﬂ<0ﬂl0‘)’2i3m9% 2


_ 17 _

6.10 Receipt of Financing Statement, etc.

The receipt by the Debtor‘s legal counsel of a ﬁnancing statement or ﬁnancing
change statement shall be deemed to be receipt ofsame by the Debtorl
6.11 Acknowledgement

The Debtor hereby acknowledges receipt of an executed copy of this agreement
6.12 Counterparts

This agreement may be executed in any number of counteIpans, all ot‘which shall
be deemed to be an original and such counterparts taken together shall constitute one agreement,
and any of the parties herein may execute this agreement by signing any such counterpart,

[The remainder [If this page is intentitmally left blank]

DM TOR 10 l llll-MWQ‘? 2130391) 2


. ‘8 .
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Debtor has executed 1his agreement,
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD,
By:
Name:
Title:
DM T1 )R. mummy;an 341398 2


_ 19 _
SCHEDULE A
LOCATION OF THE COLLATERAL
All ofthe Collateral under this Agreement is located in the Province of British Columbia
UM l'\)R,’2UlZlU»\\ﬂl)(lb/lIJUWK2


96
SCHEDULE “E”
SHARE PLEDGE AGREEMENT
cmmsozwop mosms DEC‘06\2358V12


SHARE PLEDGE AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT dated as of the 15m day of February. 2007.
BETWEEN :

MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.

a corporation existing under the laws of British Columbia

(the “Pledgor")

and

COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY OF CANADA

a trust company existing under the laws of Canada,

(the "Trustee")
WHEREAS
The Pledgor. pursuant to a Note lndenture dated February 15, 2007 between the Trustee and the
Pledgor (as the same may be amended, supplemented or replaced from time to time, the
“Indenlure”), has decided to issue 11.5% secured notes due on February 16, 2012 for a total
principal amount of U33 120 million (the “Notes"), and the Trustee has agreed to serve as
trustee under the lndenturc;
Pursuant to the terms of the [ndenture the Pledgor has agreed to pledge to the Trustee for the
beneﬁt of the holders of the Notes, as security for the Secured Obligations (as hereinafter
defined), all of the issued and outstanding common shares of Mercator Mineral Park Holdings
Ltd. (“Mercator Holdings“), its wholly-owned subsidiary;
NOW THEREFORE for good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of which
are hereby acknowledged) the Pledgor and the Trustee agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1
INTERPRETATION

1.1 Deﬁned Terms. All capitalized terms that are used herein which are not
otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the lndenttue,
“Collateral” means all of the Shares, and any renewals thereof, substitutions therefor and
proceeds of disposition thereof and all interest, dividends, income and revenue therefrom.
“Enforcement Date" means the date on which the principal amount of the Notes is accelerated
pursuant to Section M} of the lndenture,
"Secured Obligations" means (ihhe principal money (ii) the Pi‘enuum, if any, (iii) interest
(including interest on overdue principal, the Premium, if any, and interest) and (iv) all fees and
OM, TURJHHEKHXKXHIHZSXM)2:1


. 2 .
other money. in each case, from time to time owing by the Pledgor to the Noteholders under or in
connection with the Indenture and the Notes,
“Security Discharge Date" means the time of which the Secured Obligations have been paid in
full and the Indenture has been terminated.
“Security Interest” has the meaning ascribed in Section 24 hereunder.
“Shares” refers to all of the issued and outstanding shares of Mercator Holdings which are
owned by the Pledgor and such other shares of Mercator Holdings which are hereafter acquired
by the Pledgor.
1.2 Other Usages. References to “this agreement”, “the agreement”, "hereof",
“herein”, and like references refer to this Pledge Agreement and not to any particular Article,
section or other subdivision of this agreement.
1.3 Plural and Singular. Where the context so requires, words importing the
singular number shall include the plural and vice versa.
1.4 Headings. The insertion of headings in this agreement is for convenience of
reference only and shall not affect the construction or interpretation of this agreementt
1.5 Applicable Law. This agreement and all documents delivered pursuant hereto
shall be deemed to be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province of
British Columbia.
1.6 Time of the Essence. Time shall in all respects be of the essence of this
agreement, and no extension or variation of this agreement or any obligation hereunder shall
operate as a waiver of this provision.
ARTICLE 2
PLEDGE OF COLLATERAL
2.1 Pledge of Collateral. The Pledgor hereby deposits in pledge with the Trustee,
grants to the Trustee a security interest in and assigns to the Trustee all of the Pledgor’s right.
title and interest in and to the Collateral and agrees that such Collateral and any further Collateral
which is hereafter deposited in pledge with the Trustee shall be held for the benefit of the
Noteholders as continuing collateral security for the due payment and performance of the
Secured Obligations.
2.2 Possession of Collateral. Upon the deposit of the Shares in pledge pursuant to
this agreement, the Pledgor shall deposit with the Trustee all certificates representing such
Shares. All certificates deposited pursuant to this Section 2.2 shall. unless all necessary consents
and approvals are obtained. not contain any reference to restrictions on the transfer of the Shares
represented Lhereby and shall be duly endorsed in blank for transfer or shall be attached to duly
executed powers of attorney or forms of transfer.
DhL'lfle’ZOiZlOVWRle‘SWZA


e 3 V
2.3 Distributions. Prior to the Enforcement Date, all interest, cash dividends income
and revenue from Shares included in the Collateral (but not the proceeds of disposition of such
Shares) shall he collected by and payable to the Pledgor (and not the Trustee) and shall not form
part of the Collateral, and all non~cash dividends or distributions paid on such Shares shall form
part of the Collateral and, if received by the Pledgot, shall be paid to the Trustee. All dividends
paid on such Shares at any time on or after the Enforcement Date, regardless of when such
dividends were declared. and all interest, income and revenue from such Shares paid or accruing
on or after the Enforcement Date shall form part of the Collateral and, if received by the Pledgor,
shall be paid to the Trustee, and on and after the Enforcement Date the Trustee shall be entitled
to vote or not to vote such Shares as the Trustee sees ﬁt.
2.4 Attachment of Security Interest. The parties hereby acknowledge their mutual
intention that the security interest created by this agreement (the “Security Interest”) is to
attach, for the purposes of the Personal Property Security Act (British Columbia), upon the
execution and delivery of this agreement and that value has been given and that the Pledgor has
rights in the common shares included in the Collateral as of the date hereof. The Pledgor
acknowledges receipt of an executed copy of this agreement.
ARTICLE 3
ENFORCEMENT
3.1 Enforcement. The Trustee shall be entitled to enforce the security hereby
constituted on and after the Enforcement Date
3.2 Sale of Collateral. On and after the Enforcement Date, the Trustee. in addition to
' exercising all other rights and remedies to which the Trustee’may be entitled at law or hereunder; '
and without restricting the generality thereof, may, on behalf of the Noteholdersl have the Shares
included in the Collateral registered on the books of the issuers of such Shares in the name of the
Trustee or such nominee of the Trustee as the Trustee shall direct and may, on behalf of the
Noteholders, sell or otherwise dispose of the Collateral The reasonable expenses of preparing
the Collateral for sale or other disposition and of selling or otherwise disposing of the Collateral
and other like expenses, together with court costs and reasonable legal and other professional
fees incurred in realizing upon the Collateral or in enforcing this agreement or any other security
held by the Trustee for the Secured Obligations of the Pledgor, shall be deducted from the
proceeds of the Collateral before the said proceeds are applied to the Secured Obligations of the
Pledgor.
3.3 Exclusion from Liability. In realizing upon the Collaterali the Trustee shall not
be responsible for any loss occasioned by any sale or other realization thereof or for the failure to
sell or otherwise dispose of the Collateral except to the extent attributable to the T rustee’s gross
negligence or wilful misconduct, and the Trustee shall not be bound to protect the Collateral
from depreciating in value.
3.4 Purchase by the Trustee, a Nuteholder or Afﬁliate. Upon any sale or
realization of the Collateral or any portion thereof by way of public auction or tender, the
Trustee. any Notehoider or any of their affiliates may purchase the Collateral or such portion
thereof free from any right or equity of redemption, which right or equity of redemption is
l)M,TOR/20l210~fmmf2lﬁSSOZA


_ .1, .
expressly waived by the Pledgor, and may, in paying me purchase price, apply so much of the
Secured Obligations of the Pledgor on account of the purchase price as may be necessary for
such purpose.
3.5 Acknowledgement of the Pledgor. The Pledgor recognizes that the Trustee may
be unable to effect a public sale of any or all of the Collateral by reason of certain prohibitions
contained in applicable securities laws or otherwise, but may be compelled to ieson to one or
more private sales thereof to a restricted group of purchasers who will be obliged to agree,
among other things, to acquire the Collateral for their own account for investment and not with a
view to the distribution or resale thereof. The Pledgor acknowledges and agrees that any such
private sale may result in prices and other terms less favourable to the seller than if such sale
were a public sale and, notwithstanding such circumstances, agrees that any such private sale
shall not be deemed to have been made in a commercially unreasonable manner solely by reason
of its being a private sale The Trustee shall be under no obligation to delay a sale of any of the
Collateral for the period of Lime necessary to permit the issuer of the Collateral to register such
Collateral for public sale under applicable securities laws, or otherwise, even if the issuer would
agree to do 30‘
ARTICLE 4
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
4.1 Representations, Warranties and Covenants of the Pledgor: The Pledgor
represents, warrants and covenants to and in favour of the Trustee, for its own beneﬁt and the
beneﬁt of each of the Noteholders that:
' ' ' (a) ' that is the holder of 100% of the issued and outswnding"8hares,‘and that such '
Shares are all duly certiﬁcated;

(b) the Shares are duly and validly issued, fully paid and non—assessable and have
been duly and validly deposited and pledged, and the Pledgor warrants and
covenants to defend each of the Security Interests in and to the Collateral against
the claims and demands of all persons whomsoever;

(c) the Pledgot is the exclusive legal and beneficial owner of the Collateral and the
Pledgor has good title to and the unfettered legal right to pledge, assign and grant
the Security Interests in the Collateral in accordance with the terms and conditions
hereof;

(d) no other Person has any right to acquire any of the Collateral;

(e) the Pledgor has not deposited, assigned, set over, transferred or granted any other
Lien in the Collateral: and

(i) there we no restrictions on the voting rights associated with or on the transfer of,
any of the Shares and no consent of any third party is required for such transfer or
further transfer of the Shares or for the creation Security interests in the Collateral
or the exercise of any rights of the Tmsrce under this Agreement other than any
consent already Obtained.

DMJUWEOI Qll'kﬁﬁﬂlﬁl’ll 25260 1A


. 5 _
All of the foregoing representations and warranties made herein shall survive the execution and
delivery of this agreement and shall be deemed to be continuously made hereunder so long as
any of the Secured Obligations remain outstanding.
4.2 Covenants of the Pledgor: The Pledgor hereby covenants and agrees with the
Trustee, for its own benefit and the raleahle benefit of the Noteholders, as follows:

(a) it shall cause financing statements to be registered in respect of the Collateral in
the British Columbia Personal Property Registry, and shall provide documentary
proof of such registration to the Trustee;

(h) except as permitted pursuant to the lndenture, it shall not sell, dispose, assign,
grant any Lien or otherwise transfer all or part of any of the Collateral other than
to the Trustee, nor perform any act or execute any other instrument which might
prevent the Trustee from operating under any of the terms and conditions of this
agreement or which would limit the Trustee in any such operation; and

(c) it shall not cause or permit to be issued any further Shares while any portion of
the Secured Obligations remain outstanding.

ARTICLE 5
RELEASE OF COLLATERAL
5.1 Release of Collateral. Upon the Security Discharge Date, the Collateral and all
documents evidencing ownership of or title to the Collateral shall immediately be released and
returned to the Pledgor.
5.1 Non-Release. The security constituted hereby shall not be released, discharged or
in any way affected by:

(a) any increase or decrease in the amount of the Secured Obligations of the Pledgor;

(b) an extension of time for payment of the Secured Obligations of the Pledgor;

(c) any modiﬁcation of any of the Secured Obligations of the Pledgor: or

(d) any forehearance whatsoever whether as to time, performance or otherwise, or
any compromise. arrangement or plan or reorganization affecting the Pledgorr

ARTICLE 6
GENERAL CONTRACT PROVISIONS

6.1 Notices. All notices and other communications provided for herein shall be in
writing and shall be personally delivered to the addressee or sent by telcfacsimile. charges
prepaid, at or to the Trustee or at or to the Pledgor at the address or telel‘acsimile number, as the
case may be. below or to such other address or addresses or telefacsimile number or numbers as
either parry hereto may from time to time designate to the other party in such manner. Any
communication which is pcrsortaiiy delivered as aforesaid shall be deemed to have been validly
I)M_ TOR/20H?(lam/QIESKSOJA


_ 6 _

and effectively given on the date of such delivery if such date is a Business Day and such
delivery was made during normal business hours of the recipient: otherwise, it shall be deemed
to have been validly and effectively given on the Business Day next following such date of
delivery. Any communication which is transmitted by telefacsimile as aforesaid shall be deemed
to have been validly and effectively given on the date of transmission if such date is a Business
Day and such transmission was made during normal business hours of the recipient; otherwise, it
shall be deemed to have been validly and effectively given on the Business Day next following
such date of transmission.
In the case of the Pledgor: Mercator Minerals Ltd.

1971 Sandown Place

North Vancouverr BC.

V7? 3CB

Attention: Chief Financial Officer

Telefax: (604) 9609661

With a copy to DuMoulin Black LLP

Suite 1000. 595 Howe Street,

Vancouver, British Columbia

V6C Z’I‘S

Attention: Corey Dean

Telefax: (604) 6811224
In the case of the Trustee: Computershare Trust Company of Canada

510 Butrard Street. 3'4 Floor, Vancouver, B.C.

V6C 3139

Attention: Managerr Corporate Trust

Telefax: (604) 661~9403
6.2 Severnbility. Any provision hereof which is prohibited or unenforceable shall be
ineffective to the extent of such prohibition or unenforceability without invalidating the
remaining provisions hereof.
6.3 Further Assurances. The Pledgor hereby agrees to sign and deliver, or cause to
be signed and delivered, to the Trustee all such further and other deeds, documents, certificates,
agreements and written instruments and to take all such further action as may, in the reasonable
opinion of the Trustee be reasonably necessary for the purpose of better assuring to the Trustee,
perfecting or enforcing the security constituted hereby, In the event that the Piedgor shall fail to
do so, the Pledgor hereby irrevocably nominates and constitutes the Trustee, with full power of
substitution. its true and lawful attorney and agent, with full power and authority, in its name,
place and stead, to sign and deliver any such deeds, documents, certiﬁcates, agreements and
vm'tten instruments and to take such action The power of attorney hereby granted is coupled
with an interest, is irrevocable and shall extend to the successors and assigns of the Pledgor,
provided that the power of attorney shalt continue only until the Collateral is released in
DM [TOR/2m 30000090! 3850 2A


, 7 .

accordance with Section 51. The Pledgor agrees to be bound by any representations and actions
made or taken in good faith by the Trustee pursuant to this power of attorney in accordance with
the terms thereof and hereby waives any and all defences which may be available to it to contest.
negate or disaffirm the actions of the Trustee taken in good faith under this power of attorney,
6.4 Assignment. The Trustee may only assign or transfer this agreement, any of its
rights hereunder or any part thereof to any persons to Whom any of the Secured Obligations of
the Pledgor owing to the Trustee may be assigned in compliance with the lndenture. The Trustee
may also assign its rights hereunder to any successor Trustee Neither this agreement nor the
benefit hereof may be assigned by the Pledgor.
6.5 Successors and Assigns. This agreement shall enure to the beneﬁt of and shall
be binding upon the parties hereto and their respective successors and permitted assigns.
6.6 Entire Agreement. This agreement and the agreements referred to herein
constitute the entire agreement between the parties hereto and supersede any prior agreements.
undertakings, declarations, representations and understandings. both written and verbal, in
respect of the subject matter hereofi
6.7 Paramountcy. In the event of any conﬂict or inconsistency between the
provisions of this agreement and the provisions of the lndenture, the provisions of the Indentutte
shall prevail and be paramount
6.8 Counterparts. This agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts,
all of which shall be deemed to be an original and such counterparts taken together shall
constitute one agreement, and any of the parties hereto may execute this agreement by signing
any such counterpart.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this agreement as of
the date first above mentioned.
DVLTOli/ZnilKHXIXW/l125950 1A


_ 8 _
COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY
OF CANADA, as Trustee
B y:
Name:
Title:
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
By:
Name:
Title:
UM Yuk/1L3}ZlKl»«X)(K)9/2|15&30 34


97
SCHEDULE “F”
LOAN AGREEMENT
CMD\298502'\POP PROSPECTUS DEC oeuxsxvrz


Execution Copy
LOAN AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT made as of February 15v 2007‘
BETWEEN:
MINERAL PARK INC.
of HC37. Box 500, Kingman. Arizona, USA 86401
(hereinafter called "Mineral Park")
AND:
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
of 1971 Sandown Place, North Vancouver. British Columbia V7? 3C3
(hereinafter called "Mercator")
WHEREAS:
A. Mineral Park has requested Mercator to make loans or advances to Mineral Park from the net
proceeds of the issue of Notes (as hereinafter defined) pursuant to the Note Indenture (as hereinafter
deﬁned); and
B. Mercator has agreed to make the said loans and advances on the conditions as hereinafter
V described.
NOW THEREFORE THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH that in consideration of the premises and
other good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufﬁciency of which are hereby acknowledged by
the parties hereto each to the other), the parties hereto covenant and agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
1.0] Where used herein or in any amendment or supplement hereof, unless the context otherwise
requires. the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this Section 1.01:
(3) "Interest Rate" means l 1%% per annum;
(b) "Loan" means the aggregate of the advances made or to be made under this Agreement;
(c) "Note Indentnre” means the note indenture dated the date hereof between Mercator and
Computershnre Tmst Company of Canada; and
CMD\298502\POY mosescrus oncosxzmv;


_ 2 .

(d) "Promissory Notes" means the promissory notes of Mineral Park delivered to Mercator
evidencing the amounts outstanding on the Loan.

1.02 All statements of or references to dollar amounts in this Agreement mean lawful money of the

United States.

ARTICLE II
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

2.01 Mineral Park represents and warrants to Mercator that:

(a) there are no facts not disclosed to Mercator that to the knowledge of Mineral Park might
materially adversely affect the ability of Mineral Park to carry out its obligations under this
Agreement;

(b) there is not now pending against Mineral Park nor to the knowledge of Mineral Park is there
threatened against it. any litigation or proceedings by or in any Court, tribunal or governmental
agency, the outcome of which if adversely determined would materially adversely affect the
business or continued operations of Mineral Park; and

(c) there are no contracts. security instruments or other documents in force affecting Mineral Park
whether registered or unregistered, which would create or give rise to any lien, charge or any
other encumbrance against any property or assets of Mineral Park except as provided herein. and
that there is no law, statute or regulation of Canada or any province thereof which prevents or
adversely affects or could reasonably be expected to prevent or materially adversely affect its
ability to fulfill its obligations under this Agreement.

ARTICLE III
THE LOAN

3‘01 Mercator will lend to Mineral Park and Mineral Park will hon—ow from Mercator the total sum

equal to the net proceeds of the offering of the Notes (as defined in, and issued pursuant to, the Note

Indenture) less all applicable commissions. costs and expenses of the offering of such Notes and less any

holdbaek of funds to enable Mineral Parho repay Mercator for in respect of expenditures for the copper

and molybdenum expansion of the Mineral Park Project in an amount not to exceed UrS.$6,000.000 as
permitted under the terms of the Note indenture.

302 The Loan or so much thereof as is outstanding from time to time Will bear interest at the Interest

Rate,

3.03 Mineral Park will execute and deliver to Mercator demand Promissory Notes dated the date of

each advance equal to the amount advanced on such date and bearing interest at the Interest Rate.

Overdue principal and interest will bear interest at the same rates as described herein, payable on

demand, and at the option of Mercator overdue interest will be added to and will be deemed to be

principal.

3.04 The Promissory Notes will be repayable as to interest and princrpai as set forth in the Promissory

Notes.

CMD\29BSUZ\POP PROSVECI‘US mowamvs


, 3 .
ARTICLE IV
AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS 0F MINERAL PARK

4.01 At all times while any principal of or interest on the Loan or the Promissory Notes is outstanding,

Mineral Park will:

(a) duly and punctually pay or cause to be paid to Mercator the principal of and interest on the Loan
and all other amounts due under this Agreement, on the dates, at the places, in the monies and in
the manner set forth herein and in the Promissory Notes; and

(b) duly and promptly observe. perform and carry out and complete each and every covenant.
agreement and obligation on its pan to be observed. performed and completed hereunder.

ARTICLE V
EXPENSES

5.0] Whether or not the transactions contemplated hereby are consummated, Mineral Park will pay:

(a) all of Mercator's costs and expenses incurred in connection with the preparation of this
Agreement and all agreements and instruments provided for hereunder or incidental hereto and
all other costs and expenses in connection with the issue of the Promissory Notes:

(b) the fees and disbursaments of Merwor's legal counsel incurred in connection with the Learn the
preparation of this Agreement. and all agreements and instwments provided for hereunder
incidental hereto having connection with the supervising and attending on the occasion of all

r advances and wiih any amendments, modifications, consents or approvals or waivers hereunder
or related hereto;

(c) all costs of enforxment of this Agreement including fees and disbursements of counsel as
betwm solicitor and client

ARTICLE VI
TIME
601 Time will be of the essence of this Agreement.
ARTICLE VII
SURVIVAL OF REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES AND COVENANTS

701 All representations, warranties? covenants and agreements made herein and in any certiﬁeare or

other document delivered by or on behalf of Mineral Park pursuant hereto are material and shall

conclusively be deemed u: have been relied upon by Mercator, notwithstanding any prior or subsequent
investigation by Mercator, will survive advances on account of the Loan and the fulfillment of all other
transactions and deliveries contemplated hereunder, and will continue in full force and effect so long as
any amount of principal of or imeresi on the Loan remains outstanding and unpaid.

cmsssomv mosrecms DEC rim-sows


. 4 t
ARTICLE VIII
LAWS OF THE CONTRACT
801 This Agreement and the Promissory Notes will be deemed to be contracts and instruments by and
under the laws of Canada and the Province of British Columbia and will for all purposes be construed in
accordance with and governed by the said laws.
ARTICLE IX
ENTIRE AGREEMENTS: AMENDMENTS
9.01 This Agreement expresses the entire Agreement of the parties hereto with respect ()0 the
transactions contemplated hereby. and may not be amended nor may any term or covenant hereof be
waived, discharged, or terminated except in writing by instrument execumd by the party affected.
ARTICLE X
ASSIGNMENT
10.01 This Agreement is not assignable by Mineral Park without the prior written consem of Mercator.
but may be assigned in whole or in part by Mercator without consent, it being acknowledged that
Mercator will assign the debt owed hereunder as contemplated by the Note Indeniurei
ARTICLE XI
. r r EXECUTION IN COUNTERPART -
11,01 This Agreement may be executed in counterparts and by facsimile, each of which when so
executed shall be deemed to be an original and such counterparts together shall constiwm one and the
same instrument and notwithstanding their date of execution they shall be deemed to be dated as of the
date hereof
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have hereunto set their hand and seal or caused their
corporate seal m be affixed in the presence of persons ﬁrst duly authorized in that behalf as the case may
be. all as of the day and year ﬁrst above written
MJNERAL PARK INC.
pet:
MERCATOR MINERALS LTD.
per:
CMDQQSSUNOP momma-33 mum/v3

