
TSX, NYSE-MKT 
Symbol: NCQ
News Release
in j
NovaCopper Sells Titiribi Property to Brazil Resources
August 18, 2016 - Vancouver, British Columbia - NovaCopper Inc. (TSX, NYSE-MKT: 
NCQ) (“NovaCopper” or the “Company”) has entered into a share purchase agreement to sell 
its wholly-owned subsidiary, Sunward Investments Limited, which indirectly owns the Titiribi 
property to Brazil Resources Inc. (“BRI”) in exchange for 5 million common shares of BRI and 
1 million warrants.  Each warrant is exercisable into one common share of BRI for a period of 
two years from the closing date of the transaction at a price of C$3.50 per BRI common share.  
Using the 20 day volume weighted average price of BRI shares on the TSX-V of C$2.61, the 
value of the 5 million common shares of BRI would be approximately C$13.1 million.  Closing 
of  the  transaction  is  subject  to  satisfaction  of  certain  closing  conditions  and  receipt  of 
regulatory approval, and is anticipated to occur on or about September 1, 2016.
The Titiribi property is located approximately 70 kilometers southwest of the city of Medellin, 
Colombia, in Antioquia department, within the historical Titiribi mining district; an important 
historic gold and silver producing region.  It was acquired in June 2015 as part of a larger 
corporate  transaction  between  NovaCopper  and  Sunward  Resources  Limited.    “While  we 
believe the Titiribi property has excellent exploration potential and a strong local team, the 
sale allows NovaCopper to focus on its high-grade copper, zinc and precious metals projects 
located in northwest Alaska”, said Mr. Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, NovaCopper’s President and 
Chief Executive Officer.  Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse continued, “The project is being placed in good 
hands under the management of Brazil Resources who have experience in South America and 
a growth strategy of building a portfolio of assets that provides its shareholders meaningful 
optionality and leverage to the price of gold.”  
 
About NovaCopper 
 
NovaCopper Inc. is a metals exploration company focused on exploring and developing the 
Ambler  mining  district  located  in  northwestern  Alaska.  It  is  one  of  the  richest  and 
most-prospective known copper-dominant districts located in one of the safest geopolitical 
jurisdictions in the world. It hosts world-class polymetallic VMS deposits that contain copper, 
zinc, lead, gold and silver, and carbonate replacement deposits which have been found to host 
high grade copper mineralization. Exploration efforts have been focused on two deposits in the 
Ambler district - the Arctic VMS deposit and the Bornite carbonate replacement deposit. Both 
deposits  are  located  within  NovaCopper's  land  package that spans approximately  143,000 
hectares. NovaCopper has an agreement with NANA Regional Corporation, Inc., a Regional 
Alaska  Native  Corporation  that  provides  a  framework  for  the  exploration  and  potential 
development of the Ambler mining district in cooperation with local communities. Our vision is 
to develop the Ambler mining district into a premier North American copper producer. 
 
More information on the Company, its properties and its management team is available on the 
Company's website at www.novacopper.com.
1
NovaCopper Contacts: 
Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse 
 
President & Chief Executive Officer   
rickvann@novacopper.com
Elaine Sanders 
Vice President & Chief Financial Officer 
elaine.sanders@novacopper.com
604-638-8088 or 1-855-638-8088
# # # 
 
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements 
  
This  press  release  includes  certain  "forward-looking  information”  and  "forward-looking  statements”  (collectively 
"forward-looking  statements”)  within  the  meaning  of  applicable  Canadian  and  United  States  securities  legislation 
including the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements, including the anticipated 
closing date, other than statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are 
frequently, but not always, identified by words such as "expects”, "anticipates”, "believes”, "intends”, "estimates”, 
"potential”,  "possible”,  and  similar  expressions,  or  statements  that  events,  conditions,  or  results  "will”,  "may”, 
"could”, or "should” occur or be achieved. Forward-looking statements involve various risks and uncertainties. There 
can be no assurance that such statements will prove to be accurate, and actual results and future events could differ 
materially  from  those  anticipated  in  such  statements.  Important  factors  that  could  cause  actual  results  to  differ 
materially  from  NovaCopper's  expectations  include  the  uncertainties  involving  receipt  of  required  regulatory 
approvals, satisfaction of closing conditions, the need for additional financing to explore and develop properties and 
availability of financing in the debt and capital markets; uncertainties involved in the interpretation of drilling results 
and geological tests and the estimation of reserves and resources; the need for cooperation of government agencies 
and native groups in the development and operation of properties and infrastructure; the need to obtain permits and 
governmental approvals; risks of construction and mining projects such as accidents, equipment breakdowns, bad 
weather,  non-compliance  with  environmental  and  permit  requirements,  unanticipated  variation  in  geological 
structures, metal grades or recovery rates; unexpected cost increases, which could include significant increases in 
estimated capital and operating costs; fluctuations in metal prices and currency exchange rates; and other risks and 
uncertainties disclosed in NovaCopper’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended November 30, 2015 filed with 
Canadian securities regulatory authorities and with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and in 
other NovaCopper reports and documents filed with applicable securities regulatory authorities from time to time. 
NovaCopper's forward-looking statements reflect the beliefs, opinions and projections on the date the statements are 
made. NovaCopper assumes no obligation to update the forward-looking statements or beliefs, opinions, projections, 
or other factors, should they change, except as required by law.
2