
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(cid:59) ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2007
(cid:133) TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ______ to ______
Or
Commission File Number _333-117287 
U.S. GEOTHERMAL INC.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
83706
_______________ 
(Zip Code)
84-1472231 
________________
(I.R.S. Employer 
Identification No.)
Delaware 
_________________________________ 
(State or Other Jurisdiction of 
Incorporation or Organization) 
 
   1509 Tyrell Lane, Suite B 
  Boise, Idaho 
_________________________________ 
(Address of Principal Executive Offices) 
 
Registrant’s Telephone Number, Including Area Code    
Securities registered under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:  NONE  
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:  NONE 
  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 
405 of the Securities Act  (cid:133)Yes   (cid:59) No  
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 
13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.  (cid:133) Yes   (cid:59) No  
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed 
by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports),
208-424-1027
and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for at least the past 90 days.  (cid:59) Yes   
(cid:133) No 
 
Indicate  by  check  mark  if  disclosure  of  delinquent  filers  pursuant  to  Item  405  of 
Regulation  S-K  (§229.405  of  this  chapter)  is  not  contained  herein,  and  will  not  be 
contained,  to  the  best  of  registrant’s  knowledge,  in  definitive  proxy  or  information 
statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to 
this Form 10-K. (cid:59) 
 
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  or  a  non-
accelerated filer.  See definitions of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 
12b-2 of the Exchange Act (Check one) 
Large accelerated filer (cid:133) 
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-
2 of the Act).  (cid:133) Yes   (cid:59)No 
 
The aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-
affiliates computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was sold, or the 
average bid and asked price of such common equity, as of June 5, 2007: $109,233,008 
 
Number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer’s classes of common equity, as of the 
latest practicable date. 
 
           Class of Equity               
    Common stock, par value 
        $ 0.001 per share
Shares Outstanding as of June 5, 2007
53,092,612
Accelerated filer (cid:133)
Non-accelerated filer (cid:59)
U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Subsidiaries
Form 10-K
INDEX
For the Year Ended March 31, 2007
Page
Plan of Operations
Environmental Compliance
Description of Business
5 
General 
6 
Development of Business 
7 
 
7 
  Cash Requirements Next Six Months 
  Material Acquisitions/Development 
8 
  Material Changes in Employees                                                     10 
 
Principal Products                                                                           10 
10 
Sources and Availability of Raw Materials 
 
11 
Significant Patents, Licenses, Permits, Etc. 
 
11 
Seasonality of Business 
 
 
Industry Practices/Needs for Working Capital 
11 
12 
  Dependence on a Single Customer 
12 
  Competitive Conditions 
 
13 
13 
Financial Information about Geographic Areas 
13 
Available Information 
14 
Governmental Approvals and Regulations 
Environmental Credits 
15
PART I  
Item 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 1A  Risk Factors 
 
 
Item 2 
 
 
Item 3 
Item 4 
 
 
PART II 
Item 5  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder  
 
Item 6 
Item 7  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition  
 
Item 7A  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
Item 8
General Business Risks 
Risks Relating to the Market for Our Securities
Description of Property 
Raft River – Idaho 
 
 
Neal Hot Springs – Oregon 
Legal Proceedings 
Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders
Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
Selected Financial Data
and Results of Operations
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
16 
21 
22 
22 
28 
29 
29
30 
32
33 
41 
41
U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Subsidiaries
Form 10-K
INDEX
For the Year Ended March 31, 2007
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting 
Item 9  
  and Financial Disclosure 
 
Item 9A  Controls and Procedures 
Item 9B  Other Information 
 
 
PART III 
Item 10  Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance 
Item 11  Executive Compensation 
Item 12 
 
Item 13  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director 
 
Item 14 
 
 
PART IV 
Item 15  Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
Independent Audit Opinion 
Balance Sheet 
Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income 
Statement of Cash Flows 
Footnote Disclosures
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management 
  and Related Stockholder Matters
Independence 
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Page
42 
42 
42
43 
45
50
52 
53
54
PART I
ITEM 1. DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS 
  
This report contains forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, our statements on 
strategy, operating forecasts, and our working capital requirements and availability. In addition, 
from time to time, the company or its representatives have made or may make forward-looking 
statements, orally or in writing. Such forward-looking statements may be included in, but are not 
limited to, various filings made by the company with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(the  “SEC”),  press  releases  or  oral  statements  made  by  or  with  the  approval  of  an  authorized 
executive  officer  of  the  company.  Forward-looking  statements  consist  of  any  statement  other 
than  a  recitation  of  historical  fact  and  can  be  identified  by  the  use  of  forward-looking 
terminology  such  as  “may”,  “expect”,  “anticipate”,  “estimate”,  or  “continue”  or  the  negative 
thereof  or  other  variations  thereon  or  comparable  terminology.  Actual  results  could  differ 
materially from those projected or suggested in any forward-looking statements as a result of a 
wide variety of factors and conditions, including, but not limited to, the factors and conditions 
described in the discussions of “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Plan of Operations” in this 
report  and  in  other  documents  the  company  files  from  time  to  time  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Commission.  The  reader  is  cautioned  that  the  company  does  not  have  a  policy  of 
updating  or  revising  forward-looking  statements  and  thus  the  reader  should  not  assume  that 
silence by management of the company over time means that actual events are bearing out as 
estimated in such forward-looking statements.   
 
All references to “dollars” or “$” are to United States dollars and all references to Cdn$ are to 
Canadian dollars. 
 
U.S. Geothermal Inc. (the “Company,” “GTH” or “we” or “us” or words of similar import) is in 
the renewable “green” energy business.  Through its subsidiary, U.S. Geothermal Inc., an Idaho 
corporation  (“Geo-Idaho,”  although  our  references  to  the  company  include  and  refer  to  our 
operations through Geo-Idaho), we are engaged in the acquisition, development and utilization of 
geothermal resources in the Pacific Northwest of the United States.  Geothermal energy is the 
natural  heat  energy  stored  within  the  earth’s  crust.    In  some  areas  of  the  earth,  economic 
concentrations  of  heat  energy  result  from  a  combination  of  geological  conditions  that  allow 
water to penetrate into hot rocks at depth, become heated, and then circulate to a near surface 
environment.  In these settings, commercially viable extraction of the geothermal energy and its 
conversion to electricity become possible and a “geothermal resource” is present.  Our principal 
focus  is  the  development  of  the  Raft  River  project,  a  geothermal  project  encompassing 
approximately  8.4  square  miles  of  land  located  at  Raft  River,  Idaho.    As  more  thoroughly 
discussed in the sections below, the company has entered into a power purchase agreement, at 10 
megawatt monthly average, with Idaho Power Company, and is in the process of developing the 
power plant for the first phase of production.
-5-
Development of Business 
 
Geo-Idaho was formed as an Idaho corporation in February 2002 to conduct geothermal resource 
development.  On March 5, 2002 Geo-Idaho entered into a letter agreement with the previous 
owner, pursuant to which Geo-Idaho agreed to acquire all of the real property, personal property 
and permits that comprised the owner’s interest in the Raft River project.  We generally refer to 
this real and personal property interests as the “Vulcan Property”.  On December 3, 2002 the 
letter  agreement  was  replaced  by  a  formal  agreement  with  the  previous  owner  (the  “Vulcan 
Agreement”), which provided for the acquisition, in stages, of 100% of the Vulcan Property in 
consideration for shares and warrants of Geo-Idaho and cash payments to or on behalf of the 
previous owner of up to $600,000 (for 100% of the Vulcan Property).  Geo-Idaho also agreed 
that, as a condition to completing the purchase of and as an owner of the Vulcan Property, it 
would  work  to  advance  the  Raft  River  Project  by  expending  at  least  $200,000  for  a  work 
program  (which  has  since  been  completed).    By  August  1,  2005,  Geo-Idaho  had  paid  the 
previous owner $617,000 in securities and cash payments, and had completed the work program, 
to bring its percentage ownership in the Vulcan Property to 100%.   
 
The Company and Geo-Idaho entered into a merger agreement on February 28, 2002, which was 
amended and restated on November 30, 2003, and closed on December 19, 2003.  In accordance 
with the merger agreement, GTH acquired Geo-Idaho through the merger of Geo-Idaho with a 
wholly-owned subsidiary, EverGreen Power Inc., an Idaho corporation formed for that purpose. 
Geo-Idaho  is  the  surviving  corporation  and  the  subsidiary  through  which  GTH  conducts 
operations.  As part of this acquisition, we changed our name to U.S. Geothermal Inc. Because 
the  former  Geo-Idaho  shareholders  became  the  majority  holders  of  GTH,  the  transaction  is 
treated as a “reverse takeover” for accounting purposes. 
 
We intend to develop the Raft River project in two or more phases.  For Phase 1 of development 
at  Raft  River,  we  intend  to  commercialize  the  existing  production  wells  and  energy  field  by 
construction  and  operation  of  a  13  megawatt  binary  cycle  geothermal  power  plant  that  will 
provide  the  energy  to  be  delivered  under  a  power  purchase  agreement  with  Idaho  Power 
Company.  We have signed an engineering, procurement and construction agreement for the first 
power plant, and bids have been solicited from several engineering firms to provide engineering, 
procurement and construction services on all remaining aspects of Phase 1 that are not included 
in this agreement.  Final engineering, equipment procurement and construction is anticipated to 
take  approximately  14  to  16  months  from  April  25,  2006,  and  the  initial  power  plant  is 
anticipated  to  begin  production  by  the  end  of  the  third  quarter  of  2007.  The  total  Phase  1 
construction and development costs are expected to be $39 to 41 million for the construction of a 
geothermal  power  plant  capable  of  producing  13  megawatts  of  power.  We  have  completed 
project financing for Phase 1 of the Raft River project, whereby Raft River I Holdings, LLC, a 
subsidiary of The Goldman Sachs Group Inc., will contribute $34 million in cash and we have 
contributed $5 million in cash and approximately $1.5 million in production and injection wells 
and geothermal leases to Raft River Energy I LLC, the Phase 1 project joint venture company.   
 
It is anticipated that Phase 2 will involve the construction and operation of two additional 13 
megawatt  power  plants.  Strong  regional  interest  in  geothermal  power  has  resulted  in  several 
utilities entering into discussions with us to purchase the electrical power output from the two 
additional  plants.  Subject  to  drilling  confirmation  of  the  availability  of  sufficient  geothermal
-6-
resource, the output from all three power plants at Raft River could be as much as 39 megawatts.  
We anticipate that the Unit 2 power plant may utilize the geothermal resource within the Unit 1 
joint venture boundaries.  Without the agreement and consent of our Unit 1 joint-venture partner, 
Raft River Holdings, we cannot fully develop the Unit 1 geothermal resource without incurring 
increased development costs and delays.   
 
Announced on September 5, 2006, property for a second geothermal project at Neal Hot Springs 
in  eastern  Oregon  near  the  Idaho  Border  was  acquired  by  the  Company.    The  new  property 
consists  of  8.5  square  miles  of  geothermal  energy  and  surface  rights  and  was  leased  from  a 
private, third party.  The property has an identified geothermal resource and was recently made 
part  of  U.S.  Geothermal’s  submittal  to  Idaho  Power  Company’s  Request  for  Proposals  for 
electricity produced from geothermal sources. 
 
On  February  6,  2007,  a  lease  was  entered  into  with  Cyprus  Gold  Exploration  Corporation 
(“Cyprus”), a subsidiary of Phelps Dodge Corporation (NYSE: PD), for and undivided interest in 
geothermal rights associated with 4,760 acres (7.4 square miles) at Neal Hot Springs.  This lease 
adds 758 acres (1.2 square miles) of new area to the lease announced on September 5, 2006, and 
overlaps both surface and undivided geothermal rights that were previously acquired at the site. 
 
With the Cyprus lease, U.S. Geothermal has increased its total Neal Hot Springs project holdings 
to 6,167 acres (9.6 square miles) and increased ownership of the overlapping area to a majority 
of  the  geothermal  rights  in  that  area.    The  Cyprus  lease  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years  that 
extends thereafter for as long as commercial production is maintained and includes annual rental 
and  production  royalty  payment  provisions.    U.S.  Geothermal  has  ongoing  negotiations  with 
additional geothermal rights holders in the area. 
 
Plan of Operations 
The Company’s plan of operations for the next 12 months includes the following elements:
(1)  Complete plant construction for the Raft River Unit 1 power plant. 
(2)  Begin commercial power generation at Raft River Unit 1. 
(3)  Negotiate RFP full output contracts with Idaho Power Company for Units 1 and 3 at
Raft River and Units and 2 at Neal Hot Spring.
(4)  Negotiate full output contract with Eugene Water and Electric Board for Raft River
Unit 2.
operations.
(5)  Conduct an expanded geoscience program to target new production zones at Raft River. 
(6)  Plan, permit and drill production and injection wells for Raft River Unit 2.  
(7)  Plan, permit and drill initial wells at Neal Hot Spring. 
(8)  Continue  to  seek  and  acquire  additional  geothermal  resource  properties  and/or
Cash Requirements Next Six Months 
We  believe  our  cash  and  liquid  investments  at  March  31,  2007,  added  to  our  recent  private 
placement completed June 5, 2007, is adequate to fund our general operating and development 
activities  through  March  31,  2009.    The  Company  obtained  project  capital  to  construct  Raft 
River power plant through a partnership arrangement.  Through the arrangement, equity funds of 
approximately $34 million were made available for the construction of the project.  Total capital
-7-
expenditures  for  the  phase  one  project  are  currently  estimated  to  be  between  $39  and  $41 
million.  The majority of the funds needed for the project will be provided by existing funds and 
through  the  partnership  arrangement.    If  additional  funds  are  needed,  we  anticipate  that  the 
equity may be raised through the issuance of shares, exercise of existing outstanding warrants, 
and/or through the sale of ownership interest in tax credits and benefits. 
 
Material Acquisitions/Development 
 
The main power island of the power plant’s construction is under the direction of Ormat Nevada 
Inc., a subsidiary of Ormat Technologies Inc. (NYSE: ORA). Additional associated construction 
activities including the pipelines, transmission connection and production pump installation are 
under  the  direction  of  the  Company  with  services  being  provided  by  contractors.  Plant  and 
project construction is proceeding on schedule and budget, and the following status is reported:
•
Industrial Builders of Ontario, Oregon was awarded the mechanical construction contract 
by Ormat, began fabrication work in February and is assembling the plant components, 
•  The electrical construction contract was awarded to Merit Electric Incorporated in May, 
•  All major equipment has been delivered to the site and has been set on it’s foundations, 
•  Piping and electrical connections are underway, 
•  The control room and motor control center building has been erected, and 
•  The cooling tower is approximately 35% complete.
In  addition,  Raft  River  Rural  Electric  Cooperative  has  finished  construction  of  the  3.2-mile 
power transmission line that connects the power plant to the Bonneville Power Administration 
substation at Bridge, Idaho.  Equipment upgrades to the substation including a breaker, relays, 
and communications systems are underway. 
 
U.S. Geothermal has awarded a $1.3 million dollar contract to ITT Industries/Goulds Pumps to 
provide line-shaft geothermal production pumps for the project.  The first production pump has 
been delivered. 
 
The well improvement drill program, which began in August 2006, has been competed.  Four 
existing  wells  were  enhanced  either  by  deepening  or  adding  directional  legs  to  improve  their 
production  or  injection  characteristics.  Two  new  wells  were  drilled  to  expand  the  geothermal 
resource for the planned second 13 megawatt net output power plant at Raft River.  Resource 
utilization studies have determined that production well RRG-3 will be converted to an injection 
well  and  that  injection  well  RRG-7  will  be  converted  to  a  production  well.  The  hot  fluid 
production capacity of each of the wells was determined from the results of historical flow tests 
using  estimates  provided  by  the  independent  engineering  and  reservoir  consultant  firm 
GeothermEx of Redmond, CA. The Company is currently conducting additional field flow tests 
to gather more information of the production and injection capacity of the well field and expects 
to be able to refine the pump settings and number of wells required to be placed in service for the 
fueling of the 13 megawatt power plant based on this current test work.     
 
On  August  9,  2006,  we  completed  project  financing for  Phase  1  of  the  Raft  River  project.  In 
connection  with  the  project  financing,  we  entered  into  (i)  the  Membership  Admission 
Agreement, dated August 9, 2006, among Raft River Energy I LLC, a Delaware limited liability
-8-
company,  us  and  Raft  River  I  Holdings,  LLC,  a  Delaware  limited  liability  company,  (ii)  the 
Amended and Restated Operating Agreement of Raft River Energy I LLC, dated as of August 9, 
2006,  among  Raft  River  Energy  I  LLC,  Raft  River  I  Holdings,  LLC  and  us,  and  (iii)  the 
Management Services Agreement, dated as of August 9, 2006, between Raft River Energy I LLC 
and  U.S.  Geothermal  Services,  LLC,  a  Delaware  limited  liability  company  and  our  wholly-
owned subsidiary. Raft River I Holdings, LLC, a subsidiary of The Goldman Sachs Group Inc., 
will  contribute  in  staged  payments  a  total  of  $34  million  in  cash  and  we  will  contribute  $5 
million in cash and approximately $1.5 million in production and injection wells and geothermal 
leases to Raft River Energy I LLC, the Phase 1 project joint venture company.  
 
Pursuant to the Management Services Agreement, we will provide operating and management 
services to Raft River Energy I LLC. We expect to receive annual cash distributions up to $1.6 
million each year for the first four project years pursuant to the Management Services Agreement 
and  the  Amended  and  Restated  Operating  Agreement.  The  cash  distributions  made  to  us  will 
come  from  four  sources:  income-related  cash  distributions  from  our  investment  in  Raft  River 
Energy  I  LLC,  royalty  income  from  our  energy  leases  to  Raft  River  Energy  I  LLC,  a 
management fee for providing operating and maintenance services, and lease income from our 
cooling water leases to Raft River Energy I LLC.  After the first four years, we will receive a 
nominal percentage of the distributable Raft River Energy I LLC cash flow until specified rates 
of return are achieved by our partner, at which time we will receive a little more than half of the 
distributable cash flow.  If we develop the economic equivalent of 30 megawatts of power sales 
during the initial 20-year term of the power purchase agreement then, at the end of year 20, our 
share  of  the  distributable  cash  flow  increases  to  a  significant  majority  of  cash  flow  for  the 
remainder of the Phase I project life.  
 
On May 25, 2006, GTH signed a drilling contract with Union Drilling for the re-work of four of 
the wells previously drilled for Phase I, and for the drilling of two additional wells to be included 
in Phases I and II of the Raft River project.  The total cost of Phase I and II drilling completed by 
Union  Drilling  was  approximately  $16,600,000  and  has  been  completed,  with  $5  million 
attributed to the Phase I project and $11.6 million attributed to the development of production 
and  injection  well  capacity  for  a  proposed  second  13  megawatt  power  plant  unit  under 
consideration for development in Phase II. The results of current well test work are expected to 
determine the amount of potential well production actually needed for the Phase I power plant.   
 
On February 22, 2006, we received and signed a letter of intent from Eugene Water and Electric 
Board,  of  Eugene,  Oregon,  for  Eugene  Water  and  Electric  Board’s  purchase  of  the  full  13 
megawatt electrical output from the second planned power plant of Phase 2 (Unit 2), and we are 
currently negotiating a draft power purchase agreement with Eugene Water and Electric Board 
and expect to finalize it by July 2007. Upon execution of the Eugene Water and Electric Board 
power purchase agreement, and if Unit 1 is successful in the Idaho Power Company Request for 
Proposal,  then  the  total  output  from  Units  1  and  2  of  the  Raft  River  power  plants  will  be  26 
megawatts from two plants, instead of the originally planned 30 megawatts from three plants, 
resulting in substantial capital and operating cost savings through improved economies of scale. 
 
We  will  seek  additional  power  purchase  agreements  for  future  phases,  which  may  involve 
drilling new wells and determining the production capacity of those wells for additional plant 
construction.  At this time it is not possible to estimate if or when future wells will be drilled.
-9-
Future phases may involve additional power purchase agreements with Idaho Power Company or 
other utilities in the service area and may or may not include terms similar to the Phase 1 power 
purchase agreement.   
 
Material Changes in Employees 
At  May  31,  2007,  the  Company  had  16  full-time  employees  (9  –  administrative  and  project 
development, 7 – field and plant operations).  During the last fiscal period, the CEO and CFO 
positions  were  increased  from  part-time  to  full  time.    Two  additional  administrative  positions 
were needed for accounting, financial reporting and systems documentation.  We have added 7 
field and plant operating employees as part of the on-going operating requirements of the first 
power plant. The Company also continuously considers acquisition opportunities; if the company 
is  successful  in  making  acquisitions,  additional  management  and  administrative  staff  may  be 
added. 
 
The Company did not experience any labor disputes or labor stoppages during the current fiscal 
year. 
 
Principal Products 
Upon reaching commercial production, the principal product will be based upon electrical power 
produced from the utilization of geothermal resources.  The primary product will be the direct 
sale of power generated by our interests in our geothermal power plants.  Some revenues will be 
earned  through  consulting  and  management  fees  obtained  for  our  services  provided  to  other 
interests.  All power plants currently being considered and currently under construction are for 
sites in the Pacific Northwest of the United States of America. 
 
Sources and Availability of Raw Materials 
Geothermal  energy  is  natural  heat  energy  stored  within  the  earth’s  crust  at  economically 
accessible depth.  In some areas of the earth, economic concentrations of heat energy result form 
a  combination  of  geological  conditions  that  allow  water  to  penetrate  into  hot  rocks  at  depth, 
become heated, and then circulate to a near surface environment.  In these settings, commercially 
viable extraction of the geothermal energy and its conversion to electricity become possible and 
a “geothermal resource” is present.  
 
There are four major components (or factors) to a geothermal resource:
1.  Heat source and temperature – The economic viability of a geothermal resource is
related to the amount of heat generated. The higher the temperature, the more valuable 
the geothermal resource is.
2.  Fluid – A geothermal resource is commercially viable only when the system contains
water and/or steam as a medium to transfer the heat energy to the surface.
3.  Permeability – The fluid present underground must be able to move. In general,
significant porosity and permeability within the rock formation are needed to create a 
viable reservoir.
4.  Depth – the cost of development increases with depth, as do resource temperatures.
Closeness of the reservoir to the surface is therefore a key factor in the economic 
valuation of a geothermal resource.
-10-
The  final  product  of  electrical  power  will  be  directly  produced  through  the  utilization  of 
geothermal resources; however, these resources are not a direct component of the final product.  
Various forms of testing have been conducted at both the Raft River, Idaho and the Neal Hot 
Springs, Oregon sites.  All testing performed to date indicates that the resources at both sites are 
viable  for  the  production  of  geothermal  power.    Unless  major  geological  changes  occur  that 
impact the geothermal reservoirs, the condition of the existing resources is expected to remain 
consistent over time.  Each power plant constructed will have an impact on the temperature and 
pressure  of  the  tapped  reservoir.    The  extent  of  this  impact  and  the  results  of  future  drilling 
exploration to determine the actual extent of the reservoir will be a limiting factor on the number 
of plants that can be constructed at a particular reservoir.   
 
Significant Patents, Licenses, Permits, Etc. 
The Company’s permitting activities are continuing as the project develops.  A Conditional Use 
Permit  for  the  first  two  power  plants  was  issued  by  the  Cassia  County  Planning  and  Zoning 
Commission on April 21, 2005.  The Idaho Department of Environmental Quality issued the Air 
Quality Permit to Construct on May 26, 2006.  The Department of Army Corps of Engineers and 
the  Idaho  Department  of  Water  Resources,  after  the  submittal  of  a  joint  application  by  the 
Company,  have  determined  that the  Raft  River  project  does  not  need  to  obtain  a  Section  404 
Clean Water Act permit for the project as it is currently designed.  Various other county, state 
and federal permits will be required for the project, including a Cassia County Building Permit. 
 
An ALTA land title survey that covers all lands owned or leased by RREI has been completed, 
and Land America Commercial Services issued an ALTA Extended title insurance policy for the 
project on December 6, 2006.  
 
A Wastewater Reuse Permit was issued by the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality on 
February 23, 2007.  The Reuse permit will allow the land application of the non-contact cooling 
water from Unit 1 power plant cooling towers. 
 
The  Transmission  Business  Line  has  issued  a  categorical  exclusion  for  modification  of  the 
existing  substation  from  the  requirements  of  the  National  Environmental  Policy  Act.  This 
exclusion fulfills federal environmental permitting requirements for the substation work.  
 
Seasonality of Business 
Since we are in a developmental stage, there has been no operating trend information generated 
to date.  When the plant is operational, seasonal changes are not expected to have a significant 
impact  on  elements  that  will  drive  operational  revenues  or  related  costs.    During  plant 
development,  some  construction  activities  could  be  impacted  by  inclement  weather  that  can 
occur during the winter months.  
 
Industry Practices/Needs for Working Capital 
During the development stage of operations, high levels of working capital are committed, either 
directly or indirectly to the construction efforts.  After normal production operations have been 
established, the needs of working capital are expected to be low.  This assumption is primarily 
based upon the projected revenues and relatively low levels of expected operational expenses.  
The Company is expecting to be highly involved in development activities for the next 5 to 10 
years.
-11-
Dependence on Single Customer 
Ultimately,  the  market  for  electrical  power  is  vast;  however,  the  number  of  entities  that  can 
physically, logistically and economically acquire the commodity in large quantities in our area of 
operations  is  limited.    Currently,  the  Company  has  a  power  purchase  agreement  with  one 
customer (Idaho Power Company).  Negotiations are in process to sell to another customer and 
expand  sales  to  Idaho  Power  Company.    During  full  scale  operations,  it  is  expected  that  the 
Company will have a small number of direct customers that may amount to less than 4 or 5.  
 
Competitive Conditions 
Although  the  market  for  different  forms  of  energy  is  large  and  dominated  by  very  powerful 
players,  we  perceive  our  industrial  competition  to  be  independent  power  producers  and  in 
particular those producers who provide “green” renewable power.  Our definition of green power 
is electricity derived from a source that does not pollute the air, water or earth. Sources of green 
power, in addition to geothermal, include wind, solar, biomass and run-of-the river hydroelectric. 
A number of states have instituted renewable portfolio standards (“RPS”) that require utilities to 
purchase  a  minimum  percentage  of  their  power  from  renewable  sources.    For  example,  RPS 
statutes in California and Nevada require 20% renewable, and according to the Department of 
Energy’s Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy department, utilities in 34 states nationwide 
are providing their customers with the opportunity to purchase green, renewable power through 
premium pricing programs.  As a result, we believe green power is a niche sub-market, in which 
many power purchasers are increasing or committing to increase their investments. Accordingly, 
the conventional energy producers do not provide direct competition.
In the Pacific Northwest there are currently no geothermal facilities.  There exist a number of 
wind  farms,  as  well  as  biomass  and  run-of-the  river  hydroelectric  facilities.  However,  the 
Company  believes  that  the  combination  of  greater  reliability  and  baseload  generation  from 
geothermal, access to infrastructure for deliverability, and a low "full life" cost will allow it to 
successfully compete for long term power purchase agreements.
Factors that can influence the overall market for our product include some of the following:
•  number of market participants buying and selling; 
•  availability and cost of transmission; 
•  amount of electricity normally available in the market; 
•
fluctuations in electricity supply due to planned and unplanned outages of competitors’ 
generators; 
fluctuations in electricity demand due to weather and other factors;
• 
•  cost  of  fuel  used  by  generators,  which  could  be  impacted  by  efficiency  of  generation
technology and fluctuations in fuel supply;
•  environmental regulations that impact us and our competitors; 
•  extension of the production tax credits past December 31, 2008; 
• 
•  credit worthiness and risk associated with buyers.
relative ease or difficulty of developing and constructing new facilities; and
-12-
Environmental Compliance 
As the Company’s design and permitting activities have progressed, it has further refined and 
clarified  the  environmental  issues  for  which  it  will  have  to  demonstrate  compliance  in  the 
construction  and  operation  of  a  geothermal  facility  at  Raft  River.    The  relevant  legislation 
includes:  Clean  Air  Act,  Endangered  Species  Act,  Clean  Water  Act,  Rivers  and  Harbors  Act, 
National Historic Preservation Act, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act, Idaho Solid Waste Facilities Act and the IDAPA Drilling for 
Geothermal Resource Rules.   
 
In preparation for project financing, a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment was completed by 
Kleinfelder on October 21, 2005.  The Phase I assessment identified two underground storage 
tanks, which have since been removed.   
 
We believe that a geothermal facility can be designed, constructed and placed into operation at 
Raft River that will meet environmental compliance requirements.  At this time, the company 
does  not  believe  that  the  cost  of  compliance  at  the  federal,  state  and  local  levels  will  be 
significant.  
 
During the Department of Energy’s development of the Raft River project in the early 1980’s, a 
multi-year  survey  of  land,  plant,  animal,  archeological,  weather,  and  human  health  was 
undertaken.  The Department of Energy published an extensive report in 1982.  We contacted the 
Department  of  the  Interior  Fish  and  Wildlife  Service  regarding  any  plants  or  animals  in  the 
region that are listed as threatened or endangered species, and received a reply stating that there 
are  no  issues  identified  for  the  project  that  require  consultation  under  Section  7  of  the 
Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. 
 
 
Financial Information about Geographic Areas 
 
As described in detail in the Property section, the Company’s Phase I power plant scheduled to 
be placed into service in October 2007 is located in the Raft River Area in the south eastern part 
of the State of Idaho.  Similar plants are in the planning stages at the same location.  Also, land 
acquisitions and rights have been obtained to explore the development and construction of power 
plants in the south eastern part of the State of Oregon. 
 
 
Available Information 
 
We  file  all  applicable  financial  reports  required  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission.  
We make filings available to the general public.  Copies can be obtained of any document we file 
with  the  SEC  at  the  SEC’s  public  reference  room  at  100  F  Street,  NE,  Room 1580, 
Washington, D.C.  20549.  You  may  obtain  information  on  the  operation  of  the  SEC’s  public 
reference  facilities  by  calling  the  SEC  at  1-800-SEC-0330.  Copies  can  be  requested  of  these 
documents, upon payment of a duplicating fee, by writing to the SEC at its principal office at 
100 F Street, NE, Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549-1004. The SEC maintains an Internet 
website at http://www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other
-13-
information  regarding  issuers  that  file  electronically  with  the  SEC.  Our  SEC  filings  are 
accessible through the Internet at that website.   
We also file disclosure information as required by the British Columbia Securities Commission 
and  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange.  This  information  can  be  found  at  the  following  Web  site: 
www.sedar.com. 
 
Governmental Approvals and Regulation  
GTH  is  subject  to  both  federal  and  state  regulation  in  respect  of  the  production,  sale  and 
distribution  of  electricity.    Federal  legislation  includes:  The  Energy  Policy  Act  of  2005,  the 
Federal Power Act, as well as the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 ("PURPA") and 
the  Energy  Policy  Act  of  1992.    Because  GTH  is  defined  as  an  independent  power  producer 
under  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Federal  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  ("FERC"),  the 
relevant aspects of federal legislation are that its electrical generating facilities qualify under the 
policy set forth under PURPA which encourages alternative energy sources such as geothermal, 
wind, biomass, solar and cogeneration.
The  State  of  Idaho  also  regulates  electricity  through  the  Idaho  Public  Utility  Commission 
("IPUC"). Regulated utilities have the exclusive right to distribute and sell electricity within their 
service area.  They may purchase electricity in the wholesale market from independent producers 
like GTH. The IPUC, in accordance with Federal PURPA legislation has the authority to set the 
rules and regulations governing the sale of electricity generated from alternative energy sources. 
Regulated utilities are required to purchase electricity on an avoided cost basis from qualifying 
facilities.
Currently, the IPUC defines such a facility as having an average output capacity of 10 megawatt 
monthly  average  and  a  contract  term  of  up  to  20  years.    All  PURPA  contracts  in  Idaho  are 
subject to the approval of the IPUC. GTH is not required to market any of the electricity that it 
may  generate  at  Raft  River  to  Idaho  utilities;  it  can  transmit  and  sell  its  electricity  in  another 
state.  Nonetheless, GTH initially signed three 10 megawatt power purchase agreements (“PPA”) 
with the Idaho Power Company (“Idaho Power”).  
 
On  May  8,  2006,  GTH  submitted  proposals  to  Idaho  Power  in  response  to  their  “Request  for 
Proposal  for  Geothermal  Power”.    The  Company  expects  that  under  a  new  PPA  with  Idaho 
Power, which would replace the current PPA, the Unit 1 power plant will be allowed to sell its 
full output capacity of up to 13 megawatt annual average, instead of being capped at 10 average 
megawatts  as  mandated  under  the  current  PPA.    This  30%  increase  in  plant  output  would  be 
achieved without major additional capital investment and is expected to decrease the operating 
cost per kilowatt-hour. 
 
With carbon regulation widely anticipated to increase the cost of power sourced from coal, and 
limited  opportunities  to  purchase  baseload  geothermal  power,  the  company  has  found  that 
utilities across the Western United States have been eager to discuss power purchases from its 
Raft River geothermal resource.  As a result of the increased interest, U.S. Geothermal elected to 
withdraw  its  Unit  2  and  Unit  3  Idaho  Power  PPAs  without  submitting  them  to  the  IPUC  for 
approval in order to pursue larger capacity PPAs with other utilities.  With the concurrence of 
Idaho  Power,  the  Unit  2  and  Unit  3  10  megawatt  contracts  have  been  voided  without  further 
obligation on either party.
-14-
Eugene Water and Electric Board (“EWEB”), from Eugene, Oregon and U.S. Geothermal have 
signed  a  letter  of  intent  for EWEB  to  purchase  the  full  13  megawatt  electrical  output  of  Raft 
River Unit 2.  The parties have exchanged a draft PPA and intend to complete negotiations by 
July  2007.    Upon  execution  of  the  EWEB  PPA,  and  if  Unit  1  is  successfully  negotiated  with 
Idaho Power Request for Proposal, then the total output from the Unit 1 and Unit 2 Raft River 
power  plants  will  be  26  megawatts  from  two  plants,  instead  of  the  originally  planned  30 
megawatts from three plants, resulting in substantial capital and operating cost savings through 
improved economy of scale. The point of sale for the PPA will be at the Bridge Substation, with 
EWEB negotiating a swap with the Bonneville Power Administration to take delivery in Oregon. 
 
In addition, the strong regional interest in geothermal power has resulted in several utilities from 
California  to  Washington  entering  into  discussions  with  U.S.  Geothermal  to  purchase  the 
electrical  power  output  of  Unit  3.    Subject  to  drilling  confirmation  of  sufficient  geothermal 
resource, the power plant output from three units at Raft River would be 39 megawatts, instead 
of the maximum 30 megawatts under the previous Idaho Power PPA provisions.  
 
The  Company  will  require  the  approval  of  various  federal,  state  and  local  authorities  for 
construction of future geothermal facilities at Raft River.  These authorities include the U.S. Fish 
and  Wildlife  Service,  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Idaho  Department  of  Environmental 
Quality,  Idaho  Department  of  Water  Resources,  Idaho  Bureau  of  Hazardous  Materials,  Idaho 
State Historical Society, Cassia County and the Southern Idaho Regional Solid Waste District. 
We have retained Kleinfelder Inc. of Boise, Idaho, an independent environmental and regulatory 
consultant, to advise GTH as to the siting and design for purpose of governmental approvals. 
Additionally, David Evans & Associates of Boise, Idaho is providing consulting and engineering 
services for transmission and interconnection issues and the preparation of the application for a 
conditional use permit. Centra Consulting, Inc. of Boise, Idaho has been retained to assist with 
State of Idaho air quality and cooling water reuse permitting. 
 
Environmental Credits 
As a “green” power producer, environmental-related credits, such as renewable energy credits or 
carbon credits, may become available for sale to power companies (to allow them to meet their 
“green”  power  requirements)  or  to  businesses  which  produce  carbon  based  pollution.  If 
available, these credits will belong exclusively to us, and may provide an additional source of 
revenue.  
 
On  July  29,  2006,  GTH  signed  a  $4.6  million  renewable  energy  credits  purchase  and  sales 
agreement  with  Holy  Cross  Energy,  a  Colorado  cooperative  electric  association.  Holy  Cross 
Energy  will  purchase  the  renewable  energy  credits  associated  with  Phase  1  power  production 
from 2008 to 2017. We retain the renewable energy credits associated with power production 
from Phase 1 after 2017. We expect to receive a majority of the annual revenue from the ten-year 
renewable energy credits sales arrangement with Holy Cross Energy.
-15-
ITEM 1A. Risk Factors
General Business Risks
We  have  a  limited  operating  history,  have  incurred  losses  to  date,  and  cannot  give  any 
assurance  that  we  can  ever  attain  profitability.  Our  company  has  been  engaged  in  limited 
activities  in  the  geothermal  business  since  Geo-Idaho’s  incorporation  in  February  2002.  As  a 
result of our brief operating history, our operating results from historical periods are not readily 
comparable to and may not be indicative of future results. We have not generated revenues from 
operations to date, and cannot give any assurance that we will be able to generate revenues in the 
future.  For the years ended March 31, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007, we incurred net losses 
of ($164,909), ($676,398), ($1,830,421), ($1,523,385), and ($1,792,584) respectively.  At March 
31, 2006, and March 31, 2007, we had accumulated deficits of ($5,232,535) and ($7,025,115), 
respectively. We expect to incur losses for at least the next 6 months. We cannot give you any 
assurance that we will soon make a profit or that we will ever make a profit.
Our future performance depends on our ability to establish that the geothermal resource is 
economically sustainable.  Geothermal resource exploration and development involves a high 
degree  of  risk.    The  recovery  of  the  amounts  shown  for  geothermal  properties  and  related 
deferred  costs  on  our  financial  statements,  as  well  as  the  execution  of  our  business  plan 
generally, is dependent upon the existence of economically recoverable and sustainable reserves. 
Expansion of the production of power from Raft River is not certain and depends on successful 
drilling  and  discovery  of  additional  geothermal  hydrothermal  resources  in  quantities  and 
containing sufficient heat necessary to economically fuel future plants.
We  have  a  need  for  substantial  additional  financing  and  will  have  to  significantly  delay, 
curtail or cease operations if we are unable to secure such financing.  We require substantial 
additional  financing  to  fund  the  cost  of  continued  development  of  the  Raft  River  project  and 
other operating activities, and to finance the growth of our business, including the construction 
and commissioning of a power generation facility.  We may not be able to obtain the needed 
funds on terms acceptable to us or at all.  Further, if additional funds are raised by issuing equity 
securities, significant dilution to our current shareholders may occur and new investors may get 
rights that are preferential to current shareholders.  Alternatively, we may have to bring in a joint 
venture partner to fund further development work, which would result in reducing our interest in 
the project.
We may be subject to liquidated damages in the event that a resale registration statement is 
not  declared  effective  by  November  5,  2007.  On  June  5,  2007,  we  completed  a  private 
placement  of  9,090,900  shares  of  common  stock  at  a  price  of  Cdn  $2.20  per  share,  for  gross 
proceeds to the company of Cdn $19,999,980. Upon completion of the placement, the company 
had 53,092,612 shares issued and outstanding.  In connection with the offering, we agreed to file 
a  registration  statement  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  no  later  than  July  30, 
2007  and  to  use  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  cause  it  to  become  effective  and  remain 
effective for two years. In the event the registration statement is not effective by November 5, 
2007, the purchasers in the private placement are entitled to receive, as liquidated damages, 0.1 
common shares for each common share purchased
-16-
We  may  not  be  able  to  fully  develop  the  geothermal  resource  within  the  Unit  1  joint 
venture boundaries.  Without the agreement and consent of our Unit 1 joint-venture partner, 
Raft  River  Holdings,  we  cannot  fully  develop  the  geothermal  resource  without  incurring 
increased development costs and delays.   
 
It is very costly to place geothermal resources into commercial production.  Before the sale 
of  any  power  can  occur,  it  will  be  necessary  to  construct  a  gathering  and  disposal  system,  a 
power plant, and a transmission line, and considerable administrative costs would be incurred, 
together with the drilling of additional wells.  For Phase I, we have estimated these costs to be 
around  US  $39,000,000  to  be  incurred  over  an  eighteen  month  period.    Future  expansion  of 
power production at Raft River and development of new power production capability at Neal Hot 
Springs  may  result  in  significantly  increased  capital  costs  related  to  increased  production  and 
injection  well  drilling  and  higher  costs  for  labor  and  materials.  To  fund  expenditures  of  this 
magnitude, we may have to find a joint venture participant with substantial financial resources. 
There can be no assurance that a participant can be found and, if found, it would result in the 
Company having to substantially reduce its interest in the project. 
 
We may not be able to manage our growth.  Significant growth in our operations will place 
demands on our operational, administrative and financial resources, and the increased scope of 
our  operations  will  present  challenges  to  us  due  to  increased  management  time  and  resources 
required and our existing limited staff.  Our future performance and profitability will depend in 
part on our ability to successfully integrate the operational, financial and administrative functions 
of Raft River and other acquired properties into our operations, to hire additional personnel and 
to implement necessary enhancements to our management systems to respond to changes in our 
business.  There can be no assurance that we will be successful in these efforts.  Our inability to 
integrate acquired properties, to hire additional personnel or to enhance our management systems 
could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.  
 
If we incur material debt to fund our business, we could face significant risks associated 
with such debt levels.   We will need to procure significant additional financing to construct, 
commission and operate a power plant at Raft River in order to generate and sell electricity. If 
this financing includes the issuance of material amounts of debt, this would expose GTH to risks 
including, among others, the following:
a  portion  of  our  cash  flow  from  operations  would  be  used  for  the  payment  of 
principal and interest on such indebtedness and would not be available for financing 
capital expenditures or other purposes; 
a significant level of indebtedness and the covenants governing such indebtedness 
could limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business 
because certain activities or financing options may be limited or prohibited under 
the terms of agreements relating to such indebtedness; 
a significant level of indebtedness may make us more vulnerable to defaults by the 
purchasers of electricity or in the event of a downturn in our business because of 
fixed debt service obligations; and 
the terms of agreements may require us to make interest and principal payments and 
to  remain  in  compliance  with  stated  financial  covenants  and  ratios.  If  the
•
•
•
•
-17-
requirements of such agreements were not satisfied, the lenders would be entitled to 
accelerate  the  payment  of  all  outstanding  indebtedness  and  foreclose  on  the 
collateral  securing  payment  of  that  indebtedness,  which  would  likely  include  our 
interest in the project.
In  such  event,  we  cannot  assure  you  that  we  would  have  sufficient  funds  available  or  could 
obtain  the  financing  required  to  meet  our  obligations,  including  the  repayment  of  outstanding 
principal and interest on such indebtedness. 
 
The success of our business relies on retaining our key personnel.  We are dependent upon 
the services of our President and Chief Executive Officer, Daniel J. Kunz, our Chief Financial 
Officer, Kerry D. Hawkley, our Chief Operating Officer, Douglas J. Glaspey, and Kevin Kitz, 
our  Vice  President  –  Project  Development.    The  loss  of  any  of  their  services  could  have  a 
material adverse effect upon us. GTH has executed employment agreements with these persons 
but does not have key-man insurance on any of them. 
 
Our  development  activities  are  inherently  very  risky.    The  high  risks  involved  in  the 
development of a geothermal resource cannot be over-stated. The development of a geothermal 
resource is such that there cannot be any assurance of success. Exploration costs are not fixed, 
and  the  resource  cannot  be  relied  upon  until  substantial  development  has  taken  place,  which 
entails high exploration and development costs.  The costs of development drilling are subject to 
numerous  variables  which  could  result  in  substantial  cost  overruns.    Drilling  for  geothermal 
resource  may  involve  unprofitable  efforts,  not  only  from  dry  wells,  but  from  wells  that  are 
productive but do not produce sufficient net revenues to return a profit after drilling, operating 
and other costs.
Our drilling operations may be curtailed, delayed or cancelled as a result of numerous factors, 
many  of  which  are  beyond  our  control,  including  economic  conditions,  mechanical  problems, 
title problems, weather conditions, compliance with governmental requirements and shortages or 
delays  of  equipment  and  services.  If  our  drilling  activities  are  not  successful,  we  could 
experience a material adverse effect on our future results of operations and financial condition.
In  addition  to  the  substantial  risk  that  wells  drilled  will  not  be  productive,  or  may  decline  in 
productivity after commencement of production, hazards such as unusual or unexpected geologic 
formations, pressures, downhole conditions, mechanical failures, blowouts, cratering, explosions, 
uncontrollable  flows  of  well  fluids,  pollution  and  other  physical  and  environmental  risks  are 
inherent  in  geothermal  exploration  and  production.    These  hazards  could  result  in  substantial 
losses  to  us  due  to  injury  and  loss  of  life,  severe  damage  to  and  destruction  of  property  and 
equipment,  pollution  and  other  environmental  damage  and  suspension  of  operations.    As 
protection against operating hazards, we maintain insurance coverage against some, but not all, 
potential  losses.  We  do  not  fully  insure  against  all  risks  associated  with  our  business  either 
because  such  insurance  is  not  available  or  because  the  cost  of  such  coverage  is  considered 
prohibitive.  The occurrence of an event that is not covered, or not fully covered, by insurance 
could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
The impact of governmental regulation could adversely affect our business.  Our business is 
subject to certain federal, state and local laws and regulations, including laws and regulations on
-18-
taxation,  the  exploration  for  and  development,  production  and  distribution  of  electricity,  and 
environmental  and  safety  matters.    Many  laws  and  regulations  require  drilling  permits  and 
govern the spacing of wells, rates of production, prevention of waste and other matters.  Such 
laws and regulations may increase the costs of planning, designing, drilling, installing, operating 
and  abandoning  our  geothermal  wells,  the  power  plant  and  other  facilities.  In  addition,  our 
operations are subject to complex environmental laws and regulations adopted by federal, state 
and local jurisdictions where we operate.  We could incur liability to governments or third parties 
for any unlawful discharge of pollutants into the air, soil or water, including responsibility for 
remedial costs.  We could potentially discharge such materials into the environment in any of the 
following ways:
from a well or drilling equipment at a drill site; 
leakage from gathering systems, pipelines, power plant and storage tanks;
• 
• 
•  damage to geothermal wells resulting from accidents during normal operations; and 
•  blowouts, cratering and explosions.
In addition, the submission and approval of environmental impact assessments may be required. 
Environmental  legislation  is  evolving  in  a  manner  which  means  stricter  standards,  and 
enforcement,  fines  and  penalties  for  non-compliance  are  more  stringent.    Environmental 
assessments of proposed projects carry a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and 
directors,  officers  and  employees.    The  cost  of  compliance  with  changes  in  governmental 
regulations has a potential to reduce the profitability of operations. 
 
Because  the  requirements  imposed  by  such  laws  and  regulations  are  frequently  changed,  we 
cannot assure you that laws and regulations enacted in the future, including changes to existing 
laws  and  regulations,  will  not  adversely  affect  our  business.  In  addition,  because  we  acquire 
interests  in  properties  that  have  been  operated  in  the  past  by  others,  we  may  be  liable  for 
environmental damage caused by such former operators. 
 
Industry competition may impede our growth.  The electrical power generation industry, of 
which geothermal power is a sub-component, is highly competitive and we may not be able to 
compete successfully or grow our business.  We compete in areas of pricing, grid access and 
markets.  The industry in the Pacific Northwest, in which the Raft River project is located, is 
complex  as  it  is  composed  of  public  utility  districts,  cooperatives  and  investor-owned  power 
companies.    Many  of  the  participants  produce  and  distribute  electricity.    Their  willingness  to 
purchase electricity from an independent producer may be based on a number of factors and not 
solely on pricing and surety of supply.  
 
Claims  have  been  made  that  some  geothermal  plants  cause  seismic  activity  and  related 
property  damage.    There  are  approximately  two  dozen  geothermal  plants  operating  within  a 
fifty-square-mile  region  in  the  area  of  Anderson  Springs,  in  Northern  California,  and  there  is 
general  agreement  that  the  operation  of  these  plants  causes  a  generally  low  level  of  seismic 
activity.    Some  residents  in  the  Anderson  Springs  area  have  asserted  property  damage  claims 
against those plant operators.  There are significant issues whether the plant operators are liable, 
and to date no court has found in favor of such claimants.  While we do not believe the area of 
the Raft River and Neal Hot Springs projects or our intended operation of a power plant will 
present the same geological or seismic risks, there can be no assurance that we would not be
-19-
subject to similar claims and litigation, which may adversely impact our operations and financial 
condition.  
 
Actual costs of construction or operation of a power plant may exceed estimates used in 
negotiation  of  power  purchase  and  power  financing  agreements.    The  company’s  initial 
power purchase contract is under rates established by the Idaho Public Utility Commission, using 
an “avoided-cost” model for cost of construction and operating costs of a power plant.  If the 
actual costs of construction or operations exceed the model costs, the company may not be able 
to build the contemplated power plant, or if constructed, may not be able to operate profitably. 
The Company’s financing agreements provide for a priority payback to our partner. If the actual 
costs  of  construction  or  operations  exceed  the  model  costs,  we  may  not  be  able  to  operate 
profitably or receive the planned share of cash flow and proceeds from the project.  
 
Payments under our initial power purchase agreement may be reduced if we are unable to 
forecast our production adequately.  Under the terms of our initial power purchase agreement, 
if we do not deliver electricity output within 90% to 110% of our forecasted amount, payments 
for  the  amount  delivered  will  be  reduced,  possibly  significantly.    If  the  company  consistently 
mis-forecasts  its  output,  its  revenues  will  be  reduced,  and  we  may  not  be  able  to  operate 
profitably.
There are some risks for which we do not or cannot carry insurance.  Because our current 
operations  are  limited  in  scope,  GTH  carries  public  liability  insurance  and  directors’  and 
officers’  liability  coverage,  but  does  not  currently  insure  against  any  other  risks.    As  its 
operations progress, GTH will acquire additional coverage consistent with its operational needs, 
but GTH may become subject to liability for pollution or other hazards against which it cannot 
insure or cannot insure at sufficient levels or against which it may elect not to insure because of 
high premium costs or other reasons.  In particular, coverage is not available for environmental 
liability or earthquake damage.
Our officers and directors may have conflicts of interests arising out of their relationships 
with other companies.  Several of our directors and officers serve (or may agree to serve) as 
directors  or  officers  of  other  companies  or  have  significant  shareholdings  in  other  companies.  
To  the  extent  that  such  other  companies  may  participate  in  ventures  in  which  GTH  may 
participate,  the  directors  may  have  a  conflict  of  interest  in  negotiating  and  concluding  terms 
respecting the extent of such participation.  If a conflict of interest arises, a director who has such 
a  conflict  will  abstain  from  voting  for  or  against  the  approval  of  such  a  participation  or  such 
terms.  From time to time several companies may participate in the acquisition, exploration and 
development  of  natural  resource  properties  thereby  allowing  for  their  participation  in  larger 
programs,  permitting  involvement  in  a  greater  number  of  programs  and  reducing  financial 
exposure in respect of any one program.  It may also occur that a particular company will assign 
all or a portion of its interest in a particular program to another of these companies due to the 
financial  position  of  the  company  making  the  assignment.    Under  the  laws  of  the  State  of 
Delaware, the directors of GTH would be required to act honestly, in good faith and in the best 
interests of GTH.
-20-
In determining whether or not GTH would participate in a particular program and what interest 
GTH would acquire in it, the directors would primarily consider the degree of risk to which GTH 
would be exposed and its financial position at that time.
Risks Relating To the Market for Our Securities
A  significant  number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  are  eligible  for  public  resale.    If  a 
significant  number  of  shares  are  resold  on  the  public  market,  the  share  price  could  be 
reduced and could adversely affect our ability to raise needed capital.  Currently, the number 
of shares in the general market is approximately 53,092,612. The market price for our common 
stock could decrease significantly and our ability to raise capital could be adversely affected by 
the availability and resale of such a large number of shares in a short period of time.
Our officers and directors hold sufficient shares that acting collectively they may be able to 
influence the outcome of matters submitted to the shareholders.  Our officers and directors 
own in the aggregate approximately 13% of the company’s securities, on a fully diluted basis.  If 
the  officers  and  directors  were  to  act  collectively,  assuming  they  continue  to  own  all  of  their 
shares, there is a substantial likelihood that they would be able to influence the election of the 
directors of the company and the outcome of all corporate actions requiring the approval of the 
shareholders, such as mergers and acquisitions, in their own interests and to the detriment of the 
other shareholders.
The  possible  issuance  of  substantial  amounts  of  additional  shares  without  shareholder 
approval  may  dilute  the  percentage  ownership  of  our  shareholders.  There  are  53,092,612 
shares of our common stock outstanding and 4,671,973 shares of common stock issuable upon 
exercise or conversion of outstanding options and warrants.  There are 100,000,000 shares of our 
common stock authorized for issuance.  All of our authorized shares in excess of those currently 
outstanding may be issued without any action or approval by our shareholders and may dilute the 
percentage ownership of our current shareholders.
Because  the  public  market  for  shares  of  our  common  stock  is  limited,  investors  may  be 
unable to resell their shares of common stock.  There is currently only a limited public market 
for  our  common  stock  on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange  and  on  the  Over-the-Counter  Bulletin 
Board in the United States, and investors may be unable to resell their shares of common stock. 
The  development  of  an  active  public  trading  market  depends  upon  the  existence  of  willing 
buyers and sellers that are able to sell their shares and market makers that are willing to make a 
market in the shares.  Under these circumstances, the market bid and ask prices for the shares 
may be significantly influenced by the decisions of the market makers to buy or sell the shares 
for their own account, which may be critical for the establishment and maintenance of a liquid 
public market in our common stock.  Market makers are not required to maintain a continuous 
two-sided market and are free to withdraw firm quotations at any time.  We cannot give you any 
assurance that an active public trading market for the shares will develop or be sustained.
The  price  of  our  common  stock  is  volatile,  which  may  cause  investment  losses  for  our 
shareholders.  The market for our common stock is highly volatile, having ranged in the last 
fiscal year from a low of CDN$0.75 to a high of CDN$1.79 on the TSX Venture Exchange and 
from  a  low  of  US$0.70  to  a  high  of  US$1.65  on  the  Over-the-Counter  Bulletin  Board.    The
-21-
trading price of our common stock on the TSX Venture Exchange and on the OTCBB is subject 
to  wide  fluctuations  in  response  to,  among  other  things,  quarterly  variations  in  operating  and 
financial  results,  and  general  economic  and  market  conditions.    In  addition,  statements  or 
changes in opinions, ratings, or earnings estimates made by brokerage firms or industry analysts 
relating to our market or relating to our company could result in an immediate and adverse effect 
on the market price of our common stock.  The highly volatile nature of our stock price may 
cause investment losses for our shareholders.
Our common stock is considered to be a “penny stock,” which may make it more difficult 
for investors to sell their shares.  Our common stock is considered to be a “penny stock.” The 
Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted rules that regulate broker-dealer practices in 
connection  with  transactions  in  “penny  stocks.”    Penny  stocks  generally  are  equity  securities 
with  a  price  of  less  than  $5.00  (other  than  securities  registered  on  certain  national  securities 
exchanges  or  quoted  on  NASDAQ,  provided  that  current  price  and  volume  information  with 
respect  to  transactions  in  such  securities  is  provided  by  the  exchange  or  system).    Prior  to  a 
transaction in a penny stock, a broker-dealer is required to:
•  deliver  a  standardized  risk  disclosure  document  prepared  by  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission that provides information about penny stocks and the nature and 
level of risks in the penny stock market;
•  provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock; 
•  explain the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction; 
•  provide monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held
in the customer’s account; and,
•  make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for
the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction.
These requirements may have the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary 
market for our stock and investors may find it more difficult to sell their shares. 
 
 
Item 2. Description of Property 
 
The  Company  has  significant  interests  in  two  locations  in  the  Pacific  Northwest.    The  first 
location is the Raft River area located in Southeastern Idaho.  The second location is the Neal 
Hot Springs area located in Eastern Oregon, near the Idaho/Oregon boarder. 
 
Raft River - (Idaho)  
 
Phase I at Raft River is in the development stage. The resource has been verified by a certified 
consultant, contracts signed for sale and transmission of the electricity, and construction of the 
power  plant,  pipelines  and  transmission  lines  are  underway.  Commercial  operations  of  the 
facility should commence during the 4th quarter of 2007.
-22-
Although  geologic  and  geophysical  studies  of  the  reservoir  indicate  sufficient  geothermal 
resource  for  additional  phases  at  Raft  River,  drilling  confirmation  will  be  required  before 
additional work on Phase II can be initiated. 
 
The  Raft  River  project,  where  the  company’s  geothermal  operations  are  located,  is  in  south-
central  Idaho,  approximately  55  miles  southeast  of  Burley,  the  county  seat  of  Cassia  County. 
Burley,  population  8,300,  is  the  local  agricultural  and  manufacturing  center  for  the  area, 
providing a full range of light to heavy industrial services.
A  commercial  airport  is  located  90  miles  to  the  northeast  in  Pocatello,  Idaho.    Pocatello, 
population  53,000,  is  a  regional  center  for  agriculture,  heavy  industry  (mining,  phosphate 
refining),  technology  and  education  with  Idaho  State  University.    Malta,  a  town  with  a 
population of 180, is 12 miles north of the project site where basic services, fuel, and groceries 
are available.  Year-round access to the project from Burley is via Interstate Highway 84 south to 
State Highway 81 south, then east on the Narrows Canyon Road, an improved county road.
The  Raft  River  project  currently  consists  of  ten  parcels  (generally  referred  to  as  the  U.S. 
Geothermal Property, the Crank Lease, the Newbold Lease, the Jensen Investments Leases, the 
Stewart Lease, the Bighorn Mortgage Lease, the Doman Lease, the Griffin Lease, and the Glover 
Lease) comprising 783.93 acres of fee land and 4,736.79 acres of contiguous leased geothermal 
rights  located  on  private  property  in  Cassia  County,  Idaho.    All  parcels  are  defined  by  legal 
subdivision or by metes and bounds survey description.  The ten parcels are as follows:
The  U.S.  Geothermal  Property  -  Idaho.  The  U.S.  Geothermal  Property  is  comprised  of  three 
separate properties that total 783.93 acres; the Vulcan Property, the Elena Corporation Property
-23-
and the Dewsnup property. The Vulcan Property includes both surface and geothermal rights and 
consists of two parcels.  The first parcel has a total area of approximately 240 acres and three 
geothermal wells (RRGE-1, RRGP-4 and RRGP-5) are located on this parcel.  The second parcel 
has  a  total  area  of  approximately  320  acres,  and  three  additional  geothermal  wells  (RRGE-3, 
RRGI-6 and RRGI-7) are located on this parcel.  A fourth well, RRGE-2, although located on the 
property covered by the Crank lease, was acquired by the company as part of its purchase of the 
Vulcan Property.
The Elena Property is comprised of surface and geothermal rights to approximately 100 acres of 
property, excluding the oil and gas rights to the property.  The property is contiguous to other 
properties owned or leased by the company.
The  Dewsnup  Property  is  comprised  of  the  surface  and  geothermal  rights  to  approximately 
123.93 acres of property, excluding the oil and gas rights to the property, but including all water 
and  water  rights.    The  property  is  contiguous  to  other  properties  owned  or  leased  by  the 
company.
The Crank Lease. The Crank lease covers approximately 160 acres of mineral and geothermal 
rights, with right of ingress and egress.
The  Newbold  Lease.  The  Newbold  lease  covers  approximately  20  acres  of  both  surface  and 
geothermal rights.
The  Jensen  Investments  Leases.  The  first  Jensen  Investments  lease  covers  approximately 
2,954.75 acres of geothermal rights only.  It is contiguous with the Vulcan property and property 
covered  by  the  Crank  and  Stewart  leases.    The  second  Jensen  Investments  lease  covers 
approximately  44.5  acres  of  surface  and  geothermal  rights,  and  is  contiguous  with  property 
covered by the first Jensen lease.
The  Stewart  Lease.    The  Stewart  Lease  covers  approximately  317.54  acres  on  two  adjoining 
parcels.  Parcel  1  contains  approximately  159.04  acres  and  includes  surface  and  geothermal 
rights.  Parcel  2  contains  approximately  158.50  acres  and  only  covers  surface  rights.    The 
underlying geothermal rights for Parcel 2 are subject to the first Jensen Investments Lease.
The Bighorn Mortgage Lease. The Bighorn Mortgage lease covers approximately 280 acres of 
surface and geothermal rights.
The Doman Lease. The Doman lease covers approximately 640 acres of surface and geothermal 
rights, excluding oil and gas rights.
The Griffin Lease. The Griffin lease contains approximately 160 acres of geothermal rights.
The Glover Lease. The Glover lease contains approximately 160 acres of geothermal rights.
-24-
Raft River Phase I
As a result of the project financing for Phase I of the Raft River project, the Company has 
contributed $5 million in cash and approximately $1.5 million in property to Raft River Energy I 
LLC, the Phase I project joint venture company. Raft River Holdings, an affiliate of Goldman 
Sachs Group, will contribute $34 million to the project. Property assigned to Raft River Energy 
by the Company includes seven production and injection wells, seven monitoring wells, the 
Stewart lease, the Crank lease, the Newbold lease, the Doman lease, and the Glover lease. All 
appropriate permits and contracts have also been assigned to Raft River Energy for Phase I.
Although significant detail has been provided about each specific lease area, the economics of 
the project is based on the total resource. The reservoir supporting the project encompasses the 
entire Known Geothermal Resource Area (KGRA), which includes all the property owned or 
leased by the company at Raft River. All discussions of the economics of the project, including 
future phases, will be based at the project level rather than at the lease level.
-25-
Lease/Royalty Terms
The Crank lease, the Newbold lease, the Jensen Investments leases, the Bighorn Mortgage lease, 
the  Doman  lease,  the  Griffin  lease  and  the  Glover  lease  have  royalties  payable  under  the 
following terms:
Energy produced, saved and used for the generation of electric power, which is then sold by 
lessee, has a royalty of ten percent (10%) of the net proceeds. 
Energy produced, saved and sold by lessee, then used by the purchaser for generation of 
electric power, has a royalty of ten percent (10%) of the market value.
(a) 
 
(b) 
   
(c)  Energy produced, which is used for any purpose other than the generation of electricity has
a royalty of five percent (5%) of the gross proceeds.
The Stewart lease has production royalties payable under the following terms:
(a) Energy produced, saved and sold by the Lessee, then used by the purchaser for generation of
electric power, has a royalty of ten percent (10%) of the market value of the electric power.
(b) Energy produced, saved and used for the generation of electric power, which is then sold by
Lessee, has a royalty of three percent (3%) of the market value of the electric power.
(c) Energy produced, which is used for any purpose other than the generation of electricity has a
royalty of five percent (5%) of the gross proceeds.
No production royalties have been paid to date under any of the leases. All of the leases may be 
extended indefinitely if production is achieved during the primary term, so long as production is 
maintained.  For each lease other than the Crank Lease (see below), once production is achieved 
the amounts due annually will be the greater of the production royalty and the minimum payment 
for  the  last  year  of  the  primary  term.    All  payments  under  the  leases  are  made  annually  in 
advance on the anniversary date of the particular lease.  In addition, the following lease and other 
royalty terms apply to the individual leases:
The Crank Lease. The lease agreement with Janice Crank was originally entered into June 28, 
2002, and had a primary term of 5 years.  After GTH provided evidence to the lessor that the 
well (RRGE-2) located on lessor’s property is not owned by the lessor (but instead is included in 
the  Vulcan  Property),  a  new  lease  was  entered  into  on  June  28,  2003,  which  excluded  the 
ownership of RRGE-2, with a four-year initial term.  Advance production royalties (on a June to 
June basis) are payable under the Crank lease as follows:
•  Year 1 (Paid June 2002 under original lease): $5,000 
•  Year 2 (Paid June 2003 under original lease): $10,000 
•  Year 3 (Paid June 2004 under renegotiated lease): $10,000 
•  Year 4: Due June 2005: $10,000 
•  Year 5: Due June 2006: $10,000
Payments for years 2002 through 2006 have been recorded as lease expense.  When commercial 
production is attained, these lease payments can be deducted from future production royalties. 
For later years, during commercial production, there is a minimum annual production royalty of 
$18,000.  If the initial commercial production from the well is delayed past the primary lease
-26-
term,  we  will  seek  an  amendment  to  extend  the  primary  term  to  the  initial  commercial  plant 
production  date.  The  minimum  amount  that  will  be  payable  over  the  course  of  the  leases  is 
$45,000.  Maximum amounts payable will depend on production from the property.
The Newbold Lease. The company leases this property pursuant to a lease agreement with Jay 
Newbold  dated  March  1,  2004.    The  Newbold  lease  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years  (through 
February 28, 2014) and is extended indefinitely so long as production from the geothermal field 
is maintained. Minimum lease payments are as follows: 
•  Years 1-5: $10.00 per acre or $200 per year 
•  Years 6-10: $15.00 per acre or $300 per year
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $2,500.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend on royalties on production from the property. 
The Jensen Investments Leases. The first Jensen Investments lease was originally with Sergene 
Jensen, as lessor, is dated July 11, 2002, and has a primary term of 10 years. In September 2005, 
the property subject to the lease was conveyed and the lease was assumed by Jensen Investments, 
Inc.  Minimum lease payments (on a July to July basis) are as follows:
•  Years 1-5: $2.50 per acre or $7,386.88 per year  
•  Years 6-10: $3.00 per acre or $8,864.25 per year
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $81,256.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend on production from the property. The second Jensen Investments 
lease, with Jensen Investments, Inc., is dated July 12, 2002, and has a primary term of 10 years. 
Minimum lease payments (on a July to July basis) are as follows:
•  Years 1-5: $2.50 per acre or $111.25 per year  
•  Years 6-10: $3.00 per acre or $133.50 per year
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $1,224.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend on royalties on production from the property. 
 
The Stewart Lease.  The Stewart lease, with Reid and Ruth Stewart, is dated December 1, 2004, 
and has a primary term of 30 years.  Minimum lease payments are as follows:
•  Year 1:  $8,000  
•  Year 2:  $5,000. 
•  Year 3-30:  $5,000 plus an annual increase of 5% per year.
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $319,614.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend upon royalties on production from the property. 
 
The  Bighorn  Mortgage  Lease.    The  Bighorn  Mortgage  lease,  with  Bighorn  Mortgage 
Corporation,  is  dated  July  5,  2005,  and  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years.    Minimum  lease 
payments are as follows:
•  Year 1-5:  $1,400. 
•  Year 6-10:  $2,100.
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $17,500.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend upon royalties on production from the property.
-27-
The Doman Lease.  The Doman lease, with Dale and Ronda Doman, is dated June 23, 2005, and 
has a primary term of 10 years.  Minimum lease payments are as follows:
•  Year 1-5:  $1,600. 
•  Year 6-10:  $3,200.
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $24,000.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend upon royalties on production from the property. 
 
The  Griffin  Lease.    The  Griffin  lease,  with  Michael  and  Cleo  Griffin,  Harlow  and  Pauline 
Griffin,  Douglas  and  Margaret  Griffin,  Terry  and  Sue  Griffin,  Vincent  and  Phyllis  Jorgensen, 
and  Alice  Mae  Griffin  Shorts,  is  dated  June  23,  2005,  and  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years.  
Minimum lease payments are as follows:
•  Year 1:  $1,600. 
•  Year 2-5: $800. 
•  Year 6-10:  $1,200.
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $10,800.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend upon royalties on production from the property.
The Glover Lease.  The Glover lease, with Philip Glover, is dated January 25, 2006, and has a 
primary term of 10 years.  Minimum lease payments are as follows:
•  Year 1:  $2,100. 
•  Year 2-5: $1,600. 
•  Year 6-10:  $2,400.
The minimum amount that will be payable over the course of the lease is $20,500.  Maximum 
amounts payable will depend upon royalties on production from the property.
The  total  minimum  amount  payable  under  all  of  the  leases  during  their  primary  terms  is 
$522,393.    The  above  listed  lease  payments  are  payable  annually  in  advance,  and  are  current 
through lease years beginning in 2005. The leases can be renewed for extended periods as long 
as the power plant continues to produce power.
We lease general office space for our executive office in Boise at an annual cost of $31,051. The 
underlying lease is a year-to-year lease that expires on January 31, 2008.
With  the  construction  of  the  power  plant  included  in  phase  one  of  the  Raft  River  project, 
management  has  increased  the  general  liability  and  umbrella  liability  insurance  coverage,  as 
deemed necessary.  Additional builders risk insurance will be obtained prior to construction of 
the power plant. 
 
Neal Hot Springs – (Oregon)  
Announced on September 5, 2006, property for a second geothermal project at Neal Hot Springs 
in  eastern  Oregon  near  the  Idaho  Border  was  acquired  by  the  Company.    The  new  property 
consists  of  8.5  square  miles  of  geothermal  energy  and  surface  rights  and  was  leased  from  a
-28-
private, third party.  The property has an identified geothermal resource and was recently made 
part  of  U.S.  Geothermal’s  submittal  to  Idaho  Power  Company’s  Request  for  Proposals  for 
electricity produced from geothermal sources. 
 
On  February  6,  2007,  a  lease  was  entered  into  with  Cyprus  Gold  Exploration  Corporation 
(“Cyprus”), a subsidiary of Phelps Dodge Corporation (NYSE: PD), for and undivided interest in 
geothermal rights associated with 4,760 acres (7.4 square miles) at Neal Hot Springs.  This lease 
adds 758 acres (1.2 square miles) of new area to the lease announced on September 5, 2006, and 
overlaps both surface and undivided geothermal rights that were previously acquired at the site. 
 
With the Cyprus lease, U.S. Geothermal has increased its total Neal Hot Springs project holdings 
to 6,167 acres (9.6 square miles) and increased ownership of the overlapping area to a majority 
of  the  geothermal  rights  in  that  area.    The  Cyprus  lease  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years  that 
extends thereafter for as long as commercial production is maintained and includes annual rental 
and  production  royalty  payment  provisions.    U.S.  Geothermal  has  ongoing  negotiations  with 
additional geothermal rights holders in the area. 
 
 
Item 3. Legal Proceedings 
 
As of May 31, 2007, management is not aware of any legal proceedings in which the Company 
is a party, as plaintiff or defendant, or which involve any of its properties. 
 
 
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders 
 
None.
-29-
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer 
Purchases of Equity Securities 
 
Over-The-Counter Bulletin Board 
Effective June 3, 2005, the common stock of U.S. Geothermal Inc. has been quoted on the Over-
The-Counter Bulletin Board (the “Bulletin Board”) under the trading symbol “UGTH”. The first 
trades of our shares on the Bulletin Board started June 8, 2005, and trading has been  limited since 
then; there can be no assurance that a viable and active trading market will develop. There can be 
no assurance that even if a market is developed for our shares, there will be a sufficient market so 
that holders of common shares will be able to sell their shares, or with respect to any price at which 
holders may be able to sell their shares.  Future trading prices of our common shares will depend 
on  many  factors,  including,  among  others,  our  operating  results  and  the  market  for  similar 
securities.  
 
The following sets forth information relating to the trading of our common stock on the Over-
The-Counter Bulletin Board, from the date our common stock began trading on the Over-The-
Counter Bulletin Board on June 8, 2005.
Bid Prices on the Over-The-Counter Bulletin
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2006  
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter 
 
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2007 
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter
High
0.65 
1.24 
0.85 
1.30 
 
 
1.02 
1.49 
1.23 
1.65
Low
0.50 
0.52 
0.55 
0.64 
 
 
0.70 
0.70 
0.80 
1.10
TSX Venture Exchange  
The TSX Venture Exchange is a segment of the Toronto Stock Exchange Group that provides 
the global financial community with access to Canada's equity capital and energy markets.  The 
TSX  Venture  Exchange  provides  access  to  capital  for  companies  at  the  early  stages  of  their 
growth  while  offering  investors  a  well-regulated  market  for  making  venture  investments.  Our 
common  shares  are  traded  on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange  under  the  symbol  “GTH”.  The 
following  sets  forth  information  relating  to  the  trading  of  GTH  shares  on  the  TSX  Venture 
Exchange.
-30-
Sales Prices on  the TSX Venture Exchange (CDN$)
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2005 
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter 
 
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2006  
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter 
 
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2007 
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter
High 
$  0.90 
1.05 
1.10 
1.05 
 
 
1.10 
0.90 
0.90 
0.86 
 
 
1.45 
1.60 
1.33 
1.79
Low 
$  0.54 
0.70 
0.76 
0.80 
 
 
0.80 
0.61 
0.67 
0.66 
 
 
0.75 
0.80 
0.95 
1.20
As of May 31, 2007, we had approximately 2,300 stockholders of record.
The Company has never paid and does not intend to pay dividends on our common stock in the 
foreseeable  future.  Although  the  Company’s  articles  of  incorporation  and  by-laws  do  not 
preclude payment of dividends, we currently intend to retain any future earnings for reinvestment 
in our business.  Any future determination to pay cash dividends will be at the discretion of our 
board  of  directors  and  will  be  dependent  upon  our  financial  condition,  results  of  operations, 
capital  requirements  and  other  relevant  factors.    All  of  the  common  shares  are  entitled  to  an 
equal share in any dividend declared and paid.
The  following  table  details  the  number  of  securities  authorized  for  issuance  under  the 
Company’s equity compensation plans for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2007:
Plan Category
Equity compensation plans approved 
by security holders 
Equity compensation plans not 
approved by security holders 
Total
Number of securities to 
be issued upon exercise 
of outstanding options,
warrants and rights
Weighted average 
exercise price of
outstanding options, 
warrants and rights
Number of 
securities
remaining available 
for future issuance
2,936,128
CDN $0.96
1,444,923
Nil
2,936,128
Nil
CDN $0.96
Nil
1,444,923
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities 
During the prior fiscal year, GTH has engaged in the following significant equity transactions: 
 
1.  On April 3, 2006, GTH sold 25,000,000 shares of common stock in a private offering under 
Regulation D, at a price of CDN $1.00 per share for gross proceeds of CDN $25,000,000. The 
securities were issued in transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities 
Act in reliance on and compliance with Regulation D. Each of such persons represented to the
-31-
company that it purchased the securities for its own account, for investment and not with a view 
to the distribution of the securities.  The certificates for the securities bear a restrictive legend 
and  stop  transfer  instructions  have  been  placed  against  the  transfer  of  the  securities.    Dundee 
Securities Corporation of Toronto, Canada, was paid a cash fee of CDN $1,522,500, and issued a 
“compensation option” to acquire 1,522,500 shares at an exercise price per share of CDN $1.00, 
until April 3, 2008.  An additional CDN $202,200 was incurred in legal expenses relating to the 
offering, as well as CDN $32,100 in fees to the TSX Venture Exchange which together with the 
CDN  $1,522,500  cash  paid  to  Dundee  made  up  the  $1,756,800  cash  component  of  issuance 
costs. 
 
2.  On April 13, 2006, the Company announced that it has granted 1,763,000 options to acquire 
1,763,000  shares  of  common  stock  to  directors,  employees,  and  consultants.    Options  that 
amounted to 1,388,000 are exercisable at $0.85 CDN per share, and the remaining 375,000 are 
exercisable at $1.00 CDN per share.  All options expire after a 5 year term on April 12, 2011. 
 
3.  On May 23, 2006, GTH issued 40,000 common shares to a consultant of the Company upon 
the exercise of stock options issued under the company’s stock option plan.  He represented to 
the company that he purchased the securities for his own account for investment, and not with a 
view  to  the  distribution  of  the  securities.    The  certificates  for  the  securities  bear  a  restrictive 
legend and stop transfer instructions have been placed against the transfer of the securities.  No 
commissions were paid in respect to the issuance. 
 
4. During the quarter ended September 30, 2006, the Company granted 170,000 stock options to 
consultants and employees exercisable at a price of $1.00 CDN ($0.89 U.S.) until July 31, 2011. 
 
5. On January 22, 2007, the Board of Directors approved an action to grant 235,000 incentive 
stock options to purchase capital stock at a price of $1.12 for a five year period.  The options 
were granted to two employees and a director. 
 
6. On June 5, 2007, the Company entered into an agreement to underwrite a private placement of 
6,818,182 shares of common shares at a cost of $2.20 CDN per share to raise gross proceeds of 
approximately $15 million in Canadian dollars ($13.5 million US Dollars).  The Underwriters 
had the option to purchase up to an additional 2,272,727 common shares at the issue price under 
the offering that could gross up to approximately $20 million in Canadian dollars ($18.0 million 
US Dollars).   
 
 
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
For the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 
2006 
2004
2005
Operating Revenues 
Loss from Continuing Operations 
Loss per share from Continuing 
Operations 
Cash dividends declared and paid 
per common share
$
2007
0  $
(1,792,584)
(1,523,385)
(1,830,421)
0  $
0  $
0
$ 
(676,398)
(0.04)
0
(0.09)
0
(0.12)
0
(0.11)
0
-32-
2003
0 
(164,905)
(0.03)
0
2007
2006
As of March 31,
2005
2004
Total Assets 
Total Long-term Obligations (1)
$  22,673,340  $  21,895,933  $  2,584,970  $  1,373,831 
 
0
2,397,564
1,707,548
0
(1) Long-term obligations represent the fair value of stock options to be exercised by officers, directors, employees 
and consultants of the Company. These obligations were recorded as a liability since the option exercise price was 
stated in Canadian dollars, subjecting the Company and the employee to foreign currency exchange risk in addition 
to the normal market price fluctuation risk.
2003 
384,664 
0
$
Operating 
Revenues
Gross Profit
Loss from 
Operations
Net Loss from
Continued 
Operations
1st Quarter (1) 
2nd Quarter (1) 
3rd Quarter (1) 
4th Quarter
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2006 
 
 
 
 
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2007
1st Quarter 
2nd Quarter 
3rd Quarter 
4th Quarter
$
$
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0
$
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
0
(370,259) 
(594,601) 
(502,083) 
(196,126)
(961,777) 
(746,292) 
(610,310) 
(669,490)
$
(254,801) 
(570,119) 
(503,917) 
(194,548)
(372,486) 
(680,021) 
(338,278) 
(401,799)
(1) Restated figures.  During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2006, approximately $646,353 in professional 
fees incurred for plant development were expensed prior to the realization that a viable resource was going 
to result from development efforts.  After this determination, all direct development costs incurred during 
the fiscal period were capitalized.  The effect of this restatement increased construction in progress assets 
and reduced the operating loss for the first three quarters of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2006.
Item  7.  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial  Condition  and  Results  of 
Operations 
 
U.S. Geothermal Inc. is a Delaware corporation.  The Company’s shares of common stock trade on 
the TSX Venture Exchange under the symbol “GTH” and on the Bulletin Board under the symbol 
“UGTH”.  On December 19, 2003, the Company acquired all of the outstanding securities of U.S. 
Geothermal  Inc.,  an  Idaho  corporation  (“Geo-Idaho”)  incorporated  in  February  2002,  through  a 
transaction  merging  Geo-Idaho  into  Evergreen  Power  Inc.,  a  wholly-owned  Idaho  subsidiary 
formed for purposes of the merger transaction.  Following the merger, the Company changed its 
name from U.S. Cobalt Inc. to U.S. Geothermal Inc.  Pursuant to the merger, Geo-Idaho became 
the surviving subsidiary of the Company, and Evergreen Power, Inc. ceased to exist.  GTH is still a 
development stage company and has produced no revenues to date. 
 
During  the  three  months  ended  March  31,  2007,  GTH  was  focused  on  (1)  supporting 
construction  of  Phase  I  of  the  Raft  River,  Idaho  geothermal  project  (“Raft  River”),  (2)  the 
completion of drilling of production and injection wells for Phase I, and (3) the evaluation of 
potential new geothermal project acquisitions.
-33-
The  plant’s  construction  is  under  the  direction  of  Ormat  Nevada  Inc.,  a  subsidiary  of  Ormat 
Technologies Inc. Plant construction is proceeding on schedule and budget, and the following 
status is reported:
•
Industrial Builders of Ontario, Oregon was awarded the mechanical construction contract 
by Ormat, began fabrication work in February and is assembling the plant components, 
•  The electrical construction contract was awarded to Merit Electric Incorporated in May, 
•  All major equipment has been delivered to the site and has been set on it’s foundations, 
•  Piping and electrical connections are underway, 
•  The control room and motor control center building has been erected, and 
•  The cooling tower is approximately 35% complete.
In  addition,  Raft  River  Rural  Electric  Cooperative  has  finished  construction  of  the  3.2-mile 
power transmission line that connects the power plant to the Bonneville Power Administration 
substation at Bridge, Idaho.  Equipment upgrades to the substation including a breaker, relays, 
and communications systems are underway. 
 
On April 26, 2006, GTH issued a Notice to Proceed to Ormat under the Ormat EPC agreement as 
amended  April  25,  2006.    An  initial  payment  of  $2,020,000  allows  Ormat  to  proceed  with 
ordering of equipment with significant manufacturing lead times.  Under the amendment, Ormat 
commits to a guaranteed final completion date of November 25, 2007 on the Phase I facility. 
 
On May 8, 2006, Idaho Power confirmed that GTH would be allowed to bid the Raft River Unit 
1 project into the recently issued Idaho Power geothermal “Request for Proposal for Geothermal 
Power”.  If Idaho Power selects GTH as a successful bidder, the Company expects that under a 
new PPA with Idaho Power which could replace the current PPA, the Unit 1 power plant will be 
allowed to sell its full output capacity of up to 13 megawatt annual average, instead of being 
capped  at  10  average  megawatt  per  month  as  mandated  under  the  current  PPA.    This  30% 
increase in plant output would be achieved with no additional capital investment and is expected 
to decrease the operating cost per kilowatt-hour. 
 
With carbon regulation widely anticipated to increase the cost of power sourced from coal, and 
limited  opportunities  to  purchase  baseload  geothermal  power,  the  company  has  found  that 
utilities across the Western United States have been eager to discuss power purchases from the 
Raft River geothermal resource.  As a result of the increased interest, U.S. Geothermal elected to 
withdraw  its  Unit  2  and  Unit  3  Idaho  Power  PPAs  without  submitting  them  to  the  IPUC  for 
approval in order to pursue larger capacity PPAs with other utilities.  With the concurrence of 
Idaho  Power,  the  Unit  2  and  Unit  3  10  megawatt  contracts  have  been  voided  without  further 
obligation on either party.  
 
Eugene Water and Electric Board (“EWEB”), from Eugene, Oregon and U.S. Geothermal have 
signed a letter of intent for EWEB to purchase the full 13 megawatt electrical output of Unit 2.  
The  parties  have  exchanged  a  draft  PPA  and  intend  to  complete  it  by  October  2007.    Upon 
execution  of  the  EWEB  PPA,  and  if  Unit  1  is  successful  in  the  Idaho  Power  Request  for 
Proposal, then the total output from the Unit 1 and Unit 2 Raft River power plants will be 26 
megawatts from two plants, instead of the originally planned 30 megawatts from three plants, 
resulting in substantial capital and operating cost savings through improved economy of scale.
-34-
In addition, the strong regional interest in geothermal power has resulted in several utilities from 
California  to  Washington  entering  into  discussions  with  U.S.  Geothermal  to  purchase  the 
electrical  power  output  of  Unit  3.    Subject  to  drilling  confirmation  of  sufficient  geothermal 
resource, the power plant output from three units at Raft River would be 39 megawatts, instead 
of the maximum 30 megawatts under the previous Idaho Power PPA provisions.  
 
On  May  16,  2006,  a  $225,000  contract  was  signed  with  Raft  River  Rural  Electrical  Co-op  to 
build the production well power distribution lines for delivery of electricity from the power plant 
to the well heads.  At fiscal year end, the distribution lines were approximately 90% complete. 
 
On May 22, 2006, a $2.6 million contract was signed with Industrial Builders of Ontario, Oregon 
to  construct  the  geothermal  pipeline  gathering  and  distribution  system  which  will  connect  the 
production  and  injection  wells  with  the  power  plant.    At  fiscal  year  end,  this  component  was 
approximately 90% complete. 
 
On May 24, 2006, GTH signed a geothermal lease agreement with JR Land and Livestock Inc. 
for the lease of approximately 5,409 acres of surface, mineral and geothermal rights in Malheur 
County,  Oregon.  The  lease  term  is  for  ten  years  with  lease  payments  of  $15,000  at  signing, 
$20,000  in  first  year,  $25,000  in  second  year,  and  $30,000  for  each  subsequent  year.    A 
geothermal  program  was  completed  in  early  2007,  and  plans  are  in  progress  for  a  drilling 
program. 
 
On August 3, 2006, the Company announced the signing of $4.6 million renewable energy credit 
(REC) purchase and sale agreement encompassing the first 10 years of Phase I of the Raft River 
project with Holy Cross Energy. 
 
As of July 2006, the Company completed the acquisitions of two new properties with ground 
water rights that will provide cooling water to the Phase One and Phase Two power plants and 
surface access for pipelines and project facilities.  The two land parcels total 1,083 acres and 
have irrigation water rights for 1,904 acre-feet of water.  A third purchase of water rights only 
was also completed for an additional 544 acre-feet of ground water.  
 
On August 10, 2006, the $34 million project finance was announced for Phase I of the Raft River 
development.    The  project  finance  structure  is  channeled  through  a  qualified  special  purpose 
entity, Raft River Energy I, LLC (RREI).  Raft River Holdings is an affiliate of The Goldman 
Sachs Group, and is the Company’s investment partner in RREI.  The Company has made a $5 
million dollar cash contribution and is transferring to RREI the existing seven production and 
injection wells, and certain geothermal rights and leases covering the 1,800 acres from the 5,238 
total  acres  of  geothermal  rights  currently  held.    Raft  River  Holdings  will  make  capital 
contributions totaling $34 million in accordance with the construction payments schedule.  The 
partnership does not restrict further development of the Company’s geothermal rights and allows 
for the development of the planned Phase Two power plants. 
 
Announced on September 5, 2006, property for a second geothermal project at Neal Hot Springs 
in  eastern  Oregon  near  the  Idaho  Border  was  acquired  by  the  Company.    The  new  property 
consists  of  8.5  square  miles  of  geothermal  energy  and  surface  rights  and  was  leased  from  a
-35-
private, third party.  The property has an identified geothermal resource and was recently made 
part  of  U.S.  Geothermal’s  submittal  to  Idaho  Power  Company’s  Request  For  Proposals  for 
electricity produced from geothermal sources. 
 
On  February  6,  2007,  a  lease  was  entered  into  with  Cyprus  Gold  Exploration  Corporation 
(“Cyprus”), a subsidiary of Phelps Dodge Corporation (NYSE: PD), for and undivided interest in 
geothermal rights associated with 4,760 acres (7.4 square miles) at Neal Hot Springs.  This lease 
adds 758 acres (1.2 square miles) of new area to the lease announced on September 5, 2006, and 
overlaps both surface and undivided geothermal rights that were previously acquired at the site. 
 
With the Cyprus lease, U.S. Geothermal has increased its total Neal Hot Springs project holdings 
to 6,167 acres (9.6 square miles) and increased ownership of the overlapping area to a majority 
of  the  geothermal  rights  in  that  area.    The  Cyprus  lease  has  a  primary  term  of  10  years  that 
extends thereafter for as long as commercial production is maintained and includes annual rental 
and  production  royalty  payment  provisions.    U.S.  Geothermal  has  ongoing  negotiations  with 
additional geothermal rights holders in the area. 
 
U.S. Geothermal has awarded a $1.3 million dollar contract to ITT Industries/Goulds Pumps to 
provide line-shaft geothermal production pumps for the project.  The first production pump has 
been delivered. 
 
The well improvement drill program, which began in August 2006, has been completed.  Four 
existing wells were enhanced either by deepening or adding directional legs to improve their 
production or injection characteristics. Two new wells were drilled to expand the geothermal 
resource for the planned second 13 megawatt net output power plant at Raft River.  Resource 
utilization studies have determined that production well RRG-3 will be converted to an injection 
well and that injection well RRG-7 will be converted to a production well. 
 
On December 28, 2006, the Company entered into an agreement with Disco Associates, Inc. for 
well-head construction for the initial base amount of $478,475.  At fiscal year end, this project 
was approximately 13% complete.  
 
On  March  21,  2007,  the  Company  was  named  successful  bidder  in  Idaho  Power  Company’s 
request  for  geothermal  electricity.    Negotiations  began  on  the  terms  of  a  purchase  power 
agreement for an annual average of 45.5 megawatts from the Raft River and Neal Hot Springs 
projects. 
 
The  Company  entered  into  an  agreement  with  a  syndicate  of  Canadian  investment  dealers  to 
underwrite a private placement of 6,818,182 shares of common shares at a cost of $2.20 CDN per 
share to raise gross proceeds of approximately $15 million in Canadian dollars ($13.5 million US 
Dollars).    The  Underwriters  had  the  option  to  purchase  up  to  an  additional  2,272,727  common 
shares at the issue price under the offering that could gross up to approximately $20 million in 
Canadian dollars ($18.0 million US Dollars).  The proceeds will be used to fund current and future 
plant development.  The offering closed June 5, 2007 and is subject to certain conditions including, 
but not limited to, the approval of the TSX Venture Exchange.
-36-
Liquidity and Capital Resources 
 
We  believe  our  cash  and  liquid  investments  at  March  31,  2007,  added  to  our  recent  private 
placement completed June 5, 2007, is adequate to fund our general operating and development 
activities  through  March  31,  2009.    The  Company  obtained  project  capital  to  construct  Raft 
River power plant through a partnership arrangement.  Through the arrangement, equity funds of 
approximately $34 million were made available for the construction of the project.  Total capital 
expenditures  for  the  phase  one  project  are  currently  estimated  to  be  between  $39  and  $41 
million.  The majority of the funds needed for the project will be provided by existing funds and 
through  the  partnership  arrangement.    If  additional  funds  are  needed,  we  anticipate  that  the 
equity may be raised through the issuance of shares, exercise of existing outstanding warrants, 
and/or through the sale of ownership interest in tax credits and benefits 
 
Potential Acquisitions  
 
The Company intends to continue its growth through the acquisition of ownership or leasehold 
interests  in  properties  and/or  property  rights  that  it  believes  will  add  to  the  value  of  the 
Company’s geothermal resources, and through possible mergers with or acquisitions of operating 
power plants and geothermal or other renewable energy properties.   
 
Critical Accounting Policies 
 
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon 
the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial 
statements  requires  us  to  make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of 
assets,  liabilities,  revenues  and  expenses,  and  related  disclosure  of  contingent  assets  and 
liabilities. Certain accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that 
there is reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported under 
different conditions, or if different assumptions had been made. We evaluate our estimates and 
assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other 
assumptions  that  are  believed  to  be  reasonable  under  the  circumstances,  the  results  of  which 
form the basis for the financial statements.  
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
The  Company  considers  cash  deposits  and  highly  liquid  investments  to  be  cash  and  cash 
equivalents for financial reporting presentation on the consolidated balance sheet and statement 
of cash flows.  The Company subscribes to the accounting standards that define cash equivalents 
as highly liquid, short-term instruments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash, 
which  are  generally  defined  investments  that  have  original  maturity  dates  of  less  than  three 
months. With the large value of funds invested in short term deposits, small variations in short 
term  interest  rates  may  materially  affect  the  value  of  cash  equivalents.  Investments  in 
government obligations accumulate higher interest, but the principal balance is not insured by the 
FDIC.  
 
The  Company  does  not  consider  such  items  to  be  cash  equivalents  if  there  is  a  significant 
restriction placed upon the use of those assets.  At fiscal year end, the Company held deposits
-37-
that were restricted according to a contractual arrangement with a major vendor.  Accordingly, 
these deposits were classified as restricted cash, rather than cash equivalents.   
 
Going Concern 
Based  on  our  projected  spending  over  the  next  12  months,  our  current  operating  funds  and 
approximately $18 million that was raised from the private placement completed June 5, 2007, 
our auditors have determined that the going concern qualification from our financial statements 
is  not  needed.    Management  believes  that  sufficient  funding  will  be  available  to  meet  our 
business  objectives,  including  anticipated  cash  needs  for  working  capital,  and  financing  for 
construction of the Phase 1 power plant. As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial 
statements, we have incurred an accumulated deficit of $7,025,115 for the period from February 
26, 2002 (inception) to March 31, 2007, and have no revenue from operations.  In the ordinary 
course  of  constructing  a  power  plant  facility  of  this  size  and  complexity,  cost  overruns  and 
contract  delays  can  significantly  affect  the  economics  of  the  project.  Failure  to  achieve 
commercial  operations  of  the  power  plant  prior  to  December  31,  2007  would  jeopardize  the 
production tax credit, and could materially affect the ability of U.S. Geothermal to operate as a 
going concern. 
 
Property, Plant and Equipment 
During the development stage of operations, the Company has purchased and otherwise acquired 
geothermal properties for the production of power.  The geothermal properties include: drilled 
wells, power plant components, power plant support components, land, land rights, surface water 
rights,  and  mineral  rights.    Since  the  costs  of  land  and  the  rights  surrounding  the  access 
geothermal and surface water reservoirs are relatively small, these items have been included, but 
have not been reported separately in our financial statements.  The Company’s first power plant 
is scheduled to be operational in October 2007; however, it was still under construction at fiscal 
year  end.    The  costs  of  this  power  plant  are  being  accumulated  in  construction  in  process 
accounts until the plant becomes operational.  Once the plant is operational, these costs will be 
charged to operations in a systematic manner based upon the total estimated gallons of water the 
plant is expected to produce over its useful life.  The factors and assumptions that comprise this 
allocation process will be based upon the best information available to us, and will be evaluated, 
at least, annually for viability.   If it is determined that our cost allocations have produced results 
that vary significantly from the conditions surrounding the value of the Company’s geothermal 
properties, a gain or loss adjustment will be made in the period in which this determination is 
made.    The  cost  allocation  or  amortization  process  is  not  intended  to  present  the  fair  market 
value  of  our  geothermal  properties;  rather  to  allocate  the  actual  historical  costs  of  those 
properties over their service lives.    
 
The  costs  of  machinery,  vehicles  and  other  equipment,  currently  in  operation,  are  being 
depreciated in a systematic manner.  For these assets, depreciation is calculated based upon the 
straight-line method at a rate of 30%, which allocates the costs evenly over the asset’s estimated 
service  life.    Depreciation  costs  calculated  for  assets  that  are  not  directly  involved  in  the 
production of geothermal properties are charged to operations.   
 
Income Taxes 
According  to  generally  accepted  accounting  practices,  entities  must  recognize  assets  and/or 
liabilities  that  originate  with  the  differences  in  revenues  and  expenses  presented  for  financial
-38-
reporting purposes and those revenues and expenses that are utilized to comply with federal and 
state income tax law.  Often deductions can be accelerated for income tax purposes, thus creating 
temporary or timing differences.  Other items (generally non-allowable expenses) do not reverse 
over time, and are considered to be permanent differences.  These types of costs are, typically, 
not factored into the deferred income tax asset or liability calculation.  The Company’s primary 
element that impacts the liability or asset calculation relates to the operating losses generated in 
its  early  stages  of  operation  that  will  be  allowed  to  offset  future  earnings.    Stock-based 
compensation is another significant area that impacts that recognition of deferred income taxes.  
Compensation that has been provided to employees and contractors based upon the value of the 
issuance of stock options is reported as an operating cost.  However, this compensation is not an 
allowable  deduction  for  income  tax  purposes.    At  the  end  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  Company’s 
significant tax differences would ultimately result in the recognition of an asset; however, due to 
the  uncertainly  surrounding  future  earnings,  an  allowance  has  been  calculated  that  effectively 
removes  the  asset.    The  Company  continues  to  track  the  financial  elements  that  comprise  the 
deferred income tax calculation and will remove or reduce the asset allowance if the Company is 
determined to be in position where it is likely to produce earnings.  
 
Stock-Based Compensation 
At the beginning of the fiscal year, the Company adopted a standard that states that if certain 
conditions are present surrounding the issuance of equity instruments as employee compensation, 
then circumstances may warrant the recognition of a liability for financial reporting purposes.  
One such condition was present when the Company originally issued stock options in a foreign 
currency (Canadian dollars) to employees both before and after the beginning of the fiscal year.  
Authors of the standard have reasoned that when a condition is present that creates a financial 
risk to the recipient in addition to normal market risks (i.e., foreign currency translation risk), 
then the instrument takes on the characteristics of a liability, rather than an equity item.  As the 
underlying  stock  options  are  exercised  or  are  forfeited,  then  the  stock  based  compensation 
liability  will  be  reduced.    The  Company’s  financial  statements  reflect  these  changes  in  the 
consolidated balance sheet.  As the value of the options change over the vesting periods, these 
changes will ultimately be reflected in the amount of expense charged to operations.   
 
The Company awards stock options for compensation to non-employees for services performed 
and/or  services  performed  above  and  beyond  expectations.      After  the  services  have  been 
completed, the awards are made at the discretion of the Board of Directors.  The fair value of the 
options  are  determined  on  the  date  the  options  are  awarded  according  to  several  factors  that 
include the exercise price of the option, the current price of the underlying share, the expected 
life of the options and the expected volatility of the stock.  Generally speaking, a longer life and 
higher expected volatility yields a higher value of the option.  In accordance with appropriate 
accounting  guidance,  the  Company  records  the  value  of  these  options  as  operating  expense 
during the period in which they are awarded.  Stock options awarded to Company employees are 
also valued on the date they are awarded.  However, the value of these options are expensed or 
capitalized over the vesting period.  The current vesting period for all options is eighteen months.  
The nature of the services provided determines whether the value will be expensed or added to 
the value of a Company asset.  To date, no services have been provided directly related to the 
construction of property and equipment, thus, all services have been charged to operations.
-39-
Operating Results 
 
March 31, 2007 compared to March 31, 2006 
For the year ended March 31, 2007, we incurred a loss of $1,793,000 or $0.04 per share. The compares to 
a  loss  for  the  year  ended  March  31,  2006  of  $1,491,000  or  $0.09  per  share.  The  main  reason  for  this 
increased  loss  is  that  non-cash  stock-based  compensation  granted  to  directors,  officers  and  employees 
increased  by  $798,000  in  a  year  to  year  comparison.  Stock  options  granted  during  the  year  were 
2,168,000 options in 2007 as compared to 50,000 options in 2006. 
 
In  addition,  professional  fees  totaled  $663,000  in  2007  as  compared  to  $386,000  in  2006.  Legal  and 
accounting  fees  increased  $277,000  in  2007  due  to  legal  fees  associated  with  an  SB-2  registration 
statement  and  the  negotiation  of  the  Raft  River  Energy  operating  agreement,  and  an  increase  in 
accounting  fees  associated  with  amendments  to  prior  year  federal  tax  returns.  Losses  incurred  at  Raft 
River Energy of $102,000 were recorded in 2007. 
 
Increases in interest income of $670,000 and foreign currency gain of $262,000 helped to offset partially 
the increased costs. The foreign currency resulted from timing on transferring funds from the April 2006 
private placement from our Canadian accounts into the U.S. The interest income resulted from  money 
market fund interest on the balance of the Company’s cash balances. 
 
March 31, 2006 compared to March 31, 2005 
For the year ended March 31, 2006, we incurred a loss of $1,491,000 or $0.09 per share. The compares to 
a  loss  for  the  year  ended  March  31,  2005  of  $1,830,000  or  $0.12  per  share.  The  main  reason  for  this 
decreased loss is that exploration expenditures decreased by $439,000 in a year to year comparison. U.S. 
Geothermal  development  costs were capitalized in 2006 as a geothermal reservoir had been identified, 
and determined to be economic. 
 
In addition, consulting fees decreased by $461,000 in 2006, which was offset partially by an increase in 
salaries  and  wages  of  $355,000.  Individuals  previously  paid  as  consultants  were  hired  as  employees 
effective April 1, 2006. 
 
Travel  and  promotion  expenses  increased  $  271,000  as  the  Company  increased  marketing  and 
promotional efforts to attract and retain investors. Foreign currency gain increased by $245,000 as funds 
were transferred from our Canadian accounts into the U.S.  
 
Contractual Obligations  
 
The following table denotes contractual obligation by payments due for each period. 
 
 
Capital 
Leases 
 
Raft  River  Energy  I  LLC  is  the  joint  venture  partnership  constructing  the  power  plant  at  Raft  River, 
Idaho. This subsidiary is not consolidated into the financial statements. As such, the obligations of Raft 
River Energy are not reflected in this table.
> 5 years 
$  425,350
3-5 years 
$  103,900
Total 
$ 665,550
< 1 year 
$  40,100
1-3 years 
$  96,200
-40-
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements 
 
As of March 31, 2007, the Company does not have any off balance sheet arrangements.  
 
 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
 
Interest Risk on Investments  
At March 31, 2007, the Company held investments of $12,081,369 in money market accounts.  
These are highly liquid investments that are subject to risks associated with changes in interest 
rates.  The  money  market  funds  are  invested  in  governmental  obligations  with  minimal 
fluctuations in interest rates and fixed terms.   
 
Foreign Currency Risk  
The  Company  is  subject  to  limited  amount  of  foreign  currency  risks  associated  with  cash 
deposits  maintained  in  Canadian  currency.    The  Company  has  utilized  and  it  is  continuing  to 
utilize the Canadian markets for raising capital.  By proper timing of the transactions and then 
maintenance  of  adequate  operating  funds  in  other  financial  resources,  the  Company  has  been 
able to mitigate some of the risks surrounding foreign currency exchanges.  At fiscal year end, 
the company held deposits that amounted to less than $30,000 in U.S. dollar equivalents.  Also, 
the Canadian currency exchange rate has been reasonably consistent over the past fiscal year.  As 
a  matter  of  standard  operating  practice,  the  Company  does  not  maintain  large  balances  of 
Canadian currency; and, substantially, all operating transactions are conducted in U.S. dollars.  
 
The strike price for the Company’s stock option plan has been stated in Canadian dollars as the 
plan has been administered through our Vancouver office and Pacific Corporate Trust Company. 
This  subjects  the  Company  to  foreign  currency  risk  in  addition  to  the  normal  market  risks 
associated with the stock price fluctuations. A long-term liability has been established to reflect 
the fair value of the stock options payable. The strike price on future option grants will be stated 
in US dollars.  
 
Commodity Price Risk  
  The Company is exposed to risks surrounding the volatility of energy prices.   These risks are 
impacted by various circumstances surrounding the energy production from natural gas, nuclear, 
hydro, solar, coal and oil.  The Company has been able to mitigate, to a certain extent, this risk 
by signing a power purchase contract for a 20 year period for the first power plant scheduled to 
go into production.   This type of arrangement will be the model for power purchase contracts 
planned for future power plants.   
 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
 
The information required hereunder is set forth under “Report of Independent Registered Public 
Accounting  Firm,”  “Consolidated  Balance  Sheets,”  “Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations,” 
“Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) and Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit),” 
“Consolidated  Statements  of  Cash  Flows,”  and  “Notes  to  Consolidated  Financial  Statements” 
included in the consolidated financial statements that are a part of this Report (See Part IV, Item
-41-
15, exhibit 10.37).  Other financial information and schedules are included in the consolidated 
financial statements that are a part of this Report.  
 
 
Item  9.  Changes  in  and  Disagreements  With  Accountants  on  Accounting  and  Financial 
Disclosure 
 
None. 
 
 
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 
 
An  evaluation  was  performed  under  the  supervision  and  with  the  participation  of  our 
management,  including  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  (“CEO”)  and  Chief  Financial  Officer 
(“CFO”), of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rule 13(a)-
15(e) or 15d-15(e) as of March 31, 2007.  Based on that evaluation, our management, including 
the CEO and CFO, concluded that the disclosure controls and procedures were effective.  
 
There has been no change to our internal control over financial reporting during the quarter or 
fiscal year ended March 31, 2007 that has materially affected, or is likely to materially affect, our 
internal control over financial reporting. 
 
The company is not required to have, nor was Williams & Webster engaged to perform, an audit of 
internal control over financial reporting.  The audit included consideration of internal control over 
financial  reporting  as  a  basis  for  designing  audit  procedures  that  are  appropriate  in  the 
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectives of the company’s 
internal  control  over  financial  reporting.    Accordingly,  Williams  &  Webster  expressed  no  such 
opinion. 
 
 
Item 9B. Other Information 
 
Williams & Webster 
On June 12, 2007, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) in their release 
No.  105-2007-001  instituted  disciplinary  proceedings,  making  findings,  and  imposing  sanctions 
against Williams & Webster, P.S., Kevin J. Williams, CPA, and John G. Webster, CPA. Pursuant 
to Section 105(c) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and PCAOB Rule 5200(a)(1), Williams & 
Webster is censured, Kevin J. Williams is barred from being an associated person of a registered 
accounting firm, and John G. Webster is suspended for one year from being an associated person 
of a registered public accounting firm. Williams & Webster, P.S., will continue to provide audit 
services to their SEC clients under the direction of two other partners not subject to the disciplinary 
proceedings.
-42-
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance 
 
Identification of Directors, Executive Officers and Significant Employees 
The following sets forth certain information concerning the current directors, executive officers 
and significant employees of our company.  Each director has been elected to serve until our next 
annual  meeting  of  stockholders  and  until  his  successor  has  been  elected  and  qualified.  Each 
executive officer serves at the discretion of the board of directors of our company. 
 
NAME   
   
Daniel J. Kunz   
Douglas J. Glaspey (1)  
John H. Walker (1) (3)  
Paul A. Larkin (1) (2) (3)  
Leland R. Mink(3)  
Kerry D. Hawkley 
Kevin Kitz   
Robert Cline 
Christopher S. Harriman
Chief Executive Officer, President and Director   
Chief Operating Officer and Director   
Chairman of the Board and Director   
Director   
Director 
Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary 
Vice President, Development, Geo-Idaho   
Vice President, Engineering, Geo-Idaho 
President, U.S. Geothermal Services LLC
55   
54   
58   
57   
67 
53   
46   
50 
49
AGE
POSITION
(1)  Member of the Audit Committee. 
(2)  Audit Committee Financial Expert. 
(3)
Independent Director.
Background and Business Experience 
Daniel  J.  Kunz  is  the  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  a  director  of  GTH  and  the 
President of Geo-Idaho. He has served as a director of the company since March 2000, and was 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  from  March  2000  until  December  2003.  Prior  to  the 
acquisition  of  Geo-Idaho,  he  served  as  a  director  and  the  President  for  that  company  from 
February  2002  until  the  acquisition.  Mr.  Kunz  was  an  executive  of  Ivanhoe  Mines  Ltd.  from 
1997, and served as its President, Chief Executive Officer and Director from November 1, 2000 
until  March  1,  2003.    From  March  2,  2003  until  March  8,  2004,  Mr.  Kunz  served  as  Interim 
President  of  Jinshan  Gold  Mines  Inc.  Mr.  Kunz  has  more  than  30  years  of  experience  in 
international mining, engineering and construction, including, marketing, business development, 
management,  accounting,  finance  and  operations,  having  held  key  positions  in  MK  Gold 
Company (President & CEO) and Morrison Knudsen Corporation (Vice President & Controller, 
and as CFO to the Mining Group).  Mr. Kunz holds a Masters of Business Administration and a 
Bachelor  of  Science  in  Engineering  Science.    He  is  currently  a  director  of  several  companies 
publicly  traded  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  and  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange,  including 
Jinshan Gold Mines Inc., Kenai Resources Ltd., and Chesapeake Gold Corp.
Douglas J. Glaspey is the Chief Operating Officer and a director of GTH. He has served as a 
director of the company since March 2000, and served as its President from March 2000 until the 
acquisition of Geo-Idaho.  He also served as a director and the Chief Executive Officer of Geo-
Idaho  from  February  2002  until  the  acquisition,  and  continues  to  serve  as  President.    From
-43-
December  1986  to  the  present,  Mr.  Glaspey  has  been  a  Metallurgical  Engineer  and  Project 
Manager with Twin Gold Corporation. Mr. Glaspey has 29 years of operating and management 
experience.  He holds a Bachelor of Science in Mineral Processing Engineering and an Associate 
of Science in Engineering Science.  His experience includes production management, planning 
and  directing  resource  exploration  programs,  preparing  feasibility  studies  and  environmental 
permitting.    He  has  formed  and  served  as  an  executive  officer  of  several  private  resource 
development companies in the United States, including Drumlummon Gold Mines Corporation 
and Black Diamond Corporation.
John H. Walker is a director and the Chairman of the Board of directors of GTH.  He has held 
that position since December 2003. He has served (and continues to serve) as Chief Executive 
Officer  of  Mihaly  International  Canada  Limited  since  1987.  Prior  to  that  Mr.  Walker  was  a 
Senior  Advisor  to  Falconbridge  Limited  from  September  2000  to  April  2002;  and  Managing 
Director of Loewen, Ondaatje, McCutcheon, from November 1996 to August 2000. Mr. Walker 
holds a Master of Environmental Studies degree from York University in Toronto.  For many 
years he was an executive with Ontario Hydro where he directed programs in renewable energy 
and  international  business  development,  specifically  in  respect  of  thermal  power  generation. 
Currently  as  CEO  of  Mihaly  International  Canada  Limited,  based  in  Oakville,  Ontario,  he 
provides  services  to  development  and  mining  companies,  corporations,  banks,  and  insurance 
companies on a range of issues related to project management, construction, fuel supply, build 
own operate and transfer, project finance and risk management.
Paul Larkin serves as a director of GTH, a position he has held since March 2000. He served as 
Secretary of GTH until December, 2003, and served as a director and the Secretary-Treasurer of 
Geo-Idaho from February 2002 until the acquisition. Since 1983, Mr. Larkin has also been the 
President  of  the  New  Dawn  Group,  an  investment  and  financial  consulting  firm  located  in 
Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  and  the  President  of  Tyner  Resources  Ltd.,  a  TSX  Venture 
Exchange  listed  company.  New  Dawn  is  primarily  involved  in  corporate  finance,  merchant 
banking  and  administrative  management  of  public  companies.    Mr.  Larkin  held  various 
accounting and banking positions for over a decade before founding New Dawn in 1983, and 
currently serves on the boards of the following companies which are listed on the TSX Venture 
Exchange: Eventure Capital Corp., and Tyner Resources Ltd.
Dr.  Leland  “Roy”  Mink  is  the  former  Program  Director  for  the  Geothermal  Technologies 
Program, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).  Prior to working for the DOE Dr. Mink was the 
Vice  President  of  Exploration  for  U.S.  Geothermal  Inc.    He  has  also  worked  for  Morrison-
Kundson, Idaho Bureau of Mines and Geology and Idaho Water Resources Research Institute.
Kerry D. Hawkley serves as the company’s Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary.  He 
has served as the company’s controller since July 2003, and became CFO as of January 1, 2005.  
Since July 2003, he has also provided, and continues to provide, consulting services to Triumph 
Gold Corp.  From 1998 to June 2003, Mr. Hawkley served as controller, director and treasurer of 
LB Industries.  Mr. Hawkley has over 30 years experience in all areas of accounting, finance and 
administration.  He  holds  Bachelor  of  Business  Administration  degrees  in  Accounting  and 
Finance.  He started his career as an internal auditor with Union Pacific Corporation and has held 
various accounting management positions in the oil and gas, truck leasing, mining and energy 
industries.
-44-
Kevin Kitz is the Vice President-Development of Geo-Idaho.  He joined the company in April 
2003.  He is a mechanical engineer with 19 years of geothermal power plant design, construction 
and  operating  experience  with  UNOCAL,  with  whom  he  worked  until  November  2002.    He 
holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  in  Mechanical  Engineering  and  Material  Science,  and  is  a 
Professional Engineer in California.  During his career with Unocal, he was a Production and 
Operations  Engineer  at  the  75  megawatt  Salton  Sea  geothermal  power  plant  in  southern 
California, a Senior Production Engineer at the Geysers geothermal field in northern California, 
and a Power Plant Engineering Advisor in the Philippines for geothermal power plants ranging 
from 12 to 55 megawatts.
Robert  Cline  is  the  Vice  President-Engineering  of  Geo-Idaho.    He  joined  the  company  in 
February 2005.  He is a civil engineer with 24 years experience developing energy and water 
resources projects in the western U.S. He holds Bachelor of Science degrees in Civil Engineering 
and  Physics,  and  is  a  Professional  Engineer  in  Arizona  and  Oregon.  Prior  to  joining  US 
Geothermal, he was the Manager Engineering at Ida-West Energy Company, playing a key role 
in developing several hydroelectric and gas-fired generating facilities, and was instrumental in 
several highly successful hydroelectric acquisitions. Prior to 1991, he worked nine years for the 
US Bureau of Reclamation where he was involved in engineering, contracting and construction 
of various water resources related projects in Arizona. 
 
Christopher S. Harriman is the President of US Geothermal Services LLC. He has over ten years 
of power management experience and has eighteen years of industry experience.  He worked for 
Black Hills Generation as plant manager of two 10 megawatt cogeneration facilities in southern 
Idaho.  He also spent eight years with Exxon Shipping, and served in the U.S. Coast Guard.  He 
joined us in July 2006.  
 
Family Relationships 
There  are  no  family  relationships  between  directors  and  the  executive  officer  or  any  persons 
nominated to be a director.  
 
Code of Ethics 
Management submitted a proposed “Code of Ethics” to the Board of Directors for review and 
comment.  The Board approved the code of ethics at the board meeting held in conjunction with 
the  annual  general  meeting  in  September  2005.    The  code  of  ethics  applies  to  all  directors, 
officers and employees of the company.  The Code of Ethics is included in the Company’s web 
page at www.usgeothermal.com. 
 
 
Item 11. Executive Compensation 
 
The Compensation and Benefits Committee is appointed annually by the Board of Directors to 
discharge  the  Board's  responsibilities  relating  to  compensation  and  benefits  of  the  executive 
officers  of  the  Company.  The  goals  of  the  committee  is  to  attract,  retain  and  motivate  our 
executive officers by providing appropriate levels of compensation and benefits while taking into 
consideration, among such other factors as it may deem relevant, the Company's performance, 
shareholder  returns,  the  value  of  similar  incentive  awards  to  executive  officers  at  comparable 
companies and the awards given to the executive officers in past years. The main categories of
-45-
compensation  available  to  the  committee  are  base  salary,  discretionary  annual  performance 
bonuses, stock option grants, stock awards, and insurance reimbursements.
We compete with a variety of companies for our executive-level employees. The Compensation 
and  Benefits  Committee  uses  base  salary  to  compensate  the  executive  officers  for  services 
rendered  as  well  as  for  motivation  and  retention  purposes.  Base  salaries  are  intended  to  be 
competitive for companies of similar size and purpose, also taking into consideration individual 
factors such as experience, tenure, institutional knowledge and qualifications. Base salaries are 
reviewed  annually  to  determine  whether  they  are  consistent  with  our  overall  compensation 
objectives. In considering increases in base salary, the Compensation and Benefits Committee 
reviews individual and corporate performance, market and industry conditions, and our overall 
financial health.
The Compensation and Benefits Committee may grant annual performance bonuses as a reward 
for  achievement  of  individual  and  corporate  short-term  goals.  Any  grant  of  an  annual 
performance bonus is discretionary and the amount is determined after recommendation from the 
chief executive officer. Bonus amounts should be dependent upon our financial and operational 
performance as well as the performance of the individual executive officer.
Generally,  the  Compensation  and  Benefits  Committee  grant  stock  options  to  all  employees, 
including  executive  officers,  annually  after  completion  of  our  annual  financial  reports.  Stock 
options are granted with an exercise price equal to the market value of our common stock on the 
date  of  the  grant,  and  with  a  term  of  five  years.  The  timing  of  the  stock  option  grant  is  not 
coordinated with the release of material non-public information and is typically in the first or 
second fiscal quarter. The options vest 25% on date of grant, and another 25% each six months 
thereafter. In 2006, stock option grants to executive officers represented approximately 45% of 
the total stock option grants to all employees.   
Our executive officers do not receive any material incremental benefits that are not otherwise 
available  to  all  of  our  employees.  Our  health  and  dental  insurance  plans  are  the  same  for  all 
employees.   
Effective  April  1,  2006,  Daniel  J.  Kunz  signed  an  employment  agreement  that  increases  the 
amount  of  time  devoted  to  the  business  of  the  company  to  140  hours  per  month  at  a 
compensation of $132,000 annually.  Mr. Kunz is entitled to receive performance bonuses and 
incentive stock options as determined by the Company’s board of directors, benefits (including 
for immediate family) as are or may become available to other employees, and vacation.  The 
Company  will  also  provide  reasonable  life  insurance  and  accidental  death  coverage  with  the 
proceeds payable to Mr. Kunz’s estate or specified family member. The employment agreement 
may be terminated by the company without notice, payment in lieu of notice, severance or other 
sums  for  causes  which  include  failure  to  perform  in  a  competent  and  professional  manner, 
appropriation of corporate opportunities or failure to disclose a conflict of interest, conviction 
which has become final for an indictable offense, fraud, dishonesty, refusal to follow reasonable 
and lawful direction of the company, breach of fiduciary duty, and a declaration of bankruptcy 
by or against Mr. Kunz.  Otherwise, the Company may terminate the agreement upon one month 
written  notice.  The  agreement  includes  covenants  by  Mr.  Kunz  of  confidentiality  and  non-
competition, and provides for equitable relief in the event of breach. In the case of a change of 
control, Mr. Kunz can elect to receive compensation of $250,000 no later than five working days
-46-
after  the  effective  date  of  the  change  of  control.  A  copy  of  the  employment  agreement  is 
included as Exhibit 10.15 in Part IV of this report. 
 
Douglas J. Glaspey, Chief Operating Officer, signed an employment agreement on April 1, 2006, 
that  will  remain  in  effect  until  December  31,  2008,  which  provides  for  an  annual  salary  of 
$108,000.  Mr. Glaspey is entitled to receive performance bonuses and incentive stock options as 
determined by the Company’s board of directors, benefits (including for immediate family) as 
are or may become available to other employees, and vacation.  The employment agreement may 
be terminated by the company without notice, payment in lieu of notice, severance or other sums 
for causes which include failure to perform in a competent and professional manner.  In the event 
of early termination due to failure to comply with the agreement, the employee would be entitled 
to compensation earned through the date of termination.  A copy of the employment agreement is 
included as Exhibit 10.17 in Part IV of this report. 
 
Kerry D. Hawkley, Chief Financial Officer, signed an employment agreement on April 1, 2006, 
that  will  remain  in  effect  until  December  31,  2008,  which  provides  for  an  annual  salary  of 
$96,000.  Mr. Hawkley is entitled to receive performance bonuses and incentive stock options as 
determined by the Company’s board of directors, benefits (including for immediate family) as 
are or may become available to other employees, and vacation.  The employment agreement may 
be terminated by the company without notice, payment in lieu of notice, severance or other sums 
for causes which include failure to perform in a competent and professional manner.  In the event 
of early termination due to failure comply with the agreement; the employee would be entitled to 
compensation earned through the date of termination.  A copy of the employment agreement is 
included as Exhibit 10.16 in Part IV of this report.
Executive Compensation
Name and Principal position(s)
Year Ended 
March 31,
Salary
($)
Bonus ($)
Option 
Awards
($)
All Other
Comp  
($)
(a)
Daniel J. Kunz, Chief Executive 
Officer and President  
 
Douglas J. Glaspey, Chief 
Operating Officer   
 
Kerry D. Hawkley, Chief 
Financial Officer
(b) 
2007
2007
2007
(c) 
132,000
108,000
96,000
(d) 
30,000
22,500
25,000
(f) 
532,257
381,619
135,575
(i) 
37,960
0
0
Totals
($)
(j) 
732,217
512,119
256,575
(c) – Annual compensation that includes the dollar value of base salary (cash and non-cash). 
(d) - Dollar value of bonuses (cash and non-cash) are eligible to all employees.  Bonus plans are submitted
and approved by the Board annually.
(f) – Stock options are valued at the grant date using the SFAS 123R value. 
(i) – Other compensation consists of all other compensation not disclosed in another category.
The increases in officer salaries are primarily due to the change in employment status from part-
time  to  full  time.    Daniel  J.  Kunz  and  Kerry  D.  Hawkley  became  full  time  employees  of  the
-47-
All Other 
Option 
Awards: 
Number
of
Securitie
s Under-
lying 
Options
(#) 
(j)
All Other
Stock 
Awards: 
Number 
of Shares 
of Stock 
or Units
(#) 
(i)
Grant
Date Fair 
Value of 
Stock 
and
Option 
Awards18
(l)
532,257
381,619
135,575
Exercise or 
Base Price 
of Option 
Awards 
($/Sh) 
(k)
$ Cdn 1.00
$
Cdn 1.00
Cdn 1.00
530,000
380,000
135,000
Name 
(a)
Grant 
Date 
(b)
Threshold
($) 
(c)
Target
($) 
(d)
Maximum
($) 
(e)
Threshold
(#) 
(f)
Target
(#) 
(g)
Maximum
(#) 
(h)
Daniel J. Kunz, 
 
Chief 
 4/12/07 
Executive 
Officer 
 
Douglas J 
Glaspey, Chief 
Operating 
Officer 
Kerry D 
Hawkley, 
Chief Financial 
 4/12/07 
 
Officer
4/12/07
$
$
$
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End
Option Awards
Company after April 1, 2006, and their salaries were adjusted to reflect these changes.  Douglas 
J. Glaspey has been a full time employee for the past three fiscal years.  All employees of the 
Company are eligible to receive a performance bonus based upon goals submitted and approved 
annually by the Board of Directors.  Performance goals were earned and paid for the fiscal year 
ended March 31, 2007.
GRANTS OF PLAN-BASED AWARDS
Estimated Future Payouts Under
Non-Equity Incentive Plan
Awards
Estimated Future Payouts Under 
Equity Incentive Plan Awards
Executive Name
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised 
options (#) 
exercisable
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexercised 
options (#)
unexer-
cisable
Equity 
incentive
plan awards; 
number of 
securities 
underlying 
unexcersised
unearned 
options (#)
(a)
(b) 
13,494 
40,000
Daniel J. Kunz  
John H. Walker 
Douglas J. 
Glaspey 
Kerry D. Hawkley 
Kerry D. Hawkley 
Daniel J. Kunz  
Douglas J. 
Glaspey 
380,000 
115,000 
John H. Walker 
Paul A. Larkin 
180,000 
Kerry D. Hawkley  135,000
22,134 
40,000 
60,000 
530,000
(c)
(d)
Option 
exercise 
price
($)
(e) 
0.60 
0.60
0.60 
0.60 
0.85 
1.00
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00
-48-
Option 
expiration
date
Number of 
shares not 
vested (#)
Market 
value of 
shares not 
vested (#)
Stock Awards 
Equity 
incentive
plan awards: 
number of 
unearned 
shares or 
other rights 
that have not 
vested (#)
(f)
1/3/09 
1/3/09
1/3/09 
1/3/09 
11/10/09
4/12/11
4/12/11 
4/12/11 
4/12/11 
4/12/11
(g)
0
0
0
0
0
265,00
190,000
57,500
90,000
67,500
(h)
0 
0
0 
0 
0 
179,697
128,839 
37,300 
58,383 
45,772
(i)
Equity 
incentive
plan awards: 
market or 
payout value 
of unearned 
shares or 
other rights 
that have not 
vested ($)
(j)
100,000
Shares
1.40
1/22/12
Underlying
75,000
102,405
Acquired on
13,494/0 
22,134/0
Exercise 
100,000 
100,000
Number of Shares  Value of in-the-money
Unexercised 
Stock Options 
CDN$  6,949/$0 
CDN$11,399/$0
CDN 
$Value 
Realized  Unexercised Options 
$18,500 
$25,000
Leland R. Mink 
 
Daniel  J.  Kunz  (January  10,  2006)  and  Douglas  J.  Glaspey  (December  29,  2005)  exercised 
options granted in a previous year. 
 
 
 
Name 
Daniel J. Kunz 
Douglas J. Glaspey 
 
U.S. Geothermal and their Board of Directors have previously provided additional incentive to 
our  United  States  (“U.S.A.”)  officers,  directors,  employees  and  consultants  by  offering  stock 
options  at  a  discount  off  market  price  as  allowed  by  the  TSX  Venture  exchange.  The  U.S.A. 
legislature  and  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  (“IRS”)  have  issued  regulations  to  dissuade 
companies from granting these discounted stock options. Through the American Jobs Creation 
Act of 2004 and the Internal Revenue Code Section 409A, discounted stock options have now 
been classified as deferred compensation in which the “discount” is taxable at the date of vesting, 
instead of upon the date of exercise. They have also dictated that a 20% penalty on all discounts 
is to be paid at date of vesting. These new rules have been retroactively applied to all options 
vesting after January 1, 2005. 
 
Since  U.S.  Geothermal  stock  options  vest  25%  on  date  of  grant  and  25%  every  six  months 
thereafter, option holders would be subject to amending tax returns for prior years and paying tax 
and penalty on the value of the discount. These amendments and payments would be required 
whether or not the option holder exercises the options. The IRS is allowing option holders until 
December 31, 2007 to rectify the situation by allowing them to reprice the existing options to the 
market price on the date of option grant. As of March 31, 2007, the majority of our U.S.A. option 
holders have repriced their options to the market price on the date of grant. An adjustment to the 
fair  market  value  of  the  repriced  options  was  included  in  the  stock  compensation  accrual  for 
March 2007. 
 
GTH  did  not  award  any  shares,  units  or  rights  to  any  executive  officer  under  a  Long-Term 
Incentive Plan during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2005, 2006, and 2007.
Director Compensation
Name
Fees earned or 
paid in cash
($)
Stock 
awards
($)
Option 
awards
($)
Non-equity 
incentive
plan
compens-
ation 
($)
(a)
John H. Walker 
Daniel J. Kunz 
Paul A. Larkin 
Douglas J. Glaspey
(b) 
16,250 
162,000 
24,000 
130,500
(c)
(e)
(d) 
74,602 
532,257 
116,768 
381,619
-49-
Change in
pension value
and
nonqualified
deferred 
compensa-
tion earnings
($) 
(f)
All other 
compensa-
tion 
($)
Totals
($)
(g)
0 
37,960 
0 
0
(h) 
90,852 
732,217 
140,768 
512,119
0 
0
5,750 
0
5,750 
95,026
0 
95,026
Jon Wellinghoff 
Leland R. Mink 
 
Directors who are not otherwise remunerated per an employment agreement are paid $3,750 per 
quarter and $500 per board meeting attended in person.  Directors who are also officers do not 
receive  any  cash  compensation  for  serving  in  that  capacity.  However,  all  directors  are 
reimbursed for their out-of-pocket expenses in attending meetings. 
 
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation  
During the year ended March 31, 2007:  
• Mr. Daniel J. Kunz, our Chief Executive Officer, was a member of the Compensation and 
Benefits Committee;  
• none of the members of the Compensation Committee entered into (or agreed to enter into) any 
transaction or series of transactions with us or any of our subsidiaries in which the amount 
involved exceeded $120,000 in which he had or will have a direct or indirect material interest, 
which were required to be reported under Item 13 of this report;  
• none of our executive officers was a director or Compensation Committee member of another 
entity an executive officer of which served on our Compensation Committee; and  
• none of our executive officers served on the Compensation Committee (or another board 
committee with similar functions) of another entity an executive officer of which served as a 
director on our board of directors.
Compensation Committee Report  
The Compensation and Benefits Committee has reviewed and discussed with management the 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis contained in this Annual Report. Based on this review 
and discussion, the Compensation and Benefits Committee recommended to the Board of 
Directors that the Compensation Discussion and Analysis be included in the Company’s Annual 
Report.
Compensation and Benefits Committee
John H. Walker. Paul A. Larkin & Daniel J. Kunz
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related 
Stockholder Matters
The  following  table  details  the  number  of  securities  authorized  for  issuance  under  the 
Company’s equity compensation plans for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2007:
Plan Category
Equity compensation plans approved
Number of securities to 
be issued upon exercise 
of outstanding options,
warrants and rights
2,936,128
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Weighted average 
exercise price of
outstanding options, 
warrants and rights
CDN $0.96
Number of 
securities
remaining available 
for future issuance
1,444,923
-50-
by security holders 
Equity compensation plans not 
approved by security holders 
Total
Nil
2,936,128
Nil
CDN $0.96
Nil
1,444,923
The following table sets forth certain information known to the Company regarding the 
beneficial ownership of common stock as of March 31, 2007, or as of such later date as is listed 
below, of each person known to be the holder of more than 5% of our issued and outstanding 
stock.
Name and Address of Beneficial
Significant Owners
Amount and Nature of
Beneficial Owner
Owner
(2)
Title of Class
(1)
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Goldman, Sachs & Co, 295 Chipeta
Way, Salt Lake City, UT 84108 
SPCP Group LLC, 2 Greenwhich 
Plaza, Greenwhich, CT 06830
S.A.C. Capital Associates LLC, PO 
Box 58, Victoria House, The Valley,
Anguilla
Winslow Green Growth Fund, PO 
Box 7247- 7057, Philadelphia, PA
19170-7057
Wexford Capital, Walker House, 
Mary Street, Georgetown, Cayman
Islands
Daniel J. Kunz ; 1509 Tyrell 
Lane, Suite B; Boise, Idaho
(3)
4,200,000
8,300,000
3,000,000
2,700,000
3,000,000
2,541,026
Percent of Class
(4)
9.60
18.97
6.86
6.17
6.86
6.44
(2) 
2,541,026 
1,160,425 
40,000 
67,334 
687,638 
0
-51-
The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  known  to  the  Company  regarding  the 
beneficial  ownership  of  the  common  stock  as  of  March 31,  2007,  or  as  of  such  later  date  as 
indicated  below,  by  (i) each  of  our  directors,  (ii) each  of  our  named  executive  officers,  and 
(iii) all of our executive officers and directors, serving at the time of the filing of this Report, as a 
group.
Common Shares
Beneficially
Owned
Shares Individuals 
have the right to 
acquire within 60
days 
(3)
Total  Number of 
Shares Beneficially
Owned
Percent 
of Class
(4) 
2,952,020 
1,467,559 
241,250 
193,584 
822,638 
25,000
(5) 
6.68 
3.24 
0.55 
0.44 
1.84 
0.06
410,994 
307,134 
201,250 
126,250 
135,000 
25,000
Name
(1)
Daniel J. Kunz  
Douglas J. Glaspey 
Kerry D. Hawkley 
John H. Walker 
Paul A. Larkin 
Leland R. Mink
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
 
Equity Transactions with Owners and Directors 
 
1.  In September, 2004, the company agreed to pay past due compensation for services rendered 
in calendar year 2004 to Messrs. Kunz, Glaspey, Bourgeois (who was then the Chief Financial 
Officer and Secretary of the company) and Larkin, which, on October 19, 2004, each used to 
exercise options as follows:
OPTIONEE
Daniel Kunz 
Doug Glaspey 
Ron Bourgeois 
Paul Larkin 
 
Totals
Amount 
exercised 
(USD) 
$  40,550.00 
$  36,500.00 
$  13,000.00 
$  40,607.42
$130,657.42
Amount 
exercised 
(CDN) 
$  51,903.60 
$  46,719.60 
$  16,639.80 
$  51,978.00
Exercise
price 
(CDN) 
$  0.60  
$  0.60  
$  0.60  
$  0.60
Number of 
common 
shares
86,506  
77,866  
27,733  
86,630  
 
278,735
Transactions with Management and Others 
 
No  material  business  transactions  exist  between  the  Company  and  management,  or  family  or 
affiliates  of  management  as  at  March  31,  2007.  The  Board  of  Directors  must  be  notified  in 
advance,  and  authorize,  any  transaction  with  the  Company  that  may  involve  a  member  of 
management, or family or affiliates of management.  
 
Certain Business Relationships 
 
No  material  business  relationships  exist  between  the  Company  and  directors,  or  family  or 
affiliates of directors as at March 31, 2007. 
 
Indebtedness of Management   
Throughout the fiscal year and at fiscal year end, management was not indebted to the Company 
or any of its subsidiaries. 
 
Code of Ethics   
Management submitted a proposed “Code of Ethics” to the Board of Directors for review and 
comment.  The Board approved the code of ethics at the board meeting held in conjunction with 
the  annual  general  meeting  in  September  2005.    The  code  of  ethics  applies  to  all  directors, 
officers and employees of the company.  The Code of Ethics is included in the Company’s web 
page at www.usgeothermal.com.
-52-
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services 
 
The  aggregate  fees  billed  by  the  Company’s  principal  accountant  for  the  fiscal  years  ended 
March 31, 2005, 2006 and 2007 are as follows:
Year Ended 
March 31,
2007 
2006 
2005
Audit Fees (1) 
$  35,333 
31,116 
38,300
Audit Related (2) 
$ 3,725  
0  
0
Tax Preparation
(3) 
$  22,757 
0 
0
Other Fees (4) 
$  7,043  
0  
0
(1)  Includes services for the annual audit of the Company’s financial statements and services associated with
SB-2 registration statements filed with the SEC.
(2)  Fees charged for assurance and related services reasonably related to the performance of an audit, and not
included under “Audit Fees”.
(3)  Fees charged for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning services. 
(4)  Fees for services other than disclosed in any other column.
The Audit Committee reviews the Company’s financial statements, MD&A and any annual and 
interim earnings press releases before the Company publicly discloses this information and any 
reports  or  other  financial  information  (including  quarterly  financial  statements)  which  are 
submitted to any governmental body, or to the public, including any certification, report, opinion, 
or review rendered by the principal accountant performing the external audit of the Company’s 
records.    The  Audit  Committee  also  confirms  that  adequate  procedures  are  in  place  for  the 
review of the Company’s public disclosure of financial information extracted or derived from the 
Company’s financial statements. 
 
The Audit Committee engaged Williams & Webster to perform the annual audit of the financial 
statements of the company. Audit fees and scope of work are monitored and approved by the 
Audit  Committee  as  part  of  the  engagement  process.  Items  not  included  in  the  engagement 
process  are  reviewed  and  authorized  by  senior  management,  after  consulting  with  the  Audit 
Committee members.
-53-
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
EXHIBIT LIST
EXHIBIT  
NUMBER  
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
4.1
4.2
4.3
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
DESCRIPTION 
Certificate of Incorporation of U.S. Cobalt Inc. (now known as U.S. Geothermal Inc.) 
(Incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.1 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration 
statement as filed on July 8, 2004)  
Certificate of Domestication of Non-U.S. Corporation (Incorporated by reference to 
exhibit 3.2 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Certificate of Amendment of Certificate of Incorporation (changing name of U.S. 
Cobalt Inc. to U.S. Geothermal Inc.) (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.3 to the 
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Bylaws of U.S. Cobalt Inc. (now known as U.S. Geothermal Inc.) (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 3.4 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on 
July 8, 2004) 
Plan of Merger of U.S. Geothermal, Inc. and EverGreen Power Inc. (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 3.5 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on 
July 8, 2004)
Amendment to Plan of Merger (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 3.6 to the
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Form of Stock Certificate (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.1 to the registrant’s 
Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Form of Warrant Certificate (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.2 to the registrant’s 
Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Provisions Regarding Rights of Stockholders (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 4.3 
to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Agreement between U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Vulcan Power Company dated December
3, 2002 regarding the acquisition of the Vulcan interest (Incorporated by reference to 
exhibit 10.1 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 
2004)
Amendment No. 1 dated November 15, 2003 to Agreement between U.S. Geothermal
Inc. and Vulcan Power Company (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the 
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Amendment No. 2 to “Agreement by and between U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Vulcan
Power Company” dated December 30, 2003 (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.3 
to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated July 11, 2002, between Sergene Jensen,
Personal Representative of the Estate of Harlan B. Jensen, and U.S. Geothermal Inc. 
(Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.5 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration 
statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
-54-
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated June 14, 2002, between Jensen Investments
Inc. and U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.6 to the 
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated March 1, 2004, between Jay Newbold and U.S. 
Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.7 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 
registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated June 28, 2003, between Janice Crank and the 
children of Paul Crank and U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 
10.8 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated December 1, 2004, between Reid S. Stewart
and Ruth O. Stewart and US Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.9 
to the registrant’s Amendment No. 2 to Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on 
January 10, 2005)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement, dated July 5, 2005, between Bighorn Mortgage
Corporation and US Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.11 to the 
registrant’s Form 10-QSB quarterly report as filed on February 17,  2006)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement, dated June 23, 2005, among Dale and Ronda
Doman, and US Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.13 to the 
registrant’s Form 10-QSB quarterly report as filed on February 17,  2006)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement, dated June 23, 2005, among Michael and Cleo 
Griffin, Harlow and Pauline Griffin, Douglas and Margaret Griffin, Terry and Sue 
Griffin, Vincent and Phyllis Jorgensen, and Alice Mae Griffin Shorts, and US 
Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.14 to the registrant’s Form 10-
QSB quarterly report as filed on February 17,  2006)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement dated January 25, 2006, between Philip Glover and 
US Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.9 to the registrant’s Form 
10-QSB quarterly report as filed on February 17,  2006)
Geothermal Lease and Agreement, dated May 24, 2006, between JR Land and
Livestock Inc. and US Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.30 to 
the registrant’s Form 10-KSB annual report as filed on June 29,  2006)
Administrative Services Contract, dated January 1, 2004, between U.S. Geothermal Inc.
and New Dawn Holdings Ltd. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.10 to the 
registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004) 
Employment Agreement dated April 1, 2006, with Daniel J. Kunz (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 10.12 to the registrant’s Form 10-KSB annual report as filed on 
June 29,  2006) 
Employment Agreement dated April 1, 2006, with Kerry D. Hawkley (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 10.22 to the registrant’s Form 10-KSB annual report as filed on 
June 29,  2006) 
Employment Agreement dated April 1, 2006, with Douglas J. Glaspey (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 10.23 to the registrant’s Form 10-KSB annual report as filed on 
June 29,  2006) 
Escrow Agreement made December 19, 2003, among U.S. Geothermal Inc., Pacific 
Corporate Trust Company, as escrow agent, and certain security holders (Incorporated 
by reference to exhibit 10.15 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as 
filed on July 8, 2004)
-55-
10.19
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
10.28
10.29
10.30
10.31
10.32
Escrow Agreement made December 19, 2003, among U. S. Geothermal Inc., Pacific 
Corporate Trust Company, as escrow agent, and certain security holders (Incorporated 
by reference to exhibit 10.16 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as 
filed on July 8, 2004) 
First Amended and Restated Merger Agreement dated November 30, 2003 among U.S. 
Cobalt Inc., EverGreen Power Inc., U.S. Geothermal Inc., and the stockholders of U.S. 
Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.17 to the registrant’s Form SB-
2 registration statement as filed on July 8, 2004)
Agreement with Dundee Securities Corporation dated June 28, 2004 (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 10.18 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 registration statement as filed 
on July 8, 2004)
Amended and Restated Stock Option Plan of U.S. Geothermal Inc. dated September 29,
2006. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.23 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 
registration statement as filed on October 2, 2006.) 
Power Purchase Agreement dated December 29, 2004 between U.S. Geothermal Inc. 
and Idaho Power Company (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.19 to the 
registrant’s Amendment No. 2 to Form SB-2 registration statement as filed on January 
10, 2005) 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction Agreement dated December 5, 2005 
between U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Ormat Nevada Inc. (Incorporated by reference to 
exhibit 10.28 to the registrant’s Form 10-QSB quarterly report as filed on February 17,  
2006) *
Amendment to the Engineering, Procurement and Construction Agreement dated April
26, 2006 between U.S. Geothermal Inc. and Ormat Nevada Inc. (Incorporated by 
reference to exhibit 99.1 to the registrant’s Form 8-K as filed on May 2,  2006) 
Letter of Intent from Eugene Water and Electric Board to U.S. Geothermal Inc. dated 
February 22, 2006 (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.27 to the registrant’s Form 
SB-2 as filed on September 29, 2006). 
Renewable Energy Credits Purchase and Sales Agreement dated July 29, 2006 between 
Holy Cross Energy and U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 
10.28 to the registrant’s Form SB-2 as filed on September 29, 2006). 
Transmission Agreement dated June 24, 2005 between Department of Energy’s 
Bonneville Power Administration - Transmission Business Line and U.S. Geothermal 
Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.27 to the registrant’s Form 10-QSB 
quarterly report as filed on August 12,  2005) 
Interconnection and Wheeling Agreement dated March 9, 2006 between Raft River 
Rural Electric Co-op and U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 
10.28 to the registrant’s Form 10-KSB annual report as filed on June 29,  2006) 
Construction Contract dated May 16, 2006 between Raft River Rural Electric Co-op and 
U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.31 to the registrant’s 
Form SB-2 as filed on September 29, 2006).
Membership Admission Agreement, dated August 9, 2006, among Raft River Energy I 
LLC, U.S. Geothermal Inc., and Raft River I Holdings, LLC (Incorporated by reference 
to exhibit 10.1 to the registrant’s Form 8-K as filed on August 23, 2006) *
-56-
10.33
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.37 
23.1 
31.1
31.2
32.1
32.2
Amended and Restated Operating Agreement of Raft River Energy I LLC, dated as of 
August 9, 2006, among Raft River Energy I LLC, Raft River I Holdings, LLC and U.S. 
Geothermal Inc (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.2 to the registrant’s Form 8-K 
as filed on August 23, 2006).*
Management Services Agreement, dated as of August 9, 2006, between Raft River
Energy I LLC and U.S. Geothermal Services, LLC (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 
10.3 to the registrant’s Form 8-K as filed on August 23, 2006) * 
Construction contract dated May 22, 2006 between Industrial Builders and U.S. 
Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 10.31 to the registrant’s Form 10-
KSB annual report as filed on June 29,  2006)  
First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Operating Agreement of Raft River 
Energy I LLC, dated as of November 7, 2006, among Raft River Energy I LLC, Raft 
River I Holdings, LLC and U.S. Geothermal Inc. (Incorporated by reference to exhibit 
10.36 to the registrant’s Form 10-QSB as filed on February 20, 2007). * 
Consolidated Financial Statements of U.S. Geothermal Inc. as of March 31, 2007. 
Consent of Williams & Webster, P.S. 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002
* - Agreements are the subject of a confidential treatment request filed with the Commission on 
August 23, 2006.
-57-
CERTIFICATIONS
I, Daniel J. Kunz certify that: 
 
1.  I have reviewed this Form 10-K of U.S. Geothermal, Inc.; 
 
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact 
or  omit  to  state  a  material  fact  necessary  to  make  the  statements  made,  in  light  of  the 
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the 
period covered by this report;
3.  Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in 
this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations 
and cash flows of the business issuer as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining 
disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in  Exchange  Act  Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-
15(e)) for the registrant and have:
Exhibit 31.1
a  designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information 
relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by 
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being 
prepared;
b
[omitted with consent of SEC];
c  evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  registrant’s  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  and 
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls 
and  procedures,  as  of  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this  report  based  on  such 
evaluation; and
d  disclosed  in  this  report  any  change  in  the  registrant’s  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting  that  occurred  during  the  business  issuer’s  most  recent  fiscal  quarter  that  has
-58-
materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the  registrant’s  internal 
control over financial reporting; and
5.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent 
evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  to  the  registrant’s  auditors  and  the 
audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors:
a  all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal 
control  over  financial  reporting  which  are  reasonably  likely  to  adversely  affect  the 
registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b  any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who
have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
Date:  June 26, 2007 
 
 
/s/ Daniel J. Kunz________________________ 
Daniel J. Kunz 
Chief Executive Officer
-59-
CERTIFICATIONS
Exhibit 31.2
I, Kerry D. Hawkley certify that:
1.  I have reviewed this Form 10-K of U.S. Geothermal, Inc.;
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material 
fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the 
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to 
the period covered by this report;
3.  Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information 
included  in  this  report,  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition, 
results  of  operations  and  cash  flows  of  the  business  issuer  as  of,  and  for,  the  periods 
presented in this report;
4.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and 
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(e) and 15d-15(e)) for the registrant and have:
a.  designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure 
controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that 
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated 
subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly 
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.  [omitted with consent of SEC];
c.  evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures 
and  presented  in  this  report  our  conclusions  about  the  effectiveness  of  the 
disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  as  of  the  end  of  the  period  covered  by  this 
report based on such evaluation; and
d.  disclosed  in  this  report  any  change  in  the  registrant’s  internal  control  over 
financial  reporting  that  occurred  during  the  business  issuer’s  most  recent  fiscal 
quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the 
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.  The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent 
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the 
audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors:
a.  all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of 
internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely
-60-
affect  the  registrant’s  ability  to  record,  process,  summarize  and  report  financial 
information; and
b.  any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees 
who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant’s  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting.
Date:  June 26, 2007 
 
 
 
/s/ Kerry D. Hawkley________________________ 
Kerry D. Hawkley 
Chief Financial Officer
-61-
U.S.GEOTHERMAL INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, Daniel J. Kunz, certify in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that to my knowledge:
1.  The annual report of U.S. Geothermal Inc. on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March
31, 2007 (“report”), which this certification accompanies,  fully complies with the 
requirements of Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
2.  The information contained in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, the
financial condition and results of operations of the business issuer.
Date:  June 26, 2007 
 
 
/s/ Daniel J. Kunz________________________ 
Daniel J. Kunz 
Chief Executive Officer
-62-
U.S. GEOTHERMAL INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Exhibit 32.2
CERTIFICATIONS
I, Kerry D. Hawkley, certify in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that to my knowledge:
1.  The annual report for U.S. Geothermal Inc. on Form 10-KSB for the fiscal year ended
March 31, 2007 (“report”), which this certification accompanies, fully complies with the 
requirements of Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
2.  The information contained in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, the
financial condition and results of operations of the business issuer.
Date:  June 26, 2007 
 
 
/s/ Kerry D. Hawkley___ 
Kerry D. Hawkley 
Chief Financial Officer
-63-