
20-F 1 form20f.htm ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 2013 Filed by Avantafile.com -
Pacific North West Capital Corp. - Form 20-F
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
[   ] Registration Statement Pursuant to Section 12(b) Or (g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
or
[X]  Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the Fiscal Year Ended APRIL 30, 2013
or
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15 (D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
or
[   ] SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report
For the transition period from ______________ to _________________
Commission File Number: 0-29928
PACIFIC NORTH WEST CAPITAL CORP.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its Charter)
Not Applicable
(Translation of Registrant’s name into English)
British Columbia, Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
650-555 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 3X7
(Address of principal offices)
Harry Barr, CEO
info@pfncapital.com, telephone: (604) 685-1870 
facsimile: (604) 685-6550
(Name, telephone, email and/or facsimile number and address of company contact person)
Securities Registered or to be Registered Pursuant to Section 12 (b) of the Act.
Title of Each Class
Not Applicable
Name on Each Exchange On Which Registered
Not Applicable
Securities Registered or to be Registered Pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act.
Common Shares Without Par Value
(Title of Class)
1
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act.
__________________________________________________________
(Title of Class)
None
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the issuer’s classes of capital or common stock as of the close of
the period covered by the annual report.
104,047,214
__________________________________________________________
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
Yes  [  ]   No  [X]
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes  [  ]   No  [X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
Yes  [X]   No  [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any,
every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of
this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and
post such files).
Yes  [  ]   No  [X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-accelerated
filer.  See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  [  ]                                 Accelerated filer  [  ]                                            Non-accelerated filer [X]
Indicate by check mark which basis of accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial statement included
in this filing:
U.S. GAAP  [  ]                     International Financial Reporting Standards as issued  [X]                                     Other
by the International Accounting Standards Board
[  ]
If “Other” has been checked in response to the previous question, indicate by check mark which financial statement
item the registrant has elected to follow.
[  ]  Item 17              [  ]  Item 18
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b‑2
of the Exchange Act.)
Yes  [  ]   No  [X]
(APPLICABLE ONLY TO ISSUERS INVOLVED IN BANKRUPTCY PROCEEDINGS DURING THE PAST FIVE
YEARS)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed all documents and reports required to be field in Sections 12,
13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 subsequent to the distribution of securities under a plan confirmed
by a court.
[  ]  Yes          [X]  Not applicable
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
General Information
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
CAUTIONARY NOTE TO U.S. INVESTORS REGARDING RESERVE AND RESOURCE
ESTIMATES MEASUREMENT CONVERSION INFORMATION
Glossary of Mining Terms Mineral Reserves - Definitions
PART I
ITEM 1. IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISORS
ITEM 2. OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
ITEM 3. KEY INFORMATION
          A. Selected Financial Data
          B. Capitalization and Indebtedness
          C. Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
          D. Risk Factors
ITEM 4. INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
          A. History and Development of the Company
          B. Business Overview
          C. Organizational Structure
          D. Property, Plants, and Equipment
               Ontario, Canada
               I. River Valley Joint Venture Project
               II. Sargesson Lake and Kelly-Davis Properties
               III. West Timmins Nickel Project
               IV. Raglan Hills (formerly South Renfrew)
               V. Coldwell Properties
               VI. Goodchild Property
               VII. East Sudbury Property
               VIII. Swayze Joint Venture
               IX. North Duluth Property
               Quebec, Canada
               I. Glitter Lake Property
               II. SOQUEM Taureau & Chenneville Projects
               III. Fiedmont Property
               IV Destiny Gold Project
               Northwest Territories
               I. Winter Lake
               Saskatchewan Project
               I. Nickel Plats Project
               British Columbia
               I Rock & Roll Property
               Alaska, USA
               I. Union Bay Platinum Property
               II. Kane Property
               III. Tonsina Property
               IV. Nixon Fork Project
               Burkina Faso, Africa
               I. Burkina Faso
ITEM 5. OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
          A. Operating Results
               Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2013 Compared to Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2012
          B. Liquidity and Capital Resources
               Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2013 Compared to Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2012
          C. Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
          D. Trend Information
          E. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Page
5
6
6
7
10
 
11
11
11
12
12
12
12
18
18
18
18
19
19
19
44
45
46
47
48
48
49
50
50
50
52
52
53
56
56
57
57
58
58
62
62
63
63
64
64
65
66
72
72
74
74
74
74
74
F. Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
3
G. Safe Harbour
ITEM 6. DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
A. Directors and Senior Management
          B. Compensation
          C. Board Practices
          D. Employees
          E. Share Ownership
ITEM 7. MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
          A. Major Shareholders
          B. Related Party Transactions
          C. Interests of Experts and Counsel
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL INFORMATION
          A. Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
          B. Significant Changes
ITEM 9. THE OFFER AND LISTING
          A. Offer and Listing Details
          B. Plan of Distribution
          C. Markets
          D. Selling Shareholders
          E. Dilution
          F. Expense of the Issue
ITEM 10. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
          A. Share Capital
          B. Memorandum and Articles of Association
          C. Material Contracts
          D. Exchange Controls
          E. Taxation
          F. Dividends and Paying Agents
          G. Statements by Experts
          H. Documents on Display
          I. Subsidiary Information
ITEM 11. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK
PART II
ITEM 12. DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
ITEM 13. DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARS AND DELINQUENCIES
ITEM 14. MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND USE OF
PROCEEDS
ITEM 15. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
ITEM 16. (RESERVED)
ITEM 16A. AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL REPORT
ITEM 16B. CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT & ETHICS
ITEM 16C. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
ITEM 16D. EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES
ITEM 16E. PURCHASE OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED PURCHASERS
ITEM 16F. CHANGE IN REGISTRANT’S CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
ITEM 16G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
ITEM 16H. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURE
PART III
ITEM 17. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ITEM 18. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ITEM 19. EXHIBITS
75
75
76
79
79
80
83
83
88
88
88
89
89
89
90
90
90
92
92
92
93
93
93
93
93
96
96
97
103
103
103
104
104
104
104
104
104
105
105
106
106
106
106
106
107
107
108
108
110
SIGNATURES
4
GENERAL INFORMATION
113
All  references  in  this  annual  report  on  Form  20-F  to  the  terms  “we”,  “our”,  “us”,  “the  Company”  and  “PFN”  refer  to
Pacific North West Capital Corp.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report includes "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and
Section 21E of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act").  Any statements that
express  or  involve  discussions  with  respect  to  predictions,  expectations,  beliefs,  plans,  projections,  objectives,
assumptions or future events or performance (often, but not always, using words or phrases such as "expects" or "does
not expect", "is expected", "anticipates" or "does not anticipate", "plans", "estimates" or "intends", or stating that certain
actions, events or results "may", "could", "would", "might" or "will" be taken, occur or be achieved) are not statements
of historical fact and may be "forward looking statements".  Such statements are included, among other places in this
Registration Statement, in the sections entitled "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations. Forward-looking statements are based on expectations, estimated and projections at the time
the statements are made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results or events to
differ materially from those presently anticipated.  These include, but are not limited to, the risks of mining industry (for
example, operational risks of exploring for, developing and producing crude oil and natural gas, risks and uncertainties
involving  geology  of  mineral  deposits,  the  uncertainty  of  reserve  estimates  and  estimates  relating  to  production
volumes,  cost  and  expense  projections,  potential  cost  overruns  and  health,  safety  and  environmental  risks),  risks
relating to the Company's properties (for example, lack of operating history and transportation), fluctuations in mineral
prices  and  exchange  rates  and  uncertainties  resulting  from  potential  delays  or  changes  in  plans  with  respect  to
exploration  or  development  projects  or  capital  expenditures  (collectively  "Cautionary  Statements").    Although  the
Company believes that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no
assurance that such expectations will prove to have been correct.
5
Cautionary Note to U.S. Investors Concerning Reserve and Resource Estimates
The terms “mineral reserve”, “proven mineral reserve” and “probable mineral reserve” are Canadian mining terms as
defined in accordance with Canadian National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects (“NI
43-101”) and the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum (the “CIM”) - CIM Definition Standards on
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, adopted by the CIM Council, as amended. These definitions differ from the
definitions in the United States Securities and Exchange Commission Industry Guide 7 (“SEC Industry Guide 7”) under
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Under SEC Industry Guide 7 standards, a “final” or “bankable” feasibility study
is required to report reserves, the three-year historical average price is used in any reserve or cash flow analysis to
designate reserves and the primary environmental analysis or report must be filed with the appropriate governmental
authority.  Under  SEC  Industry  Guide  7  standards,  mineralization  may  not  be  classified  as  a  “reserve”  unless  the
determination has been made that the mineralization could be economically and legally produced or extracted at the
time the reserve determination is made.
In  addition,  the  terms  “mineral  resource”,  “measured  mineral  resource”,  “indicated  mineral  resource”  and  “inferred
mineral resource” are defined in and required to be disclosed by NI 43-101; however, these terms are not defined
terms under SEC Industry Guide 7 and are normally not permitted to be used in reports and registration statements
filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Investors are cautioned not to assume that any part
or  all  of  mineral  deposits  in  these  categories  will  ever  be  converted  into  reserves  or  that  they  can  be  mined
economically or legally. “Inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to their existence, and great
uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility. It cannot be assumed that all, or any part, of an inferred mineral
resource will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under Canadian rules, estimates of inferred mineral resources
may  not  form  the  basis  of  feasibility  or  pre-feasibility  studies,  except  in  rare  cases.  Investors  are  cautioned  not  to
assume  that  all  or  any  part  of  an  inferred  mineral  resource  exists  or  that  it  can  be  economically  or  legally  mined.
Disclosure  of  “contained  ounces”  in  a  resource  is  permitted  disclosure  under  Canadian  regulations;  however,  the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission normally only permits issuers to report mineralization that does
not constitute “reserves” by Securities and Exchange Commission standards as in place tonnage and grade without
reference to unit measures.
Accordingly, information contained in this annual report and the documents incorporated by reference herein contain
descriptions of our mineral deposits that may not be comparable to similar information made public by U.S. companies
subject to the reporting and disclosure requirements under the United States federal securities laws and the rules and
regulations thereunder.
MEASUREMENT CONVERSION INFORMATION
In this Annual Report on Form 20-F, metric measures are used with respect to mineral properties described herein. 
For ease of reference, the following conversion factors are provided:
1 mile
1 yard
1 acre
= 1.609 kilometres
= 0.9144 metre
= 0.405 hectare
2,240 pounds
2,000 pounds/short ton = 0.907 tonnes
1 troy ounce
= 31.103 grams
= 1 tonne
6
GLOSSARY
The following are definitions of mining terms and certain other terms used in this Statement.
Periodic symbol for Silver
Alto Ventures Ltd.
Anglo American Platinum Corporation Limited
Ag
Alto
Anglo
Platinum
Au
assay
assessment
work
BHEM
breccia
Calista
CanAlaska CanAlaska Uranium Ltd.
chalcopyriteA sulphide mineral of Copper and Iron; an important ore mineral of Copper
channel
sample
chip sample A method of sampling a rock exposure whereby a regular series of small chips of rock is broken off along
Periodic symbol for Gold
A chemical test performed on a sample of rocks or core to determine the amount of contained metals
The amount of work, specified by mining law, that must be performed each year in order to retain legal
control of mining claims
Borehole electromagnetic induction geophysics
A rock in which angular fragments are surrounded by a mass of fine-grained minerals
Calista Corporation
A sample from a small trench or channel, cut on a rock surface, usually about 5-10 cm wide and 2 cm
deep, to provide accurate distribution of mineralization
CIM
a line across the face
Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy, and Petroleum Standards on Mineral Resources and Mineral
Reserves(see “Mineral Reserves – Definitions” below)
Periodic symbol for Copper
A common basic intrusive igneous rock usually occurring in dykes or sills
A rotary type of rock drill that cuts a core of rock that is recovered in long cylindrical sections, two cm or
more in diameter
An intrusive igneous rock composed chiefly of plagioclase, hornblende, biotite or pyroxene
Cu
diabase
diamond
drill
diorite
EM Survey A geophysical survey method which measures the electromagnetic properties of rocks
Equity
exploration Prospecting, sampling, mapping, diamond drilling and other work involved in searching and defining or
Equity Exploration Consultants Ltd.
bodies
Feasibility
Study
A detailed report showing the feasibility of placing a prospective ore body or deposit of the minerals
within a mineral property into production, which report typically includes, inter alia, the specific portion or
portions of the property that should be included, in a development block, conclusions and
recommendations regarding any adjustments that should be made to the boundaries of a development
block, a description of the work to be performed in order to develop the mineral resources within the
development block and to construct a mine or mines and related facilities on the development block, the
estimated capital and operating costs thereof, a proposed schedule for the timing of development and
mine construction, and the information obtained and evaluations made in respect thereof
7
Freegold Ventures Limited
Fire River Gold Corp. – a company trading on the TSX Venture Exchange and having purchased a
100% interest in the Nixon Fork Gold Mine, Alaska, from the Company
First Nickel Inc. - the Company’s joint venture partner on the Raglan Hills project
The use of one or more geophysical techniques in geophysical exploration
GeoSim Services Inc., a mineral resource estimate consulting firm
“Revised Mineral Resources Estimate, Lismer’s North and Varley Areas (Incorporating VII Drilling),
River Valley PGM Project, Ontario, for Pacific North West Capital Corp., dated May 2006” (the “GeoSim
Report”) prepared by Ron Simpson, P.Geo., of GeoSim, and John Londry, then-Vice President of
Exploration for the Company
Geovector Management Inc.
Grams per tonne
Fiv
Fire River
First Nickel
geophysical
survey
GeoSim
GeoSim
Report
A coarse-grained intrusive igneous rock consisting of quartz, feldspar and mica
Hectare - a unit for measuring an area of land equal to 10,000 square metres
A geophysical survey method which measures the  conductivity properties of rocks
Geovector
gpt or g/t
grab samples A sample of rock or sediment taken more or less indiscriminately at any place
granite
ha
Induced
Polarization
Kaymin
Kinbauri
km
Pb
m
mineral
Kaymin Resources Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Anglo Platinum
Kinbauri Gold Corp.
A measure of distance known as a kilometre
Periodic symbol for lead
A measure of distance known as a metre
An inorganic substance having usually a definite chemical composition and, if formed under favourable
conditions, having a certain characteristic atomic structure which is expressed in its crystalline form and
other physical properties
mineralizationThe concentration of metals and their chemical compounds within a body of rock
Ni
Nickel
NI 43-101
NSR
opt
ore
Periodic symbol for Nickel
A hard white silver metallic chemical element
National Instrument 43-101,Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects – a Canadian instrument
Net Smelter Return Royalty
Ounces per ton
A natural aggregate of one or more minerals, which at a specified time and place, may be mined and
sold at a profit, or which from some part may be profitably separated
A measure of weight known as an ounce
Periodic symbol for Palladium
Platinum Group Elements
oz
Pd
PGE
8
PGM
ppb
ppm
Pt
Rh
Rock &
Roll
Report
Platinum Group Metals
Parts per billion
Parts per million
Periodic symbol for Platinum
Periodic symbol for Rhodium
NI 43-101 compliant report on the Rock and Roll Property, entitled “2010 Technical Report on the Rock and
Roll Property” by Murray Jones, P. Geo. of Equity, and Allan Armitage, Ph.D., P. Geol. and Joe Campbell,
P.Geo., of Geovector, dated February 23, 2011 and filed on the Company’s Form 6-K for May 2011
River Valley Intrusion
RVI
sample A small portion of rock or mineralization taken so that the metal content can be determined by assaying
samplingSelecting a fractional but representative part of a rock or mineralization for analysis
StillwaterStillwater Mining Company is engaged in the development, extraction, processing, smelting, refining, and
marketing of palladium, platinum and associated metals from a geological formation in southern Montana
known as the J-M Reef. This is the only known significant source of platinum group metals in the United
States and one of the significant resources outside Russia and South Africa. Stillwater’s corporate office is
located in Columbus, Montana.
The bearing of a bed or layer of rock
2,000 pounds
A metric ton (2,204 pounds)
A fissure, fault or crack in a rock filled by minerals that have traveled upwards from some deep source
NI 43-101 compliant “Technical Report and Resource Estimation of the DAC Deposit, Destiny Property,
Québec” (the “Destiny Tech Report”) for Alto Ventures Ltd. and Pacific North West Capital Corp. dated
March 1, 2011, by Todd McCracken, P.Geo.”, of Wardrop, filed on the Company’s Form 6-K for March 2011
strike
ton
tonne
vein
Wardrop
Report
Wardrop Wardrop - a Tetra Tech Company
Zn
3E
4E
Periodic symbol for Zinc
Pt+Pd+Au
Pt+Pd+Au+Rh
9
Mineral Reserves – Definitions
An Indicated Mineral Resource is part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities,
shape, and physical characteristics, can be estimated with a level of confidence sufficient to allow the
appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to support mine planning and evaluation of
the economic viability of the deposit. The estimate is based on detailed and reliable exploration and testing
information gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits,
workings, and drill holes that are spaced closely enough for geological and grade continuity to be
reasonably assumed.
An Inferred Mineral Resource is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity and grade or quality can
be estimated on the basis of geological evidence and limited sampling and reasonably assumed, but not
verified, geological and grade continuity. The estimate is based on limited information and sampling
gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings, and drill
holes.
A Measured Mineral Resource is part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities,
shape and physical characteristics are so well established that they can be estimated with confidence
sufficient to allow the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to support production
planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit. The estimate is based on a detailed and
reliable exploration, sampling and testing information gathered through appropriate techniques from
locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings, and drill holes that are spaced closely enough to
confirm both geological and grade continuity.
As defined by CIM, a Mineral Reserve is the economically mineable part of a Measured or Indicated Mineral
Resource demonstrated by at least a Preliminary Feasibility Study. This Study must include adequate
information on mining, processing, metallurgical, economic and other relevant factors that demonstrate, at
the time of reporting, that economic extraction can be justified. A Mineral Reserve includes diluting
materials and allowances for losses that may occur when the material is mined.
A Mineral Resource is a concentration or occurrence of diamonds, natural solid inorganic material, or
natural solid fossilized organic material including base and precious metals, coal, and industrial minerals in
or on the Earth’s crust in such form and quantity and of such a grade or quality that it has reasonable
prospects for economic extraction. The location, quantity, grade, geological characteristics and continuity of
a Mineral Resource are known, estimated or interpreted from specific geological evidence and knowledge.
A Probable Mineral Reserve is the economically mineable part of an Indicated and, in some circumstances,
a Measured Mineral Resource demonstrated by at least a Preliminary Feasibility Study. This Study must
include adequate information on mining, processing, metallurgical, economic, and other relevant factors that
demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that economic extraction can be justified.
Indicated
Mineral
Resource
Inferred
Mineral
Resource
Measured
Mineral
Resource
Mineral
Reserve
Mineral
Resource
Probable
Mineral
Reserve
Proven A Proven Mineral Reserve is the economically mineable part of a Measured Mineral Resource
Mineral
Reserve
Qualified
Person or
QP
demonstrated by at least a Preliminary Feasibility Study. This Study must include adequate information on
mining, processing, metallurgical, economic, and other relevant factors that demonstrate, at the time of
reporting, that economic extraction is justified.
As defined by CIM, a “Qualified Person” means an individual who is an engineer or geoscientist with at
least five years of experience in mineral exploration, mine development or operation or mineral project
assessment, or any combination of these; has experience relevant to the subject matter of the mineral
project and the technical report; and is a member or licensee in good standing of a professional association.
10
PART I
ITEM 1.          IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISORS
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this item.
ITEM 2.          OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this item.
ITEM 3.          KEY INFORMATION
A.        Selected Financial Data
Pacific North West Capital Corp. ("PFN" or the "Company") has a limited history of operations and has not generated
any operating revenues. The following table sets forth, for the periods and the dates indicated, selected financial and
operating  data  for  the  Company.    This  information  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  Company's  audited
consolidated  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  and  "Management's  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial
Condition and Results of Operations" included elsewhere herein.  The selected financial data provided below are not
necessarily  indicative  of  the  future  results  of  operations  or  financial  performance  of  the  Company.    To  date  the
Company has not paid any dividends on its common shares and it does not expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable
future.
SELECTED ANNUAL INFORMATION
The audited consolidated financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries, including comparative, have been
prepared in accordance with and using accounting policies in full compliance with International Financial Reporting
Standards (“IFRS”) and International Accounting Standards (“IAS”) issued by the International Accounting Standards
Board (“IASB”) and interpretations of the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC”).
Unless  otherwise  noted,  all  currency  amounts  are  stated  in  Canadian  dollars.  The  following  table  summarizes
selected financial data for PFN for each of the three most recently completed financial years.  The 2013, 2012 and
2011 information set forth below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated audited financial statements,
prepared in accordance with IFRS, and related notes.  The 2011 information has been adjusted in accordance with
IFRS, and therefore, may differ from the 2011 information previously published in accordance with Canadian GAAP.
Years Ended 30 April (audited)
Total revenues
General and administrative expenses
Mineral property cash costs incurred
Income (loss) before other items in total
Net income (loss) from continuing operations in total
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – continued operations
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – discontinued operation
Totals assets
Net assets
Total long term liabilities
$
2013
16,605 $
1,886,717  
587,108  
(1,886,717) 
(2,341,609) 
(0.02) 
-  
9,999,021  
9,923,666  
Nil
2012
33,134 $
2,975,697  
3,351,736  
(2,975,697) 
(4,987,597) 
(0.05) 
-  
13,200,115  
12,786,400  
Nil
2011
52,293 
1,526,478 
1,890,288 
(1,698,576)
(4,316,193)
(0.06)
- 
15,575,641 
15,094,989 
Nil
Cash dividends declared
Nil
Nil
Nil
11
The 2010 and 2009 information set forth below was prepared in accordance with Canadian GAAP, which has been
derived  from  previously  published  consolidated  financial  statements.  The  information  set  forth  below,  prepared  in
accordance with Canadian GAAP, is not comparable to the 2013, 2012, and 2011 information prepared in accordance
with IFRS, as issued by the IASB.
Years Ended 30 April (audited)
Total revenues
General and administrative expenses
Mineral property cash costs incurred
Income (loss) before other items in total
Net income (loss) from continuing operations in total
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – continued operations
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – discontinued operation
Totals assets
Net assets
Total long term liabilities
Cash dividends declared
$
2010
59,296  $
1,789,601   
1,487,026   
(1,789,601) 
(3,551,664) 
(0.06) 
0.04   
11,353,054   
11,256,103   
Nil   
Nil
2009
247,880 
2,647,547 
1,895,727 
(2,647,547)
(5,274,994)
(0.09)
(0.00)
15,095,336 
10,578,927 
3,836,415 
Nil
2009
247,880 
2,647,547 
1,895,727 
(2,647,547)
(3,455,580)
(0.06)
(0.00)
10,961,107 
6,474,588 
3,836,415 
Nil
The 2010 and 2009 information set forth below was prepared in accordance with US GAAP, which has been derived
from previously published consolidated financial statements. The information set forth below, prepared in accordance
with US GAAP, is not comparable to the 2013, 2012 and 2011 information prepared in accordance with IFRS, as
issued by the IASB.
Years Ended 30 April (audited)
Total revenues
General and administrative expenses
Mineral property cash costs incurred
Income (loss) before other items in total
Net income (loss) from continuing operations in total
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – continued operations
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – discontinued operation
Totals assets
Net assets
Total long term liabilities
Cash dividends declared
B.         Capitalization and Indebtedness
$
2010
59,296  $
1,789,601   
1,487,026   
(1,789,601) 
(3,352,325) 
(0.05) 
0.04   
7,683,664   
7,616,603   
Nil   
Nil
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this item.
C.        Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this item.
D.        Risk Factors
As resource exploration is a speculative business, which is characterized by a number of significant risks including,
among other things, unprofitable efforts resulting from the failure to discover mineral deposits.  The marketability of
minerals acquired or discovered by the Company may be affected by numerous factors which are beyond the control
of the Company and which cannot be accurately predicted, such as market fluctuations, the proximity and capacity of
milling  facilities,  mineral  markets  and  processing  equipment,  and  such  other  factors  as  government  regulations,
including  regulations  relating  to  royalties,  allowable  production,  importing  and  exporting  of  minerals,  and
environmental  protection,  the  combination  of  which  factors  may  result  in  the  Company  not  receiving  an  adequate
return of investment capital.
12
To date, the Company’s properties have no proven commercially viable reserves and are currently at the exploration
stage and as such prospective purchasers of the Company’s common shares should consider carefully, among other
things,  that  the  Company’s  exploration  of  its  properties  involves  significant  risks.    Our  current  Management  while
considerably  experienced  in  managing  exploration  projects  has  limited  production  experience  and  as  such  is
dependent upon the production expertise of our joint venture partners.
(i)
Exploration Risks
Mineral exploration involves a high degree of risk and few properties which are explored result in any discoveries of
commercial bodies of mineralization or are ultimately developed into producing mines.  The long-term profitability of
the Company’s operations will be in part directly related to the cost and success of its exploration programs, which
may be affected by a number of factors.
Substantial expenditures are required to establish reserves through drilling, metallurgical processes to extract the
metal from the ore and, in the case of new properties, to build the mining and processing facilities and infrastructure at
any site chosen for mining.   Minerals may not be discovered in sufficient quantities and grades to justify commercial
operations or funds required for further expansion may not be obtained on a timely basis. All of the Company’s
projects are currently in exploration stages.  Estimates and mineral projects can also be affected by such factors as
environmental permitting regulations and requirements, weather, environmental factors and unforeseen technical
difficulties, as well as unusual or unexpected geological formations and work interruptions.  In addition, the grade of
ore ultimately mined may differ from that indicated by drilling results.
(ii) Lack of Cash Flow and Non-Availability of Additional Funds
The Company's properties are currently being explored or assessed for exploration and as a result, the Company has
no source of operating cash flow.  The Company has limited financial resources and, if additional funding were
needed it may not be available to the Company on terms and conditions acceptable to it. Failure to obtain such
additional financing could result in delay or indefinite postponement of further exploration and the possible, partial or
total loss of the Company's interest in current properties.  The Company presently has sufficient financial resources to
undertake all of its currently planned exploration programs
The exploration of any ore deposits found on the Company's exploration properties depends upon the Company's
ability to obtain financing through debt financing, equity financing or other means.    Failure to obtain additional
financing on a timely basis could cause the Company to forfeit all or parts of its interests in some or all of its properties
or joint ventures and reduce or terminate its operations.
None of the Company's properties has commenced commercial production and the Company has no history of
earnings or cash flow from its operations.  As a result there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to
develop any of its properties profitably or that its activities will generate positive cash flow.  The Company has not
declared or paid dividends on its common shares since incorporation and does not anticipate doing so in the
foreseeable future.  The only present source of funds available to the Company is through the sale of its common
shares.  Even if the results of exploration are encouraging, the Company may not have sufficient funds to conduct the
further exploration that may be necessary to determine whether or not a commercially mineable deposit exists on any
property.
(iii)
Operating Hazards and Risks
Mineral exploration involves many risks, which even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful evaluation
may not be able to overcome.  Operations in which the Company has a direct or indirect interest will be subject to all
the hazards and risks normally incidental to exploration, of PGMs and other metals, such as unusual or unexpected
formations, cave-ins, pollution, all of which could result in work stoppages, damage to property, and possible
environmental damage.  The Company does have $10,000,000 commercial general liability insurance covering its
operations.  Payment of any liabilities in excess of its insurance could have a materially adverse effect upon the
Company's financial condition.
(iv)
No Proven Reserves
13
All of the properties in which the Company holds an interest are considered to be in the exploration stage only and do
not contain a known body of commercial ore.
(v)
Title Risks
Due to the large number and diverse legal nature of the mineral properties described herein, full investigation of legal
title to each such property has not been carried out at this time.  Much of the River Valley property was covered by the
Temagami Land Caution and was not in fact open for staking and as such was closed for mineral exploration and
development for twenty or more years.  In June 1996, the Ontario Government passed legislation allowing the area
open for staking mineral claims and on September 17, 1996, the area was re-opened for staking. The Company
cannot be certain that native land claim issues may not arise.
Many of the Company's properties may be subject to prior unregistered agreements of transfer or native land claims
and title may be affected by undetected defects.  The Company's properties consist of recorded mineral claims which
have not been surveyed, and therefore the precise area and location of such claims is undefined.
There is no guarantee that title to any claim will not be challenged or impugned.
(vi)
Uncertainty or Contestation of Contract Rights
The Company owns or has the right to earn interests in properties under contract with a number of individuals and
corporations.   The Company has no control over whether these individuals or corporation have the full right to enter
into an agreement and no control should any legal action be taken against the vendors of the properties.  Should the
Company not be able be meet its financial commitments to the vendor of a property this may result in the forfeiture of
Company’s right to earn an interest in the property.
(vii)
Conflicts of Interest
Harry Barr, Linda Holmes and John Londry, directors of the Company, are directors of other mineral resource
companies and, to the extent that such other companies may participate in ventures in which the Company may
participate, these directors of the Company may have a conflict of interest in negotiating and concluding terms
respecting the extent of such participation. (See Item 6, Directors, Senior Management and Employees, A. Directors
and Senior Management, for detailed disclosure regarding each of Messrs. Barr and Londry and Ms. Holmes and
other mineral resource companies which with each is affiliated.)   In the event that such a conflict of interest arises at a
meeting of the directors of the Company, a director who has such a conflict will abstain from voting for or against the
approval of such a participation or such terms.  In appropriate cases the Company will establish a special committee
of independent directors to review a matter in which several directors, or management, may have a conflict.  From time
to time several companies may participate in the acquisition, exploration and development of natural resource
properties thereby allowing for their participating in larger programs, permitting involvement in a greater number of
programs and reducing financial exposure in respect of any one program.  It may also occur that a particular company
will assign all or a portion of its interest in a particular program to another of these companies due to the financial
position of the company making the assignment.  In accordance with the laws of the Province of British Columbia, the
directors of the Company are required to act honestly, in good faith and in the best interest of the Company.  In
determining whether the Company will participate in a particular program and the interest therein to be acquired by it,
the directors will primarily consider the potential benefits to the Company, the degree of risk to which the Company
may be exposed and its financial position at that time.  Other than as indicated, the Company has no other procedures
or mechanisms to deal with conflicts of interest.  The Company is not aware of the existence of any conflict of interest
as described herein
14
(viii)
Competition and Agreements with Other Parties
The mineral resources industry is intensely competitive and the Company competes with many companies that have
greater financial resources and technical facilities than itself.  Significant competition exists for the limited number of
mineral acquisition opportunities available in the Company's sphere of operations.  As a result of this competition, the
Company's ability to acquire additional attractive mining properties on terms it considers acceptable may be adversely
affected.
The Company may, in the future, be unable to meet its share of costs incurred under agreements to which it is a party
and the Company may have its interests in the properties subject to such agreements reduced as a result. 
Furthermore, if other parties to such agreements do not meet their share of such costs, the Company may be unable to
finance the costs required to complete the recommended programs.
(ix)
Fluctuating Mineral Prices
The mining industry in general is intensely competitive and there is no assurance that, even if commercial quantities
of mineral resources are developed, a profitable market will exist for the sale of same.  Factors beyond the control of
the Company may affect the marketability of any minerals discovered.  Commodity prices may not remain at current
levels and significant price movements over short periods of time may be affected by numerous factors beyond the
control of the Company, including international economic and political trends, expectations of inflation, currency
exchange fluctuations (specifically, the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies), interest rates and global or regional
consumption patterns, and speculative activities.  The effect of these factors on the price of minerals and therefore the
economic viability of any of the Company's exploration projects cannot accurately be predicted.  As the Company is in
the exploration stage, the above factors have had no material impact on operations or income.
(x) Shares Reserved for Future Issuance; Potential Dilution
As of April 30, 2013, the Company had reserved 8,719,750 common shares for issuance upon the exercise of
warrants, incentive stock options and performance shares.  Such common shares represent a potential equity dilution
of approximately 8.3% based upon the number of outstanding common shares at April 30, 2013, of 104,047,214. 
Furthermore, the Company may enter into commitments in the future which would require the issuance of additional
common shares and may grant additional stock options and/or issue additional warrants.  As at April 30, 2013, the
Company had an unlimited number of authorized but unissued and unreserved common shares.  Issuance of
additional common shares would be subject to stock exchange regulatory approval and compliance with applicable
securities legislation.  The Company currently has no plans to issue common shares other than for the purposes of
raising funds for property acquisition, property exploration and general working capital requirements which issuances
would be subject to regulatory approval.
(xi)
Environmental Regulation
All phases of the Company's operations in Canada are subject to environmental regulations.  It is the Company's
belief that if environmental legislation in Canada evolved and required stricter standards and enforcement, in
conjunction with increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, including more stringent environmental
assessments of proposed projects and a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and their officers,
directors and employees, the cost of compliance therewith may substantially increase and thereby effect the
Company's operations.
(xii)
Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations
The current or future operations of the Company, including development activities and commencement of production
on its properties, require permits from various governmental authorities and such operations are and will be subject to
laws and regulations governing prospecting, development, mining, production, exports, taxes, labour standards,
occupational health, waste disposal, toxic substances, land use, environmental protection, mine safety and other
matters. Companies engaged in the development and operation of mines and related facilities generally experience
increased costs, and delays in production and other schedules as a result of the need to comply with applicable laws,
regulations and permits. There can be no assurance that approvals and permits required to commence production on
its various properties will be obtained. Additional permits and studies, which may include environmental impact
studies conducted before permits can be obtained, may be necessary prior to operation of the properties in which the
Company has interests and the Company may not be able to obtain or maintain all necessary permits that may be
required to commence construction, development or operation of mining facilities at these properties on terms which
enable operations to be conducted at economically justifiable costs.
15
The Company’s potential mining and processing operations and exploration activities are subject to various federal
and state or provincial and municipal laws and by-laws governing land use, the protection of the environment,
prospecting, development, production, exports, taxes, labour standards, occupational health, waste disposal, toxic
substances, mine safety and other matters. Such operations and exploration activities are also subject to substantial
regulation under these laws by governmental agencies and may require that the Company obtain permits from various
governmental agencies.   Permits that the Company may require for construction of mining facilities and conduct of
mining operations may not be obtainable on reasonable terms.
Failure to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and permitting requirements may result in enforcement actions
thereunder, including orders issued by regulatory or judicial authorities causing operations to cease or be curtailed,
and may include corrective measures requiring capital expenditures, installation of additional equipment, or remedial
actions. Parties engaged in mining operations may be required to compensate those suffering loss or damage by
reason of the mining activities and may have civil or criminal fines or penalties imposed for violations of applicable
laws or regulations.
Amendments to current laws, regulations and permits governing operations and activities of mining companies, or
more stringent implementation thereof, could have a material adverse impact on the Company and cause increases in
capital expenditures or production costs or reduction in levels of production at producing properties or abandonment
or delays in advancement of new exploration properties.
(xiii) Canadian Jurisdictional and Enforceability of Judgments, Risks
The Company is a Canadian corporation and is governed in its conduct by the Laws of Canada.  All of the Company’s
directors are residents of Canada and all its assets are located in Canada and United States.  Consequently, it may
be difficult for U.S. investors to effect service of process within the United States upon the Company or upon such
persons who are not residents of the United States, or to realize in the United States upon judgments of U.S. courts
predicated upon civil liabilities under U.S. securities laws. A judgment of a U.S. court predicated solely upon such
civil liabilities may be enforceable in Canada by a Canadian court if the U.S. court in which the judgment was
obtained had jurisdiction, as determined by the Canadian court, in the matter. There is substantial doubt whether an
original action could be brought successfully in Canada against any of such persons or the Company predicated
solely upon such civil liabilities.
(xiv)
Adequate Labor and Dependence upon Key Personnel
16
The Company will depend upon recruiting and maintaining other qualified personnel to staff its operations.  The
Company believes that such personnel currently are available at reasonable salaries and wages in the geographic
areas in which the Company intends to operate.  Such personnel may not always be available in the future.  In
addition, it cannot be predicted whether the labor staffing at any of the Company's projects will be unionized.  The
success of the operations and activities of the Company is dependent to a significant extent on the efforts and abilities
of its management.  The loss of services of any of its management could have a material adverse effect on the
Company.
(xv)
Forward Looking Statements
This document contains forward looking statements concerning the Company's operations, economic performance
and financial condition, including in particular, the likelihood of the Company's success in operating as an
independent company and developing and expanding its business.  These statements are based upon a number of
assumptions and estimates which are inherently subject to significant uncertainties and contingencies, many of which
are beyond the control of the Company, and reflect future business decisions which are subject to change.  Some of
these assumptions inevitably will not materialize, and unanticipated events will occur which will affect the Company's
future results.
(xvi)
Financing Risks
The Company has a history of losses and no revenues.
The Company is a mineral exploration company without operations and has historically incurred losses. To date, the
Company has not recorded any revenues from its operations nor has the Company commenced commercial
production on any of its properties. The Company does not expect to receive revenues from operations in the
foreseeable future, if at all. The Company expects to continue to incur losses unless and until such time as properties
enter into commercial production and generate sufficient revenues to fund its continuing operations.       Until such
time, the Company will be dependent upon future financings in order to meet its capital requirements and continue its
plan of operations. The Company cannot guarantee that it will obtain necessary future financing. The development of
the Company’s properties will require the commitment of substantial resources to conduct the time-consuming
exploration and development of properties. The amounts and timing of expenditures will depend on the progress of
ongoing exploration, assessment and development, the results of consultants’ analyses and recommendations, the
rate at which operating losses are incurred, the execution of any joint venture agreements with strategic partners, the
Company’s acquisition of additional properties and other factors, many of which are beyond the Company’s control.
The Company may never generate any revenues or achieve profitability.
17
ITEM 4.          INFORMATION OF THE COMPANY
A.        History and Development of the Company
The  Company  was  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the Business  Corporations  Act  (Alberta)  on  May  29,
1996.  The Company amended its articles by certificate of amendment dated October 22, 1997 to remove the private
company restrictions.  On July 13, 2004 the Company continued out of the province of Alberta into the province of
British Columbia pursuant to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
The Company's registered and executive office is located at 650-555 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada V5Z 3X7, telephone (604) 685-1870, facsimile (604) 685-6550.
The Company is a reporting issuer in the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario, Canada.
The  Company’s  common  shares  traded  on  the  Toronto  Venture  Exchange  from  December  19,  1997  and  on  the
Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) from June 8, 2001, under the trading symbol “PFN”; on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin
Board  (“OTCBB”)  since  August  30,  2001  and  the  OTCQX™  since  October  26,  2010  under  the  trading  symbol
“PAWEF”;  and  are  included  for  trading  on  the  Frankfurt  Stock  Exchange,  Open  Market,  under  the  trading  symbol
“P7J.F”.
B.         Business Overview
The Company is a mineral exploration company focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of platinum
group metals (PGMs), precious and base metals minerals properties.
The Company has not determined whether these properties contain ore reserves that are economically recoverable
and the Company is considered to be in the exploration stage.
Management's corporate philosophy is to be a project generator, explorer and project operator with the objective of
optioning/joint venturing projects with major and junior mining companies through to production.
The Company’s primary project is the River Valley PGM project in Ontario.
Exploration on the property is generally not affected by seasonal change, with drill programs being carried out year
round and surface bedrock exploration limited only by snow cover and spring thaw conditions. Exploration activities
are  dependent  upon  the  availability  of  subcontractors,  in  particular  drilling  activities.  These  sub-contractors  are
generally  available,  however,  may  vary  in  price  depending  upon  availability.  The  material  effects  of  government
regulations on the Company’s business are disclosed in Item 3 – Risk Factors.
The mineral resources industry is intensely competitive and the Company competes with many companies that have
greater financial resources and technical facilities.
C.        Organizational Structure
18
The Company owns 100%  of Pacific North West Capital Corp. USA, and  100% of Pacific North West Capital de
México, S.A. de C.V. in México (Mr. Harry Barr, CEO of the Company, owns 0.02%).
D.        Property, Plants, and Equipment
PFN  rents  executive  and  administrative  office  space  located  at  650-555  West  12th  Avenue,  Vancouver,  British
Columbia, V5Z 3X7, Canada, for the sum of $18,048.00 per month, subject to annual adjustments.  The Company has
a sub-lease agreement with Next Gen Metals Inc. and El Niño Ventures Inc. in which each pays 25% of the total lease
payments of the office space.
Mineral Properties
None  of  the  Company’s  mineral  exploration  properties  contain  a  known  commercially  mineable  mineral
deposit.
ONTARIO, CANADA
(I)        River Valley PGM Project
The River Valley mineral claims are located in the Sudbury Region of Ontario.  PFN optioned the River Valley claims
following the discovery of highly anomalous PGM values in grab samples in the Dana Lake and Azen Creek areas. 
By an agreement dated January 15, 1999 and amended March 11, 1999 (collectively, the “Agreement”), the Company
acquired  a  100%  interest  in  the  River  Valley  claims  from  Bailey  Resources  Ltd.,  Luhta  Resources  Ltd.  and  Pardo
Resources Ltd. by issuing 600,000 common shares of PFN and $265,000 in cash over four years. The River Valley
claims  are  subject  to  a  total  3%  NSR,  of  which  PFN  can  purchase  up  to  2%  of  the  NSR  from  the  vendors  for
$2,000,000.
On  July  14,  1999,  PFN  entered  into  an  unincorporated  50/50  joint  venture  agreement  (“JV”)  over  the  River  Valley
property with Kaymin whereby Kaymin was responsible for funding all exploration to completion of a feasibility study,
which would give Kaymin an additional 10% interest. In addition, if Kaymin arranged financing for a mine, it would
receive another 5% interest, for a total interest of 65%.
Kaymin continued to fund exploration under the terms of JV until 2007 and invested over $22M in the exploration of the
property; however, as a result of capital expenditure reductions during the global financial crisis in 2008, no new funds
were allocated to the River Valley Project above and beyond the minimal holding costs.
By way of a Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated for reference December 13, 2010, as amended April 6,
2011 (“Assignment Agreement”), on April 7, 2011, PFN completed the purchase from Kaymin of Kaymin’s 50% interest
in the River Valley claims, providing PFN with an undivided 100% interest in the River Valley PGM Project.  Under the
terms of the Assignment Agreement,  Kaymin exchanged its 50% interest in the JV, for a 12% interest in PFN, based
on the issued and outstanding common shares of PFN as of November 30, 2010 (67,543,008 common shares). The
aggregate purchase price for the 50% interest in the River Valley PGM project was:
a. 8,117,161 fully paid and non-assessable common shares of PFN (issued); and
 b.three-year warrants exercisable to purchase 3,000,000 common shares of PFN at a price of $0.30 per common
share.
There  are  no  other  encumbrances  on  the  River  Valley  PGM  Project  associated  with  the  terms  of  the  Assignment
Agreement, after an 18-month early disposition period lapses, and there are no back-in rights or take-off agreements
between PFN and Kaymin.
In  addition  to  the  River  Valley  claims,  PFN  holds  various  other  properties  that  together  comprise  the  River  Valley
Project as shown below:
a)Goldwright Property.  By agreement dated June 30, 1998 and subsequently amended, the Company earned a 25%
interest from Goldwright Explorations Inc. in certain mineral claims known as the Janes property, located in Janes
Township, Sudbury Mining District, Ontario, by incurring in excess of $350,000 of exploration expenditures on the
properties by May 31, 2001.  Certain of these claims are subject to a 2% NSR.
19
b)Washagami Lake Property.  The Company entered into an option to purchase agreement dated February 23, 1999,
as amended, whereby the Company could earn a 100% interest in 1 unpatented mining claim unit (16 ha) located in
Janes Township, Sudbury Mining District, Ontario, immediately south of the Frontier property, by making cash
payments of $28,200 (paid).  On December 10, 2008, the claim was allowed to lapse.
c)Razor Property.  The Company acquired a 100% interest in certain mineral claims located in the Dana Township,
Sudbury Mining District for a consideration of $30,000. The property is subject to a 2% NSR.
d)Western Front Property.  Under an agreement dated November 16, 2001, the Company earned a 70% interest in
certain mineral claims from a company (the Optionor) that previously had certain directors in common.  As
consideration the Company paid $55,000 and issued 20,000 common shares to the Optionors. In addition,
exploration expenditures of $50,000 were completed. The Company has the right to purchase an additional 30%
interest in the property by paying $750,000 to the Optionor. The property is subject to a 3% NSR the first 1% of which
the Company can purchase for $1,000,000 the second 1% can be purchased for $2,000,000. The Company and the
Optionor will share the NSR buyout privileges in proportion to their respective interest.
Location Map of River Valley PGM Project relative to the metallurgical facilities in the greater Sudbury region.
20
Property Location and Access
The River valley project is located in the Dana and Pardo townships of Northern Ontario, approximately 60km east of
Sudbury, Ontario. The project is road accessible in Canada's premier Ni-Cu-PGM mining and smelting district which
boasts perfect infrastructure and community support for mining activities.
Property and ownership:
River Valley PGM Project is 100% owned by Pacific North West Capital Corp.  The project is under two Mining leases.
The Mining Leases cover an area of 5381.1 hectares, including 4,756.2 hectares of Surface and Mining Rights and an
additional  624.9  hectares  of  Mining  Rights.  The  Mining  Leases  cover  all  of  the  NI43-101  mineral  resources  of  the
River Valley PGM Project.
The  River  Valley  PGM  project  was  acquired  in  1998  by  PFN  through  a  number  of  transactions.  PFN  discovered
significant PGM occurrences on the property and entered into a joint venture agreement with Anglo Platinum in 1999.
PFN remained operator of the joint venture.
21
In January 2011, Pacific North West Capital Corp. successfully negotiated the 100% acquisition of the Project from
Anglo Platinum Limited.To the best of PFN’s knowledge there are no environmental or other liabilities associated with
the River Valley Joint Venture claims.
All  exploration  to  date  has  been  carried  out  with  appropriate  work  permits  from  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Natural
Resources.  For the future exploration activities a more elaborate permit may be required, but to PFN’s knowledge
there is no impediment to receiving one.
Claim list and anniversary dates - River Valley
Mining Lease/ Claims
Size (Hectares)
Township
CLM450
CLM451
S 3017059
S 3017060
S 3017061
S 3017062
S 3017085
4777.181
570.308
256
256
256
256
256
Climate and Local Resources
Dana
Pardo
Pardo
Pardo
Pardo
Pardo
Pardo
Recorded
1-Nov-11
11-Jan-12
8-Apr-04
8-Apr-04
8-Apr-04
8-Apr-04
8-Apr-04
Current expiry date
31-Oct-32
28-Feb-33
8-Apr-14
8-Apr-14
8-Apr-14
8-Apr-14
8-Apr-14
Climate is temperate, with four distinct seasons, typical of the Southern Shield, and moderated by the proximity to the
Great Lakes.  Other than over small lakes, drilling and geophysical surveys can be carried out year round from skidder
roads.  Drilling water is sufficient.  Surface bedrock exploration can be done for about 7‑8 months of the year.  An
environmental base line study has not been necessary to date.
Infrastructure
Sudbury,  a  major  mining  and  manufacturing  city,  can  provide  all  of  the  infrastructure  and  technical  needs  for  any
exploration work.
Physiography
The  property  lies  at  a  mean  elevation  of  about  325  metres  (m)  ASL.  Relief  is  moderate  and  typical  of  upland
Precambrian Shield topography.  The eastern part around Azen Creek is lower and marshy.  Forest cover is mainly
poplar with about 25-33% white pine regrowth.
Outcrop exposure on the property is limited to about 20% with the remaining areas covered mostly by a thin (<1 m)
veneer of glacial till; locally gravel, outwash sand and silt reach 10’s of metres in thickness.  Most of the area around
the Dana Lake and Azen Creek areas has been logged within the past 10 years and new logging took place in the
Azen Creek Area during the summer of 2000.
History and Previous Work
In 1973, the Province of Ontario placed more than 110 Townships in a withdrawn area referred to as the “Temagami
Land Caution” – this region was excluded from any type of resource exploration and/or development until June 1996. 
The River Valley Property was covered by this withdrawn area and as a result, most of the River Valley Intrusion was
never explored for its PGM-Cu-Ni potential.
The earliest recorded work on the River Valley property was by Kennco Explorations (Canada) Ltd. in 1968, at which
time they conducted an airborne Mag-EM survey over Janes, Davis, Henry and Dana Townships.
22
Geological Setting
Regional Geology
The River Valley property is primarily underlain by rocks of the RVI, a large Paleoproterozoic intrusion that forms part
of the Huronian-Nipissing Magmatic Province or the Huronian Metallogenic Province.
Local Geology
The RVI covers more than 100 square kilometres (km2) and lies adjacent to, and straddles, the Grenville Front within
the  Grenville  Province  and  the  Grenville  Front  Tectonic  Zone  (“GFTZ”).    The  GFTZ  represents  a  complex  zone,
several km wide and consisting of generally southeast-dipping imbricate thrust faults.  In the area of the River Valley
property,  the  GFTZ  is  located  along  the  westernmost  edge  of  the  claims  where  it  is  represented  by  a  system  of
eastward-dipping  (10-25°)  thrust  faults.    This  fault  system  separates  the  intrusive  rocks  of  the  RVI  from  younger
sedimentary and intrusive rocks of the Huronian Supergroup (includes Nipissing Diabase). It is likely that intrusive
rocks of the RVI interdigitated within Huronian rocks along the fault-bound western contact.
Within  Pardo  Township,  a  north-trending  apophysis  of  the  RVI  appears  to  be  in  fault  contact  with  older  (Archean
Superior Province) mylonitic granitic rocks.  In Dana Township the western boundary is in fault contact with rocks of
the Southern Province, and the eastern and northern boundaries are in igneous contact with Archean migmatite and
paragneiss  of  the  Superior  Province.    The  eastern  and  northern  boundaries  were  previously  mapped  as  being  in
contact with rocks of the Grenville Province.
The  RVI  can  be  separated  into  two  main  areas  on  the  basis  of  structural  coherence  and  preservation  of  primary
igneous features such as contacts and layering.  The eastern part of the RVI, located primarily in Dana and Crerar
Townships, is represented by the best preserved portions of the intrusion and as such the most prospective areas for
discovery.  PFN’s River Valley property covers about 40% of this area including about 10 km of highly prospective
northern igneous contact.  Further to the west, in Henry, Janes, Loughrin, Street and Awrey Townships, the geology of
the  western  part  of  the  RVI  is  complicated  by  the  effects  of  Grenville  metamorphism.    In  this  area  the  rocks  are
attenuated, folded and structurally modified such that most of the primary features are absent.
Property Geology
The River Valley property as mapped by the Company, includes three main mineralized areas with anomalous PGM-
Cu-Ni sulphide mineralization: the Dana Lake Area, Lismer’s Ridge, and Azen Creek Area.
The Dana Lake Area of the River Valley property lies within a north-trending portion of the River Valley Intrusion (RVI).
This region of the RVI likely represents an offshoot of the main intrusive body and appears to be an up-thrust and
rotated portion of the intrusion.  In its current position, the Dana Lake Area represents a lower stratigraphic position in
the intrusion that is now oriented sub-vertical relative to its original, near-horizontal position.  The basal contact of the
intrusion  undulates  in  both  the  horizontal  and  vertical  direction  and  this  undulation  is  probably  a  primary  igneous
contact feature.  However, the area has been structurally disturbed with evidence for dip-slip, strike-slip and rotational
displacement on the centimetre to metre scale.  Steeply dipping (>80°), decimetre- to metre-scale, modally layered
rocks  of  the  River  Valley  intrusion  overly  the  contact-related,  mineralized  breccia  unit  and  are  truncated  along  the
western edge of the intrusion by the Grenville Front Fault.
23
Mineralization
An economically important feature commonly shared by the Agnew Lake, East Bull Lake and River Valley Intrusions is
the occurrence of a copper-nickel-PGE bearing breccia unit situated at the base of the intrusions, where the footwall
contact is preserved. The breccia units are characterized by inclusions of footwall and cognate mafic to ultramafic
xenoliths  and  autoliths  set  within  a  gabbronorite  to  olivine-bearing  gabbronorite  matrix.  Near  the  contact,  marginal
footwall breccias and zones of extensive footwall dikes may also be present. Blebby to disseminated chalcopyrite and
pyrrhotite, typically in modal amounts from 0.5 to 2%, occur in the matrix of the marginal and brecciated rocks and
occasionally within the breccia’s more mafic fragments. This sulphide mineralization commonly contains between 1 g/t
and 5 g/t combined platinum-palladium-gold. On the basis of work completed to date, several important observations
and conclusions can be made regarding the geological environment of the contact-type PGM-copper-nickel sulphide
mineralization on the Property:
The Breccia Zone (approximately 10 to 195 m intersections), which includes the main mineralized breccia or
Main Zone, has relatively consistent, elevated PGM values. The Main Zone occurs within about 20 m of the
intrusive contact with Archean paragneiss and migmatite.
The Inclusion-Bearing Zone (approximately 1.0 to 100 m intersections) is variably mineralized and has scattered,
elevated PGM values.
Sulphide contents generally range from 1 to 5% total sulphide but can be as high as 10% when occurring as
localized clusters of disseminated and bleb sulphide. There is a moderate correlation between PGM-bearing
sulphide mineralization and patches of blue-grey quartz (referred to as cauliflower) and/or elevated biotite
concentrations.
The majority of sulphide mineralization occurs as magmatic sulphide grains that are primarily disseminated and
bleb textured, with subordinate nettextures. Principal sulphide minerals are chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, and
entlandite with subordinate pyrite, cubanite and bornite.
24
Although the mineralized sections at the Dana Lake Area and Lismer Ridge are broadly similar, there are
several notable differences. Mafic rocks at Lismer Ridge commonly develop a moderate foliation and tend to
have a higher proportion of chlorite and biotite. There is also a higher proportion of visible chalcopyrite relative to
pentlandite + pyrrhotite at Lismer Ridge and chalcopyrite is more commonly re-crystallized along foliations. At
Lismer Ridge, blue quartz is not as prolific within the mineralized sections. These differences are likely the result
of a slightly higher metamorphic grade at Lismer Ridge (mid- to upper-amphibolite facies), relative to the Dana
Lake Area (greenschist facies). The zones of mineralized breccia starting in the northwest and proceeding to the
southeastern extent of the contact on the Property are: Dana North, Dana South, Banshee, Lismer’s Extension,
Lismer’s Ridge, Varley, Azen, Jackson’s Flats, and Razor (Figure below)
Joint Venture Exploration Programs (1999-2008)
Phase 1 Surface (July – December, 1999)
The Phase1 Surface program commenced on December 15, 1999 and included:
Regional prospecting and sampling
Grid prospecting and sampling
1. Establishing detailed and regional exploration grids
  2.
  3.
  4. Preliminary geological grid mapping (1:1000scales)
  5. Stripping and cleaning of selected outcropareas
  6. Detailed sampling (2.5 x 2.5 m grid) ofcleaned outcrop areas
  7. Preliminary mapping (1:250 scale) of cleanedoutcrop areas
 8. Orientation biogeochemical survey in area ofSouth and Trench zones; and
 9. Orientation induced polarisation and groundmagnetometer geophysical surveys.
25
More  than  2300  surface  samples  (27  grabs  from  regional  prospecting,  392  grabs  from  grid  prospecting,  and  1636
samples from detailed sampling) were collected during the exploration program.  Background was calculated to be 7
ppb Au, 25 ppb Pt, 23 ppb Pd, 1 ppb Rh, (57 ppb 4E), 82 ppm Cu and 137 ppm Ni; average ratios include 0.82 Pd:Pt
and 0.81 Cu:Ni.
Regional prospecting led to the discovery of 2 new areas of highly anomalous PGM values:
1.Central Reef, located about 1.0 km northwest of the Azen Creek Area main showing (up to 10.38 g/t 4E, 2970 ppm
Cu, 530 ppm Ni),
2.East Reef, located about 2 km east of the Azen Creek Area main showing (up to 0.7 g/t 4E, 707 ppm Cu and 765
ppm Ni.
The highest value from surface sampling was 12.11 g/t 4E, collected from a ridge several metres south of the Central
Zone.
Detailed sampling of cleared outcrop areas returned highly anomalous average values from the 2.5m x 2.5m sample
grid: all 1636 detailed samples averaged 958 ppb 4E; 632 samples from the South Zone averaged 975 ppb 4E; 99
samples from the Trench Zone averaged 1168 ppb 4E; and, 165 samples from the Central Zone averaged 1449 ppb
4E.  The highest surface sample was 16.4 g/t 4E (South Zone).
Phase 1 Drilling (February – March, 2000)
The  phase  1,  2000  m  and  13  hole  drilling  program  was  completed  between  February  28and  March  2000.    The
program concentrated on mineralization at the Dana Lake Area (claim S-1229230).  A total of 1649 samples were
taken from split drill core and sent to XRAL Laboratories in Rouyn-Noranda, Quebec for Pt-Pd-Au-Rh-Cu-Ni assay.
Drilling  program  was  very  successful  and  the  highest  drill  samples  was  10,206  ppb  4E  (Au+  Pt+Pd+Rh)  over  2.3
metres.
Phase 2 Drilling (June – July, 2000)
Phase  2  drilling  concentrated  on  mineralization  at  the  Dana  Lake  Area  (claim  S-1229230)  where  PGMs  are
associated  with  disseminated  Cu-Ni  sulphide  mineralization  that  is  hosted  by  mafic  magmatic  breccia  which  is
proximal to the footwall contact.  The Phase 2 program was designed to augment Phase 1 drilling, testing the down
dip extension of surface mineralization and in-fill drilling of untested areas.
The Phase 2 program consisted of 2820.8m in 14 holes and was completed between June 12th and July 18th, 2000. 
Core logging and sampling was fully completed by October 15th; drill hole RV00-03 was extended 27.3 m.  A total of
2177 samples (2158 from RV00-14 to 26 and 19 from RV00-03) were taken from split drill core and sent to XRAL
Laboratories (Rouyn-Noranda, Quebec & Don Mills, Ontario) for Pt-Pd-Au, Rh and Cu-Ni assays.  A total of 296 pulps
were sent to Accurassay Laboratory in Thunder Bay for sample check assays.
Significant intervals were encountered in holes number DDH 15, 20 and 25 with 1143.2 ppb 4E over 39.10m, 2342.9
ppb 4E over 15.85 and 1948.2 ppb 4E over 11.10 meters respectively.
Phase 3 Drilling (September 2000)
Phase 3 drilling consisted of 10 drill holes at the Dana Lake Area (claim S-1229230) and 3 drill holes at Lismer’s
Ridge  (claims  S-1229542  &  S-1229216).    In  both  areas,  PGMs  are  associated  with  disseminated  and  bleb  Cu-Ni
sulphide mineralisation that is hosted by a heterolithic breccia which is proximal to the intrusive contact.  The Phase 3
program was designed to augment Phases 1 & 2 drilling, testing the down dip extension of surface mineralisation and
in-fill drilling of untested areas at the Dana Lake Area, and testing newly discovered surface mineralisation at Lismer’s
Ridge.
The Phase 3 program (1958.50 m in 13 holes) was completed September 6 - 25, 2000; core logging and sampling
was fully completed by October 30, 2000.  A total of 1142 samples were collected from split drill core and assayed for
Pt, Pd, Au, Cu and Ni at XRAL Laboratories (Rouyn-Noranda, Quebec & Don Mills, Ontario).
26
Significant intervals were encountered in holes number RV0028 and RV0036, with 1022.2 ppb 3E (Au+Pt+Pd) over
42.35m, including 1386.4 ppb 3E over 7.85m and 7215.8 ppb over 8.8m respectively.
Phase 2 Surfaces (March – October, 2000)
The Phase 2 program consisted of:
1.
2.
 3. Regional mapping/prospecting and detailed mapping/sampling of newly-cleared areas.
Grid cutting
Geophysical surveys
Detailed sampling produced a total of 2133 samples; 831 were collected from newly cleared areas in the Dana Lake
Area (S-1229230); 1282 samples were collected from Lismer Ridge (S-1229542, S-1229216).  Regional mapping and
prospecting produced an additional 233 samples from regional work across the property.
Phase 4 Drilling (February – July 2001)
The  Phase  4  program  was  separated  into  two  time  blocks,  to  accommodate  for  the  changing  weather  conditions
between seasons:  February 1st to March 21, 2001 and May 14 - July 2001.  Core logging and sampling was fully
completed by August 31, 2001.  A total of 10,529 samples from Dana and 7,501 from Lismer Ridge were collected
from split drill core and assayed for Pt, Pd, Au, Cu and Ni at XRAL Laboratories (Rouyn-Noranda, Quebec & Don
Mills, Ontario).
The highest value from drilling program was as follow:
3.7 g/t 3E over 71.4m including 9.6 g/t 3E over 4.2m in DL-08 drilled in Dana Lake Area and 4.71 g/t 3E over 18 metres
including 13.2 g/t 3E over 5.2m and 28.14 g/t over 2m in hole number LR-02 drilled in Lismer Ridge Area.
At the completion of Phase 4 Drilling, an Independent Mineral Resource Study was carried out by Derry Michener
Booth  and  Wahl  (DMBW),  which  incorporated  assay  data  from  the  138  holes  drilled  to  date  on  the  property.    The
Report estimated an in situ resource at Dana Lake and Lismer Ridge totaling ~593,000 ounces (Pd+ Pt+ Au) at a 0.7
g/t cut-off in 12 million tonnes (measured + indicated + inferred).  The report notes that “there is significant potential to
increase resources on the property through further drilling both along strike from and down dip on the currently defined
mineralized zones”.
Phase 3 Surface (June – September, 2001)
During the Phase 3 program a total of 1,111 samples were collected from the property with concentrations in the south
eastern and western contact areas.
The highest value from surface sampling was 3.9 g/t 3E, collected from the Razor area.
Phase 5 Drilling (November, 2001 – August, 2002)
This Phase 5 program was completed in its entirety between November 17, 2001 and August 31, 2002; drilling was
employed from November 22, 2001 to June 24, 2002 (Part 1: November 22, 2001 to March 3, 2002 and Part 2: April
21, 2002 to June 24, 2002).
A total of 22,319 core samples were collected consisting of 10,325 from Lismer Ridge, 10,289 from Dana South, and
1,705 from Banshee Lake.  The core samples were collected from split drill core and assayed for Pt, Pd, Au, Cu and Ni
at XRAL Laboratories, located in Rouyn-Noranda, Quebec and Don Mills, Ontario.
Highlights from Phase 5 Drilling: Dana Lake Area, River Valley Property (weighted averages).
From
m
198.00
210.50
146.30
155.50
192.00
193.00
270.00
271.00
293.80
296.50
To
m
215.50
212.85
174.00
159.00
200.00
197.00
277.50
274.00
340.50
300.00
Int
m
17.50
2.35
27.70
3.50
8.00
4.00
7.50
3.00
46.70
3.50
Au
ppb
162
221
110
188
101
136
166
208
95
176
Pt
ppb
942
1798
641
1256
734
1060
1319
1519
602
1778
27
Pd
ppb
3388
6001
2147
4580
2292
3433
4091
4810
1913
5481
3E*
ppb
4492
8020
2898
6024
3127
4629
5576
6537
2610
7435
3E*
g/t
4.49
8.02
2.90
6.02
3.13
4.63
5.58
6.54
2.61
7.44
Pd:Pt
 
3.6
3.3
3.3
3.6
3.1
3.2
3.1
3.2
3.2
3.1
DDH
 
DL-55
incl.
DL-58
incl.
DL-59
incl.
DL-80
incl.
DL-83
incl.
Highlights from Phase 5 Drilling: Lismer Ridge Area, River Valley Property (weighted averages).
DDH
 
LR-70
incl.
LR-72
-
From
m
205.50
206.50
69.50
134.50
To
m
218.40
210.50
71.00
134.80
Int
m
12.90
4.00
1.50
0.30
Au
ppb
120
235
34
171
Pt
ppb
732
1691
2800
4930
Pd
ppb
1794
3810
6330
8980
3E*
ppb
2646
5736
9164
14081
3E*
g/t
2.65
5.74
9.16
14.08
Pd:Pt
 
2.5
2.3
2.3
1.8
Phase 4 Surface (October – December, 2002)
This program was completed on the River Valley property between October 15 and December 31, 2002, and included
1)  regional  geological  mapping  and  sampling;    2)  stripping,  detailed  mapping  and  sampling;    3)  line  cutting,  and
induced polarization and ground magnetometer geophysical surveys.
A  total  of  483  samples  were  collected;  395  grab  samples  from  regional  mapping  and  88  samples  from  detailed
sampling and mapping.
Of the 395 grab samples, 394 samples assayed from lower limit of detection to 250 ppb 3E (Pt, Pd, Au); 1 sample
assayed between 251-500 ppb 3E, (Jackson’s Flats area - 12 ppb Au, 280 ppb Pt, 77 ppb Pd, 4.9 ppm Cu and 10 ppm
Ni).
Of the 88 samples that were collected during detailed sampling, the highest value of PGM was 601 ppb Au, 2240 ppb
Pt, 2950 ppb Pd, 2540 ppm Cu, and 76 ppm Ni.  This sample was collected at the Banshee South trench.
Phase 6 Drilling (November 2002 – May 2004)
Phase 6 consisted of 44,131 metres in 208 holes:
70 drill holes at Dana Lake
15 holes at the Banshee Lake
41 drill holes at Lismer Ridge
7 holes at the MacDonald
32 holes at Varley
16 holes at Azen Creek
10 holes at Razor
13 holes at Jackson’s Flats
4 holes at Pardo
A total of 40,131 core samples were collected.  The core samples were collected from sawed drill core and analyzed
for Pt, Pd, Au, Cu and Ni as part of a 33 element ICP package at XRAL Laboratories, located in Rouyn-Noranda,
Quebec and Don Mills, Ontario.
Phase 5 (July 2003)
Spectrem Air Ltd., based in Lanseria, South Africa, flew airborne mag, EM and radiometric surveys over the River
Valley property.
Phase 6 Surface (May to October 2004)
28
The  Phase  6  Surface  consisted  of  extensive  geological  mapping  of  the  eastern  portion  of  the  property  along  the
northern  contact  and  the  interior  of  the  River  Valley  Intrusive.    The  mapping  successfully  traced  the  mineralized
Breccia Zone along the northern RVI-Archean contact from the south Varley area through to the Razor area.  Assays
values  from  the  Breccia  Zone  were  often  highly  anomalous,  with  maximum  returned  values  of  4,114  ppb  3E
(Pt+Pd+Au).
Untested,  potential  reef-type  mineralization  is  interpreted  to  occur  where  the  Marginal  Leucogabbronorite  Unit  is
interlayered within the Olivine Gabbronorite Zone near the base of the Layered Series on the south flank of the Turtle
Creek Syncline in the South Jackson’s Flat West area.  This interpretation is supported by a significant number of
historic geochemical samples taken from this area, which returned Pt + Pd + Au values of greater than 100 ppb.
Mapping in the Azen-Spade Lake and South Azen areas has identified a new mineralized zone straddling the contact
between  the  Layered  Gabbronorite  Zone  and  the  Upper  Leucogabbronorite/Anorthosite  Unit.    In  the  North  Spade
Lake, South Spade Lake and South Azen showing areas, significant PGE values (to 1696 ppb Au+Pt+Pd) have been
returned from coarse-grained pyroxenite pegmatite layers and lenses interlayered with norite and gabbronorite near
the top of the Layered Gabbronorite Zone and into the base of the overlying Upper Leucogabbronorite Unit.  This
mineralized zone is termed the “Transition Zone” and is a target for reef-type PGE ores in the Upper River Valley
stratigraphy.  The Thomson claims are now recognized as a potential Transition Zone target.
A Phase 7 exploration program was completed on the property during 2004 and mid 2005. The program completed
20,740 m of diamond drilling, metallurgical testing and the collection of a 40 tonne bulk sample for metallurgical testing
on the Dana North and Dana South Zones. The budget was set at $3.0 million dollars.
In the Phase 7 program particular emphasis was placed on expanding targets identified by reconnaissance drilling,
geophysics,  and  geological  mapping  especially  along  the  northern  contact  of  the  intrusive.  The  known  platinum,
palladium mineralization has been identified within the contact breccia zone over a strike length in excess of 15 km.
The mineral resource estimates have been primarily concentrated in the Dana Lake and Lismer’s Ridge Zones over a
3 km strike length.
In 2005-2006 (Phase 8), additional mapping and drilling was carried out.  In 2006 and 2007 (Phase 9), further mapping
and detailed sampling was completed.
In 2005 a $1.5 million budget (Phase 8) was approved by the joint venture. The program included the processing of
the  bulk  sample  at  Anglo  Platinum’s  facilities  in  South  Africa,  and  additional  surface  detailed  mapping  and
geophysical work.  A series of drill holes were completed at the end of 2005 to test geological interpretations for the
mapping programs.  A series of these drill holes located south of the Azen zone intercepted mineralized breccias and
horizons within the River Valley Intrusive.
In  2006  the  joint  venture  has  authorized  a  further  $1.1  million  (phase  9)  lease  survey  and  mapping  program  to
determine the controls on mineralization within the intrusive complex.   At the end of 2009 it is expected that the JV will
be in a position to receive a lease on the property from the Ontario Government.
Exploration programs completed on the property during 2007 were directed towards evaluating the potential of PGE
mineralization within central portion of the River Valley Intrusive. The programs of prospecting, geological mapping,
stripping, and channel sampling were designed to determine the continuity of indicated surface mineralization. The
leasing process of the property continued.  The budget was set at $525,000 dollars.
In  2008,  a  channel  sampling  program  was  completed  in  selected  areas  to  allow  comparison  of  grade  estimates
obtained using different sampling methods. A limited suite of samples were assayed by the Nickel Sulphide collection
fire assay method for comparison with the lead collection fire assay method used in previous years, as well as to
obtain better estimates of Osmium, Iridium, Rhodium and Ruthenium concentrations in the mineralization. In addition,
a consulting geologist was contracted to review prior year’s exploration work to identify areas where additional work
was needed.
29
In late 2008, Kaymin informed the Company that, due to the global economic downturn and concomitant drop in metal
prices,  Kaymin  wished  to  temporarily  suspend  expenditures  on  the  project  other  than  those  needed  for  normal
maintenance of the property. As a result, the Company closed its Sudbury exploration office. A budget of $285,000
was apportioned to allow for compilation and archiving of data collected from the various phases of exploration and
drilling, and to provide for property maintenance.
In 2008, a consulting geologist was engaged to review the work completed to date and recommend a future course of
action. As part of this study, selected trench areas were re-sampled in detail to compare different sampling methods for
consistency. A structural review was also completed.
A further $245,000 budget was approved for the project in 2009 to carry out reclamation work on the River Valley
property. As of February 28, 2009, the process of archiving material, storing equipment, and shutting down operations
in Sudbury was complete. Reclamation work was completed in August 2009.
An additional $150,000 budget was allocated to fund a detailed geochemical study of the River Valley mineralization
was  conducted  by  Dr.  Reid  Keays  of  Monash  University,  Melbourne,  Australia.  Dr.  Keays  is  an  expert  in  the
geochemistry of Ni and PGM deposits. Re-sampling of selected River Valley drill holes was completed in January,
2009, and of the 336 samples were submitted to the Ontario Geoscience Laboratories for analytical work, 154 results
have been received to date. In order to improve economy modelling of the deposit the study examined the full suite (Pt,
Pd, Rh, osmium, iridium, and ruthenium) PGM content of the ore, and determined the relationship of Rh, iridium and
ruthenium concentration from Pt and Pd.
2011 Exploration Program
After Pacific North West Capital Corp. acquired 100% of the project, the company announced that it commenced a five
million  dollar  15,500  metre  exploration  program  for  its  100%  owned  River  Valley  PGM  Project.  During  2011
exploration, PFN completed more than 15,500 metre of drilling and more than 140 line km of 3D IP geophysics survey.
Following is a summary of the program achievements;
Resource Drilling, 13,500 metres
Focused in the Dana North and Dana South zones
Infill drilling to advance inferred to indicated resources, increase grade and close gaps
Proximal targets drilled along strike and down-dip to expand current (2006) mineral resources
Exploration Drilling, 2,000 metres
Commenced on completion of the resource drilling
Drill one new 3D IP chargeability target
Drill two under explored targets identified from surface mineralization internally within the intrusion not drilled
previously
Geophysical Surveys
During resource drilling, 130 line km of ground 3D IP surveys completed to generate new targets
New targets identified, ranked and prioritized for drill testing ( Figure below)
Other Activities
Environmental baseline studies
30
Geology Map of River Valley Project
The 2011 drilling program carried out on the Property commenced on April 6, 2011 and was completed on January 13,
2012. Foraco Drilling Ltd., based out of North Bay, Ontario, was contracted to carry out the diamond drill program using
a hydraulic VD 5000 diamond drill rig. A total of 46 holes were drilled during three phases of the program totalling
12,767 m of NQ sized core. Dip tests were taken approximately every 50 m with a FLEXIT and later a REFLEX tool.
Holes varied in length from 75 to 690 m.
This  program  was  implemented  over  three  stages  with  each  stage  having  somewhat  different  but  overlapping
objectives. The diamond drill program was undertaken in the Dana area of the Property and completed between April
6 and mid-November 2011 (Table 10.2 and Figure 10.1). Main objectives were to:
• improve the confidence of the resource estimates and grade calculations, as well as possibly improve on the existing
computations
• test deeper lying portions of the contact for improved grades and widths.
31
2011 Drill Results
Drilling  continued  to  establish  continuity  between  previously-identified  mineralized  intercepts  on  the  deposit.  At
shallow to moderate depths, drilling encountered moderate-  to  high-grade  gold  mineralization  in  most  of  the  holes
drilled. Low-grade gold mineralization ranging 0.5 to 1.5 g/t was encountered over wide intersections in many of the
holes ranging 8 to 25 m in length. In some holes, multiple wide low grade zones were cored.
2011 Drill Collar Locations
32
Discussion
Work  to  date  at  River  Valley  suggests that  the  best  potential  for  economic  accumulations  of  PGM‐Cu‐Ni sulphide
mineralization is within the Breccia Zone. This zone includes the main mineralized zone. The main zone occurs within
about 20 m of the intrusive contact with country rocks. This contact zone extends for over 9 km of prospective strike
length and hosts the currently defined resource.
Target areas on IP map
Main Zone of the breccia‐hosted PGM mineralization averages 20‐50 m in thickness, continues to depths of greater
than 200 m, and is for the most part open along strike and downdip. In addition, the drilling demonstrates predictable
grade to depth with significant high grade intersections (5‐10 gpt 3E over 1‐5 m & 3‐5 gpt 3E over 5‐10 m) enveloped
by broader (commonly >20 m and sometimes >100 m) lower grade (1.0‐1.5 gpt 3E) intersections.
33
The continuity of mineralization and the remarkable consistency in the geology and stratigraphy along strike and at
depth,  suggests  that  there  is  significant potential  to  increase  resources  on  the  property  through  further  extensional
drilling away from the currently defined mineralized zones. Deeper holes confirmed the presence of mineralization at
depths greater than 350 m (down dip and down plunge). There is a general correlation between three dimensional
induced‐polarization (3D‐IP) geophysical survey anomalies and PGM sulphide intersections.
The  intersections  for  most  of  the  holes  correlate  with  relatively  high chargeability,  an  indication  of  disseminated
sulphide.
2012 Mineral Resource Estimate (NI 43-101 compliant):
The detailed results of the new mineral resources estimate for the River Valley PGM Project are presented in the table
below. This NI43‐101 compliant mineral resource estimate was completed by Tetra Tech, Sudbury. The new estimate
incorporates the 13,140 metres in 46 holes drilled in the Dana North and Dana South Zones since the May 2006
estimate.  All 462 holes were drilled at a nominal drill section spacing of 25 metres to 100 metres on the eight separate
mineralized zones shown in Figure below.
The estimated NI43‐101 compliant Measured and Indicated mineral resources at a cut‐off grade of 0.80 g/t PdEq have
increased by 470% from the previous mineral resource estimate filedMay 2006 to 91,339,500 tonnes grading 0.84 g/t
Pd+Pt+Au, 0.06% copper, 0.02% nickel and 0.002% cobalt. The compliant Inferred mineral resources have increased
by >1000% to 35,911,000 Mt grading 0.53 g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.06% copper, 0.03% nickel and 0.002% cobalt.
The mineral resources were estimated using Datamine Studio3(c) software and are reported at a cut‐off grade of 0.8
PdEq. The 0.8 g/t PdEq cut‐off was used pending future assessment of the economics and development potential of
River Valley as an open pit mining project. The Company considers the 0.8 g/t cut‐off value to be appropriate because:
1) the PdEq grade is 1.38 g/t for Measured and Indicated and 1.07 g/t for Inferred resources; and 2) rhodium and silver
are not included in the PdEq calculation.
Comparisons  are  made  above  to  the  previous  NI43‐101  compliant  River  Valley  mineral  resource  estimate  of  May
2006 (Technical Report by GeoSIMS available on PFN's SEDAR and EDGAR profile and on the Company's website).
The large increase in the mineral resources reported herein is explained by the combined effects of:
incorporation of the 2011 resource drilling results;
1.
 2. inclusion of three mineralized zones that were previously overlooked;
  3. use of PdEq rather than Pd+Pt cut-off grades; and
 4.use of a length‐weighted average Specific Gravity value of 2.94 measured for River Valley rather than the previous
value of 2.89.
34
NI43‐101 Compliant Mineral Resources for the River Valley PGM Project, Sudbury, Ontario
Notes to Mineral Resources in Table:
1. The mineral resource estimates in this press release use the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum
(CIM),  Standards  on  Mineral  Resources  and  Reserves,  Definitions  and  Guidelines  prepared  by  CIM  Standing
Committee  on  Reserve  Definitions  and  adopted  by  CIM  Council  on  November  27,  2010.  The  mineral  resource
estimates provided in this report are classified as "measured", indicated", or "inferred" as defined by CIM. According to
the CIM definitions, a Mineral Resource must be potentially economic in that it must be "in such form and quantity and
of such grade or quality that it has reasonable prospects for economic extraction".
35
2.  For  the  River  Valley  project,  a  palladium  equivalent  (PdEq)  cut‐off  grade  was  assigned  based  on  economic
assumptions from comparisons to other projects, and was used in the resource estimations. Resources reported in this
press  release  use  a  cut‐off  of  0.80  g/t  PdEq.  Grades  have  assumed  100%  recoveries.  The  parameters  used  to
generate the PdEq value are provided below:
PdEq=(  (Au  grade*$Au*Factor1)+(Pt  grade*$Pt*Factor1)+(Pd  grade*$Pd*Factor1)+(Ni  grade*$Ni*Factor2)+(Cu
grade*$Cu*Factor2)+(Co grade*$Co*Factor3))/($Pd*Factor1)
$Au = US$1271 per oz.
$Pt = US$1885 per oz.
$Pd = US$896 per oz.
$Ni = US$ 9.74 per lb.
$Cu = US$3.00 per lb.
$Co = US$15.90 per lb.
Factor1 = 0.0321508 (converts ounce per tonne to grams per tonne)
Factor2 = 22.04622 (converts pounds to grade percent)
Factor3 = 0.002205 (converts pounds to ppm)
3.  The  mineral  resources  were  estimated  using  a  block  model  with  parent  blocks  of  10m  x  10m  x  5m  and  using
ordinary kriging (OK) methods for grade estimation. A total of eight individual mineralized domains were identified. The
determination technique of the mineral resource is based on the combination of geological modelling, geostatistics
and conventional block modelling using the OK method of grade interpolation. The block model resource estimate
prepared by the Tetra Tech, was based on more than 96,980 metres of diamond drilling in 462 diamond drill holes.
The assay data was reviewed and a composite interval of 2.0 metres was used.
Statistical and Variogram analyses were performed to determine the "nugget effect".
4. Rhodium grades were not estimated by the OK methodology. Rhodium values were determined using a regression
formula based on the platinum and palladium grades. Rhodium values are not incorporated into the PdEq value. The
PdEq value also does not include silver.
5. The QAQC protocols and corresponding sample preparation and shipment procedures for the River Valley Project
have been reviewed and approved by Tetra Tech.
2012-2013 Metallurgical Studies;
In September 2012, two diamond drill holes were drilled inside the River Valley deposit; one at Dana North and the
other  600  metres  to  the  south  at  Dana  South.    The  holes  were  planned  to  validate  the  geological  models  and
maximize amount of mineralized sample material for the metallurgical test-work study.  Dana North and Dana South
were selected for drill sampling because they are the most accessible and best understood of the eight known PGM
mineralized zones, and therefore the likely starting location of any potential mining operation at River Valley. The hole
at Dana North was drilled for 300 metres obliquely down-dip where the zone shows a consistent orientation laterally.
The  Dana  South  hole  was  drilled  vertically  for  300  metres  in  deference  to  its  relatively  more  irregular  orientation
laterally.
The two drill holes each intersected PGM mineralization throughout their entire length. Dana North hole DNZ2012-
MET1 intersected 298 metres grading 1.9 g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.125% copper and 0.024% (i.e., 2.9 g/t PdEq) nickel from 2
metres down-hole.  This long intersection included: 23 metres grading 2.5 g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.151% copper and 0.033%
nickel from 126 metres down hole (i.e., 3.8 g/t PdEq); and 144 metres grading 2.6 g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.156% copper and
0.028% nickel (i.e., 3.9 g/t PdEq) from 156 metres down hole.  The hole ended in PGM mineralization.
36
Dana  South  hole  DSZ2012-MET1  intersected  299  metres  grading  1.2  g/t  Pd+Pt+Au,  0.076%  copper  and  0.016%
nickel (i.e., 1.9 g/t PdEq) from 1 metre down hole (Table below).  This intersection included: 1) 46 metres grading 2.8
g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.168% copper and 0.031% nickel (i.e., 4.2 g/t PdEq) from 1 metre down hole; and 2) 90 metres grading
1.8 g/t Pd+Pt+Au, 0.096% copper and 0.018% nickel (i.e., 2.6 g/t PdEq) from 149 metres down hole.  Lithologically the
Dana South hole intersected more rock types than the Dana North hole, but it also ended in PGM mineralization.
Each hole provided approximately 700 kg of core material, allowing for: 1) extensive test work on a single composite
sample  from  each  zone  plus  an  overall  composite  sample  of  the  two  zones;  and  2)  comprehensive  assaying  and
QEMSCAN studies to follow the PGM during the test work.
The holes were drilled in July 2012 using a single drill rig operated by Major Drilling.  After logging, each of the drill
cores was cut into equal halves with a diamond saw. Half of the core was sent to SGS Canada Inc.’s processing
facilities  at  Lakefield,  Ontario  for  the  metallurgical  testwork.    The  remaining  half  was  cut  into  equal  halves,  one  of
which was kept in storage for reference and the other half sampled at 1 metre intervals and shipped to SGS Canada
Inc for sample preparation and assay.  In total, 567 samples from the two drill holes were assayed (plus 63 QAQC
samples).
The metallurgical testwork samples were received by SGS Lakefield in early August.  A total weight of 713 kg was
received for the Dana North hole and 710 kg for the Dana South hole.  Composite samples for each of the holes (Dana
North and Dana South) and for both holes (Dana North plus Dana South) were prepared, for a total of three samples. 
The prepared composite samples are stored in freezer storage.
Mr. Al Hayden, P.Eng. and Associate of NordPro Mine & Project Management Services (Thunder Bay) was hired by
PFN as its metallurgical consultant to supervise the study and review results.
Table Metallurgical Drill Hole Intersections
Hole
DNZ2012-
MET1
including
including
DSZ2012-
MET1
including
including
Zone
Dana
North
Dana
North
Dana
North
Dana
South
Dana
South
Dana
South
From
(m)
2
126
156
1
1
To
(m)
300
149
300
300
47
149
239
Interval
(m)
298
Pd
(g/t)
Pt
(g/t)
Au
(g/t)
3E
(g/t)
Cu%
Ni%
PdEq
(g/t)*
1.397
0.449
0.086
1.932
0.125
0.024
2.929
23
1.780
0.599
0.130
2.509
0.151
0.033
3.817
144
1.894
0.595
0.109
2.598
0.156
0.028
3.867
299
0.874
0.292
0.052
1.218
0.076
0.016
1.856
46
90
2.001
0.652
0.125
2.778
0.168
0.031
4.167
1.295
0.399
0.061
1.755
0.096
0.018
2.576
*PdEq=((Au grade*$Au*0.03215)+(Pt grade*$Pt*0.03215)+(Pd grade*$Pd*0.03215)+(Ni grade*$Ni*22.046)+(Cu
grade*$Cu*22.046)) /($Pd*0.03215)
where  $Au US$1271/oz, $Pt = US$1885/oz, $Pd = US$896/oz/, $Ni = US$9.74/lb, $Cu = US$3.00/lb
The testwork completed by SGS Canada Inc. (SGS) of Lakefield, Ontario in April 2013 and involved Bond grindability
and abrasion studies, sample compositing, physical and chemical analyses, and bench scale flotation tests to make
high‐grade  sulphide  concentrate.    Results  show  that  the  platinum  group  metals  (PGM)  float  with  copper-  Nickel
sulphides, and therefore demonstrate potential for a sulphide concentrator to effectively process River Valley deposit
material.  SGS  recommend  additional  testwork  to  determine  the  optimal  grind  size  for  PGM  separation  and  further
improve concentrate grade and metal recovery. A copy of the SGS report is available for viewing on the Company’s
website.
37
TESTWORK RESULTS
Metallurgical  testwork  was  carried  out  on  an  Overall  Composite  sample  prepared  from  half-core  intervals  from  the
Dana  North  Zone  (DNZ)  and  the  Dana  South  Zone  (DSZ)  of  the  River  Valley  PGM  deposit.  Testwork  involved
mineralogical and chemical analysis, Bond Rod and Ball mill grindability, and Bond abrasion testing on each of the
Dana  North  and  Dana  South  Zone  composites.  Mineralogical  analysis  determined  that  the  main  minerals  are
amphibole/pyroxene and plagioclase, consistent with gabbro-norite intrusive host rock type.  Chalcopyrite is the sole
copper mineral phase and pentlandite the primary nickel sulphide phase.  However, sulphides hold only 35% to 45%
of  the  total  nickel;  the  remaining  percentage  is  held  in  silicates  and  therefore  unrecoverable.  The  Bond  rod  mill
grindability tests at 14 mesh of grind (1180 micrometres) identified each of the two composites as very hard, with Rod
Mill Work Index at ~20.0 kWh/t.  A Bond ball mill grindability test at 150 mesh (106 micrometres) identified each of the
two composites as hard to very hard, with a Ball Mill Work Index of 18.8 kWh/t for DNZ and 19.5 kWh/t for DSZ.  The 
Bond Abrasion tests determined each composite to be in the moderate to hard abrasive range.
Flotation  testwork  was  completed  on  the  Overall  composite  in  order  to:  1)  develop  a  viable  flowsheet;  2)  evaluate
parameters such as primary grind and regrind fineness, reagents and dosages; and 3) generate a concentrate that
targeted  a  grade  of  ~200  g/t  PGM.    Eleven  rougher  kinetics  tests  were  performed  to  evaluate  effective  reagents,
dosages,  flotation  time  and  primary  grind  fineness.  Cleaner  tests  were  undertaken  to  investigate  cleaner  circuit
configuration, depressants and regrind fineness.  The best test produced a concentrate grading 8.94% copper, 1.22%
nickel and 109 g/t PGM at recoveries of 86.8% for copper, 26.7% for nickel and 73.1% for PGM.
A single locked cycle test (LCT) was completed applying the flowsheet and conditions of the final cleaner test (Figure
below).  The primary grind was at P80 = 71 µm and the regrind at P80 = 19 um.  The LCT produced a concentrate
grading 15.5% copper, 1.67% nickel and 189 g/t PGM at recoveries of 84.4% copper, 22.2% nickel and 68.7% PGM
(Table  below).  The  3rd  cleaner  concentrate  from  the  LCT  was  submitted  for  multi-element  analysis.  In  addition  to
platinum, palladium, gold, copper and nickel, which would all be payable, rhodium, cobalt and silver are present a
levels  which  are  likely  also  be  payable.    Conversely,  contents  of  magnesium,  arsenic,  antimony,  bismuth,  and
selenium are all below the problematic limits for marketability.
38
Figure. Flow sheet for Locked Cycle Test by SGS.
Table. Metallurgical results for the Locked Cycle Test by SGS.
RECOMMENDATIONS
SGS make the following recommendations for further testwork on River Valley:
1. Further investigate the effect of primary grind size on flotation recovery;
2. Flotation optimization testing in order to achieve further improvement of concentrate grade and metal recovery; and
3. Flotation and grindability variability testing on the composite samples in order to identify the variability of flotation
performance.  Subsequently,  variability  testing  should  be  extended  to  investigate  a  broader  range  of  samples  from
each of the mineralized zones at River Valley, to investigate the effect of feed grade and rock type on metallurgy.
Exploration & Development Plans
Plans for the foreseeable future include Phase 2 Metallurgical Studies and execution of the exploration drill program.
A detailed plan is in preparation with SGS Canada Inc. for Phase 2 Metallurgical Studies. The testwork will involve an
expanded range of samples, grades, rock types and depths for the River Valley deposit. The exploration drill program
will consist of up to twenty drill holes, carefully designed to test the best two or three drill targets. Some of the holes will
be  selected  for  down-hole  induced  polarization  surveys  in  order  to  detect  and  model  the  location  of  off-hole
mineralization for subsequent drilling.
PFN's  Technical  Team  seized  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  slowdown  in  exploration  to  reassess  the  potential
exploration  upside  of  the  River  Valley  PGM  Project.  Compilation  and  integration  of  high  quality  geophysical  and
drilling datasets produced numerous drill-ready targets along strike, down-dip and in the immediate footwall to the
main PGM mineralized zones. The targets have been ranked and prioritized for drill testing. A formal application for an
exploration program, including drilling and geophysics, has won approval from the provincial government with input for
local communities and Aboriginal Peoples, as mandated under the new mining laws of Ontario.
Figure below illustrates hundreds of anomalies that has been identified internally within River Valley Intrusion ( reefs),
adjacent country rocks  (possible magmatic embayments and feeder features) and newly discovered River Valley like
intrusions.
39
Location of hundreds of anomalies that has been identified in the River Valley Project
Location of the mineralized zones in the Breccia Unit at the base of the River Valley Intrusion, Sudbury area,
Ontario.
Non-Reserve Mineral Resource Estimation – Mineral Deposits
SEE “CAUTIONARY NOTE TO U.S. INVESTORS CONCERNING RESERVE
AND RESOURCE ESTIMATES” AND “MINERAL RESERVES –
DEFINITIONS” ABOVE.
The  terms  “mineral  resource”,  “inferred  mineral  resource”,  “indicated  mineral  resource”  and  “measured
mineral resource” have the meanings ascribed to those terms by CIM.
40
The following italicized text was excerpted from a report entitled, “Revised Mineral Resource Estimate, Dana Lake and
Lismer’s Ridge Deposits incorporating Phase VI Drilling, River Valley PGM Project, Ontario for Pacific North West
Capital Corp”, dated June 10th, 2004, by Derry, Michener, Booth and Wahl Consultants Ltd. (“Derry, Michener, Booth
and Wahl Report”), as filed on Form 20-F on August 9, 2004.
In March 2006 the mineral resources table was updated in the GeoSim Report, as filed on Form 6-K/A on June 6,
2006.  Mr. Simpson was responsible for the calculation of the resource estimate in the Derry, Michener, Booth and
Wahl Report.  The GeoSim Report included all of the drill holes from the phase 7 program.
Cut-off Grade
The cut-off grade is the lowest grade of material that can be mined and processed considering all applicable costs,
without incurring a loss or gaining a profit. In the subsequent summary of resources, the cut-off grade used for reporting
block model statistics within mineralized zone constraints is a combined Pt+Pd grade. The resources within each zone
are reported for cut-off grades of 0.7 g/t Pt+Pd and 1.0 g/t Pt+Pd.  The lower cut-off grade of 0.7 g/t Pt+Pd is based on
historical  resource  estimates  for  the  Lac  des  Iles  Mine,  which  is  the  only  active  Pt/Pd  producer  in  Canada.  In  the
resource estimates, no allowance has been made for the respective precious metal prices, or recoveries.
Measured Mineral Resource
A  ‘Measured  Mineral  Resource’  is  that  part  of  a  Mineral  Resource  for  which  quantity,  grade  or  quality,  densities,
shape, physical characteristics are so well established that they can be estimated with confidence sufficient to allow
the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to support production planning and evaluation of
the economic viability of the deposit. The estimate is based on detailed and reliable exploration, sampling and testing
information gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill
holes that are spaced closely enough to confirm both geological and grade continuity.
Mineralization or other natural material of economic interest may be classified as a Measured Mineral Resource by the
Qualified Person when the nature, quality, quantity and distribution of data are such that the tonnage and grade of the
mineralization can be estimated to within close limits and that variation from the estimate would not significantly affect
potential economic viability. This category requires a high level of confidence in, and understanding of, the geology
and controls of the mineral deposit.
Indicated Mineral Resource
An ‘Indicated Mineral Resource’ is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape
and physical characteristics, can be estimated with a level of confidence sufficient to allow the appropriate application
of  technical  and  economic  parameters,  to  support  mine  planning  and  evaluation  of  the  economic  viability  of  the
deposit.  The  estimate  is  based  on  detailed  and  reliable  exploration  and  testing  information  gathered  through
appropriate  techniques  from  locations  such  as  outcrops,  trenches,  pits,  workings  and  drill  holes  that  are  spaced
closely enough for geological and grade continuity to be reasonably assumed.
Mineralization may be classified as an Indicated Mineral Resource by the Qualified Person when the nature, quality,
quantity  and  distribution  of  data  are  such  as  to  allow  confident  interpretation  of  the  geological  framework  and  to
reasonably  assume  the  continuity  of  mineralization.  The  Qualified  Person  must  recognize  the  importance  of  the
Indicated  Mineral  Resource  category  to  the  advancement  of  the  feasibility  of  the  project.  An  Indicated  Mineral
Resource estimate is of sufficient quality to support a Preliminary Feasibility Study which can serve as the basis for
major development decisions.
Inferred Mineral Resource
An  ‘Inferred  Mineral  Resource’  is  that  part  of  a  Mineral  Resource  for  which  quantity  and  grade  or  quality  can  be
estimated  on  the  basis  of  geological  evidence  and  limited  sampling  and  reasonably  assumed,  but  not  verified,
geological  and  grade  continuity.  The  estimate  is  based  on  limited  information  and  sampling  gathered  through
appropriate  techniques  from  locations  such  as  outcrops,  trenches,  pits,  workings  and  drill  holes.    Due  to  the
uncertainty that may be attached to Inferred Mineral Resources, it cannot be assumed that all or any part of an Inferred
Mineral Resource will be upgraded to an Indicated or Measured Mineral Resource as a result of continued exploration.
Confidence in the estimate is insufficient to allow the meaningful application of technical and economic parameters or
to  enable  an  evaluation  of  economic  viability  worthy  of  public  disclosure.  Inferred  Mineral  Resources  must  be
excluded from estimates forming the basis of feasibility or other economic studies.
41
Cautionary Note to US Investors concerning estimates of Measured and Indicated Resources:
This section uses the terms “measured resources” and “indicated resources”. We advise US investors that while those
terms are recognized and required by Canadian regulations, the US Securities and Exchange Commission does not
recognize  them. US  investors  are  cautioned  not  to  assume  that  any  part  or  all  of  mineral  deposits  in  these
categories will ever be converted into reserves.
Cautionary  Note  to  US  Investors  concerning  estimates  of  Inferred  Resources.   This  section  uses  the  terms
“inferred resources”. We advise US investors while those terms are recognized and required by Canadian regulations,
the  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  does  not  recognize  it.  “Inferred  resources”  have  a  great  amount  of
uncertainty as to their existence, and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility. It cannot be assumed
that all or any part of an Inferred Mineral Resource will ever be upgraded to a higher category or will ever be converted
into reserves. Under Canadian rules, estimates of Inferred Mineral Resources may not form the basis of feasibility or
prefeasibility  studies,  except  in  rare  cases.  US  investors  are  cautioned  not  to  assume  that  part  or  all  of  an
inferred resource exists, or is economically or legally minable.
2011 and 2012 Quality Assurance and Quality Control (QA/QC)
All diamond drill core samples were submitted to SGS Laboratories, Toronto, Ontario and assayed for Pt, Pd, Au, Cu
and  Ni  and  a  33  element  ICP  suite.  Concentrations  of  Pt-Pd-Au  were  determined  using  standard  lead  fire  assay,
followed by dissolution with acqua-regia, and measurement with an ICP (inductively coupled plasma) finish. Lower
limited of detection (30 gram sample) are 1 ppb for Au and Pd and 10 ppb for Pt; upper limits are 10,000 ppb by ICP.
Concentrations of Cu-Ni were determined by ICP methods with detection limit of 0.5 ppm for Cu and 1 ppm for Ni;
upper limit for both Cu and Ni is 1 %.
One standard and one blank were inserted every 40 samples into the sample stream. Duplicates were taken each
twentieth  sample.  This  practice  continued  throughout  2011  Phase  IA  drilling  and  included  the  preparation  and
insertion  of  new  and  necessary  standards  at  the  cut-off  grade  and  at  the  mean  grade  of  the  deposits.  All  sample
preparation has been conducted and directed on site by contract geologists and samplers hired by PFN.
(B) RIVER Valley East and West PGM Project, Ontario
The River Valley West Property is comprised of a contiguous group of 944 mining claims units in 72 mining claims and
is located in Davis, Janes, Loughrin and Henry townships. The River Valley East Property claim group consists of 532
mining  claims  units  in  35  claim  units  that  sprawl  over  parts  of  Dana,  Pardo,  Hobbs  and  McWilliams  Townships,
Sudbury Mining Division. These claims were staked in May of 2011 (Figure below). The property is situated to the east
of the Sudbury Basin and north of Highway 17.  It covers two rock groups that host significant concentrations of PGM
mineralization; the River Valley-East Bull Lake Suite of rocks and the Nipissing Gabbro.
River Valley West claims cover branches of the River Valley Intrusion from the main intrusive body that hosts the River
Valley  PGM  resource  and  intrude  Huronian  sediments  to  the  west.  These  units  are  under  explored  making  them
attractive  exploration  targets.  The  East  Bull  Lake  Suite  has  the  potential  to  contain  at  least  two  different  styles  of
sulphide mineralization: 1) brecciated contact style mineralization (similar to PFN’s River Valley PGM Project); and 2)
reef  style  mineralization  in  the  interior  of  these  intrusive  bodies,  at  the  interface  or  zone  of  mixing  of  magmas  of
differing composition. The Nipissing Gabbro has been explored for PGM on some areas of the property. Public sector
geochemical  data  from  the  newly  acquired  claims  indicate  widespread  anomalous  PGM,  gold  and  base  metals.
Hypersthene-bearing gabbro and contact breccia appear to be the most favourable lithologies within the Nipissing for
hosting significant PGM mineralization.
42
The company completed a Geo-referencing program over selected claims as outlined in Geo-referencing Standards
for Unpatented Mining Claims, Ministry of Northern Development and Mines. This undertaking was initiated on March,
1, 2013 and it was completed on March 21, 2013.  .
Location of the River Valley East and West Properties
A joint venture partner is being sought to further explore the project.
(C) Heaven Lake PGM, Gold Project, Ontario
On  June  13,  2011,  the  Company  staked  220  square  km  10  km  north  of  Lac  des  Iles  Mine,  north  of  Thunder  Bay,
Ontario.
The Heaven Lake property is located 130 km north of the city of Thunder Bay and 15 km north of the Lac des Iles PGM
Mine. Access is by all‐season paved highways, logging gravel roads and bush trails (Figure 7). The roads and trails
link to the access road system for the Lac des Iles Mine.  The Heaven Lake claim group consists of 88 contiguous 16‐
unit claims on Crown Lands (1408 units), encompassing an area of 22,528 ha and owned 100% by PFN.
The  Heaven  Lake  Property  lies  near  the  boundary  of  the  Archean  Superior  Province  to  the  west  and  the
Mesoproterozoic  Nipigon  Embayment  to  the  east  (Figure  9).  The  property  is  underlain  by  metamorphosed  and
deformed  Archean  volcanic‐sedimentary  rocks  and  intermediate  to  felsic  intrusions  of  the  Wabigoon  Terrane.  The
Archean rocks are disconformably overlain by Mesoproterozoic sedimentary rocks and intruded by Nipigon diabase
sills. The latter bodies are related to the ~1100 million‐year‐old Midcontinent Rift (MacDonald et al., 2005).
The  exploration  targets  most  commonly  noted  in  the  provincial  assessment  reports  are  Lac  des  Iles  style  PGM
mineralization and, more recently, Thunder Bay North style Cu‐Ni‐PGM mineralization. At Heaven Lake, however, Ni‐
Cu‐PGM mineralization near the base of the gabbro‐pyroxenite intrusion could possibly indicate different target type.
This target area should be ranked highly for IP and time‐domain EM surveys on grids with 100 metre line spacing and,
pending  results,  drill  testing.  Elsewhere  on  the  Heaven  Lake  property,  geophysical  surveys  and  mapping  and
prospecting  surveys  by  experienced  personnel  should  be  carried  out  to  find  and  explore  other  prospective  mafic
intrusions. An additional focus for exploration should be the unexplained airborne EM anomalies about Whitton Lake.
43
The presence of thick overburden and the flat‐lying Nipigon Diabase unit hinders ground geophysical surveys and
surface mapping and prospecting work. A modern airborne geophysical survey with higher resolution and increased
depth penetration combined with inversion modelling of EM and magnetic anomalies of interest could better focus
follow‐up exploration activities on the ground. Indeed, OFR 6164 (MacDonald et al., 2005) reports the presence of a
magnetic anomaly at depth beneath the northeastern part of the Heaven Lake Property. Gabbro has been reported in
the area, but also present are thick horizons of magnetic massive pyrrhotite associated with chert. The significance of
that  magnetic  anomaly  remains  to  be  determined.  Inversion  modelling  combined  with  physical  property  studies
warrants consideration, as a means of evaluating the potential of the Heaven Lake Property area to hold large mafic to
ultramafic intrusions which do not outcrop.
Several exploration companies have recently staked properties around the Heaven Lake Property. These companies
include Platinum Group Metals and HTX Minerals Corp., which are known to have interest in Cu‐Ni‐PGMs.
Location of the Heaven Lake Property, northwestern Ontario
(II) Sargesson Lake and Kelly-Davis Properties
Ownership
The  Company  acquired  a  100%  interest  in  certain  mineral  claims,  known  as  the  Sargesson  and  Kelly/Davis
properties, located in the Janes, Davis and Kelly Townships, Sudbury Mining District, Ontario.  As consideration, the
Company paid $68,400 and incurred $30,000 in exploration expenditures.
The property is subject to a 2% NSR.  The Company can purchase 1% of the NSR from the vendors for $400,000 and
has the right of first refusal on the remaining 1% NSR.
44
(III)     West Timmins Nickel Project
Ownership
By agreement dated October 28, 2004 as amended September 27, 2006 and April 7, 2008, the Company had the
option to earn up to a 100% interest in the West Timmins Nickel Project, consisting of 1682 claim units (27,235 ha),
from Xstrata Nickel (formerly Falconbridge Inc.).
Under the terms of the agreement PFN was required to spend $4 million over a five (5) year period in order to vest with
a 100% interest in the Project.  Xstrata would retain a 2 % NSR and could, under certain circumstances, back-in and
earn up to a 65% interest by completing a feasibility study or spending $20 million on a feasibility study, whichever
occurred first.  Under the agreement PFN acted as Project Operator.
Minimum  aggregate  exploration  expenditures  of  $4  million  were  to  be  completed  by  December  31,  2008.    This
commitment was extended to December 31, 2009 to complete additional exploration programs as follows:
On or before December 31, 2005
               On or before December 31, 2006
(completed)
(completed)
$ 750,000
$ 1,500,000
On or before December 31, 2007
               On or before December 31, 2009
(completed)
(3,077,592 incurred)
$ 2,500,000
$ 4,000,000
Location and Access
The property is located approximately 70 km west of the city of Timmins, Ontario and is within the townships of Belford,
Griffin,  Melrose,  Montcalm,  Nova,  Strachan  and  Watson.  The  property  is  accessible  by  road  travelling  west  from
Timmins along Highway 101 for 5 km, then heading northwest for 56 km along the Mallette logging road.
Location of the West Timmins Project
45
Exploration
The Company’s exploration activities on the West Timmins Nickel Project focused on nickel and associated metals. In
addition to airborne geophysical surveys completed in late 2004, a detailed compilation of the historical work in the
MFI was completed and has been used to help evaluate and prioritize conductors identified by the AeroTEM survey. In
cooperation  with  Falconbridge,  seven  priority  conductor  anomalies  have  been  identified  based  on  geophysical
responses, relation to the Montcalm deposit, geological settings and previous work over the conductors.
Follow up line cutting and EM surveys were initiated.  Drill testing of the stronger geophysical and geochemical targets
was  carried  out  in  early  2006.    The  most  significant  drill  results  were  received  in  an  area  5  km  southwest  of  the
Montcalm mine, where large zones of sulphide mineralization were intersected in an intrusive breccia.  Trace nickel
and  copper  mineralization  was  intersected  in  parts  of  the  zone.    PFN  initiated  a  deep  penetrating  program  of
geophysical surveys to cover the extensive area between the successful drill holes and the mine area, and Xstrata
agreed to continue the surveys on and over the mine on their property.  The surveys were laid out to look for sulphide
mineral zones at depth associated with magnetic anomalies identified from the AeroTEM survey.
A  diamond  drill  program  was  completed  in  2007  with  no  significant  intersections.  The  drill  program  targeted
geophysical  and  geochemical  anomalies  identified  in  previous  work  programs.  Numerous  additional  airborne  EM
(AeroTEM), Pulse borehole EM, and geochemical anomalies in the Montcalm Intrusive Complex remain to be drill
tested.
In  a  continuing  effort  to  evaluate  the  Montcalm  Intrusion,  a  deep  penetrating  UTEM  survey  was  completed  in
September 2008. Although some geophysical anomalies were identified, interpretations suggest that the anomalies
are unlikely to reflect mineralization.
On May 5, 2009, the Company terminated the option agreement with Xstrata Nickel on the West Timmins Property.
(IV)     Raglan Hills (formerly South Renfrew)
Ownership
The Company staked 6 claims (1024 ha) in Raglan Township within the Raglan meta-gabbro mafic complex in June
2006.
Reconnaissance prospecting, sampling and geochemical soil programs was conducted over the property, as well as
the historical showing areas.
In 2007 the Company entered into a 50/50 joint venture agreement with First Nickel to evaluate the claims as well as
their adjoining claims (1728 hectares) as one property.
46
Location Map of Raglan Hills joint venture property
In  2008  an  airborne  magnetic  and  electromagnetic  survey  was  completed  on  the  Raglan  Hills  property.  This  was
followed by mapping and prospecting in the vicinity of anomalies generated by the airborne survey.
Due to the downturn in commodity prices, PFN informed First Nickel that it would not be participating in the funding of
a 2009 exploration program and as a result the Company’s participating interest has been decreased. As per the joint
venture  agreement  with  First  Nickel,  the  Company’s  participating  interest  was  converted  to  a  1.5%  NSR  over  the
Raglan Hills property.
(V)       Coldwell Properties, Ontario
Ownership
In 2007, the Company acquired 91 mineral claims (20,254 ha) by staking in the Coldwell area near Marathon, Ontario.
The claims covered parts of the Coldwell alkaline intrusive complex, which also hosts the Marathon PGM deposit.
47
Location Map of Coldwell property near Marathon, Ontario
Airborne geophysical and lake bottom sediment surveys were completed in 2007. The goal of these surveys was to
identify targets for follow-up ground evaluation in 2008. Prospecting and a soil geochemical survey were completed in
2008. This work did not identify any significant mineralization.
The Company allowed the Coldwell claims to lapse in July and August 2010.
(VI)     Goodchild Property, Ontario
During the year ended April 30, 2009, the Company acquired 28 mineral claims (6640 ha) by staking in the north east
of the Coldwell Area near Marathon, Ontario. These claims were incorporated into the Coldwell project as described in
the preceeding section.
As with the Coldwell Project, the Company allowed the Goodchild claims to lapse in February 2010.
(VII)    East Sudbury Property, Ontario
During the year ended April 30, 2009, the Company acquired 124 mineral claims (1,638 units – 26,208 hectares) by
staking in the Sudbury area of Ontario.
48
Location Map of East Sudbury property near Sudbury, Ontario
A  limited  program  of  soil  sampling  and  prospecting  was  completed  on  the  East  Sudbury  property  in  2008.  In
September 2009, the Company sold certain of the East Sudbury claims to Trueclaim Exploration Inc. for a 1.5% NSR
and 50,000 Trueclaim Exploration Inc. shares.
In September 2009 the property was reduced from 128 claims to 60 claims and from then through December 2009 an
additional 56 claims were lapsed.  The Company allowed the balance of the claims remaining to lapse in August
2010.
(VIII)  Swayze Joint Venture, Ontario
In 2007 the Company acquired claims by staking in Kenogaming Township (in the Swayze Greenstone Belt), Ontario.
On February 12, 2008, the Company entered into a three-year joint venture agreement with Benton Resources Corp.
to evaluate the claims that both parties held in the Swayze Greenstone Belt.  It was proposed that the exploration
budget  over  the  three  years  would  be  $1,200,000  with  the  first  year’s  budget  of  $400,000.    Total  holdings  in  the
Swayze area include 3 properties totaling 8,544 hectares.
Any additional claims acquired in the Swayze Greenstone Belt would be included in the joint venture.  Each company
would participate in working the properties as a 50:50 joint venture.  Expenditures and programs on the properties to
be determined by an annual joint management committee meeting.
In 2008, and airborne survey was completed over claims in Tooms Township that form part of the Swayze joint venture
property. In addition, prospecting and mapping were completed on the Tooms and Heenan Township properties. In
late 2008, a small (500 m) drill program was completed on the Heenan Township property. This work did not identify
significant mineralization.
On May 5, 2009 the joint venture was terminated.  The Company allowed the Swayze claims to lapse in January 2010
and has no further plans for this project.
(IX)     North Duluth Property, Ontario
49
In 2007 the Company acquired 10 mineral claims (81 units – 1296 hectares) in the Crystal Lake Area south of Thunder
Bay,  Ontario  and  completed  an  airborne  magnetic-electromagnetic  survey  over  the  property.  The  survey  did  not
identify  any  significant  targets  for  follow-up  work  and  in  February  2009,  the  property  was  reduced  to  8  claims.    In
February 2010, the remaining claims lapsed.
QUÉBEC, CANADA
(I)        Glitter Lake Property, Québec, Canada
Ownership
By an agreement dated August 15, 2003, April 30, 2006 and further amended on April 1, 2008, with CanAlaska, a
company that previously had certain directors in common, the Company acquired a 50% interest in certain mineral
claims known as the Glitter Lake property, located in the province of Québec.
The Glitter Lake property consists of 63 unpatented mining claims totalling 1,008 hectares. The claims are owned
100% by PFN, and carry expiry dates of 24 June 2011 (extensions have been applied for). Work requirements are
$750 per claim.  The claims are situated along the trend of the gabbroic sill that hosts the Horden Lake Cu-Ni deposit
and form two groups, one situated to the southwest of the Horden Lake property, the other to the northeast.
As  consideration,  the  Company,  at  its  option,  must  issue  common  shares,  make  payments  and  incur  exploration
expenditures as follows:
On or before 15 April 2003
Upon execution of agreement
On or before 4 June 2004
On or before 15August 2004
On or before 28 May 2005
On or before 15August 2005
On or before 28 May 2006
On or before 15 April 2007
On or before 15 April 2009*
On or before 15 April 2010*
Total
(completed)$  
(paid)   
(issued)   
(paid)   
(issued)   
(paid)   
(issued)   
(completed)   
(14,953 paid)   
    
 $
Payments  
-  
10,000  
-  
15,000  
-  
20,000  
-  
-  
-  
-  
45,000
Shares  
-  $
-  
20,000  
-  
20,000  
-  
20,000  
-  
-  
-  
60,000  $
*    Extensions to these dates have been applied for and are pending.
Exploration Expenditures
50,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
150,000 
200,000 
300,000 
700,000
Upon the Company having vested with a 50% interest by completing the aforementioned payments and obligations,
the Company could elect within 45 days to increase its interest to 60% by completing a bankable feasibility study
within  24  months.    In  the  event  the  Company  did  not  complete  a  bankable  feasibility  study  within  two  years,  the
Company agreed to make cash payments in the amount of $50,000 per annum for each year the feasibility study was
not completed. Upon vesting with a 60% interest, the Company could elect within 90 days to earn a 70% interest in the
property by placing the property into commercial production within 2 years from the date of this election. In the event
that  the  bankable  feasibility  study  indicated  an  IRR  in  excess  of  15%,  the  Company  agreed  to  make  annual  cash
payments of $50,000 to CanAlaska for each year the project is not placed into commercial production.
In the event that a major mining company elected to participate in the project before the Company vested with a 50%
interest,  the  Company  would  issue  common  shares  to  the  value  of  $100,000  to  CanAlaska,  within  15  days  of  the
Company  becoming  vested,  or  pay  such  amount  that  would  result  in  having  the  Company  spent  $1  million  in
exploration expenditures.
The property is subject to 1.5% NSR payable to  a  third  party.    The  Company  and  CanAlaska  will  share  the  NSR
buyout privileges in proportion to their respective interests.
In 2007 PFN and CanAlaska agreed to an extension of the option.  A field program of sampling historical core stored
on the property was also completed in 2007.
50
On  January  30,  2009,  the  Company  and  CanAlaska  signed  an  amendment  to  the  option  agreement  whereby
CanAlaska  assigned  a  100%  ownership  of  the  Glitter  Lake  property  to  the  Company,  in  consideration  of  meeting
CanAlaska’s office lease obligations until the end of the lease term in November 2010. This equates to a one-time
cash payment of $83,601 dollars.  CanAlaska retains a 0.05% NSR interest in the property along with the existing
royalty agreement with the original prospectors of 1.5%. The original option agreement has thus been terminated.
The  Glitter  Lake  Project  is  located  in  northeastern  Quebec,  approximately  135  km  north  –northeast  of  the  town  of
Matagami.  The  property  lies  at  the  southwest  end  of  a  40  km  long,  north  east  trending  belt  of  metavolcanic  and
sedimentary rocks intruded by a gabbroic body.  The exploration target is PGM mineralization associated with copper-
nickel sulphide mineralization. The Glitter claims surround, and extend along strike from the Horden Lake Copper-
Nickel deposit, which hosts an indicated resource of 8.8Mt at 0.88% Cu and 0.21% Ni, and an inferred resource of
7.8Mt at 0.87% Cu and 0.25% Ni (Southampton Ventures Inc., Press Release, March 2, 2009).
The principal exploration target on the Glitter Lake Property is remobilized magmatic Cu-Ni sulphide mineralization
along the contact of the metagabroic intrusion that hosts the Horden Lake deposit. Of particular interest is the potential
for relatively high-grade Cu mineralization that could be used to augment the high grade, but relatively low tonnage
portion (indicated resource of 2.4 Mt at 1.37% Cu, 0.25% Ni, and inferred resource of 2.0 Mt at 1.34% Cu, 0.34% Ni) of
the Horden Lake deposit.
On May 2, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement with El Condor Minerals Inc. ("El Condor")  to which El
Condor  has  the  option  to  earn  a  100%  interest  in  the  Glitter  Lake  Property  in  the  James  Bay  lowlands  region  of
Quebec.
El  Condor  can  earn  a  100%  interest  in  the  Glitter  Lake  Property  by  paying  an  initial  $50,000  (paid)  and  issuing
350,000 common shares to PFN (completed), and by making additional cash payments totaling $100,000 and issuing
an  additional  650,000  common  shares  of  El  Condor  to  the  Company  on  or  before  the  second  anniversary  of  the
Agreement, and by maintaining the Glitter Lake Claims in good standing for the 2-year term of the Agreement. A 2%
net  smelter  return  royalty  has  been  granted  to  the  Company,  of  which  1%  may  be  purchased  by  El  Condor  for
$1,000,000. The Glitter Lake Property is also subject to a pre-existing aggregate 2% royalty payable to various royalty
holders.
(II)       SOQUEM –Taureau & Chenneville Projects, Québec, Canada
51
On July 28, 2006 the Company signed a 50/50 Cooperation Agreement with SOQUEM Inc. ("SOQUEM") in order to
conduct research on platinum properties in the southern portion of the Province of Québec, Canada, in a designated
Area  of  Mutual  Interest  ("AMI"),  with  the  objective  of  identifying  viable  properties  for  further  exploration.    PFN  and
SOQUEM  would  pool  staffing  and  funding  resources,  and  share  all  technical  data  pertaining  to  properties  located
within  the  AMI,  with  each  party  having  equal  representation  of  two  members  each  on  a  technical  committee,
responsible for setting programs, budget and schedule.  SOQUEM acted as Manager.  The first exploration program
agreed upon between the parties was budgeted at $250,000 and was completed by the end of 2006.
In  the  event  that  a  viable  property  was  identified,  the  parties  would  contribute  jointly  to  all  staking  and  acquisition
costs, or, if one party elected to do so independently, would do so at its own expense.  In that event, the other party
was granted the right of first refusal to acquire a 50% interest in the property.  Exercise of this right would result in the
creation of a new joint venture agreement between the parties for the newly acquired property.
The 2006 program’s assay results (1.17gpt Pd, 0.14gpt Pt, 0.29gpt Au, 1.62% Cu, and 0.35% Ni) from the Taureau
evaluations justified staking a mafic intrusive and the flying of an airborne EM survey.  Several magnetic bodies with
associated conductors were identified, and additional claims were acquired in these areas.
In 2007, work programs continued to evaluate mafic intrusives in the AMI.  The conductor trends identified from the
airborne  survey  in  the  Chenneville  area  were  staked  (254  mineral  claims  –  15,200  hectares)  and  evaluated.  The
Chenneville Project was initiated to follow-up on the PGE-Cu-Ni mineralization located in 2006.  Additional follow-up
ground  work  on  the  Taureau  and  Cheneville  project  areas  was  completed  in  2009,  culminating  with  a  500  m  drill
program on the Cheneville property.  No significant mineralization was identified during the course of the foregoing
investigations.
Both parties agreed to abandon the entire Chenneville property since the fieldwork did not give the significant results
expected and the Company and Soquem agreed to terminate the Taureau and Chenneville joint venture in August
2009.
(III)     Fiedmont Property, Val d’Or Québec
On December 16, 2008, the Company entered into an option agreement with Kinbauri whereby the Company could
earn a 60% interest in 40 of Kinbauri’s 84 claims covering approximately 3,458 ha, known as the  Fiedmont PGM
property,  subject  to  a  2%  NSR  held  by  the  original  vendors.  The  vendor’s  NSR  is  subject  to  a  1.0%,  $900,000
buyback, to earn a 60% interest.
Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company would pay Kinbauri an aggregate amount of $98,000, issue 150,000
common shares to Kinbauri and expend $400,000 on exploration prior to November 30, 2010 to earn its interest. The
Company’s first year commitment was mandatory and included payment to Kinbauri of $38,000 (paid), issuance of
50,000 shares (issued, valued at $4,500), and expenditures of $150,000 (incurred) on exploration prior to November
30, 2009.
The property is situated approximately 15 km northeast of Val d’Or, Québec and is road accessible.
The Company completed an initial drill program targeting potential extensions of the known mineralization in March,
2009; however, no significant assays were returned
The option agreement with Kinbauri was terminated on October 13, 2009.
52
(IV)     Destiny Gold Project, Québec
Ownership
On August 14, 2009, the Company entered into an option agreement with Alto Ventures Ltd. (“Alto”) to earn a 60%
interest in the Destiny Gold Project (formerly the Despinassy Project) consisting of 175 mining claims totalling 7260
ha.
Under the terms of the Option Agreement with Alto, PFN will pay Alto $200,000 ($100,000 paid), provide Alto with
250,000 common shares of PFN (75,000 common shares issued), and complete a total of $3,500,000 in exploration
expenditures over a four year period to earn a 60% interest in the Destiny Gold property. Subsequent to vesting of its
interest, PFN will form a joint venture with Alto to further develop the project. Certain claims comprising the property
are subject to underlying net smelter return royalties ranging from 1% to 3.5%, with varying buy-back provisions.
On August 8, 2011 PFN announced that, subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals, it has entered into a letter
agreement (“LA”) with Next Gen Metals Inc. (“Next Gen”) (TSX.V:N) whereby Next Gen has been granted an option
(“Option”) to acquire the Company’s 60% earn‐in option interest (“Option Interest”) in the Destiny Gold Project located
in Abitibi‐Témiscamingue region of Québec, which Option Interest has been granted to the Company pursuant to an
agreement with Alto Ventures Ltd. (“Alto”)(TSX.V:ATV).
On 27 June 2012, Next Gen elected to terminate its option with the Company on the Destiny Gold Project. Next Gen’s
decision to relinquish the Destiny Project was made from an assessment of the 2012 exploration results not justifying
any further capital outlay.
On 27 June 2012, the Company also terminated the Alto Option Agreement related to the Destiny Gold Project.  The
Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate efforts on advancing its
100% owned River Valley PGM Project.
Location and Access
The Destiny Gold Project is located approximately 75 km north of Val d’Or in the Abitibi-Témiscamingue region of
Québec. The property is road accessible, and excellent mining infrastructure and support facilities are available in
nearby Val d’Or.
Geology
The Destiny Gold property is underlain by Archean metavolcanic and metasedimentary rocks of the Abitibi Greenstone
Belt. A regional scale structure, the Despinassy shear zone, transects the property. High grade gold mineralization
occurs in quartz veins and alteration zones associated with this structure. Mineralization has been identified in several
locations along the Despinassy shear zone on the property over a strike distance of about 4 m.
Mineralization
The main area of mineralization, the DAC zone, occurs over a strike length of about 600 m. In this area, four to five
identifiable intervals of quartz veining and shear-related alteration zones carry high-grade gold mineralization, with
drill intersections ranging up to 178.5 g/t Au over a drill width of 1.0 m.
The DAC zone hosts a NI 43-101 compliant indicated resource of 166,863 tonnes grading 6.88 g/t Au (36,892 oz) and
an inferred resource of 444,753 tonnes grading 4.46 g/t Au (63,839 oz) as calculated by W.A. Hubacheck Consultants
Ltd. for Alto in “A Resource Estimate of the DAC Gold Deposit, Despinassy Twp., Val d’Or, Quebec,” dated January 9,
2007 (the “2007 Resource Estimate”), and incorporated into the Wardrop Report.  The DAC zone is open along strike
and  at  depth.  The  occurrence  of  high-grade  mineralization  at  the  Darla  and  20  and  21  zones  to  the  east  clearly
indicates that the mineralizing system occurs across a significant portion of the property.
Exploration
The Phase 1 program was completed on December 22, 2009 and consisted of 5,600 m of drilling in 14 holes.  Results
from the Phase I drilling program were very positive as they validated the deposit model and confirm continuity of gold
mineralization between previous wide-spaced holes.  Each of the holes targeting the DAC deposit intersected gold
within multiple zones of shearing, strong alteration, quartz veins containing variable amounts of sulphides. Significant
gold values were obtained in 100% of the holes drilled including high grade quartz veins containing up to 44.39 g/t Au
and  wide  mineralized  shear  zones  including  21.0  m  averaging  1.39  g/t  Au  and  another  high  grade  quartz  veins
containing up to 16.43 g/t Au over 0.5 m (0.48 oz/ton) and averaging 0.51 g/t and 49.5 m averaging 0.36 g/t Au.  Phase
1 confirmed the large size of the gold system at the DAC deposit.
53
The Phase II drilling program began January 26, 2010 and was completed in March 2010. The results from the Phase I
and Phase II programs are incorporated into the extensive data base available for the Destiny project for the next stage
of work, which may include diamond drilling. Drilling at the DAC Deposit continued to intersect multiple gold zones
with high grade values over significant widths. Table below illustrates significant drill intervals.
Table of Significant Gold Assays
Hole Number
DES09-128
From (m)
315.0
To (m)
318.6
With (m) 
*downhole
3.6
Au (g/t)
1.37
DES09-129
Hole Number
DES09-130
DES09-131
DES09-134
Includes
DES09-135
Includes
Includes
Includes
Includes
Includes
DES09-136
Includes
DES09-137
Includes
Includes
Includes
DES09-138 
New Vein
458.1
257.7 
 308.8 
 407.0
From (m)
299.2 
 305.5 
 354.4
94.6 
 116.8 
 131.0
124.8
256.9
 259.6
316.7
355.75
357.25
365.5
374.85
375.4
386.65
 389.15
431.4
446.5
486.55
527.1
527.1
451.0
460.9
216.3
226.8
251.9
254.0
371.0
372.9
22.0
91.0
458.6
266.0 
 316.3 
 407.5
To (m)
312.6 
 306.7 
 374.2
119.9 
 118.9
 170.5
135.3
266.7 
 260.6
332.8
368.0 
 357.75
 366.0
377.0
 375.7
391.0 
 390.15
441.8
70.35
496.9 
 530.0
527.75
463.3 
 461.5
227.6
 227.6
258.5 
 254.5
374.0 
 374.0
44.0 
 92.0
0.5
8.3 
 7.5 
 0.5
With (m) 
*downhole
13.4 
 1.2 
 19.8
25.3 
 2.1 
 49.5
10.5
9.8 
 1.0
16.1
12.25 
 0.5 
 0.5
2.15
 0.3
4.35 
 1.0
10.4
23.85
10.35
 2.9
0.65
12.3 
 1.6
11.3
 0.8
6.6 
 0.5
3.0 
 1.1
22.0 
 1.0
2.99
1.10 
 0.78 
 16.43
Au (g/t)
0.7 
 6.02 
 0.53
0.51 
 2.42 
 0.36
0.41
0.53
 2.54
0.28
2.85
 12.69
 51.66
1.55
 7.9
0.74
 2.34
0.46
0.36
0.35 
 3.35
12.84
0.9 
 3.59
0.92
 4.0
1.16
 12.0
8.46 
 20.85
0.39 
 2.57
* Based on core angles and previous drilling, true widths are estimated at approximately 80 to 90% of the downhole
lengths reported. Mineralized zones generally start at 0.1 g/t Au and assay averages may include minimal intervals of
waste material. No top cuts of assays were used.
54
The results from the first 14 holes confirmed the continuity of gold mineralization between holes drilled previously,
some of which were spaced from 100m to 200m apart.
The 2010 exploration program was completed in December 2010. A high resolution airborne magnetic survey was
conducted along with BHEM surveys that were designed to target massive sulphide mineralization.
Three  drill  holes  were  completed  and  each  had  a  specific  objective  with  respect  to  defining  controls  on  the
mineralization  at  the  Destiny  Gold  Project.  These  are  summarized  as  (1)  to  test  selected  BHEM  conductors  and
assess the association of areas of sulphide mineralization with gold mineralization, and (2) to test for shallow gold
mineralization  to  the  south  of  the  DAC  deposit  where  the  high  resolution  magnetic  survey  identified  magnetic
signatures similar to the DAC deposit.
Previous  drilling  revealed  massive  sulphide  mineralized  lenses  locally  adjacent  to  the  gold  mineralization.  The
companies  interpreted  these  sulphide  lenses  as  important  to  the  gold  mineralizing  system  and  completed  BHEM
surveys in certain drill holes to trace the extent of the massive sulphide mineralization and to help guide drilling at
depth.
The 2010 program also included the completion of the Wardrop Report, which incorporated over 7,600 m of additional
drilling  that  was  completed  on  the  deposit  subsequent  to  the  2007  Resource  Estimate,  for  an  updated  NI43-101
compliant report with a resource estimate.
Indicated and Inferred resources have been determined for the DAC deposit. The deposit is made up of narrow high-
grade gold-bearing quartz veins occurring within five parallel alteration zones. These alteration zones carry gold at
lower grades than the quartz veins but are significantly wider. The Wardrop Report indicates that the additional drilling
has expanded the DAC Deposit and significantly increased the contained ounces of gold.
At a cut-off grade of 0.5 g/t Au and using the Inverse Distance Squared (ID2) estimation method, the five gold zones
contain an Indicated Resource of about 10.8 million tonnes with an average grade of 1.05 g/t Au (364,000 contained
ounces).  In  addition,  the  Inferred  Resource  totals  8.3  Mt  with  an  average  grade  of  0.92  g/t  Au  (247,000  contained
ounces). Table 2 summarises the Resource Estimate at the 0.5 g/t cut-off.
A cut off grade of 0.5 g/t Au was selected to tabulate the total resources based on the results of similar gold projects
located in Ontario and Quebec. In addition, the following parameters were considered; 4:1 stripping ratio, operating
costs of $14.30/tonne at 10,000 tonnes per day, long term gold price of $US973/troy ounce, $US to $Cdn conversion
of 1.02 and gold recovery of 94%. The resources block considers the mineralization to start at approximately 15 m
below surface down to a depth of 400m for the deepest zone (Zone 5).
Mineral Resources are not Mineral Reserves and by definition do not demonstrate economic viability.
DAC Resource Estimation Summary (using ID2 method)
Class
Zone
Indicated
1
2
3
4
5
Total
Class
Zone
Inferred
1
Capping
Grade
(g/t)
7.53
19.63
6.66
10.80
14.00
Tonnes Above
Capped Grade
1,395,600
2,942,700
1,370,700
3,542,600
1,573,900
10,825,500
55
Average
Grade
(g/t)
0.84
1.19
0.99
1.06
0.97
1.05
Average
True Width
Au
Ounces
(m)
16
30
12
21
15
37,760
112,644
43,675
121,221
49,231
364,530
Capping
Grade
(g/t)
7.53
Tonnes Above
Capped Grade
971,900
Average
Grade
(g/t)
0.70
Average
True Width
Au
Ounces
(m)
16
21,724
2
3
4
5
Total
19.63
6.66
10.80
14.00
1,841,100
725,500
3,085,300
1,706,600
8,330,400
1.06
0.93
0.89
0.96
0.92
30
12
21
15
Cut-off Sensitivities for the DAC Deposit Resource Estimate
62,487
21,759
88,767
52,854
247,590
Class
ID2 Cut-off
(Au g/t)
Tonnes
Average Grade
(Au g/t)
Contained
Ounces Au
Indicated
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.5
2.0
24,275,300
14,371,800
10,825,500
8,225,700
5,359,200
3,858,800
1,820,100
979,900
0.65
0.90
1.05
1.21
1.48
1.71
2.26
2.73
509,960
415,780
364,530
318,840
255,370
212,310
132,490
86,100
Class
ID2 Cut-off
(Au g/t)
Tonnes
Average Grade
(Au g/t)
Contained
Ounces Au
Inferred
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.5
2.0
31,535,100
22,541,600
12,132,100
8,330,400
5,797,600
3,534,600
2,521,400
1,133,600
385,600
0.43
0.55
0.78
0.92
1.09
1.35
1.53
1.93
2.29
436,840
401,190
302,500
247,590
203,210
153,420
124,390
70,360
28,400
On  June  27,  2012,  the  Company  elected  to  terminate  its  option  agreement  with  Alto  Ventures  Ltd.  (“Alto”)  on  the
Destiny Gold Project in Val d’Or, Quebec.
Pacific  North  West  Capital  Corp.  decided  it  would  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the  company  to  not  pursue  additional
exploration on these properties and to concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES, CANADA
(I)        WINTER LAKE
In 2007, the Company staked two separate blocks of claims, totaling 33 mineral claims of approximately 34,070 ha in
the MacKay Lake area of the Northwest Territories.  These claims cover geology similar to that where GGL Resources
reported nickel values in a komatiitic environment.
56
No exploration work was completed on the property subsequent to staking, and the claims were allowed to lapse May
4, 2009 and reverted to the Crown.
SASKATCHEWAN, CANADA
(I)            Nickel Plats, Saskatchewan
By  agreement  dated  30  April  2007,  the  Company  optioned  the  Nickel  Plats  property  from  Diamond  Hunter  Ltd.
(“Hunter”)  (Figure  below).  The  property  is  located  approximately  50  km  north  of  La  Ronge,  Saskatchewan.  The
property covers a Ni-Cu occurrence (historic resource of 1.7 million tonnes grading 0.74% combined Ni-Cu) within a
sulphide rich (pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and pyrite) gabbro intrusion.
On 30 March 2009, the Company and Hunter signed an amendment to the terms agreement as follows:
Upon execution of agreement
On or before 30 June 2007
On or before 30 April 2008
On or before 30 April 2009
On or before 30 April 2010
On or before 30 April 2011
On or before 30 April 2012
On or before 30 April 2013
Total
(paid/issued)
(paid)
(paid/issued)
(paid/issued)
(paid/issued)
(paid)
(paid)
$
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$
Payments
Shares
Exploration
Expenditures
10,000
20,000
30,000
15,000
15,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
150,000
75,000 $
-  
75,000  
50,000  
50,000  
-  
-  
-  
250,000 $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Approximately  $678,609  in  expenditures  have  been  accrued  by  the  Nickel  Plats  Project,  thereby  fulfilling  all
exploration expenditure requirements under the terms of the amended Option Agreement.
In  2007,  the  Nickel  Plats  project  was  evaluated,  and  a  compilation  was  begun  to  understand  the  setting  of  the
mineralization as well as develop an approach to test the known mineralization and other targets that were developed
from the work.  Five mineral claims (7,692 ha) were staked in the vicinity to expand to the property to include additional
target areas.
The Nickel Plats Project area is located at or near a terrain boundary underlain by Proterozoic rocks of the Hearne-
Reindeer and Reindeer zones to the east of the Archean Hearne Craton and northwest of the Archean Sask Craton.
The Reindeer zone forms the core of the Trans-Hudson Orogen and is subdivided into the Rottenstone and La Ronge
domains. The Rottenstone domain consists of mainly metasedimentary rocks intruded by tonalite-trondhjemite plutons
and small mafic- ultramafic intrusions. The grade of regional metamorphism ranges from lower amphibolite to upper
amphibolite. The mafic-ultramafic intrusions are the foci of PFN’s exploration interest.
The  property  is  underlain  by  gneissic  to  migmatitic  metasedimentary  rocks  with  or  without  metavolcanic  rocks,
intermediate to felsic intrusions and, locally, mafic-ultramafic plutons. The pluton at the Gochagar Lake Property is a
multiphase intrusive complex consisting of a core of hornblendite and a margin of diorite that was intruded by gabbro.
The gabbro is described as relatively fresh which contains xenoliths of the metasedimentary country rocks and hosts
nickel-copper  sulphide  mineralization.  The  mineralized  host  rock  types  are  norite,  websterite,  hartzburgite,
hornblendite and even the surrounding metasedimentary rocks.
Exploration  work  carried  out  by  PFN  consists  of  drill  core  resampling  for  modern  assays  and  an  airborne
electromagnetic (EM) survey. Only a single drill hole was resampled. The assay results confirm the nickel enriched (up
to 0.60% Ni) composition of the mineralization relative to copper (up to 0.16% Cu), presence of cobalt (up to 0.022%)
and minor amounts of PGM (up to 0.3 gpt Pt+Pd).
In 2008, a total of 2284 line km of VTEM was flown by Geotech over PFN’s Nickel Plats Project area. Mr. Laurie Reed
(a renowned geophysical consultant) completed an interpretation of the VTEM survey for PFN. The survey did detect
the Gochagar A-Zone deposit. Several similar responses were identified in the vicinity of that zone and elsewhere on
the Nickel Plats properties. These targets remain to be geologically proofed and drill tested.
57
A 2,284 line km helicopter-borne VTEM (Versatile Time Domain Electromagnetic) geophysical survey was completed
by Geotech Ltd. over the Nickel Plats property in 2008, with a large number of anomalies identified, and limited re-
sampling of historic drill core on the property was also completed.
The Nickel Plats adjunct property is subject to a 2.0% NSR. The Company has the right to purchase a 1.0% NSR for
$750,000.
Pacific North West Capital Corp. decided it would be in the best interest of the Company to not pursue additional
exploration on these properties and to concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
The claims of the PFNs Nickel Plats Project (in grey)
BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA
(I)        Rock & Roll Property - Au-Ag-polymetallic project
Ownership
On July 28, 2009, the Company obtained an option from Misty Creek Ventures Ltd. (Misty Creek Ventures Ltd. was
dissolved  in  January  2010  and  its  interest  was  transferred  to  Equity  Exploration  Consultants  Ltd.),  First  Fiscal
Enterprises Ltd. and Pamicon Developments Ltd. (collectively, the “Vendors”) on the Rock & Roll Property.  Under the
terms of the Agreement, the Company can earn a 100% interest in the property over a four-year period by completing
$2,000,000 ($594,046 incurred) in exploration expenditures, paying the Vendors $130,000 and providing the Vendors
with a total of 600,000 (100,000 shares issued) of the Company’s common shares.  The Vendors retain a 2% NSR, of
which  1%  can  be  purchased  for  $3,000,000.  The  property  is  also  subject  to  an  underlying  NSR  of  3%  and  an
underlying    Net  Profits  Interest  Royalty  ("NPI")  of  15%,  both  of  which  are  payable  to  Prime  Equities  International
Corporation, and both of which are purchasable by the Forrest Syndicate and/or heirs and assignees in their entirety
for $1,500,000 each.
58
On 19 June 2012, the Company terminated the option agreement with the Vendors related to the Property.
Location and Access
The Rock & Roll Property is located in the Liard Mining District approximately 9 km west of the Bronson airstrip and 37
km from the Eskay Creek Mine Road in northern British Columbia.
Geology and Mineralization
The Rock & Roll Property hosts precious metals rich in volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) mineralization in a
volcano-sedimentary host rock package of Triassic age. As such, the mineralization shows similarities to the gold and
silver rich mineralization of Barrick Gold’s past-producing Eskay Creek mine.  Known mineralization on the Rock &
Roll Property occurs in multiple stacked sulphide lenses in two zones, the Black Dog and SRV zones, over a strike
length of approximately 950 m.  A total of approximately 14,000 m of core drilling in 110 drill holes was completed on
the property from 1991 to 1997. Only six drill holes tested the host stratigraphy outside of the known mineralization, but
at least 5km of strike length of the prospective lithologies is present on the property. There is the potential for additional
mineralization along strike and at depth, as historic drilling tested the known mineralization down to depths of only
about 160 m.
Exploration
The 2009 exploration program included a 350 line km, AeroTem3, helicopter-borne magnetic/electromagnetic survey
conducted by Aeroquest Limited and a drilling program consisting of a total of 540 m of core drilling completed in five
holes. The first four holes were designed to test gaps in the historic drilling on the Black Dog Zone in order to establish
the degree of continuity of the mineralization and to confirm the historic geological model. Each of the infill drill holes
encountered  the  target  mineralization,  confirming  the  continuity  of  the  sulphide  lenses  and  the  validity  of  previous
geological interpretations. The table below illustrates selected assay results from this drill program. (Au and Ag in g/t.
Cu, Pb and Zn in percent (%).
Hole Number
From (m)
To (m)
Interval
Au g/t
Ag g/t
Cu %
Pb%
Zn%
RR09-105
including
RR09-106
including
RR09-107
including
RR09-108
including
RR09-109
76.03
76.77
62.26
62.26
39.32
39.32
46.88
62.74
77.9
77.9
64.3
63.01
58.73
42.46
85.59
75.71
(m)
1.87
1.13
2.04
0.75
19.41
3.14
38.71
12.97
0.78
1.14
0.40
0.90
0.53
1.31
0.28
0.40
84.6
120.4
72.2
177.7
57.9
296.2
18.3
28.0
No Significant Assays
0.24
0.32
0.27
0.60
0.19
0.46
0.13
0.21
0.21
0.30
0.24
0.63
0.24
1.25
0.05
0.06
0.89
1.23
1.63
4.23
0.91
3.99
0.72
1.07
*Interval represents apparent thickness not true thickness
The final drill hole of this program tested a strong electromagnetic anomaly that was thought to represent the westward
continuation of the Black Dog Zone. Drilling at this location failed to return any significant assays.
Further investigations are required to test for a westward extension of the main zones of mineralization.
The 2009 work program on the property was also designed to provide an initial evaluation of the validity of historic
assay data. A total of twenty-one samples from five different historic drill holes were obtained for comparison with the
original assays. In most cases the samples were taken from the same core interval as the original samples.
59
Overall historic assay results have been confirmed, and the Company can now embark on a systematic re-sampling of
historic core to provide a statistical comparison of the historic assay data with modern data. Commencement of the
2010 Rock and Roll exploration program was announced on September 27th 2010. This program primarily focused on
continuation of re-sampling previous drill core, coupled by geological mapping/prospecting that investigated airborne
geophysical  survey  conductors  and  geological  and  geochemical  targets.  The  fieldwork  was  supported  by  further
compilation of data from the 1990-97 programs and the incorporation of new geological interpretations formulating in
conjunction with members of the British Columbia Geological Survey.
The Rock & Roll Report, commissioned by Alto and PFN, and filed on June 1, 2011 on the Company’s Form 6-K,
included  a  new  NI  43-101  compliant  mineral  resource  estimate  for  the  Black  Dog  Deposit.  The  resource  estimate
incorporated the mineralized zones of the historic drill core and the 540 m (1772 ft) of the five diamond drill holes that
were completed by PFN in 2009/2010. Through this work, PFN significantly increased the resources contained within
the Black dog deposit over the previous resource estimate, completed prior to the implementation of the NI 43-101
standards of disclosure.
The NI43-101 compliant mineral resource estimate in the “indicated” category consists of 2,155,679 tonnes grading
0.68 g/t Au (47,040 contained oz of Au), and 82.7 g/t Ag (5,734,445 contained oz of Ag) at a gold-equivalent cut-off
grade of 0.5 g/t. The deposit also contains 0.22% Cu (10,500,833 lbs Cu), 0.22% Pb (10,399,960 lbs Pb), and 0.94%
Zn (44,522,995 lbs Zn) or 3.11 g/t gold equivalent (AuEq) for an additional 215,239 oz of Au Eq at the 0.5 g/t AuEq cut-
off. The AuEq grade is based on $1000/oz Au, $15.80/oz Ag, $2.92/lb Cu, $0.86/lb Pb and $0.86/lb Zn. Tables below
give the mineral resource estimate for the Black Dog deposit at varying cut-off grades.
The Black Dog massive sulphide deposit is part of a larger area that includes the SRV Zone hosting precious metal-
rich volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) mineralization. These occurrences display similarities to other precious
metal-rich  deposits  such  as  Eskay  Creek  (50  km  to  the  east-southeast),  Greens  Creek,  and  other  deposits  of  the
Canadian Cordillera. The mineralization on the Rock &Roll property is hosted by graphitic argillite to siltstone. The
Black Dog and SRV zones are dominated by massive pyrrhotite with blebs and lenses of chalcopyrite and sphalerite.
Massive pyrite-sphalerite forms finely laminated lenses locally, with minor pyrrhotite, galena and chalcopyrite.
Indicated  Mineral  Resources,  consistent  with  CIM  definitions  required  by  NI43-101,  are  reported  at  various  cut-off
grades in Table 1 (for Au and Ag) and Table 2 (for Cu, Pb, Zn and gold equivalent values). Inverse distances squared
interpolation restricted to mineralized domains were used to estimate gold (grams/tonne Au), silver (grams/tonne Ag),
copper (% Cu), lead (% Pb), and zinc (% Zn) grades into the block models. Gold, silver, copper, lead and zinc content
were combined into a gold equivalent value (using to the prices given above) for resource reporting.
60
Gold and Silver Indicated Mineral Resource Estimate at various gold-equivalent cut-off grades. Metallurgical
recoveries and net smelter returns are assumed to be 100%
Copper, Lead, Zinc and gold equivalent Indicated Mineral Resource Estimate at various gold-equivalent cut-off
grades
On June 19, 2012, the Company elected to terminate its option agreements with Pamicon Developments Ltd. on the
Rock & Roll Polymetallic Project, British Columbia.
The Company decided it would be in its best interest to not pursue additional exploration on these properties and to
concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
61
ALASKA, USA
(I)        Union Bay Platinum Property
The project is located 32 km west of Ketchikan, Alaska.  The exploration target is an enriched platinum bearing zone
within or peripheral to a dunite core.
Location Map of Union Bay property, Alaska
By agreement dated October 1, 2002 and amended April 2, 2003 and February 4, 2004, the Company could acquire,
from Freegold, a company that previously had certain directors and officers in common, an option to earn up to a 70%
interest in the property.
In  order  to  earn  its  50%  interest,  the  Company,  purchased  a  private  placement  of  $165,000  (2002),  made  cash
payments, and issued common shares and incurred exploration expenditures as follows:
Payments    Shares
Exploration Expenditures
- Within 5 days from approval date(issued)
- On or before 1 July 2003(paid / incurred)
- On or before 30 January 2004(issued)
- On or before 1 July 2004(paid / incurred)
- On or before 1 July 2005(paid / incurred)
- On or before 1 July 2006(paid / incurred)
$
 
 
 
 
 
$
-  
20,000  
-  
20,000  
30,000  
30,000  
100,000
30,000  $
-  
30,000  
-  
-  
-  
60,000  $
- 
30,000 
- 
30,000 
340,000 
600,000 
1,000,000
Following vesting with a 50% interest on July 1, 2006, the Company had the right to elect within 45 days to increase its
interest to 60% by completing a feasibility study within 12 months of vesting with 50%.  This election was not made.
As a term of the agreement the Company, upon vesting with 50%, issued 253,586 common shares at market value of
$100,000 to Freegold.  In a previous year, 134,538 common shares were issued, the value of which was accounted in
the previous year.
62
By Memorandum of Agreement dated May 4, 2007, Freegold and the Company confirmed their 50/50 interest in the
property, with the Company as Project Operator.
In October 2012, upon agreement between Freegold Ventures Limited and Pacific North West Capital Corp., it was
agreed to cancel following claims:
604428 QTUBST 1                  604431 QTUBST 4
604429 QTUBST 2                  604432 QTUBST 5
604430 QTUBST 3                  604476 QTUBST 6
No programs were carried out during the past year and Freegold and the Company are seeking a joint venture partner
to further develop this project.
The Company decided it would be in its best interest to not pursue additional exploration on these properties and to
concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
(II)       Kane Property
On June 6, 2007, the Company entered into an option agreement with Stillwater whereby Stillwater could earn 50% of
the first selected property by spending US$3.5 million and US$4.0 million on each subsequent selected property by
December 31, 2011.  In March 2008, Stillwater elected not to continue with exploration on the property in order to
evaluate new ground in southeast Alaska.
In October 2012, the Company allowed the Kane Property claims to lapse.
The Company decided it would be in its best interest to not pursue additional exploration on these properties and to
concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
(III)     Tonsina Property
The Tonsina property, presently defined, consists of 46 State of Alaska mining claims, known as the “Marc” claims 1-
46 (ADL Nos. 610060 – 610105; which were staked in June 2006.  These claims comprise a contiguous group of
State  of  Alaska  ¼  section  claims  covering  approximately  29.78  sq.  kilometers  (744.62  hectares,  or  7,360  acres),
herein referred to as the “Tonsina property”.  The claims are owned 100% by the Company.
The property is located in the Valdez quadrangle in southeast Alaska on state select land, located approximately 6 km
south of the village of Tonsina and 110 km north of Valdez.  The property covers prospective PGM mineralization
within  the  Tonsina  ultramafic  intrusive  complex.      Access  is  relatively  good  with  bush  roads  6  km  north  to  the
Richardson  Highway  which  connects  Anchorage  to  Fairbanks.    Helicopters  are  still  required  to  reach  the  higher
elevations.
The Company decided it would be in its best interest to not pursue additional exploration on these properties and to
concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
63
The 2007 exploration program identified significant PGM anomalies associated with a sulphide and chromite enriched
layer  in  the  Tonsina  Ultramafic  Complex. An  induced  polarization  survey  designed  to  test  the  extent  of  the
mineralization was completed in the summer of 2008, and was followed by a ground magnetic survey and surface
channel  sampling.  The  results  suggest  that the  zone  of  sulphide  mineralization  is  continuous  over  a  300  m  strike
length.  Future work will focus on determining the total strike extent of this zone, and identifying the best locations for
drill testing of the mineralization.
The Company decided it would be in its best interest to not pursue additional exploration on these properties and to
concentrate efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project.
(IV)     Nixon Fork Project, Alaska
By Letter Agreement (the “Agreement”) dated December 9, 2008 between the Company and St. Andrew Goldfields
Ltd. (“SAG”), the Company was granted an option, exercisable until February 15, 2009, to acquire a 100% interest in
SAG’s  wholly-owned  subsidiary  Mystery  Creek  Resources  Inc.  (“MCR”).    MCR’s  assets  include  the  Nixon  Fork
property, located 56 km northeast of McGrath, Alaska.
The Company paid US$100,000 upon signing the agreement dated 9 December 2008. The Company exercised the
option by agreeing to pay a further US$400,000 of which US$100,000 was paid February 12, 2009, and the balance
was paid in three equal installments on May 1, 2009, July 1, 2009 and September 1, 2009.
In June 2009, the Company granted Fire River Gold Corp. (“FAU”) an option to acquire all of the outstanding shares of
MCR.  FAU  paid  PFN  US$50,000  on  signing  of  the  agreement.  The  sale  of  MCR  to  FAU  was  approved  by  PFN
shareholders in August 2009. The shareholders of FAU approved the purchase of MCR in September 2009.  FAU
exercised the option by making further payments totaling US$450,000 and issuing a total of US$2.5 million in FAU
shares at a deemed price of $0.45 per share for a total of 6,415,000 shares to the Company.
64
FAU issued to the Company 1,000,000 share purchase warrants entitling the Company to purchase 1,000,000 shares
at an exercise price of $0.50 for a period of twenty-four months from the date of closing. FAU reimbursed all expenses
incurred by the Company from May 1, 2009 until the finalization of this transaction for a total CDN$773,766.
(I)        Burkina Faso, Africa
On January 18, 2011, the Company entered into an agreement with Somitra to acquire 100% interest in the properties
of Kangara, Kalempo and Lhorosso. The Company can earn a 100% interest in the properties under the following
terms of the agreements:
US$75,000 on signing of the agreement (paid);
US$30,000 on six months following the signing of the agreement (paid);
US$105,000 on the first anniversary of the signing of the agreement (paid);
US$120,000 on the second anniversary of the signing of the agreement;
US$150,000 on the third anniversary of the signing of the agreement; and
After completion of transferring the claims, the Company is required to issue 450,000 common shares of the
Company to Somitra or pay the sum of US$135,000.
PFN’s Burkina Faso gold Projects lie within the Birimian Greenstone Belt of West Africa, one of the most prolific gold
producing  regions  of  the  world.  The  Birimian  Greenstone  Belt  consists  of  Lower  Proterozoic  age  volcanic  and
sedimentary  units  intruded  and  surrounded  by  related  plutonic  rocks  and  has  a  long  history  of  gold  mining  with
industrial history beginning in Ghana at the end of the 19th century.
On May 24, 2012, the Company entered into an agreement to provide Roxgold Inc. (“ROG”) an option to earn a 100%
interest in company’s all three gold exploration permits in Burkina Faso. In order to exercise the option, ROG shall
make the cash payments and issue shares as set forth below:
On signing
(received)
If decision is made to
proceed ( before October 7,
2012
Total
$
$
Payments
50,000
300,000
350,000
Shares,
Warrants
250,000 
Warrants, 
50,000 
common 
shares
300,000
Upon completion of the option, the Company will retain 1% NSR.  1% NSR can be purchased from the Company for
$500,000.
In February, 2013 Roxgold Inc. elected to terminate its option agreement related to the Burkina Faso gold projects,
subsequent to Roxgold’s termination, Pacific North West Capital also elected terminate its agreement with Somitra.
Each property is subject to a 1.0% NSR with the buyout price of US$1,000,000 for any deposit over 1 million ounces
and US$500,000 for any deposit under 1 million ounces.  A joint venture partner is being sought to further explore the
project.
“Property, Plants and Equipment” sections of this report have been reviewed and approved for technical content by
William Stone Ph.D. P.Geo, President & COO of PFN and a Qualified Person under the provisions of NI 43-101.
ITEM 5:  OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
65
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to
make  judgments,  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of  assets,  liabilities  and  contingent
liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of income and expenses during
the  reporting  period.  Estimates  and  assumptions  are  continuously  evaluated  and  are  based  on  management’s
experience and other factors, including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the
circumstances. However, actual outcomes can differ from these estimates.
Areas requiring a significant degree of estimation and judgment relate to the recoverability of the carrying value of
exploration and evaluation assets, fair value measurements for financial instruments and share-based payments, the
recognition and valuation of provisions for decommissioning liabilities, the recoverability and measurement of deferred
tax assets and liabilities, inventory valuation and ability to continue as a going concern.  Actual results may differ from
those estimates and judgments.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at banks and on hand, and short term money market instruments with an
original maturity of three months or less, which are readily convertible into a known amount of cash.
Investment in associate
The Company’s investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method of accounting.  Under the equity
method,  the  Company’s  investment  in  an  associate  is  initially  recognized  at  cost  and  subsequently  increased  or
decreased to recognize the Company’s share of earnings and losses of the associate and for impairment losses after
the initial recognition date.  The Company’s share of an associate’s losses that are in excess of its investment in the
associate are recognized only to the extent that the Company has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made
payments on behalf of the associate.  The Company’s share of earnings and losses of associates are recognized in
profit or loss during the period.
After application of the equity method, the Company determines whether it is necessary to recognize an impairment
loss on the Company’s investment in its associates.  The Company determines at each reporting date whether there is
any objective evidence that the investment in the associate is impaired.  If there is objective evidence, the Company
calculates  the  amount  of  impairment  as  the  difference  between  the  recoverable  amount  of  the  associate  and  its
carrying value and recognizes the amount in profit or loss.  When a group entity transacts with an associate of the
Company, profit and losses are eliminated to the extent of the Company’s interest in the relevant associate.
Foreign currencies
The Company’s reporting currency and the functional currency of all of its operations is the Canadian dollar as this is
the principal currency of the economic environment in which they operate.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the date of
the transaction.  Foreign currency monetary items are translated at the period-end exchange rate.  Non-monetary items
measured at historical cost continue to be carried at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.  Non-monetary
items measured at fair value are reported at the exchange rate at the date when fair values were determined.
66
Exchange differences arising on the translation of monetary items or on settlement of monetary items are recognized in
profit  or  loss  in  the  period  in  which  they  arise,  except  where  deferred  in  equity  as  a  qualifying  cash  flow  or  net
investment hedge.
Exchange differences arising on the translation of non-monetary items are recognized in other comprehensive income
in the statement of comprehensive income to the extent that gains and losses arising on those non-monetary items are
also recognized in other comprehensive income.  Where the non-monetary gain or loss is recognized in profit or loss,
the exchange component is also recognized in profit or loss.
Property, plant and equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. 
The cost of an item of property, plant and equipment consists of the purchase price, any costs directly attributable to
bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for its intended use and an initial estimate of the costs of
dismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is located.
Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to write off the cost of property, plant and equipment, less their estimated
residual  value,  using  the  declining  balance  method  using  the  following  rates  or  the  straight-line  method  over  the
following expected useful lives:
Automotive
Office equipment
Software
Leasehold improvements
Exploration and evaluation properties
30%
20%
100%
10 years
Exploration and evaluation expenditures include the costs of acquiring licenses, costs associated with exploration and
evaluation activity, and the fair value (at acquisition date) of exploration and evaluation assets acquired in a business
combination.    Exploration  and  evaluation  expenditures  are  capitalized.    Costs  incurred  before  the  Company  has
obtained the legal rights to explore an area are recognized in profit or loss.
Option payments received are treated as a reduction of the carrying value of the related exploration and evaluation
properties  and  deferred  costs  until  the  receipts  are  in  excess  of  costs  incurred,  at  which  time  they  are  credited  to
income.  Option payments are at the discretion of the optionee, and accordingly, are recorded on a cash basis.
Exploration  and  evaluation  assets  are  assessed  for  impairment  if  (i)  sufficient  data  exists  to  determine  technical
feasibility  and  commercial  viability,  and  (ii)  facts  and  circumstances  suggest  that  the  carrying  amount  exceeds  the
recoverable amount.
Once the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the extraction of mineral resources in an area of interest are
demonstrable, exploration and evaluation assets attributable to that area of interest are first tested for impairment and
then reclassified to mining property and development assets within property, plant and equipment.
Recoverability  of  the  carrying  amount  of  any  exploration  and  evaluation  assets  is  dependent  on  successful
development and commercial exploitation, or alternatively, sale of the respective areas of interest.
Decommissioning, restoration and similar liabilities
67
The Company recognizes provisions for statutory, contractual, constructive or legal obligations associated with the
reclamation  of  mineral  properties  and  retirement  of  long-term  assets,  when  those  obligations  result  from  the
acquisition,  construction,  development  or  normal  operation  of  the  assets.    The  net  present  value  of  future  cost
estimates  arising  from  the  decommissioning  of  plant,  site  restoration  work  and  other  similar  retirement  activities  is
added to the carrying amount of the related asset, and depreciated on the same basis as the related asset, along with
a corresponding increase in the provision in the period incurred.  Discount rates using a pre-tax rate that reflect the
current market assessments of the time value of money are used to calculate the net present value.
The  Company’s  estimates  of  reclamation  costs  could  change  as  a  result  of  changes  in  regulatory  requirements,
discount  rates  and  assumptions  regarding  the  amount  and  timing  of  the  future  expenditures.    These  changes  are
recorded directly to the related asset with a corresponding entry to the provision.
Changes in the net present value, excluding changes in the Company’s estimates of reclamation costs, are charged to
profit or loss for the period.  The net present value of reclamation costs arising from subsequent site damage that is
incurred  on  an  ongoing  basis  during  production  are  charged  to  profit  or  loss  in  the  period  incurred.    The  costs  of
reclamation projects that were included in the provision are recorded against the provision as incurred.  The costs to
prevent and control environmental impacts at specific properties are capitalized in accordance with the Company’s
accounting policy for exploration and evaluation properties.
Share-based payments
Share-based payments to employees are measured at the fair value of the instruments issued and recognized over the
vesting  periods.    Share-based  payments  to  non-employees  are  measured  at  the  fair  value  of  goods  or  services
received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, if it is determined the fair value of the goods or services
cannot be reliably measured, and are recorded at the date the goods or services are received.  The corresponding
amount is recorded to the share-based payments reserve.
The fair value of options is determined using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model which incorporates all market
vesting conditions.  The number of shares and options expected to vest is reviewed and adjusted at the end of each
reporting period such that the amount recognized  for  services  received  as  consideration  for  the  equity  instruments
granted shall be based on the number of equity instruments that will eventually vest.
Taxation
Deferred tax is provided, using the liability method, on all temporary differences at the balance sheet date between the
tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred  tax  liabilities  are  generally  recognized  for  all  taxable  temporary  differences.    Deferred  tax  assets  are
generally recognized for all deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be
available  against  which  those  deductible  temporary  differences  can  be  utilized.    Such  deferred  tax  assets  and
liabilities are not recognized if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition (other than in
a business combination) of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the
accounting profit.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no
longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be
utilized.
68
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset
is realized or the liability is settled, based on the tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the
reporting date.
Financial assets
Financial assets are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”), held-to-maturity, loans
and  receivables,  available-for-sale  financial  assets,  or  as  derivatives  designated  as  hedging  instruments  in  an
effective  hedge,  as  appropriate.    The  Company  determines  the  classification  of  its  financial  assets  at  initial
recognition.  Financial assets are recognized initially at fair value.  The subsequent measurement of financial assets
depends on their classification as follows:
Financial assets at FVTPL
Financial  assets  are  classified  as  held  for  trading  and  are  included  in  this  category  if  acquired  principally  for  the
purpose of selling in the short term or if so designated by management.  Derivatives, other than those designated as
effective hedging instruments, are also categorized as held for trading.  These assets are carried at fair value with
gains  or  losses  recognized  in  profit  or  loss.    Transaction  costs  associated  with  financial  assets  at  FVTPL  are
expensed as incurred.  Cash and cash equivalents and share purchase warrants held in other companies are included
in this category of financial assets.
Held-to-maturity and loans and receivables
Held-to-maturity and loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments
that are not quoted in an active market.  Such assets are carried at amortized cost using the effective interest method if
the time value of money is significant.  Gains and losses are recognized in profit or loss when the financial asset
classified in this category are derecognized or impaired, as well as through the amortization process.  Transaction
costs  are  included  in  the  initial  carrying  amount  of  the  asset.    Amounts  receivables  are  classified  as  loans  and
receivables.
Available-for-sale
Available-for-sale  financial  assets  are  those  non-derivative  financial  assets  that  are  not  classified  as  loans  and
receivables.  After initial recognition, available-for-sale financial assets are measured at fair value, with gains or losses
recognized  within  other  comprehensive  income.    Accumulated  changes  in  fair  value  are  recorded  as  a  separate
component of equity until the investment is derecognized or impaired.  Transaction costs are included in the initial
carrying amount of the asset.  Available-for-sale assets include short term investments in equities of other entities.
The fair value is determined by reference to bid prices at the close of business on the reporting date.  Where there is
no active market, fair value is determined using valuation techniques.  Where fair value cannot be reliably measured,
assets are carried at cost.
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge
The Company does not hold or have any exposure to derivative instruments.
69
Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as financial liabilities at FVTPL, derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an
effective hedge, or as financial liabilities measured at amortized cost, as appropriate.  The Company determines the
classification of its financial liabilities at initial recognition.  The measurement of financial liabilities depends on their
classification, as follows:
Financial liabilities at FVTPL
Financial  liabilities  at  FVTPL  has  two  subcategories,  including  financial  liabilities  held  for  trading  and  those
designated by management on initial recognition.  Transaction costs on financial liabilities at FVTPL are expensed as
incurred.  These liabilities are carried at fair value with gains or losses recognized in profit or loss.
Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost
All other financial liabilities are initially recognized at fair value, net of transaction costs.  After initial recognition, other
financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method. Amortized cost is
calculated by taking into account any issue costs, and any discount or premium on settlement.  Gains and losses
arising  on  the  repurchase,  settlement  or  cancellation  of  liabilities  are  recognized  respectively  in  interest,  other
revenues and finance costs.  Trade payables are included in this category of financial liabilities.
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge
The Company does not hold or have any exposure to derivative instruments.
Impairment of financial assets
Financial assets, other than financial assets at FVTPL, are assessed for indicators of impairment at each period end.
Assets carried at amortized cost
If  there  is  objective  evidence  that  an  impairment  loss  on  assets  carried  at  amortized  cost  have  been  incurred,  the
amount  of  the  loss  is  measured  as  the  difference  between  the  asset’s  carrying  amount  and  the  present  value  of
estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate.  The carrying amount of
the asset is reduced, with the amount of the loss recognized in profit or loss.
If, in a subsequent period, the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to
an event occurring after the impairment was recognized, the previously recognized impairment loss is reversed to the
extent  that  the  carrying  value  of  the  asset  does  not  exceed  what  the  amortized  cost  would  have  been  had  the
impairment not been recognized.  Any subsequent reversal of an impairment loss is recognized in profit or loss.
Available-for-sale
If an available-for-sale financial asset is impaired, the cumulative loss previously recognized in equity is transferred to
profit  or  loss.    Any  subsequent  recovery  in  the  fair  value  of  the  asset  is  recognized  within  other  comprehensive
income.
70
Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
Financial assets are derecognized when the rights to receive cash flows from the assets expire or, the financial assets
are transferred and the Company has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the financial
assets.  On derecognition of a financial asset, the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the sum of the
consideration received and receivable and the cumulative gain or loss that had been recognized directly in equity is
recognized in profit or loss.
For financial liabilities, they are derecognized when the obligation specified in the relevant contract is discharged,
cancelled  or  expires.    The  difference  between  the  carrying  amount  of  the  financial  liability  derecognized  and  the
consideration paid and payable is recognized in profit or loss.
Impairment of non-financial assets
The carrying amount of the Company’s assets is reviewed for an indication of impairment at the end of each reporting
period.  If an indication of impairment exists, the Company makes an estimate of the asset’s recoverable amount. 
Individual assets are grouped for impairment assessment purposes at the lowest level at which there are identifiable
cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets.  Recoverable amount of an asset
group is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.  In assessing value in use, the estimated
future cash flows are adjusted for the risks specific to the asset group and are discounted to their present value using a
pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money.
Where the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its recoverable amount, the asset group is considered impaired
and is written down to its recoverable amount.  Impairment losses are recognized in profit or loss.
An  assessment  is  made  at  each  reporting  date  as  to  whether  there  is  any  indication  that  previously  recognized
impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased.  If such indication exists, the recoverable amount is
estimated.  A previously recognized impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimates used
to  determine  the  asset’s  recoverable  amount.    An  impairment  loss  is  reversed  only  to  the  extent  that  the  asset’s
carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation, if no
impairment loss had been recognized.
Flow-through shares
Any premium received by the Company on the issuance of flow-through shares is initially recorded as a liability and
included in trade payables and accrued liabilities.  Upon renouncement by the Company of the tax benefits associated
with the related expenditures, a deferred tax liability is recognized and the flow-through liability will be reversed.  To
the extent that suitable deferred tax assets are available, the Company will reduce the deferred tax liability and record
a deferred tax recovery.
Related party transactions
Parties  are  considered  to  be  related  if  one  party  has  the  ability,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  control  the  other  party  or
exercise  significant  influence  over  the  other  party  in  making  financial  and  operating  decisions.    Parties  are  also
considered to be related if they are subject to common control, related parties may be individuals or corporate entities. 
A  transaction  is  considered  to  be  a  related  party  transaction  when  there  is  a  transfer  of  resources  or  obligations
between related parties.
71
A.        Operating Results
The  following  discussion  and  analysis  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  Company’s  audited  consolidated
financial  statements  and  related  notes  thereto  included  herein.  The  Company’s  audited  consolidated  financial
statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS.
Unless  otherwise  noted,  all  currency  amounts  are  stated  in  Canadian  dollars.  The  following  table  summarizes
selected  financial  data  for  PFN  for  each  of  the  two  most  recently  completed  financial  years.    The  2013  and  2012
information set forth below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated audited financial statements, prepared
in accordance with IFRS, and related notes.
Total revenues
General and administrative expenses
Mineral property cash costs incurred
Income (loss) before other items in total
Net income (loss) from continuing operations in total
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – continued operations
Loss per share – Basic & fully diluted – discontinued operation
Total assets
Net assets
Total long term liabilities
Cash dividends declared
$
2013
16,605  $
1,886,717   
587,108   
(1,886,717)  
(2,341,609)  
(0.02)  
-   
9,999,021   
9,923,666   
Nil   
Nil
For the Years Ended 30 April (audited)
2012
33,134 
2,975,697 
3,351,736 
(2,975,697)
(4,987,597)
(0.05)
- 
13,200,115 
12,786,400 
Nil 
Nil
Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2013 Compared to Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2012
Results of operations
The  year  ended  30  April  2013  resulted  in  a  loss  from  operations  of  $2,341,609  which  compares  with  a  loss  of
$4,987,597 for the year ended 30 April 2013.  The decrease in loss of $2,645,988 was mainly attributable to net effect
of the following:
Decrease of $518,461 in write-down of exploration and evaluation properties.  Write-down of exploration and
evaluation properties of $585,915 for the year ended 30 April 2013 as compared to $1,104,376 for the same
period in 2012.
Decrease of $418,633 in loss on revaluation of share purchase warrants.  Loss on revaluation of share purchase
warrants of $132,631 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to $511,264 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $423,588 in loss on sale of short term investments.  $110,042 for the year ended 30 April 2013 as
compared to $533,630 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $330,441 in net loss from associate.  $103,664 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to
$434,105 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $226,562 in flow-through share income recognized.  Flow-through share income of $311,218 for the
year ended 30 April 2013 compared to $537,780 for the same period in 2012.
72
Decrease of $416,358 in share-based payment, because no stock options were issued during the current period.
Cost of $115,354 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to $531,712 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $289,937 in investor and shareholder relations.  Cost of $238,291 for the year ended 30 April 2013
compared to $528,228 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $160,926 in management fees due to no bonuses paid during the current period.  Cost of $271,412
for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to $432,338 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $124,926 in travel, lodging and food.  Cost of $72,344 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to
$197,270 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $82,993 in office and miscellaneous.  Cost of $91,559 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to
$174,552 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $33,077 in foreign exchange gain. $7,484 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to $40,561 for
the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $14,363 in accounting and audit fees.  Cost of $18,955 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared
to $33,318 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $25,728 in transfer agent and filing fees.  Cost of $50,686 for the year ended 30 April 2013
compared to $76,414 for the same period in 2012.
Increase of $63,738 in office rent expenses due to new office space. Cost of $128,969 for the year ended 30 April
2013 compared to $65,231 for the same period in 2012.
Decrease of $2,005 in insurance, licenses & fees. Cost of $44,623 for the year ended 30 April 2013 compared to
$46,628 for the same period in 2012.
Events Subsequent to Year Ended April 30, 2013
On 2 May 2013, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on the Nickel Plats and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM Project.
On 15 July 2013, the Company announced a non-brokered flow-through and non-flow-through private placement of up
to a combined 16,000,000 units for gross proceeds of up to $800,000.  Finder’s fees may be paid in connection with
this private placement, subject to regulatory approval.
Each flow-through unit (the “FT Unit”) at a price of $0.05 per FT Unit will consist of one common flow-through share
and  one-half  of  one  non-flow-through,  non-transferable,  share  purchase  warrant  (the  “Warrant”),  with  each  Warrant
entitling the holder to purchase one additional non-flow-through common share of the Company at a price of $0.10 per
share for a period of 12 months from the closing date.  The proceeds from the sale of the FT Units will be used for the
further development and exploration of the River Valley PGM Project and the exploration of the two large adjacent
properties.
73
Each non-flow-through unit (the “NFT Unit”) at a price of $0.05 per NFT Unit will consist of one common share and
one-half of one non-transferable Warrant, with each Warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share of the
Company at a price of $0.10 per share for a period of 12 months from the closing date.  The proceeds from the sale of
the NFT Units will be used as working capital and for funding other properties.
On 21 May 2013, 558,500 warrants with an exercise price of $0.32 and 243,250 warrants with an exercise price of
$0.30 expired
B.         Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s objectives are to safeguard the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in order to support
the Company’s normal operating requirements, continue the development and exploration of its mineral properties.
The Company is dependent upon external financing to fund its activities. In order to carry out the planned exploration
and to pay for general administration costs, the Company may issue new shares, issue new debt, acquire or dispose
of assets or adjust the amount of cash and cash equivalents.  The Company will continue to assess new properties
and seek to acquire an interest in additional properties if it feels there is sufficient geologic or economic potential and if
it has adequate financial resources to do so.
The Company is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.  There were no significant changes in the
Company’s approach or the Company’s objectives and policies for managing its capital.
Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2013 Compared to Twelve Months Ended April 30, 2012
During the year ended April 30, 2013, the Company’s working capital, defined as current assets less current liabilities,
was $1,637,523 compared with working capital of $4,570,797 at April 30, 2012.
The Company’s total issued and outstanding common shares at April 30, 2013, was 104,047,214 common shares.
The Company had a portfolio of investments with a book value of $1,791,786 and a market value of $586,964 as at
April 30, 2013.
C.        Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
As the Company is a mineral exploration company with no research and development, the information required by this
section is inapplicable.
D.        Trend Information
As  the  Company  is  a  mineral  exploration  company  with  no  producing  properties,  the  information  required  by  this
section is inapplicable.
E.         Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
F.         Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
74
The following table sets out the Company’s contractual commitments as of the latest financial year ended April 30,
2013:
Payments due by period
Contractual
Obligations(1)
Management
Agreement(2)
Rent and lease
payments
Total
Less than 1 yr
$
2-5 yrs
$
More than 5 yrs
$
Total
$
280,214
111,802
392,016
576,572
-
856,786
481,746
1,058,318
530,090
530,090
1,123,638
1,980,424
1)No mineral property payments or exploration expenditures are included in the above table as they are considered
option payments solely exercisable at the option of the Company.
2)as amended December 1, 2008 and again on April 1, 2011, the Company entered into a five-year management agreement with a Company
controlled by a director and Chairman.  Compensation is $20,833 per month for the first year, with a 5% increase on each anniversary date
plus benefits.  The Chairman and director is also entitled to receive up to 20% of the stock options granted during the period that the
agreement is in place.  This agreement is automatically renewable for two-year periods.  The Company may terminate the agreement at any
time but will be responsible to pay the greater of the remaining amount under the contract or two years’ compensation.
The  Company  has  a  management  agreement  with  CGR,  a  company  owned  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the
Company, effective 1 April 2012.
The Company has a sub-lease agreement with Next Gen and El Niño in which Next Gen and El Niño each pays 25%
of the total lease payments of the current office space at 650-555 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3X7.
Included in the long-term prepaid expenses is a deposit related to the current office space of $170,000 (30 April 2012 -
$Nil).
G.        Safe Harbor
The Company seeks safe harbor for our forward-looking statements contained in Items 5E and F.  See the heading
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
75
ITEM 6.          DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
A.        Directors and Senior Management
The following table states the name, province or state, and country of residence of each of the directors and executive
officers of the Company, the positions and offices presently held by them and the period or periods of time during
which each has served as a director of the Company. The directors named below were elected or re-elected by the
Company’s shareholders on September 7, 2012.
Name, Province and 
Country of Residence
Harry Barr
Vancouver, BC
Canada
Age
58
Position in the Company
Director, Chairman and CEO
Period(s) as a Director of
the Company
since 1996
Linda Holmes(1)(2)
Summerland, BC
Canada
John Londry(1) (2)
Stittsville, ON
Canada
Jordan Point(1)(2)
Vancouver, BC
Canada
Michael Neumann
Kingston, ON
William Stone
Burlington, ON
Canada
Robert Guanzon
Richmond, BC
Canada
John Oness
Maple Ridge, BC
Canada
Coreena Hansen
Coquitlam, BC
Canada
63
Director
since September 2007
68
Director
since February 2009
50
Director
since September 2007
Director
since September 2012
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
62
56
President and Chief Operating Officer
49
Chief Financial Officer
66
Senior Vice President, Business and
Corporate Development
39
Corporate Secretary
(1)
  (2)
Denotes member of Audit Committee.
Denotes member of Compensation Committee.
Business Experience, Function and Area of Experience for the Past Five Years
Harry Barr –Chairman, CEO and Director
Mr. Barr has been involved in the mining industry for over 25 years and has an extensive background in business
management, corporate finance, and marketing.
Mr. Barr is currently CEO, Chairman and a Director of the Company. (President from 1996 to September, 2011). CEO,
Chairman, President and Director of Next Gen Metals Inc. (September 2009 to present); Director, Chairman and CEO
of El Niño Ventures Inc. (from September 2009) and CEO, Chairman and Director of Southern Sun Minerals Inc. (June
2011 to present) and a director of Copper Reef Mining Corporation since June 3, 2011.
Mr. Barr previously served as President and Director of Fire River Gold Corp. (1997 – 2011); CEO of Fire River Gold
Corp. (2007 – 2011); Chairman & COO of CanAlaska Uranium Ltd. (2004- 2007); Director of CanAlaska (1985-2007);
Chairman of Freegold Ventures Limited (1999-2007); Director of Freegold Ventures Limited (1985–2007); CEO of El
Niño Ventures Inc. (2003 – 2007); Chairman of El Niño Ventures Inc. (2006-2007); and Director of El Niño Ventures
Inc. (1999–2007).
76
Linda Holmes – Director
Ms.  Holmes  has  been  a  Canadian  and  US  securities  compliance  consultant  to  public  companies,  and  companies
desiring to go public, since 1994, and has been involved in the mineral resource industry for over 25 years.
Ms. Holmes is currently a director (since  September  2007)  of  the  Company,  former  director  (November  2007-June
2012)  of  Fire  River  Gold  Corp.,  a  director  (since  August  2009)  of  Next  Gen  Metals  Inc.;  and  a  director  of  El  Niño
Ventures Inc. (since May 2010).
Ms. Holmes has been a director and/or officer of, and/or consultant to, numerous public companies including:  IGC
Resources Inc. (director: 2003 –2009, Corporate Secretary: 2000 –2009); Copper Mesa Mining Corporation (formerly
Ascendant  Copper  Corporation)  (director:  2005  -  2007);  Corporate  Secretary  and  manager  of  compliance:  (2005  –
2009).
John Londry – Director
Mr. Londry received his BSc and MSc degrees in Geology from the University of Windsor.  For over 35 years he has
been active in the mineral exploration and mining industry. Mr. Londry’s considerable experience encompasses both
grass roots and advanced stage exploration projects throughout Canada, the United States and South America.  He
has held senior positions with Camflo, Noranda Exploration, Hemlo Gold Mines and Battle Mountain Gold.  Mr. Londry
served as Vice President of Exploration (2004 – 2008) of Pacific North West Capital Corp.  Mr. Londry has been a
director of Next Gen Metals Inc. since January 12, 2011.
Jordan Point - Director
Mr.  Point  is  the  Executive  Director  of  the  First  Nations  Fisheries  Council  of  British  Columbia,  an  organization  that
acts at the intersection between the Federal department of Fisheries and Oceans, and the 203 First Nations in British
Columbia. He works closely with the leads of the Assembly of First Nations, the First Nations Summit and the Union of
BC Indian Chiefs (collectively known as the Leadership Council).  Mr. Point is also a long-term elected Councillor with
the  Musqueam  Indian  Band,  serving  his  local  community  since  1996,  with  portfolios  as  chair  of  the  Finance
Committee, Economic Development Committee and the Gateway construction initiative.
Mr.  Point  also  served  as  a  public  servant  for  15  years,  and  was  a  senior  Program  Manager  with  the  Federal
Government in Fisheries and Oceans, focused on Aboriginal Affairs, leading negotiations on annual allocations for
salmon, and financial contribution agreements with First Nation Bands with interim assignments to the litigation case
management unit and the treaty and Aboriginal Policy Unit for the Pacific Region.
Michael Neumann – Director
Mr.  Neumann  has  been  Proprietor  of  Neumann  Engineering  and  Mining  Services,  Inc.  since  1993  providing
international  engineering  services  focusing  primarily  on  underground  hard  rock  engineering  facets  such  as  mine
design,  productivity  improvements,  rock  mechanics,  second  opinions,  peer  reviews  and  other  types  of  studies.  Mr.
Neumann is a graduate of Haileybury School of Mines and Michigan Technological University (Mining Engineering
Degree)  a  member  of  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Mining,  the  International  Society  of  Rock  Mechanics  and  the
Association  of  Professional  Engineers  of  Ontario.  Concurrent  with  his  current  position,  from  2003  to  2006,  Mr.
Neumann was Director and Chief Operating Officer of Silver Eagle Mines Inc., (now Excellon Resources Inc.). Prior to
this  Mr.  Neumann  was  Co-  Founder  and  Director  of  the  Engineering  Seismology  Group  Inc.  based  in  Kingston,
Ontario.  His  early  industry  experience  includes  positions  of  Chief  Engineer  at  Campbell  Red  Lake  Mines  and
Underground Superintendent at Barrick's Holt McDermott Mine.
William Stone – President and Chief Operating Officer
77
William  Stone  was  appointed  to  President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  the  Company  in  September,  2011.    Dr.
Stone,  M.Sc  and  Ph.D,  Geology,  has  held  senior  positions  with  international  and  Canadian  mining  and  mineral
exploration  companies  based  in  Vancouver  and  Toronto  and  has  more  than  twenty-five  years  of  exploration
experience, including significant experience with platinum group metals (PGMs) and nickel-copper sulphides and a
wealth of technical and practical experience. He served as Principal Geologist and Vice President of Exploration with
several Canadian and Australian listed firms, including positions with WMC Resources Ltd. at Kambalda (Western
Australia).  Dr. Stone was also a Senior Lecturer in Economic Geology and Geochemistry at the University of Western
Australia  in  Perth.  Dr.  Stone  joined  the  Company  from  his  most  recent  position  as  Vice-President  of  Exploration,
Canada, for Magma Metals Ltd.  Previously he served as Vice President of Exploration for North American Palladium
Ltd.
Robert Guanzon – Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Guanzon is currently the Chief Financial Officer of the Company (2008 – present).  Prior to his appointment, Mr.
Guanzon was the accountant for the Company (2007 – 2008).  He was the accountant of RG properties Ltd. (1999 –
2007).  Mr. Guanzon is a Certified Public Accountant, Philippines and currently pursuing his designation as Certified
Management Accountant, Canada. Mr. Guanzon is also currently Chief Financial Officer of El Nino Ventures Inc. (2011
to present) and Next Gen Metals Inc. (2013-present).
John Oness – Senior Vice President, Business and Corporate Development
Mr. Oness has extensive experience and education in all aspects of corporate management with strengths in strategic
planning,  business  development  and  investor  relations  for  public  companies.    Mr.  Oness  is  a  director  and  Chief
Operating  Officer  (formerly  acting  Chief  Financial  Officer)  of  El  Nino  Ventures  Inc.  (2010  –  present)  and  Chief
Operating  Officer  (formerly  Vice-President,  Corporate  Business  Development),  of  Next  Gen  Metals  Inc.  (2010  –
present).
Mr. Oness has served as a director, executive and consultant to public companies in the resource and non-resource
fields over a 20 year career. He is a current director of Southern Sun Minerals Inc. (June 2011-present) and a former
director  of  Alix  Resources  Corp.  (2007  –  2009),  Sierra  Geothermal  Power  Corp.  (2004  –  2006)  and  Gatekeeper
Systems Inc.
Coreena Hansen – Corporate Secretary
Coreena Hansen was appointed to Corporate Secretary of the Company in October, 2011.  Ms. Hansen has over ten
years  experience  in  corporate  compliance  and  public  company  management.  She  has  significant  expertise  in  the
areas of corporate governance, financing transactions and securities regulatory filings. She currently also holds the
position of Corporate Secretary for El Nino Ventures Inc. and Next Gen Metals Inc. (2011 to present).
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between the directors and officers of the Company.
Other Relationships
Except as disclosed in Item 7B – Related Party Transactions, there are no arrangements or understandings between
any  major  shareholder,  customer,  supplier  or  others,  pursuant  to  which  any  of  the  above-named  persons  were
selected as directors or members of senior management.
Conflicts of Interest
Other than as disclosed in Item 3D(vii) – Risk Factors, Conflicts of Interest, there are no existing or potential conflicts of
interest among the Company, its directors, officers or promoters.
78
B.         Compensation
The  table  below  sets  forth  the  compensation  paid  to  or  earned  by  the  Company’s  members  of  its  administrative,
supervisory or management bodies during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013:
Salary
Year
Ended
Apr 30
2013 250,000
($)
Share-
based 
awards
Option-
based
awards
($)
Nil
($)
12,990
2013 176,000
Nil
46,237
Name
Harry Barr(1) 
CEO & Director
William Stone
Non-equity
incentive
plan
compensation
($)
Annual 
Incentive
Plans
Nil
Nil
Long-
term
Pension
All Other
Total
Incentive
value
Compensation
Compensation
Plans
Nil
Nil
($)
Nil
Nil
($)
38,876
12,519
($)
301,866
234,756
(2) President &
COO
Robert Guanzon 
CFO
John Oness 
Senior Vice
President 
Business &
Corporate 
Development
Ali
Hassanalizadeh(3)
Vice President 
Exploration
Coreena Hansen 
Corporate
Secretary
2013
84,000
Nil
3,314
2013
Nil
Nil
7,953
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
2013 109,338
Nil
3,424
Nil
Nil
Nil
2013
54,000
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
87,314
7,953
112,762
54,000
(1)      Mr.  Barr’s  salary  is  paid  through  Canadian  Gravity  Recovery  Inc.  (“CGR”),  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the
management contract between the Company and CGR (as set forth below under the heading “Termination Benefits”).
Pursuant to the terms of the management contract between the Company and CGR during the year ended April 30,
2013,  Mr.  Barr  received  a  benefit  in  the  amount  of  $38,876;  a  benefit  for  the  use  of  a  leased  vehicle  (of  which
approximately 40% of its use was for personal use) of $10,201;  $21,416 for disability/critical illness and life insurance,
and rent expensed of $7,259.  Subsequent to the year end on May 1, 2013, Mr. Barr agreed to a 50% reduction in
salary to $10,417 per month until such time the Company is in a more positive financial position. 
(2)      Mr.  Stone’s  salary  is  paid  pursuant  to  a  contract  with  the  Company,  as  set  forth  below  under  the  heading
“Termination Benefits.” Effective July 21, 2013, Dr. Stone’s Executive Management Agreement dated December 21,
2011 was terminated with notice by the Company and a new consulting agreement will be entered into.  Dr. Stone will
spend approximately 50% of his time on the Company’s business and continue as President and Chief Operating
Officer of the Company for a monthly fee of $12,500.00.  
(3)   Mr. Hassanalizadeh’s contract with the Company was terminated June 21, 2013.  His salary was paid pursuant to
a contract with the Company, as set forth below under the heading “Termination Benefits.”
Directors who are not members of the Company’s administrative, supervisory or management bodies are each entitled
to receive an annual retainer fee of $6,000, an additional $500.00 per meeting for attending directors’ meetings, and
may  be  reimbursed  for  actual  expenses  reasonably  incurred  in  connection  with  the  performance  of  their  duties  as
directors.
Compensation paid to or earned by the Company’s directors who were not members of its administrative, supervisory
or management bodies during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013 was as follows:
John Londry            $7,000
  Jordan Point            $7,000
  Linda Holmes          $7,000
  Michael Neumann    $3,500
  Dennis Hop(1)          $2,500
(1) Dennis Hop resigned as a director of the Company on September 6, 2012.
Stock Options Granted During the Fiscal Year Ended April 30, 2013
No  stock  options  were  granted  to  the  Company’s  directors  and  members  of  its  administrative,  supervisory  or
management bodies during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013:
79
C.        Board Practices
Term of Office
An election of directors takes place at each annual meeting of shareholders and all the directors then in office retire
but, if qualified, are eligible for re-election. A director retains office only until the election of his successor. The number
of  directors  to  be  elected  at  such  meeting  is  the  number  of  directors  then  in  office,  unless  the  directors  or  the
shareholders otherwise determine. The election is by ordinary resolution of shareholders. If an election of directors is
not held at the proper time, the incumbent directors continue in office until their successors are elected. Our last annual
general meeting was held on September 6, 2012.
Our articles also permit the directors to add additional directors to the board between annual general meetings as long
as the number appointed does not exceed one-third of the number directors elected at the last annual general meeting.
Individuals appointed as directors to fill casual vacancies created on the Board or added as additional directors hold
office like any other director until the next annual general meeting at which time they may be re-elected or replaced.
Our officers are appointed by the directors at a meeting following each annual general meeting.
Termination Benefits
The  Company  does  not  have  any  other  contracts  with  a  director  or  member  of  the  Company’s  administrative,
supervisory or management bodies which provides benefits upon termination of employment, other than as set forth
below:
Harry Barr was appointed the President and CEO of the Company on November 29, 1996.  Mr. Barr resigned as the
President of the Company on September 7, 2011 and continues as the Company’s Chairman, CEO and a director. 
Harry  Barr  is  indirectly  paid  for  his  services  as  CEO  and  general  corporate  and  management  consultant  to  the
Company through Canadian Gravity Recovery Inc. (“CGR”), which entered into a management agreement with the
Company dated December 1, 2005, as amended December 1, 2008, and April 1, 2011 (the “Contract”), for a term of
five  years.    Renewal  of  the  Contract  is  automatic  for  subsequent  two-year  periods  if  not  otherwise  terminated. 
Pursuant to the terms of the Contract, CGR is paid an annual base fee of $250,000.  Subsequent to the year end on
May 1, 2013, Mr. Barr agreed to a 50% reduction in salary to $10,417 per month until such time the Company is in a
more positive financial position.  CGR is entitled to receive additional bonuses, incentive fees, or other compensation
at the discretion of the Board.  Mr. Barr spends approximately 50% of his time on the Company’s business.
The base fee is reviewed every anniversary date with an annual increase negotiated between the parties; however if
the parties cannot agree within 30 days to an amendment of the base fee, the base fee is subject to an automatic
increase by the Cost of Living Index for the City of Vancouver, British Columbia, as published by the Canadian federal
government or by 5%, whichever is greater.  In addition, the Company pays for disability/critical illness insurance and
life  insurance  for  Mr.  Barr,  as  well  as  for  the  cost  of  a  leased  vehicle  of  up  to  $1,200  per  month.    All  reasonable
expenses incurred by CGR on behalf of the Company will be reimbursed by the Company.
The Company may terminate the agreement at any time by paying to CGR the greater of (i) the aggregate remaining
base fee for the unexpired remainder of the term of the Contract; or (ii) two annual base fees, each base fee multiplied
by 24, plus one month of base fee for each year, or portion thereof, served with the Company plus a buy-out of any
outstanding stock options at fair market value at the time of termination (the “Termination Fee”).  The Termination Fee
will be doubled in the event Mr. Barr is removed or not reappointed as an officer or Director of the Company without the
consent  of  CGR,  there  is  a  change  of  control  of  the  Board  or  the  Company  without  the  consent  of  CGR,  or  the
agreement is terminated or repudiated by the Company without due and proper cause or otherwise not in compliance
with its terms. The termination fee may be paid in whole or in part with common shares of the Company, at the election
of  CGR.    In  the  event  Mr.  Barr  is  unable  to  provide  adequate  services  to  the  Company  as  a  result  of  disability  or
otherwise, the Company will fund a disability plan through CGR for a period of three years at 75% of the average base
and incentive fees received for the two years preceding the cessation of services.
80
William Stone was appointed to President and Chief Operating Officer of the Company on September 7, 2011.  Dr.
Stone is paid directly for his services and spends approximately 60% of his time on the Company’s business.  Dr.
Stone entered into a formal Executive Management Agreement (the “Agreement”) with the Company on December 21,
2011.   Pursuant to the terms of this agreement, Dr. Stone is paid a base fee of $250,000.00 per year.  Dr. Stone is
eligible to earn an annual performance bonus based on a target of fifty percent (50%) of his base salary with payment
to be made in the form of 50% cash and 50% performance shares.  Performance criteria to be determined annually by
Stone, The Compensation Committee and the CEO based on a list of milestones rated out of 100%.  Each milestone
accomplished will earn Dr. Stone a set percentage of his performance bonus.
The Agreement may be terminated by either party without cause by giving the other party three (3) months written
notice of termination.  In the event that Dr. Stone provides notice, the Company is not obligated to provide severance. 
If the Company gives notice of termination during the first year, then Stone is entitled to an amount equal to three (3)
months’ base salary plus any and all leave and lieu days accrued to the date of termination plus any and all health and
insurance benefits for a period of three (3) months from the last date of employment..  In year two: four (4) month’s base
salary plus any and all leave and in lieu days accrued to the date of termination plus any and all health and insurance
benefits for a period of three (3) months from the last date of employment:  In year three:  five (5) month’s base salary
plus  any  and  all  leave  and  in  lieu  days  accrued  to  the  date  of  termination  plus  any  and  all  health  and  insurance
benefits for a period of three (3) months from the last date of employment: and; in year four:  six (6) month’s base salary
plus  any  and  all  leave  and  in  lieu  days  accrued  to  the  date  of  termination  plus  any  and  all  health  and  insurance
benefits for a period of three (3) months from the last date of employment.
In the event of termination without cause within one (1) year of a change of control, Dr. Stone is entitled to payment of
twelve (12) months base salary plus a lump sum cash payment equal to the sum of the value of all share option based
awards plus annual leave accrued as well as all other compensation payable to Dr. Stone.  Effective July 21, 2013, Dr.
Stone’s Executive Management Agreement dated December 21, 2011 was terminated with notice by the Company
and a new consulting agreement will be entered into.  Dr. Stone will spend approximately 50% of his time on the
Company’s  business  and  continue  as  President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  the  Company  for  a  monthly  fee  of
$12,500.00.
Ali  Hassanalizadeh  was  promoted  to  Vice  President,  Exploration  of  the  Company  in  December,  2011.    Mr.
Hassanalizadeh  is  paid  directly  for  his  services  and  spends  approximately  60%  of  his  time  on  the  Company’s
business.    Mr.  Hassanalizadeh’s  Executive  Management  Agreement  was  entered  into  on  March  30,  2012.    The
Agreement may be terminated by either without cause by give the other party (1) month written notice of termination of
employment.  In the event Mr. Hassanalizadeh provides notice, the Company is not obligated to provide severance.  If
the Company gives notice of termination then Hassanalizadeh is entitled to an amount equal to:  (1 ½) months base
salary plus any and all leave accrued to the date of termination in lieu of notice in the first year of employment:  (2) two
months base salary plus any and all leave accrued to the date of termination in lieu of notice for the second year of
employment:  and(3) three months base salary plus any all leave accrued to the date of termination in lieu of notice for
the third year of employment.  In the event of termination within one (1) year of a change of control termination without
cause, Mr. Hassanalizadeh is entitled to payment of twelve (12) months base salary.  Pursuant to the terms of this
agreement, Mr. Hassanalizadeh is paid a base fee of $140,000 per annum.  Mr. Hassanalizadeh is eligible to earn an
annual performance bonus based on a target of (15%) fifteen percent of his base salary.  Performance criteria to be
determined annually between Hassanalizadeh and the President and COO.  In addition, 150,000 performance shares
are allocated to Hassanalizadeh at $0.01.  The performance shares will vest over a period of five years at a rate of up
to 30,000 shares each year.  The amount of performance shares vested each year may be subject to adjustment based
on an evaluation of performance by the President, CEO and Compensation Committee who will determine the level of
achievement attained by Hassanalizadeh in meeting established milestones based on a list of milestones rated out of
100%.    Each  milestone  accomplished  will  earn  Hassanalizadeh  a  set  percentage  of  his  performance  bonus.  Mr.
Hassanalizadeh’s agreement was terminated with notice by the Company subsequent to the year end on June 21,
2013.  He remains in an advisory capacity to the Company.
81
Committees
Audit Committee
The  Company’s  Audit  Committee  must  be  comprised  of  at  least  three  directors,  who  are  not  employees,  control
persons or members of the management of the Company or any of its associates or affiliates.  As of the date of this
report, the following directors are members of the Audit Committee:  Jordan Point, Chairman of the Audit Committee,
Linda Holmes and John Londry.  The Board of Directors of the Company, after each annual shareholder’s meeting
must appoint or re-appoint an audit committee.
The Audit Committee:
-    assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities for oversight of financial and accounting matters;
-    recommends the auditors to be nominated and reviews the compensation of the auditors;
-    is directly responsible for overseeing the work of the external auditors and pre-approves non-audit services;
-    reviews the Company’s financial statements and related management’s discussion and analysis of financial and
operating results; and
-        establishes  procedures  for  the  receipt,  retention  and  treatment  of  complaints  regarding  accounting,  internal
accounting controls or auditing matters.
The Audit Committee’s mandate requires that all of the members be financially literate and at least one member have
accounting or related financial management expertise.
The mandate of the Committee empowers it to retain legal, accounting and other advisors.
Compensation Committee
As at April 30, 2013, the Compensation Committee was comprised of three directors: Linda Holmes, Chairman of the
Compensation  Committee,  Jordan  Point  and  John  Londry.  The  majority  of  the  Compensation  Committees  is  to  be
comprised of a majority of directors, who are not employees, control persons or members of the management of the
Company or any of its associates or affiliates
The primary purpose of the Compensation Committee is to:
-     recommend levels of executive compensation that are competitive in order to attract, motivate and retain highly
skilled and experienced executive officers;
-     provide fair and competitive compensation;
-     align the interest of management with those of shareholders and to reward corporate and individual performance;
-     review executive compensation disclosure in public disclosure documents
The  Compensation  Committee  does  not  have  a  formal  compensation  program  with  set  benchmarks;  however,  the
Compensation Committee does have an informal program which seeks to reward an executive officer’s current and
future  expected  performance  and  the  achievements  of  corporate  milestones  and  align  the  interests  of  executive
officers with the interests of the Company’s shareholders.
The  Compensation  Committee,  when  determining  cash  compensation  to  the  executive  officers,  it  takes  into
consideration the extensive experience in the mining industry, responsibilities and duties as executive officers, as well
as  personal  risks  and  contributions  to  the  Company’s  success.    The  executive  officers  receive  a  base  cash
compensation that the Company feels is in line with that paid by similar companies in North America; however no
formal survey has been completed by the Compensation Committee or the Board in making such a determination.
82
D.        Employees
During  the  fiscal  year  ended  April  30,  2013,  the  Company  had  10  full-time  employees,  located  in  the  Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada offices of the Company, involved in accounting, administration, IT, and investor relations. 
Other services are carried out by consultants.
We do not currently have a collective bargaining arrangement with any labour union or association.
E.         Share Ownership
The following table sets forth the share ownership of those individuals in Item 6.A, Directors and Senior Management,
above and indicates the percentage of ownership for each based on the 104,047,214 common shares outstanding of
the Company as at July 15, 2013. The voting rights attached to the common shares owned by our directors, officers
and  senior  management  do  not  differ  from  those  voting  rights  attached  to  shares  owned  by  people  who  are  not
directors, officers or senior management of the Company.
83
Stock Options
Total
number
of securities
and
common
shares
underlying
unexercised
Stock
Options
and
Common 
Shares
Beneficially
unexercised
Owned
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
warrants
Nil
4,282,913(5)
warrants
5,562,913
Percentage
of Issued
and
Outstanding
Common 
Shares
5.35%
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
600,000
0.58%
35,291
235,291
0.23%
366,666
966,666
0.99%
13,334
293,334
0.28%
Nil
N/A
N/A
28,334
333,334
0.32%
640,000
920,000
0.88%
15,714
265,714
0.26%
Nil
10,000
290,000
0.28%
Number of 
securities
underlying
unexercised
options
(#)
260,000(1)
490,000 (2)
340,000(3)
190,000(4)
Option 
exercise
price
($)
0.25 
 0.30 
 0.25 
 0.25
Option
expiration
date
May 18/17 
Feb 24/16
Nov 5/14 
Apr 22/14
600,000
0.27
Sept 7/16
125,000 
75,000
300,000 
300,000
0.30 
 0.25
0.30
 0.25
Feb 24/16 
Apr 22/14
Feb 24/16 
Feb 1/16
80,000 
100,000 
100,000
Nil
100,000 
125,000 
80,000
100,000 
100,000 
80,000
40,000 
100,000 
75,000 
35,000
100,000
100,000
80,000
0.30
 0.25 
 0.50
N/A
0.25 
 0.30 
 0.25
0.25
 0.30 
 0.25
0.25
 0.30
 0.25
 0.25
0.25 
 0.30 
 0.25
Feb 24/16
Jan 5/15
Jan 5/15
N/A
Oct 11/17
Feb 24/16
Apr 22/14
Oct 29/17 
Feb 24/16 
Apr 22/14
May 18/17 
Feb 24/16 
Nov 5/14 
Apr 22/14
Oct 11/17 
Feb 24/16 
Apr 22/14
Name & Title
Harry Barr 
CEO & Director
William Stone
President & COO
Robert Guanzon 
CFO
John Oness 
Senior Vice
President, 
Business &
Corporate 
Development
Ali(6)
Vice President, 
Exploration
Coreena Hansen
Corporate
Secretary
Linda Holmes 
Director
Dennis Hop(7)
Director
John Londry
Director
Jordan Point 
Director
Michael
Neumann
Director
TOTAL
Nil
N/A
N/A
4,075,000
Nil
Nil
Nil
N/A
N/A
5,392,252
9,467,252
9.10%
(1)Of this total 100,000 options are held by Mr. Barr; 80,000 are held by The Public Company Coach Inc and 80,000
are held by Canadian Gravity Recovery Inc. (“CGR”), both private companies wholly-owned by Mr. Barr.
Held by Mr. Barr.
(2)
(3) Of this total 170,000 options are held by Mr. Barr and 170,000 are held by CGR.
(4) These options are held by 293020 BC Ltd., a private company wholly-owned by Mr. Barr.
(5)Of this total, 2,005,813 common shares are held directly by Mr. Barr; 1,462,000 are held by 293020 BC Ltd.; 97,000
are held by 607767 BC Ltd., a private company wholly-owned by Mr. Barr; 718,100 are held by CGR.
Former Vice President, Exploration to June 21, 2013.
(6)
(7)Former Director to September 6, 2012.  Mr. Hop’s stock options were cancelled effective December 6, 2012.
84
The stock options granted to directors have been granted at an exercise price at least equal to or greater than the
closing price of the Company’s common shares on the TSX as at the date of grant.  Options are typically granted for a
period of five years and have a vesting period as determined by the Board.
As at July 15, 2013, our directors, officers and senior management held, as a group, directly or indirectly, an aggregate
of 5,392,252 common shares; 3,520,666 options exercisable within 60 days and no warrants exercisable within 60
days.
Stock Option Grants
The stock option grants to directors, officers, other employees and consultants are determined by an assessment of the
individual’s  current  and  expected  future  performance,  level  of  responsibilities,  importance  of  the  position  held,
contribution to the Company and previous option grants and exercise prices including:
-    the  remuneration  paid  to  the  individual  as  at  the  grant  date  in  relation  to  the  total  remuneration  payable  by  the
Company to all of its directors, officers, employees and consultants as at the grant date;
-  the length of time that each individual has been employed or engaged by the Company; and
-  the quality of work performed by such director, officer, employee or consultant.
The fair value of stock options is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes pricing model. The following
assumptions were used in the fair value calculation for options granted and/or vested during the year ended April 30,
2013:
Risk-free interest rate
Options expected life
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
-%
0 years
-%
Nil
Description of Existing Incentive and Stock Compensation Plans
The  Company  has  three  existing  incentive  and  stock  compensation  plans  the  2004  Plan,  the  2005  Plan  and  a
Performance Share Plan (all as defined below), all of which have been previously approved by the shareholders of the
Company and by the TSX. These plans are detailed below and are maintained separate and apart from each other.
(a)  Following is a summary of the substantive terms of the 2004 Stock Option Plan:
The Company’s 2004 stock option plan, as amended August 23, 2004 (the “2004 Plan”) provides that the aggregate
number of shares of the Company that may be issued shall not exceed 6,324,200 shares.  As at April 30, 2013, there
are 1,180,366 stock options outstanding under the 2004 Plan which represents 1.13% of the Company’s 104,047,214
issued and outstanding shares.  All allowable options have been granted under the 2004 Plan. The 2004 Plan shall
remain in effect only until all outstanding options have been exercised, cancelled or have expired.
If a participant ceases to be a director, officer, consultant or employee of the Company or ceases to be employed by
the Company (other than by reason of disability, death or termination for cause), as the case may be, then the option
granted shall expire on no later than the 90th day following the date that the option holder ceases to be a director,
officer, consultant, or employee or ceases to be employed by the Company, subject to terms and conditions set out in
the 2004 Plan. In the event of death of a participant, the option previously granted to him/her shall be exercisable only
within the twelve months next succeeding such death.
(b)  Following is a summary of the substantive terms of the 2005 Plan:
The Company’s 2005 Stock Option and Incentive Plan dated August 24, 2005 (the “2005 Plan”) provides that the
aggregate number of shares of the Company that may be issued under the 2005 Plan shall not exceed 10% of the
issued and outstanding capital of the Company, as such may be from time-to-time.  As at April 30, 2013, of the
10,404,721 options allowable for grant under the 2005 Plan, options to purchase up to 4,237,634 common shares
have been granted, representing 4% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares.
Details of this plan are indicated below:
85
1.The 2005 Plan is administered by the Board or by a committee appointed by the Board in accordance with terms of
the 2005 Plan.
2.The 2005 Plan shall terminate at 4:00 PM of the next business day following March 31, 2015 (the “Termination
Date”).  No incentive under the 2005 Plan may be granted after the Termination Date, but the terms of an incentive
agreement may extend beyond the Termination Date in accordance with the terms of the agreement but that no
agreement may provide for a period in excess of ten years.
3.Subject to the provisions of the 2005 Plan, the Board shall have the authority in its discretion to:  (i) to grant Incentive
Awards (as such term is defined under the 2005 Plan) to Participants (as such term is defined under the 2005 Plan);
(ii) to determine, upon review of relevant information and in accordance with Section 2.16 of the 2005 Plan, the Fair
Market Value (as such term is defined under the 2005 Plan) of the shares of the Company; (iii) to determine the
exercise price per share of Incentive Awards (as such term is defined under the 2005 Plan) to be granted; (iv) to
determine the number of common shares to be represented by each Incentive Award; (v) to determine the
Participants to whom, and the time or times at which Incentive Awards shall be granted; (vi)  to determine
Management objectives; (vii) to interpret the 2005 Plan; (viii) to prescribe, amend and rescind rules and regulations
relating to the 2005 Plan; (ix) to determine the terms and provisions of each Incentive Award granted (which need
not be identical); (x) with the consent of the grantee thereof, to modify or amend Incentive Awards; (xi) to accelerate
or defer (with the consent of the grantee) the exercise date of any Incentive Award; (xii) to authorize any person to
execute on behalf of the Company any instrument required to effectuate the grant of an Incentive Award; (xiii) to
accept or reject the election as to method of payment made by a grantee pursuant to Section 7.5 of the 2005 Plan;
(xiv) to permit other Incentives to employ payment elections, such as net exercise, of Section 7.5 of the 2005 Plan;
(xv) to create and implement new and innovative Incentives acceptable under law and policy and grant the same to
eligible Participants and (xvi) to take all other acts and make all other determinations deemed necessary or
advisable by the Board for the administration of the 2005 Plan.
4.No individual may receive incentive grants exceeding 5% of issued and outstanding capital of the Company, unless
specifically authorized by the Board and permitted by applicable laws and exchange policies.
5.Unless otherwise provided in the option agreement, the term of each option shall be five (5) years from the date of
grant.
6.Payment for shares shall be paid by cash, in the form of currency or cheque or other cash equivalent acceptable to
the Company, non-forfeitable, unrestricted or restricted common shares, which are already owed by the optionee
and have an aggregate market reference value at the time of exercise that is equal to the option price or any other
legal consideration that the Board may deem appropriate, including without limitation any form of consideration
authorized pursuant to Section 7 of the 2005 Plan.
7.The Board in its sole discretion may permit a cashless exercise of the option.  In the event of a cashless exercise of
the option, the Company shall issue the option holder the number of shares determined as follows:
X = Y (A-B) / A
X = the number of shares to be issued to the option holder.
Y = the number of shares with respect to which the option is being exercised.
A = the market price of the common stock prior to the date of exercise.
B = the exercise price
86
8.The 2005 Plan may be amended by the Board at any time, without shareholder approval subject to the following
amendments requiring shareholder approval, as required by law or TSX policies:  an increase in the fixed
percentage of shares subject to the 2005 Plan; and any change in the definition of Participant.
9.The Board may make amendments such as repricing and extending non-insider options.  If required by TSX policy
to which the Company is subject, repricing or extension of Incentive Awards to insiders shall require shareholder
approval.
10.Subject to applicable laws and TSX policies, the Board may, in its discretion, assist any Participant in the exercise
of awards under the 2005 Plan by authorizing the Company to provide a loan to the Participant (not to exceed the
exercise price plus tax liability incurred in connection therewith), permitting the Participant to pay the exercise price
in instalments, authorizing the Company to guarantee a loan obtained by the Participant from a third party, or
granting a cash bonus to the Participant to enable the Participant to pay tax obligations arising from an award.  Any
such loans may be forgiven by the Company at the discretion of the Board.
(c)
Previously Approved Performance Shares
In 2003 and 2004, the shareholders approved the issuance of an aggregate of 2,697,990 nominal value performance
shares (1,116,940 in 2003; 1,581,050 in 2004).  These performance shares are separate from any performance
shares that may be issued under the 2005 Plan.
As at April 30, 2012, 850,000 of these performance shares have been issued and 750,000 performance shares that
have been allotted are outstanding.  As at July 18, 2012, the 2,697,990 performance shares represent 2.59% of the
Company’s issued and outstanding shares.
These performance shares have been and shall be issued at the discretion of the Board to such arm’s length parties
as the Board considers desirable to attract to the Company due to their particular expertise, management experience,
operations experience, financial capacity, industry profile or other such characteristics.  Vesting provisions have been
and may be imposed at the discretion of the Board at the date of issuance.  The value of the performance shares shall
be determined by the Board in its sole discretion at the date of issuance.  The total number of performance shares
granted to any one individual may not exceed 5% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares at the date of
issuance.
87
ITEM 7. MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS
A.        Major Shareholders
Based upon the Company’s review of the records maintained by Computershare Investor Services and insider reports
filed  with  the System for Electronic Disclosure by Insiders  (SEDI),  as  at  July  15,  2013,  the  following  shareholders
beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, or exercised control or direction over, shares carrying more than 5% of the
voting rights attached to all outstanding common shares of the Company:
Shareholder Name And Address
CDS & Company
25 The Esplanade
Toronto, Ontario, M5E 1W5
Canada
Kaymin Resources Limited(2)
2th Floor, 55 Marshall Street,
Johannesburg 2001
South Africa
Stillwater Mining Company
1321 Discovery Drive
Billings, Montana 59102
USA
Number Of Shares Held
Percentage Of Issued Shares
86,189,521(1)
82.84%
8,117,161
5,750,692
7.80%
5.53%
(1) CDS & Co. is a depository, the Company has no knowledge as to the beneficial ownership of these shares.
(2) Kaymin Resources Ltd. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Anglo Platinum Limited of South Africa.
As of July 15, 2013, Computershare Trust Company of Canada, our registrar and transfer agent, reported that we had
104,047,214 common shares issued and outstanding. Of those common shares, 88,433,428 common shares were
registered  to  Canadian  residents  (51  shareholders);  7,384,625  common  shares  were  registered  to  residents  of  the
United States (17 shareholders); and 8,229,161 common shares were registered to residents of other foreign countries
(4 shareholders).
To the best of our knowledge, we are not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another corporation, by any
foreign government or by any other natural or legal person.
There are no arrangements known to us, the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a
change in the control of our company.
The major shareholders do not have different voting rights from all shareholders.
B.         Related Party Transactions
Other than as disclosed below or elsewhere in this annual report, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no
material transactions or loans from the commencement of our 2013 fiscal year to the date of this annual report between
our company and: (a) enterprises that directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, control or are controlled
by, or are under common control with, the Company; (b) associates; (c) individuals owning, directly or indirectly, an
interest  in  the  voting  power  of  the  Company  that  gives  them  significant  influence  over  the  Company,  and  close
members  of  any  such  individual's  family;  (d)  key  management  personnel  of  the  Company,  including  directors  and
senior management of the Company and close members of such individuals' families; and (e) enterprises in which a
substantial interest in the voting power is owned, directly or indirectly, by any person described in (c) or (d) or over
which such a person is able to exercise significant influence.
The Company's Board consists of Harry Barr, John Londry, Linda Holmes, Jordan Point and Michael Neumann.  Harry
Barr is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Company, William Stone is the President and Chief Operating
Officer,  Robert  Guanzon  is  the  Chief  Financial  Officer,  John  Oness  is  the  Senior  Vice  President,  Business  and
Corporate Development, and Coreena Hansen is the Corporate Secretary.
The Company paid or accrued amounts to related parties as follows:
88
Management fees paid to a company controlled by Mr. Harry Barr(1)
Consulting fees paid to a company controlled by Mr. John Londry(2)
2013
249,996
2012
428,694
2011
200,071
-
6,600
18,658
Consulting fees paid to Ms. Linda Holmes(3)
Consulting fees paid to a company controlled by Mr. John Oness(4)
Consulting fees and salaries paid to Mr. Ali Hassanalizadeh(5)
Director fees paid/accrued to Ms. Linda Holmes(6)
Director fees paid/accrued to Mr. Denny Hop(7)
Director fees paid/accrued to Mr. John Londry(6)
Director fees paid/accrued to Mr. Jordan Point(6)
Director fees paid/accrued to Mr. Michael Neumann(6)
NOTES:
-
105,000
109,338
7,000
2,500
7,000
7,000
3,500
36,628
63,000
102,534
3,000
8,500
8,500
9,000
-
47,000
72,500
59,268
-
7,000
8,500
8,000
-
Director and CEO of the Company
Former Vice President of Exploration
Former Corporate Secretary of the Company
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4) Vice President of Corporate & Business Development
(5)
(6)
(7)
Former Vice President of Exploration
Director of the Company
Former Director of the Company
These transactions, occurring in the normal course of operations, are measured at the exchange amount which is the
amount of consideration established and agreed to by the related parties.
C.        Interests of Experts and Counsel
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
ITEM 8.          FINANCIAL INFORMATION
A.        Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
The  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Company  and  the  accompanying  notes  have  been  prepared  in
accordance with  International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) and International Accounting Standards (“IAS”)
issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“IASB”)  and  interpretations  of  the  International  Financial
Reporting Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC”).
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2013 are prepared on a consolidated basis and
include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned US subsidiaries, Pacific North West Capital Corp. USA
and  Pacific  North  West  Capital  de  México,  S.A.  de  C.V.  on  the  basis  that  the  Company  owned  and  effectively
controlled a 100% interest in these companies.
This annual report contains the consolidated financial statements for the Company for the fiscal year ended April 30,
2013 which contains:
-  Report of the Independent Auditor dated July 22, 2013
-  Consolidated statements of financial position as at April 30, 2013 and April 30, 2012.
-  Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.
89
-  Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.
-  Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.
-  Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Legal Proceedings and Regulatory Actions
During  the  fiscal  year  ended  April  30,  2013,  the  Company  was  not  and  is  not  current  a  party  to,  nor  is  any  of  its
property  the  subject  of,  any  legal  proceedings  for  which  the  outcome  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the
Company, nor, to the Company’s knowledge, is the Company to be a party to any contemplated legal proceedings, the
outcome of which could have a material adverse effect on the Company.
There have been no penalties or sanctions imposed against the Company by a court relating to securities
legislation or by a securities regulatory authority during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013, or any other time that
would likely be considered important to a reasonable investor making an investment decision in the Company, and the
Company has not entered into any settlement agreements before a court relating to securities legislation or with a
securities regulatory authority during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2013.
Dividend Distributions
Holders of our common shares are entitled to receive such dividends as may be declared from time to
time by the Board, in its discretion, out of funds legally available for that purpose. The Company has not, since the date
of  its  incorporation,  declared  or  paid  any  dividends  on  its  common  shares  and  does  not  currently  intend  to  pay
dividends.  Earnings will be retained to finance further exploration.
B.         Significant Changes
No significant change has occurred since the date of the annual audited consolidated financial statements included in
this Annual Statement.
ITEM 9.          THE OFFER AND LISTING
A.        Offer and Listing Details
TSX Exchange – symbol “PFN”
The annual high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company on the TSX Exchange for each of the
last five (5) completed financial years are as follows:
Year Ended
May 2012- April 2013
May 2011 – April 2012
May 2010 – April 2011
May 2009 – April 2010
May 2008 – April 2009
High
0.14
0.38
0.36
0.245
0.35
Low
0.05
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.05
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company on the TSX Exchange for each full financial
quarter for the two (2) most recently completed full financial years are as follows:
Year Ended
April 30, 2013
1st Quarter ended July 2012
2nd Quarter ended October 2012
3rd Quarter ended January 2013
4th Quarter ended April 2013
Year Ended
April 30, 2012
High
0.14
0.10
0.07
0.07
Low
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.05
High
Low
90
1st Quarter ended July 2011
2nd Quarter ended October 2011
3rd Quarter ended January 2012
4th Quarter ended April 2012
0.38
0.34
0.20
0.17
0.25
0.16
0.10
0.10
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company on the TSX Exchange for the most recent six
(6) months are as follows:
Month Ended
June 2013
May 2013
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
High
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
Low
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company on the TSX Exchange on the first trading day
of each month in the most recent six months:
Month Ended
June 2013
May 2013
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
High
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.05
Low
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
On April 30, 2013 the closing sale price of the common shares on the TSX was $0.05 per share.
OTC Markets Group, Inc.’s OTC Bulletin Board (“OTCBB”) and OTCQX International (“OTCQX”)
Since  August  31,  2001,  the  common  shares  of  the  Company  have  been  quoted  on  the  OTCBB  under  the  symbol
“PAWEF”.  On October 26, 2010, the Company moved up to the OTCQX platform, the premier tier of the U.S. Over-the-
Counter marketplace.  The same symbol of PAWEF applies to the OTCQX.
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company for the five (5) most recent full financial years:
Year Ended
May 2012-April 2013
May 2011 – April 2012
May 2010 – April 2011
May 2009 – April 2010
May 2008 – April 2009
High
0.13
0.39
0.415
0.239
0.35
Low
0.04
0.10
0.07
0.071
0.05
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company for each full financial quarter for the two (2)
most recently completed financial years:
Year Ended
April 30, 2013
1st Quarter ended July 2012
2nd Quarter ended October 2012
3rd Quarter ended January 2013
High
0.13
0.10
0.08
Low
0.05
0.06
0.04
4th Quarter ended April 2013
0.07
0.04
91
Year Ended
April 30, 2012
1st Quarter ended July 2011
2nd Quarter ended October 2011
3rd Quarter ended January 2012
4th Quarter ended April 2012
High
0.39
0.35
0.18
0.17
Low
0.27
0.15
0.10
0.11
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company for the most recent six (6) months:
Month Ended
June 2013
May 2013
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
High
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
Low
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.04
The high and low market prices for the common shares of the Company for the first trading day of each month in the
most recent six months:
Month Ended
June 2013
May 2013
April 2013
March 2013
February 2013
January 2013
High
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05
Low
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.05
On April 30, 2013 the closing sale price of the common shares on the OTCQX was $0.04per share.
B.         Plan of Distribution
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
C.        Markets
The Company’s common shares have traded on the TSX (and its predecessors, the Canadian Venture Exchange and
the Vancouver Stock Exchange) since December 19, 1997 under the trade symbol “PFN”; the Company’s common
shares have been quoted on the OTCBB from August 31, 2001 and on the OTCQX since October 26, 2010, under the
trade symbol PAWEF; and on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, Open Market under the symbol P7J.
D.        Selling Shareholders
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
E.         Dilution
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
F.         Expense of the Issue
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
92
ITEM 10.        ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A.        Share Capital
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
B.         Memorandum and Articles of Association
Articles
The  Company’s  Articles  of  Association  and  Memorandum  are  registered  with  the  British  Columbia  Registrar  of
Companies under corporation number C0699625. A copy of these Articles of Association and Memorandum were filed
as an exhibit with the Company’s initial registration statement on Form 20‑F.
The  Company  was  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the Business  Corporations  Act  (Alberta)  on  May  29,
1996.  The Company amended its Articles by certificate of amendment dated October 22, 1997 to remove the private
company restrictions.  On July 13, 2004 the Company continued out of the Province of Alberta into the Province of
British Columbia, and amended its Articles, pursuant to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (“BCBCA”).
Objects and Purposes
Under the BCBCA we are permitted to conduct any lawful business that we are not restricted from conducting by our
Articles, which does not contain any restriction on the business the Company may conduct.
Director’s Powers to Vote on a Proposal, Arrangement or Contract in which the Director is Materially Interested
The BCBCA requires that every director who is a party to, or who is a director or officers of, or has a material interest
in, any person who is a party to, a material contract or transaction or a proposed material contract or transaction with
the Company, must disclose in writing to the Company or request to have entered into the minutes of the meetings of
directors, the nature and extent of his or her interest and must refrain from voting on the matter; however, the BCBCA
states that:
1.A director or senior officer of the Company does not hold a disclosable interest in a contract or transaction if:
(a)the situation that would otherwise constitute a disclosable interest arose before the coming into force of the
BCBCA, or the interest was disclosed and approved under, or was not required to be disclosed under legislation
that applied to the Company before the coming into effect of the BCBCA;
(b)both the Company and the other party to the contract or transaction are wholly-owned subsidiaries of the same
corporation;
(c) the Company is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the other party to the contract or transaction;
(d) the other party to the contract or transaction is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company; or
(e)the director or senior officer is the sole shareholder of the Company or of a corporation of which the Company is a
wholly-owned subsidiary; and
2.a director or senior officer of a company does not hold a disclosable interest in a contract or transaction merely
because:
(a)the contract or transaction is an arrangement by way of security granted by the Company for money loaned to, or
obligations undertaken by, the director or senior officer, or a person in whom the director or senior officer has a
material interest, for the benefit of the company or an affiliate of the company,
(b)
the contract or transaction relates to an indemnity or insurance,
93
(c)the contract or transaction relates to the remuneration of the director or senior officer in that person's capacity as
director, officer, employee or agent of the company or of an affiliate of the company,
(d)the contract or transaction relates to a loan to the company, and the director or senior officer, or a person in whom
the director or senior officer has a material interest, is or is to be a guarantor of some or all of the loan, or
(e)the contract or transaction has been or will be made with or for the benefit of a corporation that is affiliated with the
Company and the director or senior officer is also a director or senior officer of that corporation or an affiliate of that
corporation.
Director’s Power, in the Absence of an Independent Quorum, to Vote Compensation to Themselves or any
Members of their Body
The compensation of the directors is decided by the directors unless the Board of Directors requests approval of the
compensation from the shareholders.  If the issuance of compensation to the directors is decided by the directors, a
quorum is the majority of the directors in office.
Indemnification of Directors
Under 15.1 of the Company’s Articles, the directors must cause the Company to indemnify its directors and former
directors, and their respective heirs and personal or other legal representatives to the greatest extent permitted by the
BCBCA.  Under the BCBCA, the Company will be prohibited from paying an indemnity if:
(a) the party did not act honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the Company;
(b)the proceeding was not a civil proceeding and the party did not have reasonable grounds for believing that his or
her conduct was lawful; and
(c) the proceeding is brought against the party by the Company or an associated corporation.
Borrowing Powers of Directors
Under 6.1 of the Company’s Articles, the directors may from time to time on behalf of the Company:
(a)borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and on the terms and conditions that
they consider appropriate,
(b)issued bonds, debentures and other debt obligations either outright or as security for any liability of obligation of the
Company or any other person,
(c)guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any obligation of any other person,
and
(d)mortgage or charge, whether by way of specific or floating charge, or give other security on the whole or any part of
the present and future undertaking of the Company.
The borrowing powers may be varied by amendment to the Articles of the Company which requires approval of the
shareholders of the Company by special resolution.
Retirement or Non-Retirement of Directors
There are no such provisions applicable to the Company under the Notice of Articles, Articles or the BCBCA nor does
the Board have any mandatory retirement policy for directors.
Directors’ Share Ownership
A director of the Company is not required to hold any common shares in the capital of the Company as qualification for
his/her office.
94
Rights, Preferences and Restrictions for each Class of Shares
Dividends
The Company’s Articles provide that holders of our common shares are entitled to receive such dividends as may be
declared from time to time by the Board, in its discretion, out of funds legally available for that purpose. The Company
has  not,  since  the  date  of  its  incorporation,  declared  or  paid  any  dividends  on  its  common  shares  and  does  not
currently intend to pay dividends.  Any dividend declared by the directors may be made payable on such date as is
fixed by the directors.
Rights
The  Company  has  only  one  class  of  shares,  common  shares  without  par  value.  All  of  the  common  shares  of  the
Company rank equally as to voting rights, participation in a distribution of the assets of the Company on a liquidation,
dissolution or winding-up of the Company and the entitlement to dividends.  The holders of the common shares are
entitled to receive notice of all shareholder meetings and to attend and vote at such meetings.  Each common share
carries with it the right to one vote.  The common shares do not have preemptive or conversion rights.  In addition,
there are no sinking fund or redemption provisions applicable to the common shares or any provisions discriminating
against any existing or prospective holders of such securities as a result of a shareholder owning a substantial number
of shares.
Directors do not currently stand for reelection at staggered intervals.
If there were profits realized by the Company, there is no right held by shareholders to share in the Company’s profits. 
There  are  no  rights  held  by  shareholders  to  share  in  any  surplus  in  the  event  of  liquidation;  nor  are  they  any
redemption  provisions,  sinking  fund  provisions,  liability  to  further  capital  calls  by  the  Company  or  any  provision
discriminating against any existing or prospective holder of the Company’s securities as a result of such shareholder
owing a substantial number of shares.
Changes to Rights
Under the BCBCA, the rights of shareholders may be changed only by the shareholders passing a special resolution
approved by 2/3 of the votes cast at a special meeting of shareholders, the notice of which is accompanied by an
information circular describing the proposed action and its effect on the shareholders.
Annual and General Meetings
The Board of Directors must call an annual general meeting once in each calendar year and not later than 15 months
after the last such meeting. The Board may call an extraordinary general meeting at any time. Notice of such meetings
must  be  accompanied  by  an  information  circular  describing  the  proposed  business  to  be  dealt  with  and  making
disclosures as prescribed by statute.  Admission to such meetings is open to registered shareholders and their duly
appointed proxies. Others may be admitted subject to the pleasure of the meeting.
No advance notice will be required to be published at a meeting where directors are to be elected.  The Company
must give shareholders not less than 21 days notice of any general meeting of the shareholders.
The Directors may fix in advance a date, which is no fewer than 35 days or no more than 60 days prior to the date of
the meeting.  All the holders of common shares as at that date are entitled to attend and vote at a general meeting.
A  quorum  for  a  meeting  of  shareholders  of  the  Company  is  two  persons  who  are,  or  who  represent  by  proxy,
shareholders who, in the aggregate, hold at least 1/20 (5%) of the issued shares entitled to be voted at the meeting.
The  Company’s  Notice  of  Articles  and  Articles  contain  no  limitations  on  the  rights  of  non-resident  or  foreign
shareholders to hold or exercise rights on our shares. Except for the Investment Canada Act, which requires certain
transactions to be approved by the Minister of Industry and/or the Minister of Canadian Heritage as being of net benefit
to Canada before they may proceed, there is no limitation at law upon the right of a non-resident to hold shares in a
Canadian company.
95
There  are  no  provisions  in  the  Company’s  Notice  of  Articles  and  Articles  that  would  have  an  effect  of  delaying,
deferring  or  preventing  a  change  in  control  and  that  would  operate  only  with  respect  to  a  merger,  acquisition  or
corporate restructuring involving the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
There is no provision in the Company’s Notice of Articles and Articles setting a threshold or requiring or governing
disclosure  of  shareholder  ownership  above  any  level.  Securities  Acts,  regulations  and  the  policies  and  rules
thereunder in the Provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario, where the Company is a reporting company,
require any person holding or having beneficial ownership or control or direction of more than 10% of the Company’s
issued shares to file insider and other reports disclosing such shareholdings.
C.        Material Contracts
During  the  two  years  immediately  preceding  publication  of  this  document,  the  Company  entered  into  material
contracts, other than contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business, as follows:
1.Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated December 13, 2010 between Kaymin, Anglo Platinum and the
Company, assigning Kaymin’s and Anglo Platinum’s 50% interest in the River Valley property to the Company
Platinum’s, thus giving 100% ownership to the Company.
2.Amendment dated April 6, 2011 to the Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated December 13, 2010
(“Assignment Agreement”), between Kaymin, Anglo Platinum and the Company. Under the terms of the Assignment
Agreement, Kaymin exchanged its 50% interest in the JV, for a 12% interest in PFN, based on the issued and
outstanding common shares of PFN as of November 30, 2010 (67,643,008 common shares). The aggregate
purchase price for the 50% interest in the River Valley PGM project was:
a. 8,117,161 fully paid and non-assessable common shares of PFN (issued); and
b.three-year warrants exercisable to purchase 3,000,000 common shares of PFN at a price of $0.30 per common
share.
3.Letter Agreement dated August 8, 2011 between Pacific North West Capital Corp. and Next Gen Metals Inc. for the
purchase and sale of the option to acquire a 60% interest in the Destiny Gold Project, Val D’or, Quebec.
D.        Exchange Controls
There is no law or governmental decree or regulation in Canada that restricts the export or import of capital, or affects
the  remittance  of  dividends,  interest  or  other  payments  to  a  non-resident  holder  of  common  shares,  other  than
withholding tax requirements.
There is no limitation imposed by Canadian law or by the constituent documents of the Company on the right of a non-
resident  to  hold  or  vote  common  shares,  other  than  are  provided  in  the  Investment  Canada  Act  (Canada).    The
following summarizes the material features of the Investment Canada Act (Canada).
The  Investment  Canada  Act  (Canada)  requires  certain  "non-Canadian"  individuals,  governments,  corporations  or
other entities who wish to acquire a "Canadian business" (as defined in the Investment Canada Act), or establish a
"new Canadian business" (as defined in the Investment Canada Act) to file either a notification or an application for
review with a governmental agency known as "Investment Canada".  The Investment Canada Act requires that certain
acquisitions of control by a Canadian business by a "non-Canadian" must be reviewed and approved by the Minister
responsible for the Investment Canada Act on the basis that the Minister is satisfied that the acquisition is "likely to be
of net benefit to Canada", having regard to criteria set forth in the Investment Canada Act.  Only acquisitions of control
are reviewable under the Investment Canada Act; however, the Investment Canada Act provides detailed rules for the
determination of whether control has been acquired and, pursuant to those rules, the acquisition of one-third or more of
the voting shares of a corporation may, in some circumstances, be considered to constitute an acquisition of control. 
Certain  reviewable  acquisitions  of  control  may  not  be  implemented  before  being  approved  by  the  Minister;  if  the
Minister  does  not  ultimately  approve  a  reviewable  acquisition  which  has  been  completed,  the  acquired  Canadian
business  be  divested.    Failure  to  comply  with  the  review  provisions  of  the  Investment  Canada  Act  could  result  in,
among other things, an injunction or a court order directing disposition of assets or shares.
96
E.         Taxation
Material United States Federal Income Tax Consequences
The  following  is  a  general  discussion  of  certain  possible  United  States  federal  income  tax  consequences,  under
current law, generally applicable to a U.S. Holder (as hereinafter defined) of common shares of the Company. This
discussion does not address all potentially relevant federal income tax matters and it does not address consequences
peculiar  to  persons  subject  to  special  provisions  of  federal  income  tax  law,  such  as  those  described  below  as
excluded from the definition of a U.S. Holder. In addition, this discussion does not cover any state, local or foreign tax
consequences. (See “Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences” below).
The following discussion is based upon the sections of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”),
Treasury Regulations, published Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) rulings, published administrative positions of the
IRS and court decisions that are currently applicable, any or all of which could be materially and adversely changed,
possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time and which are subject to differing interpretations. This discussion does not
consider  the  potential  effects,  both  adverse  and  beneficial,  of  any  recently  proposed  legislation,  which,  if  enacted,
could be applied, possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time. This discussion is for general information only and it is
not intended to be, nor should it be construed to be, legal or tax advice to any holder or prospective holder of common
shares  of  the  Company  and  no  opinion  or  representation  with  respect  to  United  States  federal  income  tax
consequences  to  any  such  holder  or  prospective  holder  is  made.  Accordingly,  holders  and  prospective  holders  of
common shares of the Company should consult their own tax advisors about the federal, state, local, and foreign tax
consequences of purchasing, owning and disposing of common shares of the Company.
U.S. Holders
As used herein, a “U.S. Holder” means a holder of common shares of the Company who is a citizen or individual
resident of the United States, a corporation or partnership created or organized in or under the laws of the United
Sates or of any political subdivision thereof, an estate whose income is taxable in the United States irrespective of
source or a trust subject to the primary supervision of a court within the United States and control of a United States
fiduciary as described in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code. This summary does not address the tax consequences to,
and U.S. Holder does not include, persons subject to specific provisions of federal income tax law, such as tax-exempt
organizations,  qualified  retirement  plans,  individual  retirement  accounts  and  other  tax-deferred  accounts,  financial
institutions,  insurance  companies,  real  estate  investment  trusts,  regulated  investment  companies,  broker-dealers,
nonresident  alien  individuals,  or  foreign  corporations  whose  ownership  of  common  shares  of  the  Company  is  not
effectively  connected  with  conduct  on  a  trade  or  a  business  in  the  United  States,  persons  or  entities  that  have  a
“functional currency” other than the U.S. dollar, shareholders who hold common shares as part of a straddle, hedging
or a conversion transaction, and shareholders subject to the alternative minimum tax, and shareholders who acquired
their common shares through the exercise of employee stock options or otherwise as compensation for services. This
summary is limited to U.S. Holders who own common shares as capital assets. This summary does not address the
consequences  to  a  person  or  entity  holding  an  interest  in  a  shareholder  or  the  consequences  to  a  person  of  the
ownership, exercise or disposition of any options, warrants or other rights to acquire common shares.
Distribution on Common Shares of the Company
U.S. Holders receiving dividend distributions (including constructive dividends) with respect to common shares of the
Company are required to include in gross income for United States federal income tax purposes the gross amount of
such distributions, equal to the U.S. dollar value of such distributions on the date of receipt (based on the exchange
rate on such date), to the extent that the Company has current or accumulated earnings or profits, without reduction for
any Canadian income tax withheld from such distributions. Such Canadian tax withheld may be credited, subject to
certain limitations, against the U.S. Holder’s federal income tax liability or, alternatively, may be deducted in computing
the U.S. Holder’s federal taxable income by those who itemize deductions. (See more detailed discussion at “Foreign
Tax  Credit”  below.)  To  the  extent  that  distributions  exceed  current  or  accumulated  earnings  and  profits  of  the
Company, they will be treated first as a return of capital up to the U.S. Holder’s adjusted basis in the common shares
and thereafter as gain from the sale or exchange of the common shares. Preferential tax rates for long-term capital
gains are applicable to a U.S. Holder, which is an individual, estate or trust. There are currently no preferential tax
rates for long-term capital gains for a U.S. Holder, which is a corporation.
97
In the case of foreign currency received as a dividend that is not converted by the recipient into U.S. dollars on the date
of receipt, a U.S. Holder will have a tax basis in the foreign currency equal to its U.S. dollar value on the date of
receipt. Generally any gain or loss recognized upon a subsequent sale or other disposition of the foreign currency,
including the exchange for U.S. dollars, will be ordinary income or loss. However, an individual whose realized gain
does  not  exceed  $200  will  not  recognize  that  gain,  to  the  extent  that  there  are  no  expenses  associated  with  the
transaction that meet the requirement for deductibility as a trade or business expense (other than travel expenses in
connection with a business trip) or as an expense for the production of income.
Dividends  paid  on  the  common  shares  of  the  Company  generally  will  not  be  eligible  for  the  dividends  received
deduction provided to corporations receiving dividends from certain United States corporations. A U.S. Holder which is
a corporation may, under certain circumstances, be entitled to a 70% (or 80%) deduction of the United States source
portion  of  dividends  received  from  the  Company  (unless  the  Company  qualifies  as  a  “foreign  personal  holding
company” or a “passive foreign investment company,” as defined below) if such U.S. Holder owns common shares
representing at least 10% (or 20%) of the voting power and value of the Company. The availability of this deduction is
subject to several complex limitations that are beyond the scope of this discussion.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding
Under current Treasury Regulations, dividends paid on the Company’s common shares, if any, generally will not be
subject to information reporting and generally will not be subject to U.S. backup withholding tax. However, dividends
and the proceeds from a sale of the Company’s common shares paid in the U.S. through a U.S. or U.S. related paying
agent (including a broker) will be subject to U.S. information reporting requirements and may also be subject to the
30% U.S. backup withholding tax, unless the paying agent is furnished with a duly completed and signed Form W-9.
Any amounts withheld under the U.S. backup withholding tax rules will be allowed as a refund or a credit against the
U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, provided the required information is furnished to the IRS.
Foreign Tax Credit
A U.S. Holder who pays (or has withheld from distributions) Canadian income tax with respect to the ownership of
common shares of the Company may be entitled, at the option of the U.S. Holder, to either receive a deduction or a tax
credit for such foreign tax paid or withheld. Generally, it will be more advantageous to claim a credit because a credit
reduces  United  States  federal  income  taxes  on  a  dollar-for-dollar  basis,  while  a  deduction  merely  reduces  the
taxpayer’s income subject to tax. This election is made on a year-by-year basis and applies to all foreign taxes paid by
(or withheld from) the U.S. Holder during that year. There are significant and complex limitations which apply to the
credit, among which is the general limitation that the credit cannot exceed the proportionate share of the U.S. Holder’s
United States income tax liability that the U.S. Holder’s foreign source income bears to his or its worldwide taxable
income. In the determination of the application of this limitation, the various items of income and deduction must be
classified  into  foreign  and  domestic  sources.  Complex  rules  govern  this  classification  process.  In  addition,  this
limitation  is  calculated  separately  with  respect  to  specific  classes  of  income  such  as  “passive  income”,  “high
withholding tax interest”, “financial services income”, “shipping income,” and certain other classifications of income.
Dividends  distributed  by  the  Company  will  generally  constitute  “passive  income”  or,  in  the  case  of  certain  U.S.
Holders, “financial services income” for these purposes. The availability of the foreign tax credit and the application of
the limitations on the credit are fact specific, and U.S. Holders of common shares of the Company should consult their
own tax advisors regarding their individual circumstances.
98
Disposition of Common Shares of the Company
A U.S. Holder will recognize gain or loss upon the sale of common shares of the Company equal to the difference, if
any, between (i) the amount of cash plus the fair market value of any property received, and (ii) the shareholder’s tax
basis in the common shares of the Company. Preferential tax rates apply to long-term capital gains of U.S. Holders
which are individuals, estates or trusts. This gain or loss will be capital gain or loss if the common shares are a capital
asset  in  the  hands  of  the  U.S.  Holder,  which  will  be  long-term  capital  gain  or  loss  if  the  common  shares  of  the
Company are held for more than one year. Deductions for net capital losses are subject to significant limitations. For
U.S. Holders who are not corporations, any unused portion of such net capital loss may be carried over to be used in
later tax years until such net capital loss is thereby exhausted. For U.S. Holders which are corporations (other than
corporations subject to Subchapter S of the Code), an unused net capital loss may be carried back three years from
the loss year and carried forward five years from the loss year to be offset against capital gains.
Currency Exchange Gains or Losses
U.S. Holders generally are required to calculate their taxable incomes in United States dollars. Accordingly, a U.S.
Holder who purchases common shares of the Company with Canadian dollars will be required to determine the tax
basis of such shares in United States dollars based on the exchange rate prevailing on the settlement date of the
purchase (and may be required to recognize the unrealized gain or loss, if any, in the Canadian currency surrendered
in the purchase transaction). Similarly, a U.S. Holder receiving dividends or sales proceeds from common shares of
the Company in Canadian dollars will be required to compute the dividend income or the amount realized on the sale,
as the case may be, in United States dollars based on the exchange rate prevailing at the time of receipt in the case of
dividends and on the settlement date in the case of sales on an established securities exchange. Gain or loss, if any,
recognized  on  a  disposition  of  Canadian  currency  in  connection  with  the  described  transaction  generally  will  be
treated as ordinary gain or loss.
Other Considerations
In  the  following  circumstances,  the  above  sections  of  this  discussion  may  not  describe  the  United  States  federal
income tax consequences resulting from the holding and disposition of common shares:
Foreign Personal Holding Company
If  at  any  time  during  a  taxable  year  more  than  50%  of  the  total  combined  voting  power  or  the  total  value  of  the
Company’s outstanding common shares is owned, directly or indirectly, by five or fewer individuals who are citizens or
residents of the United States and 60% or more of the Company’s gross income for such year was derived from certain
passive  sources  (e.g.,  from  dividends  received  from  its  subsidiaries),  the  Company  may  be  treated  as  a  “foreign
personal holding company”. In that event, U.S. Holders that hold common shares would be required to include in gross
income for such year their allocable portions of such passive income to the extent the Company does not actually
distribute  such  income.  The  Company  does  not  believe  that  it  currently  qualifies  as  a  foreign  personal  holding
company. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will not be considered a foreign personal holding
company for the current or any future taxable year.
Foreign Investment Company
If 50% or more of the combined voting power or total value of the Company’s outstanding common shares are held,
directly or indirectly, by citizens or residents of the United States, United States domestic partnerships or corporations,
or estates or trusts other than foreign estates or trusts (as defined by the Code Section 7701(a)(31)), and the Company
is found to be engaged primarily in the business of investing, reinvesting or trading in securities, commodities, or any
interest  therein,  it  is  possible  that  the  Company  may  be  treated  as  a  “foreign  investment  company”  as  defined  in
Section 1246 of the Code, causing all or part of any gain realized by a U.S. Holder selling or exchanging common
shares  to  be  treated  as  ordinary  income  rather  than  capital  gain.  The  Company  does  not  believe  that  it  currently
qualifies  as  a  foreign  investment  company.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company  will  not  be
considered a foreign investment company for the current or any future taxable year.
99
Passive Foreign Investment Company
The Code contains rules governing “passive foreign investment companies” (“PFIC”) which can have significant tax
effects on U.S. Holders of foreign corporations. These rules do not apply to non-U.S. Holders. Section 1297 of the
Code defines a PFIC as a corporation that is not formed in the United States and, for any taxable year, either (i) 75% or
more of its gross income is “passive income”, which includes interest, dividends and certain rents and royalties or (ii)
the average percentage, by fair market value (or, if the Company is not publicly traded and either is a controlled foreign
corporation or makes an election, by adjusted tax basis), of its assets that produce or are held for the production of
“passive income” is 50% or more. The Company believes that it qualified as a PFIC for the fiscal year ended April 30,
1997  and  the  fiscal  years  ended  from  April  30,  1998  through  April  30,  2002  and  April  30,  2006.  There  can  be  no
assurance that the Company’s determination concerning its PFIC status will not be challenged by the IRS, or that it
will be able to satisfy record keeping requirements which will be imposed on a qualified electing fund (“QEF”). Each
U.S.  Holder  of  the  Company  is  urged  to  consult  a  tax  advisor  with  respect  to  how  the  PFIC  rules  affect  their  tax
situation.
A U.S. Holder who holds stock in a foreign corporation during any year in which such corporation qualifies as a PFIC
is subject to United States federal income taxation under one of two alternative tax regimes at the election of each
such U.S. Holder. The following is a discussion of such two alternative tax regimes applied to such U.S. Holders of the
Company. In addition, special rules apply if a foreign corporation qualifies as both a PFIC and a “controlled foreign
corporation” (as defined below) and a U.S. Holder owns, actually or constructively, 10% or more of the total combined
voting  power  of  classes  of  stock  entitled  to  vote  of  such  foreign  corporation  (See  more  detailed  discussion  at
“Controlled Foreign Corporation” below).
A U.S. Holder who elects in a timely manner to treat the Company as a QEF (an “Electing U.S. Holder”) will be subject,
under Section 1293 of the Code, to current federal income tax for any taxable year in which the Company qualifies as
a PFIC on his pro rata share of the Company’s (i) “net capital gain” (the excess of net long-term capital gain over net
short-term capital loss), which will be taxed as long-term capital gain to the Electing U.S. Holder and (ii) “ordinary
earnings” (the excess of earnings and profits over net capital gain), which will be taxed as ordinary income to the
Electing U.S. Holder, in each case, for the shareholder’s taxable year in which (or with which) the Company’s taxable
year ends, regardless of whether such amounts are actually distributed.
The  effective  QEF  election  also  allows  the  Electing  U.S.  Holder  to  (i)  generally  treat  any  gain  realized  on  the
disposition of his Company common shares (or deemed to be realized on the pledge of his shares) as capital gain; (ii)
treat his share of the Company’s net capital gain, if any, as long-term capital gain instead of ordinary income; and (iii)
either  avoid  interest  charges  resulting  from  PFIC  status  altogether,  or  make  an  annual  election,  subject  to  certain
limitations,  to  defer  payment  of  current  taxes  on  his  share  of  the  Company’s  annual  realized  net  capital  gain  and
ordinary earnings subject, however, to an interest charge. If the Electing U.S. Holder is not a corporation, such an
interest charge would be treated as “personal interest” that is not deductible.
The procedure a U.S. Holder must comply with in making an effective QEF election will depend on whether the year of
the election is the first year in the U.S. Holder’s holding period in which the Company is a PFIC. If the U.S. Holder
makes a QEF election in such first year, i.e., a timely QEF election, then the U.S. Holder may make the QEF election
by simply filing the appropriate documents at the time the U.S. Holder files his tax return for such first year. If, however,
the Company qualified as a PFIC in a prior year, then in addition to filing documents, the U.S. Holder must elect to
recognize under the rules of Section 1291 of the Code (discussed herein), any gain that he would otherwise recognize
if the U.S. Holder sold his stock on the qualification date or if the Company is a controlled foreign corporation, the U.S.
Holder’s pro rata share of the Company’s post-1986 earnings and profits as of the qualification date. The qualification
date is the first day of the Company’s first tax year in which the Company qualified as a QEF with respect to such U.S.
Holder. The elections to recognize such gain or earnings and profits can only be made if such U.S. Holder’s holding
period for the common shares of the Company includes the qualification date. By electing to recognize such gain or
earnings and profits, the U.S. Holder will be deemed to have made a timely QEF election. A U.S. Holder who made
elections to recognize gain or earnings and profits after May 1, 1992 and before January 27, 1997 may, under certain
circumstances, elect to change such U.S. Holder’s qualification date to the first day of the first QEF year. U.S. Holders
are urged to consult a tax advisor regarding the availability of and procedure for electing to recognize gain or earnings
and profits under the foregoing rules. In addition, special rules apply if a foreign corporation qualifies as both a PFIC
and a “controlled foreign corporation (as defined below) and a U.S. Holder owns, actually or constructively, 10% or
more of the total combined voting power of classes of stock entitled to vote of such foreign corporation. (See more
detailed discussion at “Controlled Foreign Corporation” below).
100
If the Company is a PFIC for any taxable year during which a Non-Electing U.S. Holder holds Company common
shares, then the Company will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to such Company common shares, even
if it is no longer definitionally a PFIC. A Non-Electing U.S. Holder may terminate this deemed PFIC status by electing
to  recognize  gain  (which  will  be  taxed  under  the  rules  discussed  above  for  Non-Electing  U.S.  Holders)  as  if  such
Company common shares had been sold on the last day of the last taxable year for which it was a PFIC.
Effective  for  tax  years  of  U.S.  Holders  beginning  after  December  31,  1997,  U.S.  Holders  who  hold  (actually  or
constructively) marketable stock of a foreign corporation that qualifies as a PFIC, may annually elect to mark such
stock to the market (a “mark-to-market election”). If such an election is made, such U.S. Holder will not be subject to the
special taxation rules of Section 1291 discussed above. However, if the mark-to-market election is made by a Non-
Electing U.S. Holder after the beginning of the holding period for the PFIC stock, then the Section 1291 rules will apply
to certain dispositions of, distributions on and other amounts taxable with respect to the Company’s common shares. A
U.S. Holder who makes the mark-to-market election will include in income for the taxable year for which the election
was made an amount equal to the excess, if any, of the fair market value of the common shares of the Company as of
the close of such tax year over such U.S. Holder’s adjusted basis in such common shares. In addition, the U.S. Holder
is allowed a deduction for the lesser of (i) the excess, if any, of such U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in common
shares over the fair market value of such shares as of the close of the tax year, or (ii) the excess, if any, of (A) the mark-
to-market gains for the common shares in the Company included by such U.S. Holder for prior tax years, including any
amount which would have been included for any prior tax year but for the Section 1291 interest on tax deferral rules
discussed above with respect to Non-Electing U.S. Holders, over (B) the mark-to-market losses for shares that were
allowed as deductions for prior tax years. A U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the common shares of the Company
will be adjusted to reflect the amount included in or deducted from income as a result of a mark-to-market election. A
mark-to-market election applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year,
unless the Company’s common shares cease to be marketable, as specifically defined, or the Secretary of the IRS
consents to revocation of the election. Because the IRS has not established procedures for making a mark-to-market
election, U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisor regarding the manner of making such an election.
Under  Section  1291(f)  of  the  Code,  the  IRS  has  issued  Proposed  Treasury  Regulations  that,  subject  to  certain
exceptions, would treat as taxable certain transfers of PFIC stock by Non-Electing U.S. Holders that are generally not
otherwise taxed, such as gifts, exchanges pursuant to corporate reorganizations, and transfers at death. Generally, in
such cases the basis of the Company common shares in the hands of the transferee and the basis of any property
received in exchange for those common shares would be increased by the amount of gain recognized. Under the
Proposed Treasury Regulations, an Electing U.S. Holder would not be taxed on certain transfers of PFIC stock, such
as gifts, exchanges pursuant to corporate reorganizations, and transfers at death. The transferee’s basis in this case
will depend on the manner of transfer. In a transfer at death, for example, the transferee’s basis is equal to (i) the fair
market  value  of  the  Electing  U.S.  Holder’s  common  shares  reduced  by  the  U.S.  Holder’s  adjusted  basis  in  these
common shares at death. The specific tax effect to the U.S. Holder and the transferee may vary based on the manner
in which the common shares are transferred. Each U.S. Holder of the Company is urged to consult a tax advisor with
respect to how the PFIC rules affect their tax situation.
101
Certain special, generally adverse, rules will apply with respect to the Company common shares while the Company
is a PFIC whether or not it is treated as a QEF. For example, under Section 1298(b)(6) of the Code, a U.S. Holder who
uses PFIC stock as security for a loan (including a margin loan) will, except as may be provided in regulations, be
treated as having made a taxable disposition of such shares.
If the Company is classified as a PFIC, U.S. Holders who do not make timely QEF Elections (as discussed above) will
be subject to a number of special tax rules. For example, gains recognized on disposition of the Company stock or the
receipt of an “excess distribution” from the Company is (i) treated as if it were ordinary income earned ratably on each
day of the period the U.S. Holder owns shares of the Company at the highest marginal rate in effect during the period
in which it was deemed included and (ii) subject to an interest charge as if the resulting tax had actually been due in
such earlier year or years (An excess distribution is the amount of any distribution received by the U.S. Holder during
the taxable year that exceeds 125% of the immediately preceding three year average of distributions received from the
Company,  subject  to  certain  adjustments.)  Proposed  Regulations  broadly  define  a  disposition  to  include  any
transaction  or  event  that  constitutes  an  actual  or  deemed  transfer  of  property  for  any  purpose  under  the  Code,
including (but not limited to) a sale, exchange, gift, transfer at death, and the pledging of PFIC stock to secure a loan. If
the tax described above is not imposed on transfer at death, the recipient of the PFIC stock receives a basis in the
transferred stock equal to the lessor of the fair market value or the adjusted basis of the stock in the hands of the U.S.
Holder immediately before death. Finally, the foregoing rules will continue to apply with respect to a U.S. Holder who
held the stock of the Company while the Company met the definition of a PFIC even if the Company ceases to meet
the definition of a PFIC.
Controlled Foreign Corporation
If more than 50% of the total combined voting power of all classes of shares entitled to vote or the total value of the
shares of the Company is owned, actually or constructively, by citizens or residents of the United States, United States
domestic partnerships and corporations or estates or trusts other than foreign estates or trusts (as defined by the Code
Section 7701 (a)(31), each of which own, actually or constructively, 10% or more of the total combined voting power of
all classes of shares of the Company (“United States Shareholder”), the Company could be treated as a controlled
foreign corporation (“CFC”) under Subpart F of the Code. This classification would effect many complex results, one of
which is the inclusion of certain income of a CFC which is subject to current U.S. tax. The United States generally
taxes United States Shareholders of a CFC currently on their pro rata shares of the Subpart F income of the CFC.
Such  United  States  Shareholders  are  generally  treated  as  having  received  a  current  distribution  out  of  the  CFC’s
Subpart F income and are also subject to current U.S. tax on their pro rata shares of the CFC’s earnings invested in
U.S. property. The foreign tax credit described above may reduce the U.S. tax on these amounts. In addition, under
Section  1248  of  the  Code,  gain  from  the  sale  or  exchange  of  shares  by  a  U.S.  Holder  of  common  shares  of  the
Company which is or was a United States Shareholder at any time during the five-year period ending with the sale or
exchange is treated as ordinary income to the extent of earnings and profits of the Company attributable to shares sold
or exchanged. If a foreign corporation is both a PFIC and a CFC, the foreign corporation generally will not be treated
as a PFIC with respect to United States shareholders of the CFC. This rule generally will be effective for taxable years
of United States Shareholders beginning after 1997 and for taxable years of foreign corporations ending with or within
such taxable years of United States Shareholders. Special rules apply to United States Shareholders who are subject
to the special taxation rules under Section 1291 discussed above with respect to a PFIC. Because of the complexity of
Subpart  F,  a  more  detailed  review  of  these  rules  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  discussion.  The  Company  does  not
believe  that  it  currently  qualifies  as  a  CFC.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Company  will  not  be
considered a CFC for the current or any future taxable year.
Material Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences
The  summary  below  is  restricted  to  the  case  of  a  holder  (a  “Holder”)  of  one  or  more  common  shares  who  for  the
purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “Act”) is a non-resident of Canada, holds his common shares as capital
property and deals at arm’s length with the Company.
The following is a general discussion of certain possible Canadian federal income tax consequences, under current
law, generally applicable to a non-resident of Canada (as hereinafter defined) of common shares of the Company.
This  discussion  does  not  address  all  potentially  relevant  federal  income  tax  matters  and  it  does  not  address
consequences peculiar to persons subject to special provisions of federal income tax law, such as those described
above as excluded from the definition of a U.S. Holder. In addition, this discussion does not cover any provincial, local
or foreign tax consequences.
102
Dividends
A Holder will be subject to Canadian withholding tax (“Part XIII Tax”) equal to 25%, or such lower rate as may be
available  under  an  applicable  tax  treaty,  of  the  gross  amount  of  any  dividend  paid  or  deemed  to  be  paid  on  his
common shares. Under the 1995 Protocol amending the Canada-US Income Tax Convention (1980) (the “Treaty”) the
rate of Part XIII Tax applicable to a dividend on common shares paid to a Holder who is a resident of the United States
is, if the Holder is a company that beneficially owns at least 10% of the voting stock of the Company, 5% and in any
other case, 15% of the gross amount of the dividend. The Company will be required to withhold the applicable amount
of Part XIII Tax from each dividend so paid and remit the withheld amount directly to the Receiver General for Canada
for the account of the Holder.
Capital Gains
A Holder who disposes of a common share, including by deemed disposition on death, will not be subject to Canadian
tax  on  any  capital  gain  (or  capital  loss)  thereby  realized  unless  the  common  share  constituted  “taxable  Canadian
property” as defined by the Act. Generally, a common share will not constitute taxable Canadian property of a Holder
unless he held the common shares as capital property used by him carrying on a business (other than an insurance
business)  in  Canada,  or  he  or  persons  with  whom  he  did  not  deal  at  arm’s-length  alone  or  together  held  or  held
options to acquire, at any time within the five years preceding the disposition, 25% or more of the shares of any class
of the capital stock of the Company.
A Holder who is resident of the United States and realizes a capital gain on disposition of a common share that was
taxable Canadian property will nevertheless, by virtue of the Treaty, generally be exempt from Canadian tax thereon
unless (a) more than 50% of the value of the common share is derived from, or forms an interest in, Canadian real
estate, including Canadian mineral resource properties, (b) the common share formed part of the business property of
a permanent establishment that the Holder has or had in Canada within the 12 months preceding disposition, or ( c)
the Holder (i) was a resident of Canada at any time within the ten years immediately the disposition and for a total of
120 months during the 20 years, preceding the disposition, and (ii) owned the common share when he ceased to be a
resident of Canada.
A Holder who is subject to Canadian tax in respect of a capital gain on disposition of a common share must include
one-half of the capital gain (taxable capital gain) in computing his taxable income earned in Canada. This Holder may,
subject  to  certain  limitations,  deduct  one  half  of  any  capital  loss  (allowable  capital  loss)  arising  on  disposition  of
taxable Canadian property from taxable capital gains realized in the year of disposition in respect of taxable Canadian
property and, to the extent not so deductible, from such taxable capital gains of any of the three preceding years or any
subsequent year.
F.         Dividends and Paying Agents
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
G.        Statements by Experts
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no requirement to
provide any information under this section.
H.        Documents on Display
Any documents referred to in this annual report may be inspected at the head office of the Company, 650-555 West
12th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 3X7, during normal business hours.
The Company’s filings with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), including exhibits filed
with this Form 20-F, may be reviewed and copied at prescribed rates at the SEC’s public reference room located at
100 F Street N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549, or accessed through the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
Further information on the public reference rooms may be obtained by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
103
The  Company  also  files  reports,  statements  and  other  information  with  the  Canadian  securities  administrators  and
these  can  be  accessed  electronically  at  the  System  for  Electronic  Document  Analysis  and  Retrieval’s  website  at
www.sedar.com.
I.          Subsidiary Information
There is no information relating to the Company’s subsidiaries, which must be provided in Canada, and which is not
otherwise  called  for  by  the  body  of  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  used  in  preparing  the  audited
consolidated financial statements.
ITEM 11.        QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURE ABOUT MARKET RISK
The Company anticipates its primary market risk, if any, to be related to fluctuations in exchange rates.  Exchange rate
risk may arise if the Company is required to use different currencies for various aspects of its operations.  At present,
the functional currency for the Company is the Canadian dollar.  Based on the Company’s overall exchange rate risk
as at April 30, 2013, the Company believes that a ten percent change in exchange rates would not have a material
adverse effect on its financial position, results of operations, or changes in financial position.  The Company intends to
monitor its exchange rate risk and take reasonable steps to reduce its exposure.  The Company does not intend to
purchase or sell derivative instruments for speculative purposes.
PART II
ITEM 12.        DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
This Form 20F is being filed as an annual report under the Exchange Act and as such there is no requirement to
provide information under this item.
ITEM 13.        DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES
There has not been a material default in the payment of principal, interest, a sinking or purchase fund installment, or
any other material default not cured within thirty days, relating to indebtedness of the Company of any of its significant
subsidiaries.  There are no payments of dividends by the Company in arrears, nor has there been any other material
delinquency relating to any class of preference shares of the Company.
ITEM 14.        MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS
                     AND USE OF PROCEEDS
Not Applicable
ITEM 15.        CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
At the end of the period covered by this report, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operations of the
Company’s “disclosure controls and procedures” (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the Exchange Act)
was carried out by the Company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer.
Based upon that evaluation, the Company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer have concluded
as of the end of the period covered by this report the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures were designed
and are effective in providing reasonable assurance that:
104
information required to be disclosed by the Company in reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in Commission rules and forms,
and
material information required to be disclosed in our reports is accumulated and communicated to management,
including the Company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer, to allow timely decisions
regarding required disclosures.
Management Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as
defined in Rules 13a-15(e) under the Exchange Act.  Our internal control over financial reporting is intended to provide
reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for
external purposes in accordance with IFRS.  Our internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and
procedures that:
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of our assets;
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with applicable GAAP, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and the Board of Directors; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and our
Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based on the
framework and criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework, issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.  The Company’s internal control over financial reporting was to provide
reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  in
accordance with IFRS.
Based on this evaluation, management has concluded that as of April 30, 2013, the internal controls over financial
reporting was effective.
All internal control systems, no matter how well designed, have inherent limitations.  Therefore, even those systems
determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and
presentation.
The  Company  will  continue  to  periodically  review  its  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  and  internal  control  over
financial reporting and may make modifications from time to time as considered necessary or desirable.
Changes in internal control over financial reporting
During the Company’s most recently completed financial year ended April 30, 2013, there were no changes in the
Company’s internal control over financial reporting that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially
affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Attestation report of the registered public accounting firm
This annual report does not include an attestation report of the Company’s registered public accounting firm regarding
internal  control  over  financial  reporting.    Management’s  report  was  not  subject  to  attestation  by  the  Company’s
registered public accounting firm pursuant to temporary rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission that permit
the Company to provide only management’s report in this annual report.
ITEM 16.        [Reserved]
105
ITEM 16A.     AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERT
The Board of Directors has determined that Jordan Point, Chairman of the Audit Committee, meets the definition of an
“audit  committee  financial  expert”  as  defined  in  Item  16.A  of  Form  20F,  is  financially  literate  in  accordance  with
Canadian national securities legislation, is independent in accordance with the standards of Director Independence
set out under NI 52-110, and has an understanding of internal controls and procedures for financial reporting.
ITEM 16B:     CODE OF ETHICS
The Company has adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics that applies to the Company’s principal executive
officer and principal financial officer, directors and employees.  A copy of the Company’s Code of Business Conduct
and Ethics, as amended June 28, 2010, is incorporated herein by reference and is posted on the Company’s website
(www.pfncapitalcom)  and  under  the  Company’s  profile  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com  and  will  be  provided  to  any
person without charge, upon request by mail but may also be made by telephone, facsimile or other electronic means
of communication.
ITEM 16C.     PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
The  following  table  discloses  the  aggregate  fees  billed  for  each  of  the  last  two  (2)  financial  years  for  professional
services rendered by the Company’s audit firm for various services. “Audit fees” are fees billed by the Company’s
external  auditors  for  services  provided  in  auditing  the  Company’s  annual  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the
subject year.  “Audit-related fees” are fees not included in audit fees that are billed by the auditors for assurance and
related services that are reasonably related to the performance of the audit or review of the Company’s consolidated
financial statements.  “Tax fees” are fees billed by the auditors for professional services rendered for tax compliance,
tax advice and tax planning.  “All other fees” are fees billed by the auditors for products and services not included in
the foregoing categories.
The fees paid by the Company to its auditors for each of the last two fiscal years, by category, are as follows:
Financial Year
Ending
April 30, 2013
April 30, 2012
Audit Fees
Audit Related Fees
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
$15,000
$29,318
$         Nil
$         Nil
$          Nil
$   4,000
$         Nil
$         Nil
From time to time, management of the Company recommends to and requests approval from the Audit Committee for
non-audit services to be provided by the Company’s auditors.  The Audit Committee routinely considers such requests
at committee meetings, and if acceptable to a majority of the Audit Committee members, pre-approves such non-audit
services by a resolution authorizing management to engage the Company’s auditors for such non-audit services, with
set  maximum  dollar  amount  for  each  itemized  service.    During  such  deliberations,  the  Audit  Committee  assesses,
among other factors, whether the services requested would be considered “prohibited services” as contemplated by
the  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  whether  the  services  requested  and  the  fees  related  to  such
services could impair the independence of the auditors.
ITEM 16D.     EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES
Not Applicable
ITEM 16E.      PURCHASE OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED PURCHASERS
None
106
ITEM 16F.      CHANGE IN REGISTRANT’S CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
Not Applicable
ITEM 16G.     CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The Company’s corporate governance practices do not differ significantly from the standards and guidelines that have
been set by the regulatory agencies.  A copy of the Company’s Corporate Governance Policies is published on the
Company’s web site, has been posted to SEDAR and EDGAR, and is incorporated by reference to the Form 20-F that
was filed by the Company on July 27, 2010.
ITEM 16H.     MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURE
Not Applicable
PART III
107
ITEM 17.        FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Not applicable.
ITEM 18.        FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Financial Statements Filed as Part of this Annual Report:
Independent Auditor’s Report dated July 22, 2013
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as at April 30, 2013 and April 30, 2012.
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2013 and 2012
Notes to consolidated financial statements.
108
Consolidated Financial Statements
30 April 2013
(An Exploration Stage Company)
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
1
JAMES STAFFORD
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
To the Shareholders of Pacific North West Capital Corp.
James Stafford, Inc.
  Chartered Accountants
  Suite 350 – 1111 Melville Street
  Vancouver, British Columbia
  Canada V6E 3V6
  Telephone +1 604 669 0711
  Facsimile +1 604 669 0754
  www.JamesStafford.ca
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial statements  of  Pacific  North  West  Capital  Corp.,  which
comprise  the  consolidated statements  of  financial  position  as  at  30  April  2013  and  2012,  and  the  consolidated
statements  of  loss  and  comprehensive  loss,  cash  flows  and  changes  in  equity  for the  years  then  ended,  and  a
summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Management’s Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements  in
accordance  with International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as  issued  by  the  International Accounting  Standards
Board, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our  responsibility  is  to  express  an  opinion  on  these  consolidated financial  statements  based  on  our  audits.  We
conducted our audits in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we comply with ethical
requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial
statements are free from material misstatement.
An  audit  involves  performing  procedures  to  obtain  audit evidence  about  the  amounts  and  disclosures  in  the
consolidated 
financial statements.  The  procedures  selected  depend  on  the  auditor’s  judgment,  including the
assessment  of  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  consolidated  financial statements,  whether  due  to  fraud  or
error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity’s preparation and
fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. An
audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
estimates  made  by management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  presentation  of  the  consolidated  financial
statements.
We  believe  that  the  audit  evidence  we  have  obtained  is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our audit
opinion.
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial  position  of
Pacific North West Capital Corp. as at 30 April 2013 and 2012, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for
the years then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International
Accounting Standards Board.
Emphasis of Matter
Without qualifying our opinion, we draw attention to Note 1 in the consolidated financial statements, which describes
matters  and conditions  that  indicate  the  existence  of  a  material  uncertainty  that  raises substantial  doubt  about  the
ability of Pacific North West Capital Corp. to continue as going concern, including a net loss of $2,341,609 for the year
ended 30 April 2013 and accumulated deficit of $30,771,904 since inception.
Chartered Accountants
Vancouver, Canada
22 July 2013
2
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
ASSETS
 
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Amounts receivable
Short term investments
Prepaid expenses
 
 
Long-term prepaid expenses
Investment in associate
Exploration and evaluation properties
Property and equipment
 
Total assets
 
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Notes
5 
6, 17 
7 
 
 
  
20 
8 
9 
10
As at 
30 April
2013
$   
    
    
    
    
848,953   
206,831   
586,964   
70,130   
1,712,878   
    
170,000   
194,561   
7,735,932   
185,650   
    
9,999,021
As at 30 
April 
 
 2012
$ 
 
 
 
 
3,440,410 
154,349 
1,079,057 
310,696 
4,984,512 
 
- 
298,225 
7,686,109 
231,269 
 
13,200,115
Current liabilities
Trade payables and accrued liabilities
 
Total liabilities
 
Equity
Share capital
Reserves
Deficit
 
Total equity
 
Total equity and liabilities
11, 17 
  
 
  
  
12 
12
75,355   
    
75,355   
    
    
34,558,392   
6,137,178   
(30,771,904)  
    
9,923,666   
    
9,999,021
APPROVED BY THE BOARD:
 
 
“Harry Barr”
 
Director
“Jordan Point”
Director
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Expenses
Accounting and audit
Bank charges and interest
Consulting fees
Corporate development
Depreciation
Director fees
Insurance, licenses and fees
Investor and shareholder relations
Legal fees
Management fees
Office and miscellaneous
Rent
Salaries and benefits
Share-based payments
Telephone and utilities
Transfer agent and regulatory fees
Travel, lodging and food
Vehicle lease
 
Loss before other items
 
Other items
Foreign exchange gain
Loss on sale of short term investments
Interest and other income
Write-down of exploration and evaluation properties
Recovery of written down exploration and evaluation expenditures
Notes 
 
  
 
 
17 
 
10 
17 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
17 
13, 17 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
7 
 
9 
9
413,715 
 
413,715 
 
 
34,494,642 
6,722,053 
(28,430,295)
 
12,786,400 
 
13,200,115
Page | 1
Year Ended 30 April
2013  
$  
   
18,955  
3,790  
272,566  
50,049  
58,926  
27,000  
44,623  
238,291  
3,545  
271,412  
91,559  
128,969  
398,758  
115,354  
28,539  
50,686  
72,344  
11,351  
   
(1,886,717) 
   
   
7,484  
(110,042) 
16,605  
(585,915) 
142,053
2012 
$ 
 
33,318 
5,452 
267,349 
49,382 
52,194 
29,000 
46,628 
528,228 
32,322 
432,338 
174,552 
65,231 
415,771 
531,712 
26,307 
76,414 
197,270 
12,229 
 
(2,975,697)
 
 
40,561 
(533,630)
33,134 
(1,104,376)
-
Loss on revaluation of share purchase warrants
Flow-through share income
Net loss from associate
 
Net loss for the year
Other comprehensive loss
Unrealized loss on short term investments
Reclassification of loss on short term investments
 
Net comprehensive loss
 
Loss per share
Basic
Diluted
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
 
Loss before tax
Adjustments for:
     Depreciation
     Share-based payments
     Loss on sale of short term investments
     Write-down of exploration and evaluation properties
     Recovery of written down exploration and evaluation expenditures
     Loss on revaluation of share purchase warrants
     Flow-through share income
     Net loss from associate
Operating cash flows before movements in working capital
     (Increase) decrease in amounts receivables
     (Increase) decrease in prepaid expenses
     Increase (decrease) in trade payables and accrued liabilities
 
Cash used in operating activities
 
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
Cash spent on exploration and evaluation properties
Cost recovery on exploration and evaluation properties
Purchase of property and equipment
Proceeds from sale of property and equipment
Purchase of short term investments
Proceeds from sale of short term investments
 
Cash used in investing activities
 
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
 
Proceeds from issuance of common  shares
Share issue costs
7 
 
8 
  
 
  
7 
7 
  
 
  
  
14 
14
(132,631) 
311,218  
(103,664) 
   
(2,341,609) 
   
(749,521) 
110,042  
   
(2,981,088) 
   
   
(0.02) 
(0.02)
(551,264)
537,780 
(434,105)
 
(4,987,597)
 
(2,225,549)
533,630 
 
(6,679,516)
 
 
(0.05)
(0.05)
Page | 2
Year ended 30 April
Notes 
 
  
  
 
  
10 
13 
7 
9 
9 
 
 
8 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
9 
9 
10 
10 
7 
7 
  
 
  
  
  
12
2013  
$  
   
   
(2,341,609) 
   
58,926  
115,354  
110,042  
585,915  
(142,053) 
132,631  
(311,218) 
103,664  
   
(52,482) 
70,566  
(27,142) 
   
(1,697,406) 
   
   
   
(587,108) 
65,423  
(13,307) 
-  
(465,235) 
103,176  
   
(897,051) 
   
   
   
3,000  
-
2012 
$ 
 
 
(4,987,597)
 
52,194 
531,712 
533,630 
1,104,376 
- 
551,264 
(537,780)
434,105 
 
65,397 
(136,931)
(300,841)
 
(2,690,471)
 
 
 
(3,224,377)
- 
(161,518)
2,178 
(468,189)
1,510,942 
 
(2,340,964)
 
 
 
4,748,889 
(157,240)
Cash from financing activities
 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
Supplemental cash flow information (Note 18)
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3,000  
   
(2,591,457) 
3,440,410  
   
848,953
4,591,649 
 
(439,786)
3,880,196 
 
3,440,410
Page | 3
Share
  
capital
$
Share-based
payments
reserve
$
Warrant
  
reserve
$
Investment
revaluation
  
reserve
$
Deficit
$
Total
$
Number of
  
shares
85,737,788
31,282,121
17,424,426   4,670,389
2,810,075
2,991,047
   
-
-
175,000
310,000
100,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19,250
111,874
13,000
(771,684)
(673,068)
-
(157,240)
-
-
-
-
(34,374)
(12,000)
-
-
531,712
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
673,068
-
-
-
-
-
1,454,444
(23,442,698)
15,094,989
   
 
   
-   4,670,389 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(2,225,549)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19,250
77,500
1,000
(771,684)
-
531,712
(157,240)
(2,225,549)
533,630
-
533,630
-   (4,987,597)  (4,987,597)
103,747,214
34,494,642
3,295,413
3,664,115
(28,430,295)
(237,475)
12,786,400
Balances, 30 April
2011
Shares issued for
     Cash
     Exploration and
evaluation properties
     Exercise of stock
options
     Exercise of
performance share
Flow-through shares
premium liability
Value assigned to
warrants
Share-based
payments
Share issue costs
Unrealized loss on 
available-for-sale
assets
Reclassification of
loss on investments
Net loss for the year
 
Balances, 30 April 
2012
Shares issued for
     Exercise of
performance shares
Share-based
payments
Unrealized loss on
available-for-sale
assets
Reclassification of
loss on investments
Net loss for the year
300,000
63,750
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(60,750)
115,354
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(749,521)
-
-
-
3,000
115,354
(749,521)
110,042
-
110,042
-   (2,341,609)  (2,341,609)
Balances, 30 April
2013
104,047,214
34,558,392
3,350,017
3,664,115
(30,771,904)
(876,954)
9,923,666
Page | 4
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
1.
CORPORATE INFORMATION
The Company was incorporated under the Business Corporations Act (Alberta) on 29 May 1996 and on 13 July 2004,
the Company continued out of the Province of Alberta and into the Province of British Columbia. The Company is in
the process of acquiring, exploring and developing Platinum Group Metals (“PGMs”), precious and base metals
mineral properties.  The Company will attempt to bring the properties to production, structure joint ventures with
others, option or lease properties to third parties, or sell the properties outright.  The Company has not yet determined
whether these properties contain ore reserves which are economically recoverable and the Company is considered to
be in the exploration stage.
The Company’s head office, principal address and records office are located at Suite 650 - 555 West 12th Avenue,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 3X7.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements as at 30 April 2013 and for the year then ended have been
prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and
commitments in the normal course of business. The Company has a net loss of $2,341,609 for the year ended 30 April
2013 (2012: $4,987,597) and has a working capital of $1,637,523 at 30 April 2013 (30 April 2012: $4,570,797).
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $848,953 as at 30 April 2013 (30 April 2012: $3,440,410), but
management cannot provide assurance that the Company will ultimately achieve profitable operations or become
cash flow positive, or to be able to raise additional debt and/or equity capital.  If the Company is unable to raise
additional capital in the immediate future, management expects that the Company will need to curtail operations,
liquidate assets, seek additional capital on less favourable terms, pursue other remedial measures and/or cease
operations.  These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should
the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
2.
2.1
BASIS OF PREPARATION
Basis of consolidation
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Page | 5
The consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries. 
Subsidiaries are those entities controlled by the Company.  Control exists when the Company has the power, directly
or indirectly, to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.  The
financial statements of the subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control
is obtained to the date control ceases. All inter-company transactions, balances, income and expenses are eliminated
in full upon consolidation.
An associate is an entity in which the Company or any of its subsidiaries has significant influence, and that is neither
a subsidiary nor an interest in a joint venture.  Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and
operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over those policies and is presumed to exist
when the Company holds between 20 and 50 percent of the voting power of another entity. Investments in associates
are accounting for by using the equity method.
The subsidiaries and associate of the Company as at 30 April 2013 and 2012 are described below:
Name
  
  
 Subsidiaries
 Pacific North West Capital Corp. USA(1)
 Pacific North West Capital de México, S.A. de C.V.(1)
  
 Associate
 Next Gen Metals Inc.
(1) Inactive entities.
2.2
Basis of presentation
Country of
incorporation
UnitedStates
Mexico
 
 
Canada
% equity interest
as at
2013
 
 
 
100%
100%
 
 
22.14%
2012
100%
100%
22.14%
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for certain financial
instruments which are measured at fair value, as explained in Note 16, and are presented in Canadian dollars, except
where otherwise indicated.
2.4
Statement of compliance
The consolidated financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries, including comparatives, have been
prepared in accordance with and using accounting policies in full compliance with International Financial Reporting
Standards (“IFRS”) and International Accounting Standards (“IAS”) issued by the International Accounting Standards
Board (“IASB”) and interpretations of the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (“IFRIC”).
2.5 Adoption of new and revised standards and interpretations not yet adopted
At the date of authorization of these financial statements, the IASB and IFRIC have issued the following new and
revised standards, amendments and interpretations which are not yet effective during the year ended 30 April 2013:
IFRS 9 ‘Financial Instruments’is a new financial instruments standard effective for annual periods beginning on
or after 1 January 2015 that replaces IAS 39 and IFRIC 9 for classification and measurement of financial assets
and financial liabilities.
Page | 6
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
IFRS 10 ‘Consolidated Financial Statements’ is a new standard effective for annual periods beginning on or
after 1 January 2013 that replaces consolidation requirements in IAS 27 (as amended in 2008) and SIC-12.
IFRS 11 ‘Joint Arrangements’ is a new standard effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January
2013 that replaces IAS 31 and SIC-13.
IFRS 12 ‘Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities’ is a new standard effective for annual periods beginning on or
after 1 January 2013 that replaces disclosure requirements in IAS 27 (as amended in 2008), IAS 28 (as revised
in 2003) and IAS 31.
IFRS 13 ‘Fair Value Measurement’is a new standard effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January
2013 that replaces fair value measurement guidance in other IFRSs.
IAS 1 (Amendment) ‘Presentation of Financial Statements’ is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1
July 2012 and 1 January 2013, and includes amendments regarding presentation of items of other
comprehensive income and clarification of the requirements for comparative information, respectively.
IAS 19 (Amendment) ‘Employee Benefits’ is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2013
and revises recognition and measurement of post-employment benefits.
IAS 27 (Amendment) ‘Separate Financial Statements’ is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1
January 2013 that prescribes the accounting and disclosure requirements for investments in subsidiaries, joint
ventures and associates when an entity prepares separate financial statements.
IAS 28 (Amendment) ‘Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures’ is effective for annual periods beginning on
or after 1 January 2013 that prescribes the accounting for investments in associates and sets out the
requirements for the application of the equity method when accounting for investments in associates and joint
ventures.
IAS 32‘Financial Instruments: Presentation’is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2014
and 1 January 2013 that includes amendments that clarify the application of offsetting requirements and
presentation of interest, dividends, losses and gains.
IFRIC 20 ‘Stripping Costs in the Production Phase of a Surface Mine’ is a new interpretation effective for annual
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2013 that prescribes the accounting for stripping costs in the production
phase of a surface mine.
The Company has not early adopted these standards, amendments and interpretations and anticipates that the
application of these standards, amendments and interpretations will not have a material impact on the financial
position and financial performance of the Company.
Page | 7
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
3.1 Significant accounting judgments, estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the Company’sconsolidated financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires managementto
make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amountsof assets, liabilities and contingent
liabilities at the date of theconsolidated financial statements and reported amounts of income and expensesduring the
reporting period. Estimates and assumptions are continuouslyevaluated and are based on management’s experience
and other factors, includingexpectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under thecircumstances.
However, actual outcomes can differ fromthese estimates.
Areas requiring a significant degree ofestimation and judgment relate to the recoverability of the carrying value
ofexploration and evaluation assets, fair value measurements for financialinstruments and share-based payments, the
recognition and valuation ofprovisions for decommissioning liabilities, the recoverability and measurementof
exploration and evaluation properties and deferred tax assets andliabilities, and the ability to continue as a going
concern.  Actual results maydiffer from those estimates and judgments.
3.2
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash atbanks and on hand, and short term money market instruments with an
originalmaturity of three months or less, which are readily convertible into a knownamount of cash.
3.3
Investment in associate
The Company’s investment in its associateis accounted for using the equity method of accounting.  Under the
equitymethod, the Company’s investment in an associate is initially recognized at costand subsequently increased or
decreased to recognize the Company’s share ofearnings and losses of the associate and for impairment losses after
theinitial recognition date.  The Company’s share of an associate’s losses thatare in excess of its investment in the
associate are recognized only to theextent that the Company has incurred legal or constructive obligations or
madepayments on behalf of the associate.  The Company’s share of earnings andlosses of associates are recognized
in profit or loss during the period.
After application of the equity method, theCompany determines whether it is necessary to recognize an impairment
loss onthe Company’s investment in its associates.  The Company determines at eachreporting date whether there is
any objective evidence that the investment inthe associate is impaired.  If there is objective evidence, the
Companycalculates the amount of impairment as the difference between the recoverableamount of the associate and
its carrying value and recognizes the amount inprofit or loss.  When a group entity transacts with an associate of
theCompany, profit and losses are eliminated to the extent of the Company’sinterest in the relevant associate.
Page | 8
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3.4
Foreign currencies
The Company’s reporting currency and thefunctional currency of all of its operations is the Canadian dollar as this
isthe principal currency of the economic environment in which it operates.
Foreign currency transactions aretranslated into functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at thedate of
the transaction.  Foreign currency monetary items are translated at theperiod-end exchange rate.  Non-monetary items
measured at historical costcontinue to be carried at the exchange rate at the date of the transaction. Non-monetary
items measured at fair value are reported at the exchange rate atthe date when fair values were determined.
Exchange differences arising on thetranslation of monetary items or on settlement of monetary items are recognizedin
profit or loss in the period in which they arise, except where deferred inequity as a qualifying cash flow or net
investment hedge.
Exchange differences arising on thetranslation of non-monetary items are recognized in other comprehensive
incomein the statement of comprehensive income to the extent that gains and lossesarising on those non-monetary
items are also recognized in other comprehensiveincome.  Where the non-monetary gain or loss is recognized in
profit or loss,the exchange component is also recognized in profit or loss.
3.5
Property and equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost lessaccumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. 
The cost of anitem of property, plant and equipment consists of the purchase price, any costsdirectly attributable to
bringing the asset to the location and conditionnecessary for its intended use and an initial estimate of the costs
ofdismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is located.
Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to writeoff the cost of property, plant and equipment, less their estimated
residualvalue, using the declining balance method using the following rates or thestraight-line method over the
following expected useful lives:
Automotive
Office equipment
Software
Leasehold improvements
30%
20%
100%
10 years
Page | 9
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3.6
Exploration and evaluation properties
Exploration and evaluation expenditures include the costs of acquiring licenses, costs associated with exploration
and evaluation activity and the fair value (at acquisition date) of exploration and evaluation assets acquired in a
business combination.  Exploration and evaluation expenditures are capitalized.  Costs incurred before the Company
has obtained the legal rights to explore an area are recognized in profit or loss.
Option payments received are treated as a reduction of the carrying value of the related exploration and evaluation
properties and deferred costs until the receipts are in excess of costs incurred, at which time, they are credited to
income.  Option payments are at the discretion of the optionee, and accordingly, are recorded on a cash basis.
Exploration and evaluation assets are assessed for impairment if (i) sufficient data exists to determine technical
feasibility and commercial viability, and (ii) facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying amount exceeds the
recoverable amount.
Once the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the extraction of mineral resources in an area of interest are
demonstrable, exploration and evaluation assets attributable to that area of interest are first tested for impairment and
then reclassified to mining property and development assets within property, plant and equipment.
Recoverability of the carrying amount of any exploration and evaluation asset is dependent on successful
development and commercial exploitation, or alternatively, sale of the respective areas of interest.
3.7 Decommissioning, restoration and similar liabilities
The Company recognizes provisions for statutory, contractual, constructive or legal obligations associated with the
reclamation of mineral properties and retirement of long-term assets, when those obligations result from the
acquisition, construction, development or normal operation of the assets.  The net present value of future cost
estimates arising from the decommissioning of plant, site restoration work and other similar retirement activities is
added to the carrying amount of the related asset, and depreciated on the same basis as the related asset, along with
a corresponding increase in the provision in the period incurred.  Discount rates using a pre-tax rate that reflect the
current market assessments of the time value of money are used to calculate the net present value.
The Company’s estimates of reclamation costs could change as a result of changes in regulatory requirements,
discount rates and assumptions regarding the amount and timing of the future expenditures.  These changes are
recorded directly to the related asset with a corresponding entry to the provision.
Page | 10
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Changes in the net present value, excluding changes in the Company’s estimates of reclamation costs, are charged
to profit or loss for the period.  The net present value of reclamation costs arising from subsequent site damage that is
incurred on an ongoing basis during production are charged to profit or loss in the period incurred.  The costs of
reclamation projects that were included in the provision are recorded against the provision as incurred.  The costs to
prevent and control environmental impacts at specific properties are capitalized in accordance with the Company’s
accounting policy for exploration and evaluation properties.
3.8
Share-based payments
Share-based payments to employees are measured at the fair value of the instruments issued and recognized over
the vesting periods.  Share-based payments to non-employees are measured at the fair value of goods or services
received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, if it is determined the fair value of the goods or services
cannot be reliably measured, and are recorded at the date the goods or services are received.  The corresponding
amount is recorded to the share-based payments reserve.
The fair value of options is determined using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model which incorporates all market
vesting conditions.  The number of shares and options expected to vest is reviewed and adjusted at the end of each
reporting period such that the amount recognized for services received as consideration for the equity instruments
granted shall be based on the number of equity instruments that will eventually vest.
3.9
Taxation
Deferred tax is provided, using the liability method, on all temporary differences at the balance sheet date between the
tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognized for all taxable temporary differences.  Deferred tax assets are
generally recognized for all deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be
available against which those deductible temporary differences can be utilized.  Such deferred tax assets and
liabilities are not recognized if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition (other than
in a business combination) of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the
accounting profit.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no
longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be
utilized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset
is realized or the liability is settled, based on the tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the
reporting date.
Page | 11
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3.10
Financial assets
Financial assets are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”), held-to-maturity, loans
and receivables, available-for-sale financial assets, or as derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an
effective hedge, as appropriate.  The Company determines the classification of its financial assets at initial
recognition.  Financial assets are recognized initially at fair value.  The subsequent measurement of financial assets
depends on their classification as follows:
Financial assets at FVTPL
Financial assets are classified as held for trading and are included in this category if acquired principally for the
purpose of selling in the short term or if so designated by management.  Derivatives, other than those designated as
effective hedging instruments, are also categorized as held for trading.  These assets are carried at fair value with
gains or losses recognized in profit or loss.  Transaction costs associated with financial assets at FVTPL are
expensed as incurred.  Cash and cash equivalents and share purchase warrants held in other companies are
included in this category of financial assets.
Held-to-maturity and loans and receivables
Held-to-maturity and loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments
that are not quoted in an active market.  Such assets are carried at amortized cost using the effective interest method if
the time value of money is significant.  Gains and losses are recognized in profit or loss when the financial asset
classified in this category are derecognized or impaired, as well as through the amortization process.  Transaction
costs are included in the initial carrying amount of the asset.  Amounts receivables are classified as loans and
receivables.
Available-for-sale
Available-for-sale financial assets are those non-derivative financial assets that are not classified as loans and
receivables.  After initial recognition, available-for-sale financial assets are measured at fair value, with gains or
losses recognized within other comprehensive income.  Accumulated changes in fair value are recorded as a
separate component of equity until the investment is derecognized or impaired.  Transaction costs are included in the
initial carrying amount of the asset.  Available-for-sale assets include short term investments in equities of other
entities.
The fair value is determined by reference to bid prices at the close of business on the reporting date.  Where there is
no active market, fair value is determined using valuation techniques.  Where fair value cannot be reliably measured,
assets are carried at cost.
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge
The Company does not hold or have any exposure to derivative instruments.
Page | 12
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3.11
Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as financial liabilities at FVTPL, derivatives designated as hedging instruments in
an effective hedge, or as financial liabilities measured at amortized cost, as appropriate.  The Company determines
the classification of its financial liabilities at initial recognition.  The measurement of financial liabilities depends on
their classification, as follows:
Financial liabilities at FVTPL
Financial liabilities at FVTPL has two subcategories, including financial liabilities held for trading and those
designated by management on initial recognition.  Transaction costs on financial liabilities at FVTPL are expensed as
incurred.  These liabilities are carried at fair value with gains or losses recognized in profit or loss.
Financial liabilities measured at amortized cost
All other financial liabilities are initially recognized at fair value, net of transaction costs.  After initial recognition, other
financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method. Amortized cost is
calculated by taking into account any issue costs, and any discount or premium on settlement.  Gains and losses
arising on the repurchase, settlement or cancellation of liabilities are recognized respectively in interest, other
revenues and finance costs.  Trade payables are included in this category of financial liabilities.
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge
The Company does not hold or have any exposure to derivative instruments.
3.12
Impairment of financial assets
Financial assets, other than financial assets at FVTPL, are assessed for indicators of impairment at each period end.
Assets carried at amortized cost
If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss on assets carried at amortized cost have been incurred, the
amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the present value of
estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate.  The carrying amount of
the asset is reduced, with the amount of the loss recognized in profit or loss.
If, in a subsequent period, the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively
to an event occurring after the impairment was recognized, the previously recognized impairment loss is reversed to
the extent that the carrying value of the asset does not exceed what the amortized cost would have been had the
impairment not been recognized.  Any subsequent reversal of an impairment loss is recognized in profit or loss.
Page | 13
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Available-for-sale
If an available-for-sale financial asset is impaired, the cumulative loss previously recognized in equity is transferred to
profit or loss.  Any subsequent recovery in the fair value of the asset is recognized within other comprehensive
income.
3.13
Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
Financial assets are derecognized when the rights to receive cash flows from the assets expire or, the financial assets
are transferred and the Company has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the financial
assets.  On derecognition of a financial asset, the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the sum of the
consideration received and receivable and the cumulative gain or loss that had been recognized directly in equity is
recognized in profit or loss.
For financial liabilities, they are derecognized when the obligation specified in the relevant contract is discharged,
cancelled or expires.  The difference between the carrying amount of the financial liability derecognized and the
consideration paid and payable is recognized in profit or loss.
3.14
Impairment of non-financial assets
The carrying amount of the Company’s assets is reviewed for an indication of impairment at the end of each reporting
period.  If an indication of impairment exists, the Company makes an estimate of the asset’s recoverable amount. 
Individual assets are grouped for impairment assessment purposes at the lowest level at which there are identifiable
cash flows that are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets.  Recoverable amount of an asset
group is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.  In assessing value in use, the estimated
future cash flows are adjusted for the risks specific to the asset group and are discounted to their present value using
a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money.
Where the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its recoverable amount, the asset group is considered impaired
and is written down to its recoverable amount.  Impairment losses are recognized in profit or loss.
An assessment is made at each reporting date as to whether there is any indication that previously recognized
impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased.  If such indication exists, the recoverable amount is
estimated.  A previously recognized impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimates used
to determine the asset’s recoverable amount.  An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the asset’s
carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation, if no
impairment loss had been recognized.
Page | 14
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
3.15
Flow-through shares
Any premium received by the Company on the issuance of flow-through shares is initially recorded as a liability and
included in trade payables and accrued liabilities.  Upon renouncement by the Company of the tax benefits
associated with the related expenditures, a deferred tax liability is recognized and the flow-through share premium
liability will be reversed.  To the extent that suitable deferred tax assets are available, the Company will reduce the
deferred tax liability and record a deferred tax recovery.
3.16
Related party transactions
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability, directly or indirectly, to control the other party or
exercise significant influence over the other party in making financial and operating decisions.  Parties are also
considered to be related if they are subject to common control, related parties may be individuals or corporate
entities.  A transaction is considered to be a related party transaction when there is a transfer of resources or
obligations between related parties.
3.17
Comparative Figures
Certain comparative figures have been adjusted to conform to the current year’s presentation.
Page | 15
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
4.
SEGMENTED INFORMATION
At 30 April 2013, the Company operates in three geographical areas, being Canada, the United States and Burkina
Faso.  The following is an analysis of the net loss, current assets and non-current assets by geographical area:
Net loss
      For the year ended 30 April 2013
      For the year ended 30 April 2012
  
 Current assets
      As at 30 April 2013
      As at 30 April 2012
Canada
$
1,784,952
4,987,597
1,712,878
4,984,512
United
States
$
Burkina
Faso
$
222,389
-
 
 
-
-
334,268
-
 
 
-
-
Total
$
2,341,609
4,987,597
1,712,878
4,984,512
194,561
298,225
7,735,932
7,093,158
185,650
231,269
-
-
 
 
-
208,683
-
-
 
 
-
384,268
-
-
-
-
194,561
298,225
7,735,932
7,686,109
185,650
231,269
Page | 16
Investment in associate
      As at 30 April 2013
      As at 30 April 2012
  
 Exploration and evaluation properties
      As at 30 April 2013
      As at 30 April 2012
  
 Property and equipment
      As at 30 April 2013
      As at 30 April 2012
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
5.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents are denominated in the following currencies:
Denominated in Canadian dollars
  Denominated in U.S. dollars
   
  Total cash and cash equivalents
As at
30 April
2013
$
738,343
110,610
848,953
As at
30 April
2012
$
2,734,541
705,869
3,440,410
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company issued a total of Nil flow-through shares (30 April 2012:
13,734,593 flow-through shares) for a total of $Nil (30 April 2012: $3,612,089) (Notes 11 and 12).  As at 30 April 2013,
the Company has $Nil (30 April 2012: $1,456,744) remaining to be spent on qualifying Canadian exploration
expenditures under the terms of the flow-through share agreements. Included in the cash and cash equivalent
balance is a deposit of $132,250 (30 April 2012: $132,250) being held as collateral by the Bank of Montreal as the
bank required the deposit to be held in order to issue a credit card to the Company.
6.
AMOUNTS RECEIVABLE
The Company’s amounts receivables are as follows:
GST/HST receivable
  Interest receivable
  Advances receivable
  Shared office costs receivable (Note 17)
  Other receivables
   
  Total trade and other receivables
As at
30 April
2013
$
20,005
413
15,997
170,416
-
206,831
As at
30 April
2012
$
20,510
310
22,338
110,041
1,150
154,349
Included in amounts receivable of the Company are amounts due from related parties which are disclosed in Note 17. 
The amounts are unsecured, interest-free and repayable upon written notice given from the Company.
Page | 17
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
7.
SHORT-TERM INVESTMENTS
The Company’s available-for-sale investments and share purchase warrants are as follows:
Fire River Gold Corp.
 
5,000 shares (30 April 2012: 500,000 shares).
Nil warrants (30 April 2012: 575,000 warrants).
El Niño Ventures Inc.
8,558,777 shares (30 April 2012: 3,319,888 shares).
3,729,060 warrants (30 April 2012: 1,470,329 warrants).  384,615 warrants
 
expire on 16 August 2013, 800,000 warrants expire on 12 October 2013,
1,111,111 warrants expire on 2 April 2014 and 1,433,334 warrants expire on 30
June 2014.
Next Gen Metals Inc.
 
4,000,000 warrants expiring on 27 September 2015 (30 April 2012: 4,000,000
warrants).
Gensource Capital Corp. (formerly Augen Capital Corp.) 
 
2,257,000 shares (30 April 2012: 2,257,000 shares). Nil warrants (30 April
2012: 428,500 warrants).
Benton Resources Corp.
 
Nil shares (30 April 2012: 300,000 shares).
Benton Capital Corp.
 
300,000 shares (30 April 2012: Nil shares).
Benton Resources Inc. CM
 
300,000 shares (30 April 2012: Nil shares).
Calais Resources Inc.
 
2,083,000 shares (30 April 2012: 2,083,000 shares).
Goldtrain Resources Inc.
 
976,000 shares (30 April 2012: 976,000 shares).
Nevada Sunrise Gold Corp.
 
300,000 shares (30 April 2012: 300,000 shares).
 Others
  
 Total short term investments
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
As at 30 April
2013
Cost
$
As at 30 April 2012
Fair
Value
$
Cost
$
Fair
Value
$
2,420
100 233,082
75,012
955,577278,129 515,175 381,436
223,690 34,830 223,690
46,570
166,664135,420 182,365 120,704
-
- 134,539
90,000
67,270 12,000
67,270 36,000
-
-
-
-
125,000
- 125,000 124,980
29,280
-
29,280
63,440
15,233 18,000
54,000
139,382 72,485 146,399 122,915
15,233
1,791,786586,9641,604,7631,079,057
Page | 18
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
El Niño Ventures Inc. (“El Niño”) and Next Gen Metals Inc. (“Next Gen”) are companies with certain directors in
common.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company sold a total of 495,000 shares of Fire River Gold Corp. for total
proceeds of $65,799, resulting in a loss of $112,402.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company sold a total of 133,000 shares in other marketable securities for
total proceeds of $37,377, resulting in a gain of $2,360.
8.
INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATE
The Company’s investment in its associate is as follows:
Next Gen
As at 30 April 2013
Net Book Value
$
194,561
Fair Value
$
173,000
As at 30 April 2012
Net Book Value
$
298,225
Fair Value
$
461,333
The Company accounts for its investment in Next Gen under the equity method of accounting.
As at 30 April 2013
   
  Next Gen
Number of
shares
5,766,667
Company’s
interest
 
22%
Quoted
market
price/share
$0.03
Page | 19
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The Company acquired the investment in Next Gen through a combination of cash transactions and as part of the
agreement related to the sale of Destiny Gold Project (Note 9).
Next Gen
  
  
 As at 30 April  2013
Date acquired
Number of
shares
Acquisition
value
3 August 2010
26 September 2011
1,216,667
4,550,000
$140,830
$591,500
5,766,667
$732,330
Movements on equity investments for the years ended 30 April 2013 and 2012 are as follows:
Balance, 30 April 2011
  Additions
  Company’s share of net loss
Company’s
interest at the
date of
transaction
5%
17%
22%
Next Gen
$
-
732,330
(434,105)
Balance, 30 April 2012
  Additions
  Company’s share of net loss
   
  Balance, 30 April 2013
298,225
-
(103,664)
194,561
Summary of financial information as at and for year ended 30 April 2013 for the equity accounted investment, not
adjusted for percentage of ownership held by the Company, is as follows:
Next Gen
Current
Assets
$
Non-
current
Assets
$
Total
Assets
$
523,295
495,977
1,019,272
Total
Liabilities
$
60,717
Net Loss
$
468,266
Page | 20
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
9. EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION PROPERTIES
The Company’s exploration and evaluation properties expenditures for the year ended 30 April 2013 are as follows:
ACQUISITION COSTS
  
 Balance, 30 April 2012
      Additions
      Payments received
      Impairment
      Recovery of write-down
 Balance, 30 April 2013
  
 EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION COSTS
  
 Balance, 30 April 2012
      Assaying
      Drilling
      Engineering and consulting
      Field expenses
      Geology
      Geophysics
      Metallurgical study
      Payments received
      Cost recovery
      Recovery of write-down
      Impairment
 Balance, 30 April 2013
  
 Total costs
River
Valley
$
BC
Rock & Roll
$
Destiny
Gold Burkina Faso
$
$
Other
properties
$
Total
$
3,341,289
30,753
-
-
-
3,372,042
3,730,499
5,962
1,350
306,140
31,735
4,967
8,225
275,012
-
-
-
-
4,363,890
 
7,735,932
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,258
-
-
-
-
-
8,000
-
-
-
-
-(65,423)
- 65,423
-
-
 
-
(9,258)
-
 
-
210,000
-
(50,000)
(160,000)
-
-
174,268
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(174,268)
-
 
-
-
21,370 3,572,659
30,753
(78,000) (128,000)
(20,000) (180,000)
76,630
- 3,372,042
76,630
-
-
208,683 4,113,450
5,962
1,350
21,587 328,985
31,735
-
4,967
-
-
16,225
- 275,012
(7,881)
(65,423)
65,423
(222,389) (405,915)
- 4,363,890
 
- 7,735,932
(7,881)
-
-
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The Company’s exploration and evaluation properties expenditures for the year ended 30 April 2012 are as follows:
Page | 21
ACQUISITION COSTS
  
 Balance, 30 April 2011
      Additions
      Payments received
      Impairment
 Balance, 30 April 2012
  
 
 EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION COSTS 
  
 
 Balance, 30 April 2011
      Assaying
      Drilling
      Engineering and consulting
      Environmental
      Field expenses
      Geology
      Geophysics
      Governmental credits
      Recovery of costs
      Impairment
 Balance, 30 April 2012
  
 Total costs
River Valley
$
BC
Rock & RollDestiny GoldBurkina Faso
$
$
$
Other
properties
$
Total
$
3,189,989
151,300
-
-
3,341,289
902,055
523,827
1,520,691
419,959
63,024
145,047
6,519
269,714
-
(120,337)
-
3,730,499
7,071,788
60,000
61,000
-
(121,000)
-
594,046
-
-
10,745
-
-
-
8,000
-
-
(612,791)
-
 
-
73,954
58,250
(50,000)
(82,204)
-
1,355,311
164,514
-
22,410
-
-
-
-
(438,664)
(815,190)
(288,381)
-
 
-
75,000
135,000
-
-
210,000
-3,398,943
21,370 426,920
-
(50,000)
- (203,204)
21,3703,572,659
111,693
-
-
-2,963,105
- 688,341
-1,520,691
62,575 208,683 724,372
-
63,024
- 145,047
-
6,519
- 277,714
- (438,664)
- (935,527)
- (901,172)
174,268 208,6834,113,450
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
384,268 230,0537,686,109
Page | 22
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Project Overview:
River Valley, Ontario
By agreement dated 14 July 1999, the Company granted to Kaymin Resources Limited (“Kaymin”), a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Anglo Platinum Limited, an option to earn up to a 65% interest in the Company’s portion of certain
properties, including the River Valley property, the Goldwright property, the Frontier property (these claims were
allowed to lapse on 12 December 2006), the Washagami property (these claims were allowed to lapse on 10
December 2008), the Razor property and the Western Front property, in the Sudbury Region of Ontario.  During a prior
year, Kaymin elected to vest its option obtaining a 50% interest in the properties, upon having paid the Company
$300,000 (received in a prior year) and advanced and spent in excess of $4,000,000 for exploration on the properties.
Kaymin continued to fund exploration under the terms of a joint venture until 2007 and invested over $22 million in the
exploration of the property; however, as a result of capital expenditure reductions during the global financial crisis in
2008, no new funds were allocated to the River Valley Project above and beyond the minimal holding costs.
By way of a Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated for reference 13 December 2010, as amended on 6 April
2011 (the “Assignment Agreement”), the Company completed the purchase of Kaymin’s 50% interest in the River
Valley claims, providing the Company with an undivided 100% interest in the River Valley Platinum Group Metals
(PGM) Project.  Under the terms of the Assignment Agreement,  Kaymin exchanged its 50% interest in the joint
venture, for a 12% interest in the Company, based on the issued and outstanding common shares of the Company as
of 30 November 2010 (67,543,008 common shares). The aggregate purchase price for the 50% interest in the River
Valley PGM project was:
8,117,161 fully paid and non-assessable common shares of the Company (issued); and
Three-year warrants exercisable to purchase 3,000,000 common shares of the Company at a price of $0.30 per
common share (issued).
Included in the River Valley PGM Project are the following:
(i)
River Valley Property, Ontario
By agreement dated 15 January 1999 and amended 11 March 1999, the Company acquired a 100% interest in 226
claim units, known as the River Valley Property, located in the Dana and Pardo Townships, Sudbury Mining District,
Ontario. As consideration, the Company paid $265,000 and issued 600,000 common shares to the optionors.  In
addition, minimum annual exploration expenditures of $100,000 were completed. The property is subject to a 3% Net
Smelter Return (“NSR”).  The Company, at its option, can purchase up to 2% of the NSR from the vendors for
$2,000,000.
Page | 23
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
(ii)
Goldwright Property, Ontario
By agreement dated 30 June 1998 and subsequently amended, the Company earned a 25% interest in certain
mineral claims known as the Janes property, located in the Janes Township, Sudbury Mining District, Ontario. Certain
claims are subject to a 2% NSR.
(iii)
Razor Property, Ontario
The Company acquired a 100% interest in certain mineral claims located in the Dana Township, Sudbury Mining
District, Ontario for consideration of $30,000.
The property is subject to a 2% NSR.
(iv)
Western Front Property, Ontario
By agreement dated 16 November 2001, the Company earned a 70% interest in certain mineral claims known as the
Western Front property from a company (the “optionor”) with certain directors in common, for consideration of $55,000
and issuance of 20,000 shares.  In addition, an exploration expenditure of $50,000 was incurred.
The Company has the right to purchase an additional 30% interest in the property by paying $750,000 to the optionor.
The property is subject to a 3% NSR, the first 1% of which the Company can purchase for $1,000,000; the second 1%
can be purchased for $2,000,000.  The Company and the optionor will share the NSR buyout privileges in proportion
to their respective interests.
Heaven Lake PGM Gold Project, Ontario
On 13 December 2010, the Company staked 220 square kilometres (“km”), 10 km north of Lac des Iles Mine, North of
Thunder Bay, Ontario.
The property covers the entire Heaven Lake Greenstone Belt. The project lies near the junction of Highway 527 and
Road 811, midway between Thunder Bay and the railway community of Armstrong.
A joint venture partner is being sought to further explore this project.
River Valley East and West PGM Project, Ontario
On 15 September 2011, the Company staked 132 mining claims covering approximately 58,000 acres adjacent to its
River Valley palladium (Pd), platinum (Pt) and gold (Au) project in the Sudbury area of Ontario. The newly acquired
claim group is located east of the city of Sudbury, in the townships of Davis, Henry, Janes, Loughgrin, Pardo, Dana
Hobbs and McWilliams. The property is situated to the east of the Sudbury Basin and north of Highway 17.  It covers
two rock groups that host significant concentrations of Platinum Group Metals mineralization - the River Valley-East
Bull Lake Suite of rocks and the Nipissing Gabbro.
Page | 24
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Rock & Roll Property, British Columbia
On 28 July 2009, the Company obtained an option by Letter Agreement from Misty Creek Ventures Ltd. (Misty Creek
Ventures Ltd. was dissolved in January 2010 and its interest was transferred to Equity Exploration Consultants Ltd.),
First Fiscal Enterprises Ltd. and Pamicon Developments Ltd. (collectively the “Vendors”) on the Rock & Roll property
(the “Property”), located in the Liard Mining District approximately 9 km west of the Bronson airstrip and exploration
camp in northern British Columbia. Under the terms of the Letter Agreement,  the  Company can  earn a 100%  interest
in the Property over a four-year period by completing $2,000,000 in exploration expenditures, paying the Vendors
$130,000 and providing the Vendors with a total of 600,000 of the Company's shares (Note 12).  The Vendors will
retain a 2% Net Smelter Return royalty (“NSR”), of which 1% can be purchased for $3,000,000. The Property is also
subject to an underlying NSR of 3% and an underlying  Net Profits Interest royalty ("NPI") of 15%, both of which are
payable to Prime Equities International Corporation, and both of which are purchasable by the Forrest Syndicate
and/or heirs and assignees in their entirety for $1,500,000 each.
On 19 June 2012, the Company terminated the option agreement with the Vendors related to the Property. During the
year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a provision for write-down of $9,258 related to the Rock & Roll
Property.
Destiny Gold Project, Québec
In September 2009, the Company entered into an option agreement with Alto Ventures Ltd. ("Alto") on the Destiny
Gold Project (formerly the Despinassy Project) located approximately 75 km north of Val d’Or in the Abitibi-
Témiscamingue region of Québec (the "Alto Option Agreement”).  The property consists of 175 mining claims totaling
7,260 hectares ("ha"). Under the terms of the Alto Option Agreement, the Company will pay Alto $200,000, provide
Alto with 250,000 common shares of the Company, and complete a cumulative total of $3,500,000 in exploration
expenditures over a four-year period, with minimum exploration expenditures of $1,400,000, to earn a 60% interest in
the Destiny Gold property.
On 8 August 2011, the Company entered into a Letter Agreement (the “LA”) with Next Gen whereby Next Gen was
granted an option to acquire the Company's 60% earn-in option interest ("Option Interest") in the Destiny Gold Project
which Option Interest was granted to the Company pursuant to an agreement with Alto.
Under the terms of the LA, the Company will grant to Next Gen an irrevocable right and option to acquire the
Company's right, title and interest in and to the Option Interest in the Destiny Gold Project, for an aggregate purchase
price of: (i) a total of $675,000 in cash; (ii) 15,000,000 Next Gen  common  shares;  and   (iii)  4,000,000  Next  Gen
share purchase  warrants  exercisable into 4,000,000 common shares of Next Gen at varying prices for four years from
the date of issuance, all of which are due as follows:
Cash: Next Gen paid to the Company $50,000 on signing the LA and will make the balance of the cash payments to
the Company in tranches of: (i) $75,000 on or before the first anniversary of the LA; (ii) $200,000 on or before the
second anniversary of the LA; and (iii) $350,000 on or before the third anniversary of the LA.
Page | 25
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Next Gen Shares: The 15,000,000 common shares of Next Gen will be issued as fully paid and non-assessable
common shares, in tranches of: (i) 4,550,000 common shares (issued) (Note 8) upon Next Gen's delivery to the
Company of a notice of commencement of the Option; (ii) 5,225,000 common shares on or before the first anniversary
of the LA; and (iii) 5,225,000 common shares on or before the second anniversary of the LA.
Warrants: The 4,000,000 Next Gen Warrants shall be issued to the Company upon Next Gen's delivery to the
Company of a notice of commencement of the option. The Warrants are exercisable as follows: (i) 1,000,000 Warrants
are exercisable at $0.25 per share; (ii) 1,000,000 Warrants are exercisable at $0.30 per share; (iii) 1,000,000 Warrants
are exercisable at $0.35 per share; and (iv) 1,000,000 Warrants are exercisable at $0.50 per share.
In addition to the cash, shares and warrants payable by Next Gen, Next Gen shall also be responsible for all
remaining cash payments and exploration expenditures due to be paid or incurred, as the case may be, under the
Company’s agreement with Alto, along with any costs and expenditures associated with any resultant joint venture
that arises between Next Gen and Alto.  The Company will continue to be responsible for issuances of common
shares to Alto under its agreement with Alto until the date of exercise of the option and the transfer and registration of
the Option Interest from the Company to Next Gen in accordance with the terms of the LA.
On 27 June 2012, Next Gen elected to terminate its option with the Company on the Destiny Gold Project. Next Gen’s
decision to relinquish the Destiny Project was made from an assessment of the 2012 exploration results not justifying
any further capital outlay.
On 27 June 2012, the Company also terminated the Alto Option Agreement related to the Destiny Gold Project.  The
Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate efforts on advancing its
100% owned River Valley PGM Project. During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a recovery of
write-down of $65,423 related to a tax refund for mineral property expenditures related to the Destiny Gold Project.
Glitter Lake Property, Québec
By agreement dated 15 August 2003, as amended on 30 April 2006, the Company could acquire, from CanAlaska
Uranium Ltd. (“CanAlaska”), a company that previously had certain directors in common, a 50% interest in certain
mineral claims known as the Glitter Lake property, located in the province of Québec. As consideration, the Company,
at its option, could issue shares, make payments and incur exploration expenditures (the expenditure commitments for
2008 and 2009 have been extended to 2009 and 2010 as agreed to in an amendment dated 1 April 2008).
On 30 January 2009, the Company and CanAlaska signed an amendment to the option agreement whereby
CanAlaska assigned 100% interest in the Glitter Lake property to the Company for approximately $83,600 in payment
of CanAlaska’s remaining lease obligations to the Company that ended in November 2010. CanAlaska retains a 0.5%
NSR interest in the property. The original option agreement has thus been terminated.
On 24 April 2012, the Company entered into an agreement to provide El Condor Minerals Inc. (“LCO”) an option to
earn a 100% interest in the Glitter Lake Property, subject to a two-week due diligence period. In order to exercise the
option, LCO shall make the cash payments and issue shares as set forth below:
Page | 26
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
On directors and regulatory approvals(received)
 On or before 24 April 2013
 On or before 24 April 2014
 Total
Payments
$
50,000
50,000
50,000
150,000
Shares
 
350,000
350,000
300,000
1,000,000
Upon completion of the option, the Company will retain 2% NSR.  A 1% NSR can be purchased from the Company for
$1,000,000.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a recovery of write-down of $76,630 related to cash and
share payments received by the Company related to the Glitter Lake property.
Nickel Plats, Saskatchewan
By agreement dated 30 April 2007, the Company can acquire, from Diamond Hunter Ltd. (“Hunter”), a 100% interest in
certain mineral claims known as the Nickel Plats property, located in the province of Saskatchewan.
On 30 March 2009, the Company and Hunter signed an amendment to the terms of the agreement as follows:
Upon execution of agreement
 On or before 30 June 2007
 On or before 30 April 2008
 On or before 30 April 2009
 On or before 30 April 2010
 On or before 30 April 2011*
 On or before 30 April 2012*
 On or before 30 April 2013*
 Total
(paid/issued)
(paid)
(paid/issued)
(paid/issued)
(paid/issued)
(paid)
(paid)
Payments
$ 
10,000
20,000
30,000
15,000
15,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
150,000
Shares
75,000
-
75,000
50,000
50,000
-
-
-
250,000
Exploration Expenditures
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page | 27
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
* The payments of $20,000 are Advanced Royalty Payments based on the price of nickel maintaining a minimum
price of US$6.00/lb in the three months preceding each of the 4th, 5th and 6th anniversary of the agreement. In the
case that the price of nickel does not maintain a minimum price of US$6.00/lb in the three months preceding each of
the 4th, 5th and 6th anniversary of the agreement, the dollar amount of the Advanced Royalty Payments will be less
than $20,000 on the 4th, 5th and 6th anniversary of the agreement and the actual dollar amount will be negotiated
between Hunter and the Company at the time of the anniversary.
An additional 100,000 shares may be issued upon the vesting of a 100% interest if the results of feasibility studies are
positive.
The property is subject to a 2.0% NSR. The Company shall have the right to purchase a 1.0% NSR for $750,000.
By agreement dated 16 May 2007, the Company can acquire for $10,000 (paid), from Hunter, a 100% interest in
certain mineral claims known as the Nickel Plats adjunct property, located in the province of Saskatchewan.
The Nickel Plats adjunct property is subject to a 2.0% NSR. The Company shall have the right to purchase a 1.0%
NSR for $750,000.
On 2 May 2013, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM Project (Note 21).
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a provision for write-down of $20,000 related to the
Nickel Plats property.
Tonsina Property, Alaska
The Tonsina property, presently defined, consists of 46 mining claims in the State of Alaska, known as the “Marc”
claims 1-46 (ADL Nos. 610060 – 610105) which were staked in June, 2006.  These claims comprise a contiguous
group of State of Alaska ¼ section claims covering approximately 29.78 sq. km (744.62 ha, or 7,360 acres), herein
referred to as the “Tonsina Property”.  The claims are owned 100% by the Company.
During the year, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM Project.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a provision for write-down of $114,410 related to the
Tonsina Property.
Page | 28
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Kane Property, Alaska
The Company acquired certain mineral claims by staking in Alaska.  On 6 June 2007, the Company entered into an
option agreement with Stillwater pertaining to ongoing exploration on the property (the “Stillwater Option Agreement”).
Under the terms of the Stillwater Option Agreement, Stillwater could elect to spend US$3.5 million to earn 50% of the
first selected property and US$4.0 million on each subsequent selected property by 31 December 2011.
In March 2008, Stillwater elected not to continue with exploration on the property in order to evaluate new ground in
southeast Alaska.
During the year, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM project. During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company
recorded a provision for write-down of $98,102 related to the Kane property.
Union Bay Property, Alaska
By agreement dated 1 October 2002 and amended 2 April 2003 and 4 February 2004, the Company acquired from
Freegold Ventures Limited (“Freegold”), a company that formerly had certain directors and officers in common, an
option to earn up to a 70% interest in the Union Bay Property.
In order to earn a 50% interest, the Company purchased a private placement of $165,000 (2002) and made cash
payments, issued shares and incurred exploration expenditures.
Following the vesting of its 50% interest on 1 July 2006, the Company had the right to elect within 45 days to increase
its interest to 60% by completing a feasibility study within 12 months of vesting. This election was not made.
Under the terms of the agreement, the Company, upon the vesting of its 50%, issued 253,586 shares at market value
for $100,000 to Freegold.
By Memorandum of Agreement dated 4 May 2007, Freegold and the Company confirmed their 50/50 interest in the
property.
In October 2012, upon agreement between Freegold and the Company, it was agreed to cancel 6 of the claims. There
were 86 claims outstanding as at 30 April 2013.
During the year, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on these properties and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM Project.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a provision for write-down of $9,877 related to the Union
Bay property.
Page | 29
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Burkina Faso, Africa
On 18 January 2011, the Company entered into an agreement with Somitra to acquire a 100% interest in the
properties of Kangara, Kalempo and Lhorosso. The Company can earn a 100% interest in the properties under the
following terms of the agreements:
US$75,000 on signing of the agreement (paid);
US$30,000 on six months following the signing of the agreement (paid);
US$105,000 on the first anniversary of the signing of the agreement (paid);
US$120,000 on the second anniversary of the signing of the agreement;
US$150,000 on the third anniversary of the signing of the agreement; and
After completion of transferring the claims, the Company is required to issue 450,000 common shares of the
Company to Somitra or pay the sum of US$135,000.
Each property is subject to a 1.0% NSR with the buyout price of US$1,000,000 for any deposit over 1 million ounces
and US$500,000 for any deposit under 1 million ounces.
On 24 May 2012, the Company entered into an agreement to provide Roxgold Inc. (“Roxgold”) an option to earn a
100% interest in the Kalempo I, Kangara I and Lhorosso I exploration permits located in the Burkina Faso property.
In order to exercise the option, Roxgold shall make the cash payments, issue shares and warrants, and incur
exploration expenditures as set forth below:
On signing(received)
 On or before 1 October 2012
 On or before 7 October 2012 if decision is made to proceed
 Total
$ 
50,000
-
-
-
Payments Shares Warrants Exploration Expenditures
$
-
150,000
-
150,000
-
-
300,000 50,000 250,000
350,000 50,000 250,000
The 250,000 share purchase warrants have an exercise price determined by the Roxgold share price as of the close
of trading on 7 October 2012 and are exercisable for a period of two years from that date.
Upon completion of the option, the Company will retain 1% NSR.  A 1% NSR can be purchased from the Company for
$500,000.
In February 2013, Roxgold elected to terminate its option agreement related to the Burkina Faso gold projects.
Subsequent to Roxgold’s termination, PFN also elected terminate its agreement with Somitra.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company recorded a provision for write-down of $334,268 related to the
Burkina Faso property.
Page | 30
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
10.
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
The changes in the Company’s property and equipment for the year ended 30 April 2013 are as follows:
COST
  
 As at 30 April 2012
 Additions
 Disposals
  
 As at 30 April 2013
  
 DEPRECIATION
  
 As at 30 April 2012
 Depreciation
  
 As at 30 April 2013
  
 NET BOOK VALUE
  
 As at 30 April 2012
 As at 30 April 2013
Automotive
$
Office equipment Software
$
$
Leasehold improvements
$
Total
$
122,947
-
-
122,947
83,097
11,956
95,053
39,850
27,894
289,522
-
-
289,522
59,558
13,307
-
72,865
185,122
20,880
206,002
48,570
17,642
66,212
104,400
83,520
10,988
6,653
76,871 548,898
13,307
-
-
-
76,871 562,205
840 317,629
58,926
8,448
9,288 376,555
76,031 231,269
67,583 185,650
Page | 31
Pacific North West Capital Corp.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
11.
TRADE PAYABLES AND ACCRUED LIABILITIES
The Company’s trade and other payables are broken down as follows:
Trade payables
  Accrued liabilities
  Flow-through shares premium liability
   
  Total trade payables and accrued liabilities
As at
30 April
2013
$
44,157
31,198
-
75,355
As at
30 April
2012
$
76,664
25,833
311,218
413,715
During the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company issued Nil flow-through shares (30 April 2012: 13,734,593 flow-
through shares) for total proceeds of $Nil (30 April 2012: $3,612,089) (Note 5 and 12).  This issuance of flow-through
shares resulted in a flow-through share premium liability of $Nil (30 April 2012: $771,684) (Note 12).
Included in trade payables and accrued liabilities was $Nil due to related parties which are disclosed in Note 17.
12.
12.1
SHARE CAPITAL
Authorized share capital
The Company has authorized share capital of an unlimited number of common and preferred shares with no par
value.  As at 30 April 2013, the Company had 104,047,214 common shares issued and outstanding (30 April 2012:
103,747,214) and no preferred shares outstanding (30 April 2012: Nil).
12.2
Share issuances
During the years ended 30 April 2013 and 2012, the Company issued common shares as follows:
On 13 July 2011, the Company closed the first tranche of a non-brokered private placement of 2,583,333 non flow-
through units at $0.30 per unit, with each unit consisting of one fully paid and non-assessable common share in the
capital of the Company and one-half of one non-transferable share purchase warrant, each whole warrant entitling the
holder thereof to purchase one additional common share of the Company for a period of 18 months at an exercise
price of $0.40. A total of 4,332,141 flow-through units at $0.35 per unit were also placed (Notes 5 and 11). Each flow-
through unit consists of one fully paid and non-assessable common share in the capital of the Company and one-half
of one non-transferable share purchase warrant, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one
additional non flow-through common share of the Company for a period of 18 months at an exercise price of $0.45.
Page | 32
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The Company paid finder’s fees of $68,750 in cash.  This issuance of flow-through shares resulted in a flow-through
share premium liability of $216,607 at the date of issue (Note 11).
On 18 July 2011, the Company closed the second and final tranche of the non-brokered private placement of 620,000
non flow-through units at $0.30 per unit, with each unit consisting of one fully paid and non-assessable common share
in the capital of the Company and one-half of one non-transferable share purchase warrant, each whole warrant
entitling the holder thereof to purchase one additional common share of the Company for a period of 18 months at an
exercise price of $0.40. A total of 210,000 flow-through units at $0.35 per unit were also placed (Notes 5 and 11).
Each flow-through unit consists of one fully paid and non-assessable common share in the capital of the Company
and one-half of one non-transferable share purchase warrant, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to
purchase one additional non flow-through common share of the Company for a period of 18 months at an exercise
price of $0.45. The Company paid finder’s fees of $12,975 in cash.  This issuance of flow-through shares resulted in a
flow-through share premium liability of $14,700 at the date of issue (Note 11).
On 26 October 2011, the Company completed the first tranche of a non‑brokered private placement and issued an
aggregate of 8,075,452 flow-through units at $0.22 per flow-through unit for proceeds of $1,776,600 (Notes 5 and 11). 
Each flow-through unit consisting of one common share in the capital of the Company and one-half of one non-
transferable non flow-through share purchase warrant, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase
one additional non flow-through common share of the Company for a period of 18 months at an exercise price of
$0.32. This issuance of flow-through shares resulted in a flow-through share premium liability of $484,527 at the date
of issue (Note 11).
On 21 November 2011, the Company closed the second and final tranche of the non-brokered private placement, the
Company issued 486,500 non flow-through units at $0.20 per unit for gross proceeds of $97,300, with each unit
consisting of one common share in the capital of the Company and one-half of one non-transferable share purchase
warrant, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one additional common share of the Company for
a period of 18 months at an exercise price of $0.30.
Also in its second tranche, the Company issued 1,117,000 flow-through units at $0.22 per unit for gross proceeds of
$245,740 (Note 5 and 11), with each flow-through unit consisting of one common share in the capital of the Company
and one-half of one non-transferable non flow-through share purchase warrant, each whole warrant entitling the
holder thereof to purchase one additional non flow-through common share of the Company for a period of 18 months
at an exercise price of $0.32. This issuance of flow-through shares resulted in a flow-through share premium liability
of $55,850 at the date of issue (Note 11).
All securities issued pursuant to the first tranche closing are subject to a hold period that expired 27 February 2012. In
connection with the closing of both tranches of the financing, the Company paid finder’s fees of $62,474 in cash.
Page | 33
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
As at 30 April 2013, a total of 300,000 performance shares have been exercised and issued (30 April 2012 – 100,000)
at $0.01 per share.
During the previous year ended 30 April 2012, 100,000 shares at a deemed price of $0.11 per share were issued for
the acquisition of the Rock & Roll Property (Note 9) and 75,000 shares at a deemed price of $0.11 per share were
issued for the acquisition of Destiny Gold Project (Note 9).
During the previous year ended 30 April 2012, 100,000 performance shares were exercised for proceeds of $1,000
and 310,000 stock options were exercised for proceeds of $77,500.
12.3
Share purchase warrants
The following is a summary of the changes in the Company’s share purchase warrants for the year ended 30 April
2013 and year ended 30 April 2012:
30 April 2013
30 April 2012
Outstanding, beginning
 Granted
 Exercised
 Forfeited
 Outstanding, end of year
Number of
warrants
11,712,213
-
-
(7,910,463)
3,801,750
Weighte
average
exercise
price
$
0.35
-
-
0.37
0.30
Number of
warrants
10,941,309
8,712,213
-
(7,941,309)
11,712,213
Weighted
average
exercise
price
$
0.36
0.36
-
0.38
0.35
The following table summarizes information regarding share purchase warrants outstanding as at 30 April 2013 (Note
21):
Number of
warrants
3,000,000
558,500
243,250
3,801,750
Exercise
price
$0.30
$0.32
$0.30
Expiry date
13 December 2013
21 May 2013
21 May 2013
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
12.4
Performance shares
Page | 34
A total of 2,697,990 performance shares are reserved for issuance.  At the discretion of the Board, these shares may
be issued to such arm’s length parties as the Board considers desirable to attract consultants to the Company.
As at 30 April 2013, a total of 1,150,000 performance shares have been exercised and issued (2012: 850,000 shares)
at $0.01 per share.
During the previous year, the Board authorized the issuance of up to 300,000 performance shares at an exercise price
of $0.01 per share to the President and Chief Operating Officer of the Company.  These shares are to be granted at
the discretion of the Board as follows:
Shares
  100,000
  100,000
  100,000
  300,000
Scheduled Grant Date
6 September 2012
6 September 2013
6 September 2014
(allotted *)
* 100,000 performance shares were reserved for issuance at $0.01 per share during the year ended 30 April 2013. 
The fair market value of the performance shares at the date of allotment/accrual was $5,000 and was recorded in the
accounts as share-based payments (Note 13).  The offsetting entry is to share-based payments reserve.
During the previous year, the Board authorized the issuance of up to 150,000 performance shares at an exercise price
of $0.01 per share to the Vice President Exploration of the Company.  These shares are to be granted at the discretion
of the Board as follows:
Shares
30,000
 
30,000
 
 
30,000
30,000
 
30,000
 
 
150,000
Scheduled Grant Date
15 December 2012
15 December 2013
15 December 2014
15 December 2015
15 December 2016
(allotted*)
* 30,000 performance shares were reserved for issuance at $0.01 per share during the year ended 30 April 2013. 
The fair market value of the performance shares at the date of allotment/accrual was $900 and was recorded in the
accounts as share-based payments (Note 13).  The offsetting entry is to share-based payments reserve.
Page | 35
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
During a prior year, the Board authorized the issuance of up to 300,000 performance shares at an exercise price of
$0.01 per share to the Senior Vice-President of Corporate and Business Development of the Company.  These
shares are to be granted at the discretion of the Board as follows:
Shares
  150,000
  75,000
  75,000
  300,000
Scheduled Grant Date
1 February 2011
1 August 2011
1 February 2012
(allotted as at 30 April 2011*)
(allotted as at 30 April 2012**)
(allotted as at 30 April 2012**)
* 150,000 performance shares were reserved for issuance at $0.01 per share during the year ended 30 April 2011.
The fair market value of the performance shares at the date of allotment/accrual was $28,500 and was recorded in the
accounts as share-based payments (Note 13). The offsetting entry is to share-based payments reserve.
** 150,000 performance shares were reserved for issuance at $0.01 per share during the year ended 30 April 2012.
The fair market value of the performance shares at the date of allotment/accrual was $32,250 and was recorded in the
accounts as share-based payments (Note 13). The offsetting entry is to share-based payments reserve.
During the year ended 30 April 2013, 300,000 performance shares granted to the Senior Vice-President of Corporate
and Business Development of the Company were exercised at $0.01 per share for total proceeds of $3,000.  The fair
market value of the performance shares recorded in prior years related to the performance shares $60,750.  The fair
market value of $60,750 was transferred from share-based payment reserve to share capital.
12.5
Stock options
The Company has adopted a stock option plan whereby the Company may grant stock options to employees,
directors and/or consultants of the Company. The exercise price of any options granted under the plan will be
determined by the Board of Directors, at its sole discretion, but shall not be less than the last closing price of the
Company’s common shares on the day before the date on which the Directors grant such options.
Page | 36
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The following is a summary of the changes in the Company’s stock option plan for year ended 30 April 2013 and year
ended 30 April 2012:
Outstanding, beginning
 Granted
 Exercised
 Expired
 Forfeited
  
 Outstanding, end of year
Year ended 30 April 2013
Year ended 30 April 2012
Number of
options
7,233,000
-
-
(675,000)
(1,140,000)
5,418,000
Weighted-
average
exercise
price
$
0.32
-
-
0.60
0.33
0.28
Number of
options
8,268,000
1,000,000
(310,000)
(70,000)
(1,655,000)
7,233,000
Weighted-
averag
exercise
price
$
0.32
0.30
0.25
0.50
0.35
0.32
The weighted average fair value of the options granted during the year ended 30 April 2013 was estimated at $Nil (30
April 2012: $0.19877) per option at the grant date using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model.  The weighted
average assumptions used for the calculation were:
Risk free interest rate
  Expected life
  Expected volatility
  Expected dividend per share
30 April   2013
30 April 2012
-
-
-
-
1.49%
3.58years
129.05%
0.00%
Page | 37
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The following table summarizes information regarding stock options outstanding and exercisable as at 30 April 2013:
Exercise price
  
 Options outstanding
 $0.20 - $0.29
 $0.30 - $0.39
 $0.40 - $0.60
  
 Total options outstanding
Exercise price
Number of 
options 
outstanding
3,173,000
2,145,000
100,000
5,418,000
Number of 
options 
exercisable
Weighted-
average 
remaining contractual 
life 
(years)
2.56
2.75
1.68
2.62
Weighted-
average 
remaining 
contractual 
life 
(years)
Weighted- 
average 
exercise 
Price
$0.25
$0.30
$0.50
$0.28
Weighted- 
average 
exercise 
Price
Options exercisable
  $0.20 - $0.29
  $0.30 - $0.39
  $0.40 - $0.60
   
  Total options exercisable
2,777,000
2,130,000
100,000
5,007,000
2.45
2.77
1.68
2.57
$0.25
$0.30
$0.50
$0.28
Page | 38
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
13.
SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
Share-based payments for the following options granted by the Company will be amortized over the vesting period, of
which $109,454 was recognized in the year ended 30 April 2013 (2012: $499,462):
Grant date of stock options
  
  
 11 June 2008
 15 July 2009
 4 January 2010
 5 January 2010
 1 February 2011
 24 February 2011
 15 March 2011
 14 June 2011
 7 September 2011
  
 Share-based payments from stock options
  
 Performance shares allotted(Note 12)
  
 Total
14.
LOSS PER SHARE
Fair value of 
options 
granted
$
Amount 
vested in 
2013
$
18,701
8,613
42,773
71,056
45,030
667,912
22,705
81,708
163,298
1,121,796
-
-
-
1,303
-
58,158
3,757
-
46,236
109,454
5,900
Amount 
vested 
in 
2012
$
-
223
-
6,837
18,897
333,904
12,080
81,708
45,813
499,462
32,250
115,354
531,712
The calculation of basic and diluted loss per share is based on the following data:
Net loss for the year
 Weighted average number of shares – basic and diluted
  
 Loss per share, basic and diluted
2013
$
(2,341,609)
104,046,392
(0.02)
2012
$
(4,987,597)
97,288,446
(0.05)
The basic loss per share is computed bydividing the net loss by the weighted average number of common
sharesoutstanding during the year.  The diluted loss per share reflects the potentialdilution of common share
equivalents, such as outstanding stock options,performance shares and share purchase warrants, in the weighted
average numberof common shares outstanding during the year, if dilutive.  All of the stockoptions, performance shares
and the share purchase warrants were anti-dilutivefor the years ended 30 April 2013 and 2012.
Page | 39
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
15.
CAPITAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Company’s objectives are to safeguard the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in order to support
the Company’s normal operating requirements, continue the development and exploration of its exploration and
evaluation properties.
The Company is dependent upon external financing to fund its activities. In order to carry out the planned exploration
and to pay for general administration costs, the Company may issue new shares, issue new debt, acquire or dispose
of assets or adjust the amount of cash and cash equivalents.  The Company will continue to assess new properties
and seek to acquire an interest in additional properties if it feels there is sufficient geologic or economic potential and
if it has adequate financial resources to do so.
The Company is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.  There were no significant changes in the
Company’s approach or the Company’s objectives and policies for managing its capital.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Categories of financial instruments
16.
16.1
FINANCIAL ASSETS
   
  FVTPL, at fair value
       Cash and cash equivalents
       Short term investments – warrants
  Loans and receivables, at amortized cost
       Amounts receivable
  Available-for-sale, at fair value
       Short term investments – shares
   
  Total financial assets
   
  FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
   
  Other liabilities, at amortized cost
       Trade payables
   
  Total financial liabilities
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
As at 
30 April 
2013
$
848,953
56,196
206,831
530,768
1,642,748
44,157
44,157
As at 
   30 April 
   2012
$
3,440,410
103,883
133,839
975,174
4,653,306
78,664
78,664
Page | 40
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
16.2
Fair value
The fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities at amortized cost is determined in accordance with generally
accepted pricing models based on discounted cash flow analysis or using prices from observable current market
transactions.  The Company considers that the carrying amount of all its financial assets and financial liabilities
recognized at amortized cost in the financial statements approximates their fair value due to the demand nature or
short term maturity of these instruments.
The following table provides an analysis of the Company’s financial instruments that are measured subsequent to
initial recognition at fair value, grouped into Level 1 to 3 based on the degree to which the inputs used to determine
the fair value are observable.
Level 1 fair value measurements are those derived from quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities.
Level 2 fair value measurements are those derived from inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1,
that are observable either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 fair value measurements are those derived from valuation techniques that include inputs that are not
based on observable market data.  As at 30 April 2013, the Company does not have any Level 3 financial
instruments.
As at 30 April 2013
   
   
  Financial assets at fair value
       Cash and cash equivalents
       Short term investments – Shares
       Short term investments – Warrants
   
  Total financial assets at fair value
As at 30 April 2012
   
   
  Financial assets at fair value
       Cash and cash equivalents
       Short term investments – Shares
       Short term investments – Warrants
   
  Total financial assets at fair value
Level 1
$
848,953
530,768
-
Level 2
$
-
-
56,196
Total
$
848,953
530,768
56,196
1,379,721
56,196
1,435,917
Level 1
$
3,440,410
975,174
-
4,415,584
Level 2
$
-
-
103,883
Total
$
3,440,410
975,174
103,883
103,883
4,519,467
There were no transfers between Level 1 and 2 in the years ended 30 April 2013 and 30 April 2012.
Page | 41
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
16.3
Management of financial risks
The financial risk arising from the Company’s operations are credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk, currency risk
and commodity price risk.  These risks arise from the normal course of operations and all transactions undertaken are
to support the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.  The risks associated with these financial
instruments and the policies on how to mitigate these risks are set out below.  Management manages and monitors
these exposures to ensure appropriate measures are implemented on a timely and effective manner.
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of an unexpected loss if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its
contractual obligations and arises primarily from the Company’s cash and cash equivalents and amounts receivable. 
The Company manages its credit risk relating to cash and cash equivalents by dealing with only with highly-rated
financial institutions.  As at 30 April 2013, amounts receivable was mainly comprised of Goods and Services
Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax receivable and amounts receivable from related entities for shared office and
administrative costs (Notes 6 and 17).  As a result, credit risk is considered insignificant.
Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due. The
Company manages liquidity risk by continuously monitoring actual and projected cash flows and matching the
maturity profile of financial assets and liabilities.  As at 30 April 2013, the Company had $848,953 (30 April 2012:
$3,440,410) in cash and cash equivalents to settle current liabilities of $75,355 (30 April 2012: $413,715) and,
accordingly, liquidity risk is considered insignificant.
Currency risk
The Company is exposed to currency risk to the extent of its acquisition and exploration expenditures on its US
properties and African property.  The Company’s expenditures will be negatively impacted if the US dollar increases
versus the Canadian dollar.
The majority of the Company’s cash flows and financial assets and liabilities are denominated in Canadian dollars,
which is the Company’s functional and reporting currency.  Foreign currency risk is limited to the portion of the
Company’s business transactions denominated in currencies other than the Canadian dollar.
Page | 42
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
The Company’s objective in managing its foreign currency risk is to minimize its net exposures to foreign currency
cash flows by holding most of its cash and cash equivalents in Canadian dollars (Note 5).  The Company monitors
and forecasts the values of net foreign currency cash flow and balance sheet exposures and from time to time could
authorize the use of derivative financial instruments such as forward foreign exchange contracts to economically
hedge a portion of foreign currency fluctuations.  The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial
statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Other risks
Unless otherwise noted, it is management’s opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest rate risk
and commodity price risk arising from financial instruments.
17.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
For the year ended 30 April 2013, the Company had related party transactions with the following companies related
by way of directors or shareholders in common:
Next Gen Metals Inc., a company with management and certain directors in common with the Company.  Next
Gen pays shared office costs to the Company on a month-to-month basis.
El Niño, a company with management and certain directors in common with the Company.  El Niño pays shared
El Niño, a company with management and certain directors in common with the Company.  El Niño pays shared
office costs to the Company on a month-to-month basis.
Canadian Gravity Recovery Inc. (“CGR”), a company owned by the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. 
CGR provides management services on a month-to-month basis.
Onestar Consulting Inc. (“Onestar”), a company owned by the Senior Vice President of Business and Corporate
Development.  Onestar provides consulting services on a month–to- month basis.
17.1
Related party expenses
Related party expenses are summarized as follows:
Year ended 30 April
   
   
  CGR - Management fees
  Onestar - Consulting fees
  Total
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
2013
$
249,996
105,000
354,996
2012
$
428,694
63,000
491,694
Page | 43
Related party expense recoveries related to shared office and operating costs are summarized as follows:
Year ended 30 April
   
   
  Next Gen
  El Niño
   
  Total related party recoveries
2013
$
159,550
493,450
653,000
2012
$
303,513
431,411
734,924
The above amounts have been recorded as a reduction in the respective expense amounts of the Company.
The Company has a sub-lease agreement with Next Gen and El Niño in which Next Gen and El Niño each pays 25%
of the total lease payments of the current office space at 650-555 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3X7 (Note
20).  The Company provides invoices to Next Gen and El Niño for shared office costs, including the lease payments,
on a monthly basis.
17.2
Due from/to related parties
The assets of the Company include the following amounts due from related parties:
Year ended 30 April
   
   
  El Niño
  Next Gen
   
  Total amount due from related parties (Note 6)
   
  Directors
2013
$
112,785
57,631
2012
$
16,746
93,295
170,416
110,041
-
2,000
Total amount due to related parties
17.3
Key management personnel compensation
-
2,000
The remuneration of directors and other members of key management for the years ended 30 April 2013 and 2012
were as follows:
2013
$
330,423
27,000
84,872
2012
$
836,371
29,000
258,458
442,295
1,123,829
Page | 44
Year ended 30 April
  
  
 Short-term benefits - management fees, consulting fees and salaries
 Short-term benefits – directors fees
 Share-based payments
  
 Total key management personnel compensation
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
18.
SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION
18.1
Cash payments for interest and taxes
The Company made the following cash payments for interest and income taxes:
Year ended 30 April
 
 
 
 
 
Interest paid
  Taxes paid
 
  Total cash payments
2013
$
-
-
 
-
2012
$
-
-
-
18.2
Non-cash financing and investing activities
The Company incurred the following non-cash investing and financing transactions:
Year ended 30 April
  
  
 Common shares issued for properties
 Warrants issued for properties
 Common shares received for properties
 Warrants received for properties
  
 Total non-cash financing and investing activities
19.
19.1
TAXES
Provision for income taxes
2013
$
-
-
28,000
-
28,000
2012
$
19,250
-
591,500
223,690
834,440
Year ended 30 April
2013
2012
Loss before tax
  Statutory tax rate
   
  Expected tax recovery
  Non-deductible items
  Change in future tax rates
  Change in estimates to actual
  Change in valuation allowance
   
  Tax recovery for the year
$
2,341,609
25.08%
587,353
(23,943)
127,106
(729,237)
38,721
-
$
4,987,597
26.00%
1,296,775
(283,107)
(38,987)
-
(974,681)
-
Page | 45
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
19.2
Deferred tax balances
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to deferred tax assets are as follows:
As at 30 April
   
   
  Tax loss carry-forwards
  Property and equipment
  Exploration and evaluation properties
  Share issue costs
   
   
  Valuation allowance
   
  Deferred tax assets
19.3
Expiry dates
2013
$
3,192,977
99,565
28,680
32,212
3,353,434
(3,353,434)
 
-
2012
$
2,703,631
81,004
562,546
44,974
3,392,155
(3,392,155)
-
The Company’s recognized and unrecognized deferred tax assets related to unused tax losses have the following
expiry dates:
As at 30 April
   
   
  Non-capital losses
  2014
  2015
  2026
  2027
  2028
  2029
  2030
  2031
  2032
  2033
2013
$
701,754
684,375
851,782
1,271,389
1,336,195
1,530,437
267,302
1,445,791
2,392,285
1,799,369
Total non-capital losses
   
  Total resource-related deduction, no expiry
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
20.
COMMITMENTS
12,280,679
7,846,241
Page | 46
As at 30 April 2013, the Company had the following commitments:
As at 30 April 2013
   
   
  Management fees
  Rent and lease payments
   
  Total commitments
< 1 year
$
280,214
111,802
2-5 years
$
576,572
481,746
> 5 years
$
-
530,090
Total
$
856,786
1,123,638
392,016
1,058,318
530,090
1,980,424
The Company has a management agreement with CGR, a company owned by the Chief Executive Officer of the
Company, effective 1 April 2012.
The Company has a sub-lease agreement with Next Gen and El Niño in which Next Gen and El Niño each pays 25%
of the total lease payments of the current office space at 650-555 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 3X7 (Note
17).
Included in the long-term prepaid expenses is a deposit related to the current office space of $170,000 (30 April 2012 -
$Nil).
21.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
1.On 2 May 2013, the Company decided not to pursue additional exploration on the Nickel Plats and to concentrate
efforts on advancing its 100% owned River Valley PGM Project (Note 9).
2.On 15 July 2013, the Company announced a non-brokered flow-through and non-flow-through private placement of
up to a combined 16,000,000 units for gross proceeds of up to $800,000.  Finder’s fees may be paid in connection
with this private placement, subject to regulatory approval.
Each flow-through unit (the “FT Unit”) at a price of $0.05 per FT Unit will consist of one common flow-through share
and one-half of one non-flow-through, non-transferable, share purchase warrant (the “Warrant”), with each Warrant
entitling the holder to purchase one additional non-flow-through common share of the Company at a price of $0.10 per
share for a period of 12 months from the closing date.  The proceeds from the sale of the FT Units will be used for the
further development and exploration of the River Valley PGM Project and the exploration of the two large adjacent
properties.
Page | 47
Pacific North West Capital Corp. 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
30 April 2013
(Expressed in Canadian dollars)
Each non-flow-through unit (the “NFT Unit”) at a price of $0.05 per NFT Unit will consist of one common share and
one-half of one non-transferable Warrant, with each Warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share of the
Company at a price of $0.10 per share for a period of 12 months from the closing date.  The proceeds from the sale of
the NFT Units will be used as working capital and for funding other properties.
3.On 21 May 2013, 558,500 warrants with an exercise price of $0.32 and 243,250 warrants with an exercise price of
$0.30 expired (Note 12).
22.
APPROVAL OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the year ended 30 April 2013 were approved and
authorized for issue by the Board of Directors on 22 July 2013.
Page | 48
ITEM 19.        EXHIBITS
The following exhibits filed with, or incorporated into, this Form 20-F Annual Report for the fiscal year ended April 30,
2013:
EXHIBIT #
1.
1.1 Memorandum and By-laws dated May 29, 1996, as amended October 22, 1997, and Certificate of
Articles of Incorporation
Incorporation as an Alberta corporation
1.2 Certificate of Continuation and Articles as a British Columbia Corporation dated July 13, 2004
4. Material Contracts
4.1 2004 Stock Option Plan
4.2 2005 Stock Option Plan
4.3 Farm-In Agreement dated July 14, 1999 on the River Valley property, Ontario, between the Company and
Kaymin Resources Limited and Anglo Platinum Limited
4.4 Agreement between the Company and CanAlaska dated August 15, 2003, whereby the Company could
acquire up to 70% of CanAlaska’s Glitter Lake Property in Québec
4.5 Agreement dated April 30, 2006, between the Company and CanAlaska, amending the August 15, 2003
agreement to acquire up to 70% of CanAlaska’s Glitter Lake Property
4.6 Agreement dated April 1, 2008, between the Company and CanAlaska, amending the August 15, 2003
agreement, as amended April 30, 2006, to acquire up to 70% of CanAlaska’s Glitter Lake Property
4.7 Agreement dated January 30, 2009, between the Company and CanAlaska, amending the August 15, 2003
agreement, as amended April 30, 2006, as amended April 1, 2008, assigning 100% ownership of the Glitter
Lake Property to the Company
4.8 Joint Venture Agreement dated October 31, 2007, between the Company and First Nickel Inc. in respect of
the Company acquiring the Southern Ontario Properties (known as the Raglan Hills Property)
4.9 Letter Agreement dated December 9, 2008 between the Company and St. Andrew Goldfields Ltd., (“SAG”)
granting the Company an option to acquire a 100% interest in SAG’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Mystery
Creek Resources, Inc.
(2)
(7)
(7)
(7)
(1)
(3)
(7)
(7)
(7)
(7)
(7)
4.10 Letter Agreement dated June 26, 2009, effective June 25, 2009, between the Company and Fire River Gold
(7)
Corp. (“FAU”) granting FAU an option to acquire a 100% interest in the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary,
Mystery Creek Resources, Inc.
4.11 Agreement dated April 30, 2007 between the Company and Diamond Hunter Ltd. for the Company to acquire
(7)
a 100% interest in the Nickel Plats Project (Gochager Lake property)
4.12 Agreement dated March 30, 2009, between the Company and Diamond Hunter Ltd., amending the terms of
(7)
the Agreement dated April 30, 2007 covering the Gochager Lake property
4.13 Joint Venture Agreement dated August 14, 2009, between the Company and Alto Ventures Ltd. in respect of
(7)
the Despinassy Property, Quebec (known as the Destiny Gold Property)
4.14 Letter Agreement dated July 28, 2009, between the Company and Misty Creek Ventures Ltd., Pamicon
(7)
Developments Ltd. and First Fiscal Enterprises Ltd., granting the Company an option to earn a 100% interest
in the Rock and Roll Property
110
4.15 Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated December 13, 2010 between Kaymin, Anglo Platinum and
the Company, assigning Kaymin’s and Anglo Platinum’s 50% interest in the River Valley property to the
Company
(9)
4.16 Amendment dated  April 6, 2011 to the Mineral Interest Assignment Agreement dated December 13, 2010
(9)
between Kaymin, Anglo Platinum and the Company
4.17 Letter Agreement dated August 8, 2011 between Pacific North West Capital Corp. and Next Gen Metals Inc.
(11)
for the purchase and sale of the option to acquire a 60% interest in the Destiny Gold Project, Val D’or,
Quebec
List of Subsidiaries
Pacific North West Capital de México, S.A. de C.V., a México company, incorporated January 20, 2009
8.
8.1 Pacific North West Capital Corp. USA, an Alaska corporation, incorporated May 27, 2003
 
11. Code of Ethics
11.1 Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
12. Certifications of Disclosure in Annual Report
12.1 Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
12.2 Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
12.3 Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C Section 1350, Adopted Pursuant to Section 906
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
12.4 Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C Section 1350, Adopted Pursuant to Section 906
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
12.5 Certificate of Ethics for the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer
15. Other
15.1 Charter of the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors
15.2 Whistleblower Policy adopted by the Audit Committee on May 24, 2010
15.3 Technical report entitled “Revised Mineral Resource Estimate, Dana Lake and Lismer’s Ridge Deposits
incorporating Phase VI Drilling, River Valley PGM Project, Ontario for Pacific North West Capital Corp”,
dated June 10th, 2004, by Derry, Michener, Booth and Wahl Consultants Ltd. (“Derry, Michener, Booth and
Wahl Report”).
15.4 “Revised Mineral Resources Estimate, Lismer’s North and Varley Areas (Incorporating VII Drilling), River
Valley PGM Project, Ontario, for Pacific North West Capital Corp., dated May 2006” (the “GeoSim Report”)
prepared by Ron Simpson, P.Geo., of GeoSim, and John Londry.
15.5 NI 43-101 compliant “Technical Report and Resource Estimation of the DAC Deposit, Destiny Property,
Québec” (the “Destiny Tech Report”) for Alto Ventures Ltd. and Pacific North West Capital Corp. dated
March 1, 2011, by Todd McCracken, P.Geo.”, of Wardrop.
(11)
(6)
*
*
*
*
*
(6)
(6)
(4)
(5)
(8)
15.6 NI 43-101 compliant “Technical Report and Resource Estimate on the River Valley PGM Project, Northern
(10)
Ontario” for Pacific North West Capital Corp. dated June 13, 2012, by Todd McCracken, P.Geo, of Tetra
Tech Wardrop and Consent of Qualified Person to Technical Report.
15.7 Consent of James Stafford Inc. Chartered Accountants
*
111
NOTES:
* Filed herewith
Incorporated by reference from our Form 6-K/A on June 6, 2006.
Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed on July 27, 2010.
Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 20-F on October 24, 2003.
Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 20-F on August 9, 2004.
(1)Incorporated by reference from our Registration Statement on Form 20-F filed on paper September 17, 1999.
 (2) Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed on paper June 8, 2000.
 (3)
 (4)
  (5)
 (6)
 (7) Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report, as Amended, on Form 20-F/A filed on March 7, 2011.
 (8) Incorporated by reference from our Form 6-K for the month of March 2011 filed on April 4, 2011.
 (9) Incorporated by reference from our Form 6-K for the month of April 2011 filed on April 29, 2011.
 (10) Incorporated by reference from our Form 6-K for the month of June 2012 filed on July 5, 2012.
 (11)
Incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed on July 27, 2012.
112
SIGNATURES
The Company hereby certifies that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form 20-F and that it has duly caused
and authorized the undersigned to sign this annual report on its behalf.
Dated:  July 29, 2013
PACIFIC NORTH WEST CAPITAL CORP.
By: /s/ Harry Barr
_______________________________
Harry Barr
Chief Executive Officer
By: /s/ Robert Guanzon
_______________________________
Robert Guanzon
Chief Financial Officer
113