
EX-1.2 3 exhibit2.htm EX-1.2 Exhibit  EX-1.2
CENTRAL MINERA CORP.
Proxy Circular
The information contained in this Proxy Circular, unless otherwise indicated, is as of October 21, 2005. Any
reference to currency in this circular is in United States dollars (“US$”) unless otherwise noted.
The management of Central Minera Corp. is mailing this Proxy Circular to everyone who was a
shareholder of record of our company on October 28, 2005, which is the date that has been fixed by the
Directors of the Central Minera as the record date to determine the shareholders who are entitled to
receive notice of the meeting. We are mailing this Proxy Circular in connection with the solicitation of proxies
by and on behalf of our management for use at the annual meeting of the company that is to be held on Friday,
December 23, 2005. The solicitation of proxies will be primarily by mail. Certain employees of Central Minera
may also solicit proxies by telephone or in person. The cost of solicitation will be borne by Central Minera.
Details of the time and place of the meeting are contained in the Notice of Meeting that accompanies this Proxy
Circular.
Under our bylaws at least two shareholders must be present, in person or by proxy, before any action may
validly be taken at the meeting. If two shareholders are not present in person or by proxy, we will reschedule the
meeting.
PART ONE – VOTING
Who can vote?
The holders of Subordinate Voting shares and Variable Multiple Voting shares registered at the close of
business on October 28, 2005, the record date fixed for determining who is entitled to receive notice of the
meeting, are entitled to attend the meeting and to vote as a single class on all matters to be voted on by the
shareholders at the meeting.
Voting Shares
As at October 21, 2005, Central Minera’s issued and outstanding share capital consisted of:
a.  24,969,517 Subordinate Voting shares (previously Common shares prior to re-designation), each
entitling the registered holder to one vote at the meeting; and
b.  3,000,000 Variable Multiple Voting shares, each entitling the registered holder to that number of
votes at the meeting as determined by the formula:
B x 0.55
A x 0.45
where B is the number of issued Subordinate Voting shares and A is the number of issued Variable Multiple
Voting shares.
If a shareholder transfers shares after this date to someone else, and that person becomes a registered
shareholder, the new shareholder may cast the votes attached to the shares transferred provided that he or she
has asked our transfer agent, Pacific Corporate Trust Company, to include his or her name in the list of
shareholders. This request must be made at least 10 days before the meeting.
To the knowledge of our Directors and Officers, the only persons or companies who or which beneficially own,
directly or indirectly, or exercise control or direction over 10% or more of our shares on October 21, 2005, are:
Name
Carlo
Civelli
 
 
 
Total
Number of shares &
Class of shares1
1,066,1142
Subordinate Voting share
2,250,0003, 4
 
  Variable Multiple Voting shares
Percentage of class
4.2%
75.0%
Percentage of total
voting rights
43.1%
1.  Information as to ownership or control of shares has been provided by Mr. Civelli.
2.  250,000 of these shares are held directly by Mr. Civelli. 816,114 of these shares are held by Clarion
Finanz AG a company over which Mr. Civelli exercises control or direction.
3.  See Part Three – Compensation and Other Information – Interest of Management and Others in Material
Transactions.
4.  500,000 of these shares are held by Clarion Finanz AG and 1,750,000 of these shares are held by Acacia
Management Services Inc., companies over which Mr. Civelli exercises control or direction.
The Directors and Officers of Central Minera, as a group, control or direct 51.1% of the total voting rights of the
shares of Central Minera.
Voting in person
If you are a shareholder entitled to attend the meeting, you can cast for each share registered in your name on
the books of Central Minera:
a)  One vote for each Subordinate Voting share; and
b)  for each Variable Multiple Voting share, that number of votes determined by the following formula:
B x 0.55
A x 0.45
where B is the number of issued Subordinate Voting shares and A is the number of issued Variable Multiple
Voting shares;
on all resolutions put before the meeting.
Voting by proxy
If you do not come to the meeting, you can still make your votes count by appointing someone who will be there
to act as your proxy holder. You can either tell that person how you want to vote or you can let him or her decide
for you. You can do this by completing a form of proxy.
What is a form of proxy?
A proxy is a document that authorizes someone to attend the meeting and cast your votes for you. We have
enclosed a form of proxy with this Proxy Circular. You should use it to appoint a proxy holder, although you can
also use any other legal form of proxy.
Appointing a proxy holder
1
You can choose any individual to be your proxy holder. It is not necessary for the person whom you choose
to be a shareholder. To make such an appointment, simply fill in the person’s name in the blank space provided
in the enclosed form of proxy. To vote your shares, your proxy holder must attend the meeting.
If you do not fill a name in the blank space in the enclosed form of proxy, the persons named in the form of proxy
are appointed to act as your proxy holder. Those persons are Officers of Central Minera.
Your proxy vote
You may indicate on your form of proxy how you wish your proxy holder to vote your shares. To do this, simply
mark the appropriate boxes on the form of proxy. If you do this, your proxy holder must vote your shares in
accordance with the instructions you have given.
If you do not give any instructions as to how to vote on a particular issue to be decided at the meeting,
your proxy holder can vote your shares as he or she thinks fit. If you have appointed the persons
designated in the form of proxy as your proxy holder they will, unless you give contrary instructions,
vote your shares at the meeting as follows:
ü
ü
FOR the election of the proposed nominees as Directors;
FOR the appointment of Pannell Kerr Forster as the auditor of Central Minera.
For more information about these matters, see Part Two – Business of the Meeting. The enclosed form of proxy
gives the persons named on it the authority to use their discretion in voting on amendments or variations to
matters identified on the Notice of Meeting. At the time of printing this Proxy Circular, the management of
Central Minera is not aware of any other matter to be presented for action at the meeting. If, however, other
matters do properly come before the meeting, the persons named on the enclosed form of proxy will vote on
them in accordance with their best judgment, pursuant to the discretionary authority conferred by the form of
proxy with respect to such matters.
In order to be valid, you must return the completed form of proxy by 5:00 p.m. (Vancouver time) on Monday,
December 19th, 2005, to our Transfer Agent, Pacific Corporate Trust Company, at:
10th Floor
625 Howe Street
Vancouver, B.C.
V6C 3B8
Facsimile: (604) 689-8144.
Changing your mind
If you want to revoke your proxy after you have delivered it, you can do so at any time before it is used. You may
do this by stating clearly, in writing, that you want to revoke your proxy and by delivering this signed written
statement to Pacific Corporate Trust Company at the address indicated above.
Your proxy will only be revoked (A) if a revocation is (i) received by 5:00 p.m. in the afternoon (Vancouver time)
on the last business day before the day of the meeting, or any adjournment thereof, or (ii) to the person
presiding at the meeting before it (or any adjournment) commences, or (B) in any other manner permitted by
law. If you revoke your proxy and do not replace it with another that is deposited with our Transfer Agent, Pacific
Corporate Trust Company, before the deadline, you can still vote your shares must to do so you must attend the
meeting in person.
Non-registered shareholders
If your shares are not registered in your own name, they will be held in the name of a “nominee”, usually a bank,
trust company, securities dealer or other financial institution. Your nominee must seek your instructions as to
how to vote your shares.
Accordingly, unless you have previously informed your nominee that you do not wish to receive material
relating to shareholders’ meetings, you will have received this Proxy Circular from your nominee, together with
a form of proxy or voting instruction form. If that is the case, it is most important that you comply strictly with the
voting instructions that have been given to you. If you have voted and wish to change your voting instructions,
you should contact your nominee to discuss whether this is possible and what procedures you must follow.
If your shares are not registered in your own name, Central Minera’s Transfer Agent will not have a record of
your name and, as a result, unless your nominee has appointed you as a proxy holder, it will have no
knowledge of your entitlement to vote. If you wish to vote in person at the meeting, therefore, please insert your
own name in the space provided on the form of proxy or voting instruction form that you have received from your
nominee. If you do this, you will be instructing your nominee to appoint you as proxy holder. Please adhere
strictly to the signing and returning instructions provided by your nominee. It is not necessary to complete the
form in any other respect, since you will be voting at the meeting in person.
How a vote is passed
All of the matters that will come to a vote at the meeting, as described in the attached Notice of Meeting, are
ordinary resolutions and can be passed by a simple majority – that is, if more than half of the votes that are cast
are in favour, then the resolution is approved.
PART TWO – THE BUSINESS OF THE MEETING
Report of the Directors
The Annual Report of Central Minera for the year ended June 30, 2005 accompanies this Proxy Circular.
Financial statements
The financial statements of Central Minera for the year ended June 30, 2005 will be placed before you at the
meeting. They have been mailed to shareholders together with the Notice of Meeting and this Proxy Circular.
Election of Directors
Directors of Central Minera are elected for a term of one year. The term of office of each of the nominees
proposed for election as a Directors will expire at the meeting, and each of them, if re-elected, will serve until
the close of the next annual meeting, unless he or she resigns or otherwise vacates office before that time.
Under our Articles, the number of Directors may not be fewer than three nor more than ten. We currently have
three Directors.
The Nominees
2
The following are the nominees proposed for election as Directors of Central Minera. All of them are currently
Directors. Unless you give other instructions, the persons named in the enclosed form of proxy intend to
vote FOR those nominees. Each of the nominees has agreed to stand for re-election and we are not aware of
any intention of any of them not to do so. If, however, one or more of them should become unable to stand for re-
election, it is likely that one or more other persons would be nominated at the meeting for election, and, in that
event, the persons designated in the form of proxy will vote in their discretion for a substitute nominee.
Name, place of residence 
and position held
Principal occupation
during the past five years
Directors
since
Shares beneficially
  owned/controlled or
directed1
Michael Cytrynbaum2
Quebec, Canada
President
Murray F. Kosick2
British Columbia, Canada
Reinhard Siegrist2
Wettswil, Switzerland
Since August 1983, President,
First
Fiscal Management Ltd. (a private
consulting firm); from May 1996 to
date,
Chairman, Look Communications
Inc; from
May 1997 to March 2001,
President and
Chief Executive Officer, Ignition
Point
Technologies (formerly TeleLink
Communication Corporation),
May 2001 to
date Chairman, Ignition Point
Technologies.
 
Dentist
Independent investor and
financial advisor
July 2002
504,5903, 4
Subordinate Voting
shares
May 1999
December 1997
759,0015
Subordinate Voting
shares; and
250,0005
Variable Multiple
Voting shares
 
600,0006
Subordinate Voting
shares
1.  Information as to ownership or control of shares has been provided by the nominees.
2.  Member of the Audit Committee.
3.  Mr. Cytrynbaum exercises voting control or direction over these shares pursuant to an agreement dated as
of July 18, 2002, but disclaims any beneficial interest in them.
4.  Does not include 500,000 options to acquire Subordinate Voting shares (see Part Three – Compensation
and Other Information – Stock Option Plan) held by Mr. Cytrynbaum.
5.  Does not include 250,000 options to acquire Subordinate Voting shares (see Part Three – Compensation
and Other Information – Stock Option Plan) or 200,000 warrants to purchase 200,000 Subordinate Voting
shares at US$0.10 expiring on February 13, 2006 held by Dr. Kosick.
6.  Does not include 250,000 options to acquire Subordinate Voting shares (see Part Three – Compensation
and Other Information – Stock Option Plan), or 200,000 warrants to purchase 200,000 Subordinate Voting
shares at US$0.10 expiring on February 13, 2006 held by Mr. Siegrist.
Appointment of the auditor
During the financial years ended June 30, 2005 and 2004, Pannell Kerr Forster served as Central Minera’s
auditor, having originally been appointed in December 2003. Fees for audit services billed by the auditor to
Central Minera in 2004/05 for the 2004 fiscal year were US $5,600 (CDN. $7,000). Fees paid to the previous
auditor, Steele & Co. for the 2003 fiscal year were $US6,100.
Central Minera’s management recommends that Pannell Kerr Forster be appointed as Central Minera’s auditor.
Unless they are instructed otherwise, the persons named in the form of proxy intend to vote FOR the
appointment of Pannell Kerr Forster to act as our auditor until the close of our next annual meeting.
3
PART THREE – COMPENSATION AND OTHER INFORMATION
EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION
Plan Catagory (See
Stock Option Plan –
below)
 
Equity
compensation
plans approved by
security holders
 
Equity
compensation
plans not approved
by security holders  
 
 
Total
Number of
Securities to be
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
—
(a)
1,625,000
n/a
  
1,625,000
outstanding
Weighted-average 
exercise price of  
 
 
 
  options, warrants
—
and rights
(b)
0.20
n/a  
 
0.20
Number of
securities
remaining available
for future issuance
under equity
compensation plans
(excluding
securities
reflected in Column
(a))
(c)
1,375,000
n/a
  
1,375,000
Stock option plan
At the annual meeting held in December 1996, the shareholders of Central Minera approved the adoption of a
Stock Option Plan designed to enable Central Minera to attract, retain and motivate qualified employees.
Certain amendments to the Plan were approved by our shareholders in December 1999. As amended, the Plan
allows us to grant options to Directors, Officers, employees, consultants and advisors. The Plan is administered
by our board of Directors which is authorized to decide to whom options may be granted, the number of options
granted to any person, the exercise price, which may not be less than $0.15 per share, the term (which may not
be longer than 10 years from the date of grant) and any restrictions upon exercise. A maximum of 3,000,000
Subordinate Voting shares may be made subject to options under the Plan. There are currently 1,625,000
outstanding options, all exercisable at US$0.20 per share. Of these, 1,325,000 are held by our Directors and
Officers and expire on December 31, 2005. The remaining 300,000 are held by consultants to Central Mineral
and expire on December 31, 2006.
No options were granted to and no options were exercised by the Named Executive Officer in the financial year
ended June 30, 2005.
The following table sets out the value of unexercised incentive stock options held by the Named Executive
Officer as at June 30, 2005.
Name and position 
Michael
Cytrynbaum
President
nil
Unexercised Options  Value of unexercised
  
  as at June 30, 2005  
in-the-money options
  
 Securities acquired Aggregate value Exercisable/Unexerci
at June 30, 2005
on exercise
realized
sable
Exercisable/Unexercisable
nil
500,000 / 0
nil / nil
Compensation of Directors
We do not pay our Directors a fee for acting as such. They are, however, entitled to be reimbursed for
reasonable expenditures incurred in performing their duties as Directors. Central Minera may, from time to time,
grant options to purchase Subordinate Voting shares to the Directors. No options were granted to the Directors
during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005. The following table sets out details of incentive stock options
previously granted by Central Minera Corp. to the Directors.
Name
Michael Cytrynbaum
Murray Kosick
Reinhard Siegrist
Date of grant
October 7,
2002
 
October 7,
2002
 
October 7,
2002
Options granted
500,000
250,000
250,000
Exercise
price
 
US$0.20
US$0.20
US$0.20
Expiry date
December 31,
2005
 
December 31,
2005
 
December 31,
2005
Compensation of named executive Officers
Michael Cytrynbaum (the “Named Executive Officer”) has been the President of Central Minera since July 18,
2002. Central Minera does not have a Chief Financial Office and no other Executive Officer of Central Minera
was paid more than Cdn $150,000 in compensation during the financial year ended June 30, 2005. The
following table provides a summary of the compensation earned by the Named Executive Officer during the
financial year ended June 30, 2004, and in the preceding two financial years.
Name and position
 
 
 
Michael Cytrynbaum1
President
Annual Compensation
Fiscal  Salary  Bonus 
year  
 
ended 
 
2005  
 
2004
2003
nil
nil
nil
nil
nil
nil
Long-Term
Compensation
Other annual
Securities under
compensation   options granted (#)
US$72,000 2
nil
US$67,000 2
US$94,000 2
nil
500,000
1.  Michael Cytrynbaum has been the President of Central Minera since July 18, 2002.
2.  Consists of management services fees paid to First Fiscal Management Ltd., a private consulting firm
controlled by Mr. Cytrynbaum (see “Management Contract”).
Committee responsibilities and activities
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities relating to the Company’s corporate
accounting and reporting practices. The Audit Committee is responsible for ensuring that management has
established appropriate processes for monitoring the Company’s systems and procedures for financial reporting
and controls, reviewing all financial information in disclosure documents; monitoring the performance and fees
and expenses of the Company’s external auditors and recommending external auditors for appointment by
shareholders. The Audit Committee is also responsible for reviewing the Company’s annual financial
statements prior to approval by the Board and release to the public. Currently the members are Michael
Cytrynbaum, Murray Kosick and Reinhard Seigrist.
At the present time the Company does not have a Compensation Committee or Nominating Committee. All
decisions involving compensation and nomination issues are made by the Board of Directors of the Company.
Management contracts
The management functions of Central Minera are preformed by the Directors and Executive Officers of Central
Minera and, except as disclosed below, no management contracts have been entered into by Central Minera for
performance of the management functions of the Company.
Central Minera entered into an agreement dated July 18, 2002 with First Fiscal Management Ltd. (“First Fiscal”)
to provide it with management services, including assisting in formulating and developing Central Minera’s
strategic vision and policy and making recommendations to the board of Directors with respect to the ongoing
development of its business, finances and affairs. First Fiscal has also agreed to provide secretarial support
services and office facilities to Central Minera and is entitled to a monthly fee of Cdn $15,000 and to be
reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the course of providing the services. The principal shareholder
of First Fiscal is Michael Cytrynbaum who is the President of Central Minera. The agreement may be terminated
by First Fiscal on 60 days’ written notice and by Central Minera on at least six months written notice or, if First
Fiscal commits a material breach of the agreement, is unwilling or unable to provide the services contracted for
or commits fraud or serious neglect or misconduct in performing the services, immediately. If Central Minera
terminates the agreement by notice to First Fiscal, First Fiscal is entitled to a lump sum payment of the
management fee multiplied by the number of months in the notice period.
Effective March 1, 2003, in order to assist Central Minera in managing cash flow constraints, First Fiscal
voluntarily agreed to accept one-half of the monthly fee payable pursuant to the management agreement, as a
temporary reduction for an indefinite period of time. This arrangement remains in place.
Interest of informed persons in material transactions
No proposed nominee for election as a Director, and no Director or Officer of Central Minera who has served in
such capacity since the beginning of the last financial year of Central Minera, and no shareholder holding of
record or beneficially, directly or indirectly, more than 10% of Central Minera’s outstanding shares, and none of
the respective associates or affiliates of any of the foregoing, had any interest in any transaction with Central
Minera or in any proposed transaction since the commencement of Central Minera’s last completed financial
year that has materially affected Central Minera or is likely to do so, except as follows.
Effective July 31, 2003, 3,000,000 Units in the capital of Central Minera were issued pursuant to the conversion
terms of unsecured debentures issued by Central Minera in July, 2002 in the aggregate principal amount of
US$300,000. The debentures were converted into Units at the rate of one Unit for each US$0.10 in principal
amount. Each Unit consisted of (i) one Variable Multiple Voting share in the capital of Central Minera and
(ii) one non-transferable share purchase warrant to acquire, on or before July 31, 2004, one Subordinate Voting
share of Central Minera at an amended per share price of US$0.10. 500,000 Units were issued to Barbara
Cytrynbaum, the wife of Michael Cytrynbaum, the President and a Director of Central Minera; 250,000 Units
were issued to Murray Kosick, a Director of Central Minera; and 1,750,000 Units were issued to Acacia
Management Services Inc. and 500,000 Units were issued to Clarion Finanz AG, companies over which Carlo
Civelli, an Officer of Central Minera, exercises control or direction. (See Part One – Voting.)
Additional information
You may obtain additional information about Central Minera in our Annual Report for the year ended June 30,
2005, which is included with this Proxy Circular. Additional copies may be obtained without charge upon
request to Central Minera at P.O. Box 93038, Caulfeild Village R.P.O., West Vancouver, British Columbia, V7W
3G4; telephone (604) 687-6191; fax (604) 648-8341. You may also access our disclosure documents through
the Internet on the Canadian System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval (SEDAR) at .
Directors’ approval
The board of Directors of Central Minera has approved the contents of this Proxy Circular and its distribution to
each shareholder entitled to receive notice and to the auditor of Central Minera.
Joan Jamieson
Corporate Secretary
October 21, 2005
Vancouver, British Columbia
4