
10-K/A 1 v190746_10ka.htm Unassociated Document 
 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Amendment No. 2
to
FORM 10-K
x ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended: December 31, 2009
OR
¨ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from __________ to __________
Commission File No. 000-30563
DELTA MUTUAL, INC.
(Exact name of Registrant as Specified in Its Charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
Incorporation or organization)
14-1818394
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
14362 N. Frank Lloyd Wright Blvd., Suite 1103, Scottsdale, AZ
(Address of principal executive offices)
Registrant’s Telephone Number, Including Area Code:  (480) 477-5808
85260
(Zip Code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:  None
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:  Common Stock, $.0001 par value per
share
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of
the Securities Act.                                                                                                                                     
                             Yes  ¨   No x
Indicate by checkmark if the registrant is not required to file reports to Section 13 or 15(d)Of the
Act.              ¨ Yes  x No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section
13 or 15(d) of the Securities  Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such
filing requirements for the past 90 days.               x  Yes    ¨  No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K
(§229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in
Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.      ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant
to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).            Yes
¨    No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a
smaller reporting company.  (Check One):
 
Large accelerated filer  ¨
 
Non-accelerated filer ¨
 (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Accelerated filer  ¨
 
Smaller reporting company  x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act).
¨  Yes                x  No
Exchange
The aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates  as
of the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter was
$3,393,966.
Number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of March 31, 2010: 27,073,996.
Documents incorporated by reference:  None
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
 
Item 1. Business.
 
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
 
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
 
Item 2. Properties.
 
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
 
Item 4. Reserved.
3
 
3
 
11
 
14
 
14
 
15
 
15
PART II
 
Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Shareholder Matters and Issuer
Purchases of Equity Securities.
 
Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
 
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations.
 
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
 
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
 
Item 9. Changes In and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosure.
 
Item 9A (T). Controls and Procedures.
 
Item 9B. Other Information.
 
PART III
 
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance.
 
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
 
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters.
 
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
 
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
 
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
16
16
 
17
17
 
21
 
22
49
 
49
 
49
 
50
 
50
 
51
53
 
53
 
55
 
55
ii
EXPLANATORY NOTE
WE  ARE  FILING  THIS  AMENDMENT  NO.  2  TO  OUR  FORM  10-K  FOR  THE  YEAR  ENDED
DECEMBER 31, 2009 (THE “2009 FORM 10-K”) TO FURTHER AMEND THE NOTES TO THE
CONSOLIDATED  FINANCIAL  STATEMENTS,  THE  REPORT  OF  THE 
INDEPENDENT
REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM, AND ITEMS 5, 9 AND 12. IN THIS AMENDMENT
NO.  2,  OUR  FINANCIAL  STATEMENTS  HAVE  BEEN  RESTATED  DUE  TO  AN
UNDERSTATEMENT OF THE NUMBER OF SHARES OF COMMON STOCK OUTSTANDING
AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2009. IN ORDER TO PRESERVE THE NATURE AND CHARACTER OF
THE DISCLOSURES SET FORTH IN THE 2009 FORM 10-K AS OF APRIL 15, 2010, THE DATE
ON WHICH THE 2009 10-K WAS FILED, NO ATTEMPT EXCEPT AS DESCRIBED ABOVE HAS
BEEN MADE IN THIS AMENDMENT NO. 2 TO MODIFY OR UPDATE DISCLOSURES.
 
PART I
NOTE REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR PURPOSES OF THE "SAFE HARBOR" PROVISIONS
OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This Annual Report contains historical information as well as forward- looking statements.
Statements looking forward in time are included in this Annual Report pursuant to the safe harbor
provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements involve known
and unknown risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results in future periods to be
materially different from any future performance suggested herein. We wish to caution readers that
in addition to the important factors described elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the following forward-
looking statements, among others, sometimes have affected, and in the future could affect, our
actual results and could cause our actual consolidated results during 2009, and beyond, to differ
materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by or on our behalf.
Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements under the following
headings; (i) "Business Plan," about the development of certain projects and business
opportunities and the Company's attempts to convert these plans and opportunities into operating
businesses that generate revenues and profits; (ii) "Business Plan," about the intentions of the
Company to fund its businesses and operations by borrowings and the successful placement of
debt and equity financings; (iii) "Results of Operations"; (iv) "Liquidity and Capital Resources,"
about the Company's plan to raise additional capital; and (v) "Liquidity and Capital Resources,"
about the contingent nature of the consummation of any agreements with its contracting and joint
venture parties.
Item 1. Business.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms "the Company," "we," "our" and "us" refers to
Delta Mutual, Inc., and, as the context requires, its consolidated subsidiaries.
Background
We were incorporated under the name Delta Mutual, Inc. on November 17, 1999, in the State of
Delaware with the purpose of providing mortgage services through the Internet. In 2003, we
established business operations focused on providing environmental and construction
technologies and services to specific geographic reporting segments in the Far East, the Middle
East, and the United States. During the year ended December 31, 2008, the Company
discontinued all of its operations in the Far East (Indonesia) and its construction technology
activities that were conducted through its wholly owned U.S. subsidiary, Delta Technologies, Inc.
The Company’s construction operations in Puerto Rico were discontinued in 2008, which included.
Effective March 4, 2008, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, pursuant to
which we acquired from  Egani, Inc. shares of Altony SA, an Uruguayan Sociedad Anonima
(“Altony”), which owns 100% of the issued and outstanding membership interests in South
American Hedge Fund LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (sometimes herein referred to as
“SAHF”).  At the closing of the Agreement, we issued 13,000,000 shares of our common stock to
Egani, Inc. which constituted, following such issuance, a majority of the outstanding shares of our
common stock. Immediately following the closing of the Agreement, Altony became a wholly-
owned subsidiary of the Company. For accounting purposes, the transaction was treated as a
recapitalization of the Company, as of March 4, 2008, with Altony as the acquirer.
The principal business of Altony SA is the ownership and management of South American Hedge
Fund, which maintains its business office in Uruguay and has investments in oil and gas
concessions in Argentina and intends to focus its investment activities in the energy sector. We
have also signed a purchase option agreement related to the acquisition of approximate 150,000
hectares in forty mines located in the Northwest part of Argentina, south of the border with Bolivia,
with high lithium and borates brines concentration. As of December 30, 2009, Altony SA closed its
business operations and is currently under a process of dissolution.
 
3
Our principal offices are located at 14362 N. Frank Lloyd Wright Blvd. #2105, Scottsdale, AZ
85260. Our telephone number is (480)  480-477-5807. Our common stock is quoted on the Over-
the-Counter Electronic Bulletin Board under the symbol "DLTZ.OB".
 
General
The primary focus of the Company’s business at this time is the SAHF subsidiary, South American
Hedge Fund, which has investments in oil and gas concessions in Argentina and will continue its
focus on the energy sector, including the development and supply of energy and alternative energy
sources in Latin America and North America. As of December 31, 2008, we terminated all of the
construction technology activities that were carried out by Delta Technologies, Inc. (a wholly owned
subsidiary). Also as of December 31, 2008 the securities trading activities of South American
Hedge Fund were accounted for as a discontinued operation. As of December 31, 2009, we
terminated the operation of oil sludge processing facilities in Bahrain and Kuwait and the
manufacture of insulating concrete from ICF products in Saudi Arabia, which are accounted for
as  discontinued operations.
As of December 31, 2009, the Company holds 45% ownership interest in Delta –Envirotech, Inc.
which is engaged  in select business opportunities in the Middle East related to environmental
remediation and other projects. These activities are managed and carried out by majority
stockholders  of Delta-Envirotech, Inc., (“Envirotech”) a joint venture company incorporated in the
state of Delaware with headquarters in Virginia and formed in January 2004. The Company’s
majority stockholders are  Hi-Tech Consulting and Construction, Inc. and an unrelated
individual.  We hold a 45% interest in Envirotech, which has entered into strategic alliance
agreements with several United States-based entities with technologies and products in the
environmental field to support its activities. As of December 2009, management has determined
that Envirotech, Inc. is not considered the variable interest entity for the year ending December 31,
2009 and accordingly has been deconsolidated from the consolidated financial statements
effective December 31, 2009 (see “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition
and Results of Operations”, as well as our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this
Annual Report for further information).
Our goal is to generate meaningful growth in our net asset value per share for proved reserves by
acquisition, exploitation and exploration of oil and gas projects with attractive rates of return on
capital employed.   Specifically, we have focused, and plan to continue to focus, on the following
investments in South America.
Our Oil and Gas Investments
Our main source of revenue will derive from the sale of the crude oil and natural gas produced from
the oil and gas concessions in which we have made investments. In August 2007, SAHF signed
agreements to purchase partial ownership interests in four in oil and gas concessions in Northern
Argentina. The joint venture owning these concessions then started the process to obtain the
necessary government and environmental operating permits for the commercial exploitation of
these concessions. While we are not the operators of these concessions, we expect to have
representation on the operating committees that are responsible for managing the business affairs
of these concessions.
On September 25, 2009 SAHF was approved to be registered in Salta, Argentina as a branch of
SAHF LLC. In March 19, 2010 a tax ID number was granted to SAHF as the last requisite needed
to be included in the nine exploration/exploitation joint ventures for oil-gas blocks. Formal approval
of the Secretary of Energy authorities is expected in second quarter 2010 .Until the approval, SAHF
interest are protected with the Escrow Agreement with the joint venture members.
As per December 2009 the SAHF participation in the Argentina concessions are as follows:
Blocks with current Delta Mutual participation (through SAHF):
#Wells  Status
  
3 Testing
10 Product
Delta %  
 10
 10
Partners
JV Investment
% CO*   JHP(China)Maxi  2.7 MM
% CO*   JHP(China)Maxi  1.7 MM
21 Seismic
1 Seismic
2 Drilling
2 Geodesic
0 Geodesic
0 Geodesic
4 Geodesic
9
9
% CO*
% CO *
20%
20%
20%
20%
20%
New Energy
(HK)M
New Energy(HK)
M
 Ketsal
 Ketsal
 Ketsal
 Ketsal
 Ketsal
30 MM
5 MM
 1 MM
 .5 MM
 .5 MM
 .5 MM
 .5 MM
Block
Jollin
Tonono
Tartagal
Morillo
Guemes**
La Union**
Cobres**
Valles**
Rosario**
 
 
4
*CO means a carried interest in the project.
** Of these five properties, the Company and its joint venture partner have made initial investments
in Guemes. As of March 31, 2010, our joint venture partner has made the initial payments to the
government, for our share of which we will be responsible when SAHF is accepted as a qualified
company in Argintina.  This is expected to occur in the second quarter of 2010.
Jollin and Tonono Concessions
The Company has a 10% ownership interest in the Jollin and Tonono oil and gas concessions
located in Salta Province, Argentina. During 2007, SAHF purchased 47% of these concessions
and paid the purchase price by issuing a non-interest bearing note in the principal amount of
$1,820,000 to Oxipetrol-Petroleros de Occidente S.A. (“Oxipetrol”), one of the other owners, with a
maturity date of July 2008. The purchase price was subsequently reduced to $1,270,000 by mutual
agreement among the parties, prior to the maturity date. During 2008, the Company exchanged
50% of its ownership in this investment with a third party for no cash consideration, however, the
acquirer contractually agreed to assume 50% of the Company’s obligations with respect to future
development expenses.
In December 2008, a reentry workover was made in the Jollin 2 well for 23 days until gas presence
was detected in January 3, 2009 with a 170psi associated with the burning test. After several hours
of test a strong presence of sand stopped the test. After 10 weeks of workover with two different rigs
without a satisfactory performance of the well, a technical decision was taken to perform a 3D
seismic job around the Jollin Block including the Jollin 2. After the conclusion of the 3D, estimated
for second quarter 2010 a side track will be performed in the J2 or a bypass in the trouble stage in
the vicinity  of 2270 mt of the tubing.
5
We also expect to complete a 3D total research in the Tonono Block to identify the potential
reserves in the second quarter 2010.In 2008, the well Tonono 6 was declared commercially viable
by the authorities with a daily production around 90/obd. The produce was sold to the Grasta
refinery. In the second semester 2009 the daily average was reduced and technical decision was
taken to work over the well after the seismic conclusion is received.
Tartagal and Morillo Concessions
The Company has 9% ownership of the Tartagal and Morillo oil and gas concessions located in
Salta Province, Argentina. During 2007, SAHF purchased 18% ownership of these concessions
and paid the purchase price by issuing a non-interest bearing note in the principal amount of
$480,000 to Oxipetrol-Petroleros de Occidente S.A. (“Oxipetrol”), one of the other owners, with a
maturity date of July 2008. The purchase price was subsequently reduced to $450,000, by mutual
agreement among the parties, prior to the maturity date. During 2008, the Company exchanged
50% of its ownership in this investment with a third party for no cash consideration, however, the
acquirer contractually agreed to assume 50% of the Company’s obligations with respect to future
development expenses.
In December 15, 2009 a services contract was signed between the Joint Venture of Tartagal &
Morillo and Wiccap, a local company using the equipment, technical assistance and data
processing of Westerngeco Clean and Cut(Completion, opening, leveling and topographic
calculations for source and reception of seismic lines) of the work areas and the performance of 3-
D seismic work in the Tartagal Oriental Area and 2-D seismic work in Morillo Area. Wiccap has the
option to accept the data interpretation of Schlumberger. Conclusion of this services are expected
to be delivered to the Tartagal and Morillo JV in second quarter 2010.The total amount of seismic
investment is over $25 MM.
Exploration Rights (Guemes Block)
On February 6, 2008, SAHF purchased 40% of the oil and gas exploration rights to five
geographically defined areas in the Salta Province of Northern Argentina for $697,000. Provided
certain development activities are undertaken by owners, these exploration rights will remain in
effect until the year 2010. The initial development costs and fees were paid by the majority owner
and the Company incurred no additional expenses related to this investment in 2008.
As of March 12, 2010, we had completed analysis of 25 microbial and 8 sorbed gas samples along
a single traverse over the seismic line 33115 and across the Cuchuma prospect of the Guemes
area in the Northwest Basin, Salta Province, Argentina. The study area is located approximately 75
kilometers from the capital city of Salta by Province Route Nº 9/34. Samples were collected at 100-
150 meter intervals.
With this confirmation, the drilling plan on the K-K Salta CuN x-2001 was approved to start on April
1, 2010. The main objective is the Yacoraite formation ceiling and the Maiz Gordo formation
bottom. The drilling rig to be utilized is an Oil Well 66 Britain with Perterser operators. Well
completion is expected in May 2010.
Development Schedule for Our Oil and Gas Investments
 
In December 2008, a well located in the Tonono Concession received government approval to
begin commercial production of oil. When the test re-entry well at this location was completed in the
fourth quarter of 2008, it initially produced between 10-15 cubic meters of oil per day, the equivalent
of 90-101 barrels of oil.
 
The same well also contains natural gas. A natural gas pipeline connecting the Jollin Concession
to a nearby refinery is in the pre-construction phase. It is expected to become operational in during
the third quarter of 20 10. Upon completion, it will permit the joint venture to commence deriving
additional revenue from natural gas sales. The gas pipeline construction is delayed until the 3-D
seismic conclusion will be delivered to substantiate critical design factors as the total expected
delivery volume.
 
Deliveries of crude oil are expected to commence from the Tartagal and Morillo concessions during
the third quarter of 2010.  Deliveries of crude oil are expected in the second quarter of 2010 from
the Guemes Block.
 
6
The main costs associated with our oil and gas investments are related to oil and gas property
acquisition, drilling costs, initial well revitalization, gas pipeline construction and ongoing operating
expenses. The revitalization of wells allows short-term cash increases while holding the lease for
additional future development.
Commitment to Technology
In each of our core operating areas, we have accumulated detailed geologic and geophysical
knowledge and have developed significant technical and operational expertise.  This data is
analyzed with advanced geophysical and geological computer resources dedicated to the accurate
and efficient characterization of the subsurface oil and gas reservoirs that comprise our asset
base.    This commitment to technology has increased the productivity and efficiency of our field
operations and development activities.
Lithium Project
On March 1, 2010, we signed a purchase option agreement with Minera Jujuy from the Jujuy
Province, Argentina related to the acquisition of approximate 143,000 hectares with 29 mines
located in the Northwest part of Argentina, south of the border with Bolivia, with high lithium and
borates brines concentration. Currently, we are performing sampling and geological conclusions
with a local geological company in order to determine value to the property.
The Central Andes has the main concentrations of lithium brines in South America. World Class
deposits are: “Uyuni” in Bolivia, “Atacama” in Chile and “Hombre Muerto” and “Rincon” in
Argentina. The Argentina Puna is very rich in salt pan deposits, locally called "salares". The
biggest one is Salar Arizaro, located in the western side of the Salta Puna region.
The salt pan of the Puna has different compositions, one to the east and another to the west. The
eastern salars are rich in borate deposits (ulexite, 30% boric oxide), meanwhile the western salars
contain sulphates (sodium sulphate, mirabilite-thenardite) as their main economic minerals.
Likewise, all the salars has sodium chloride (halite) followed by calcium sulphate (gypsum) and
scarce carbonate (mainly travertines from thermal springs). Currently, the main mining activity
related to salars are borates, represented by ulexite (calcium-sodium borate) and borax (sodium
borate)  which are exploited for use in the boric acid industry. Common salt is mined from the upper
crust and sold for use in paper, leather, table salt and other minor uses.
Moreover, salars contain rich brines mineralized by different chemical elements. The most
important among them is lithium, followed by boron, magnesium, potash, cesium and strontium.  A
150 million dollar to obtain lithium from brines (600 ppm) was carried out by Minera del Altiplano, a
subsidiary of  FMC (an American company), in the salar del Hombre Muerto (Salta-Catamarca
boundary). A $30 million project is carried out in Salar del Rincón by Ady Resources Ltd., from
Australia.(Excerpts from a Geological Report by Geol G.Horacio)
A confidentiality agreement was signed by Delta  with a European joint venture on March 12th,
2010 for thirty days to perform samples procedures regarding the 150,000 hectares in the Jujuy
prospect.
7
Each of the black dots represents a mine location.
Development Activities
 
Development projects on the concessions in which we have investments include accessing
additional productive formations in existing well bores, formation stimulation, infill drilling on closer
well spacing, and retrofitting or reworking existing wells.
Business Strategy
The key elements of our business strategy are to:
·Make accretive acquisitions of producing properties generally characterized by long-lived
reserves with stable production and reserve development potential;
·Add proved reserves and maximize cash flow and production through development projects and
operational efficiencies; and
8
·Engage in adjacent exploration drilling where evaluation of the property is positive.
Our investments have focused on concessions where there are shut-in, plugged and abandoned
wells that have, in our assessment, a high probability of additional recovery of reserves through our
revitalization process. The revitalization process is directed toward bringing wells back into
production, or to enhance production through ordinary practices used in the oil and gas industry.
In addition, we will continue to evaluate newly developed alternative energy technologies for
possible investment and development.
Customers
 
Crude oil production from the Guemes and Tonono Concessions would be sold to nearby
refineries, and is transported by truck. The natural gas production of the Jollin concession will be
transported by a pipeline to be constructed to the Refinor oil company refinery also located in the
Salta Province in Northern Argentina. Sales are made based on spot market price postings, and
vary month to month. These prices typically are tied to domestic market crude and natural gas
prices.
 
Title to Properties
We believe that we have satisfactory title to or rights in all of our producing properties.  As is
customary in the oil and gas industry, minimal investigation of title is made at the time of acquisition
of undeveloped properties.  In most cases, we investigate title and obtain title opinions from
counsel only when we acquire producing properties or before commencement of drilling
operations.
Competition
We operate in a highly competitive environment for acquiring properties, marketing oil and natural
gas and securing trained personnel.  Many of our competitors possess and employ financial,
technical and personnel resources substantially greater than ours, which can be particularly
important in the areas in which we operate.  Those companies may be able to pay more for
productive oil and gas properties and exploratory prospects and to evaluate, bid for and purchase a
greater number of properties and prospects than our financial or personnel resources permit.  Our
ability to acquire additional prospects and to find and develop reserves in the future will depend on
our ability to evaluate and select suitable properties and to consummate transactions in a highly
competitive environment.  Also, there is substantial competition for capital available for investment
in the oil and gas industry.
Middle East
Envirotech holds the exclusive Middle East distribution rights to a gas-imaging product, which
detects and visualizes harmful gasses produced by oilfield and refinery operations. This product
was field tested by ARAMCO, the Saudi government oil company, during the third quarter of 2009.
ARAMCO is currently evaluating whether or not to purchase this technology and may elect to
purchase it from a competitor.
During the second half of 2007, Envirotech, as a distributor, introduced an organic supplement,
designed to increase crop yield, to one of the major farming operators in Saudi Arabia. During the
third and fourth quarters of 2008, the farm operator purchased sample quantities of the organic
supplement for crop testing. Envirotech received commission revenue of $43,000 associated with
these purchases. Subsequent purchases in commercial quantities will depend upon the evaluation
of the crop yield during the second quarter of 2010.
Governmental Regulation
The key points of the statutory and regulatory regime in respect of oil and gas operations in
Argentina are as follows:
9
Statutory royalties on hydrocarbon production are payable to the Province of Salta. These royalties
are monthly levies collected by the provincial government, based on hydrocarbon production lifted
within their territories under an exploration permit or exploitation concession. The applicable royalty
rate is 12% for exploitation concessions. The royalty is calculated from the well head value of the
hydrocarbon production, less certain allowable deductions. Royalties are, in principle, paid in cash,
although in certain cases royalties may be paid, or may be required to be paid, in kind. Concession
holders responsible for the payment of royalties are required to report to the Secretary of Energy in
a royalty return, the volumes of natural gas and oil actually produced for the purpose of determining
the computable production and the statutory royalty payments due of 12%.
A surface canon is a statutory, yearly fee payable in advance to the federal government on each
anniversary of the grant of the relevant concession and is calculated using the acreage of the
relevant concession. Surface canon payments are required in order to maintain a concession in
good-standing. The actual surface canon payable under a particular block depends on the nature
of the title over the relevant block. The concession joint ventures in which the Company is a
member pay to the Secretary of Energy the highest retention option canon for the current period.
The holder of an exploration permit or exploitation concession must compensate surface owners for
any damage caused by hydrocarbon activities to their properties. Such compensation may be
established by: (i) a court in a lawsuit for damages filed by the surface owner; (ii) mutual agreement
of the parties; or (iii) the surface owner’s acceptance of the tariffed compensation amounts
established by the government from time to time. Tariffed compensation charts for each of the main
oil and gas basins are issued from time to time, taking into account the agricultural activities
generally carried out in each such zone.
The concession joint ventures in which the Company is a member have executed written
agreements with the owners of the surface corresponding to its four exploitation concessions in
Argentina under which the joint ventures have agreed to compensate them following the applicable
tariffed compensation charts.
There are minimum work commitments and minimum investment commitments under statute in the
concession documents. However, the Federal Hydrocarbons Law 17,319 provides that the “holder
of an exploitation concession shall make such investments as may be necessary, within
reasonable periods of time, for the execution of the works required for the development of the entire
acreage comprised in the area of his concession ... in such a manner as to ensure the maximum
production of hydrocarbons”. To such end, the holders of exploration permits and exploitation
concessions must file each year with the Secretary of Energy a “Form of Investments”, reporting the
investments made during the preceding year and the projected investments for the then current
year.
All imports and exports of foreign currency into the domestic exchange market must be registered
with the Central Bank of Argentina; imports of foreign currency (except foreign direct investment,
foreign trade financing and initial public offerings) may not be repaid or remitted abroad earlier than
365 days, from the date the Central Bank recorded their entrance; importers of foreign currency
(except for foreign direct investment, foreign trade financing and initial public offerings) must
deposit 30 per cent. of their foreign currency imports into Argentina with a local financial institution
for a minimum 365 day term. Said deposit shall be non transferable and “non remunerative”
(without interest). The remittance abroad of interests on financial obligations payable by local
residents to foreign creditors is allowed, subject to the minimum 365 day stay described above.
Furthermore, the relevant financial obligations must be registered with the Central Bank.
Remittance of dividends approved in closed and audited financial statements is allowed, and
therefore dividends can be remitted abroad.
Research and Development
We do not anticipate performing any significant product research and development under our plan
of operation.
Employees
Currently,  we  have two employees: Dr. Daniel R. Peralta, President and CEO, and Malcolm W.
Sherman, Executive Vice President.
10
Available Information
We maintain a website at the address www.deltamutual.com.  We are not including the information
contained on our website as part of, or incorporating it by reference into, this report.  We make
available free of charge (other than an investor’s own Internet access charges) through our website
our Annual Report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K,
and amendments to these reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file
such material with, or furnish such material to, the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Our oil and gas investments made by our subsidiary South American Hedge Fund may not be
profitable.
The success of our investments in Argentina will depend to a great extent on the operations,
financial condition and management of the oil and gas concession and exploration rights in which
we have investments. Their success may depend upon management of the operations in which the
investments were made and numerous other factors beyond our control.
Drilling for and producing oil and natural gas are high risk activities with many uncertainties.
Our future success will depend on the success of our development, exploitation, production and
exploration activities.  Our oil and natural gas exploration and production activities are subject to
numerous risks beyond our control, including the risk that drilling will not result in commercially
viable oil or natural gas production.  Our decisions to purchase, explore, develop or otherwise
exploit prospects or properties will depend in part on the evaluation of data obtained through
geophysical and geological analyses, production data and engineering studies, the results of
which are often inconclusive or subject to varying interpretations.  Our cost of drilling, completing
and operating wells is often uncertain before drilling commences.  Overruns in budgeted
expenditures are common risks that can make a particular project uneconomical.  Further, many
factors may curtail, delay or cancel drilling, including the following:
·delays imposed by or resulting from compliance with regulatory requirements;
· pressure or irregularities in geological formations;
·shortages of or delays in obtaining qualified personnel or equipment, including drilling rigs and
CO2;
· equipment failures or accidents; and
·adverse weather conditions, such as freezing temperatures, hurricanes and storms.
The presence of one or a combination of these factors at our properties could adversely affect our
business, financial condition or results of operations.
Prospects that we decide to drill may not yield oil or gas in commercially viable quantities.
A prospect is a property on which we have identified what our geoscientists believe, based on
available seismic and geological information, to be indications of oil or gas.  Our prospects are in
various stages of evaluation, ranging from a prospect which is ready to drill to a prospect that will
require substantial additional seismic data processing and interpretation.  There is no way to
predict in advance of drilling and testing whether any particular prospect will yield oil or gas in
sufficient quantities to recover drilling or completion costs or to be economically viable.  The use of
seismic data and other technologies and the study of producing fields in the same area will not
enable us to know conclusively prior to drilling whether oil or gas will be present or, if present,
whether oil or gas will be present in commercial quantities.  In addition, because of the wide
variance that results from different equipment used to test the wells, initial flowrates may not be
indicative of sufficient oil or gas quantities in a particular field.  The analogies we draw from
available data from other wells, from more fully explored prospects, or from producing fields may
not be applicable to our drilling prospects.  We may terminate our drilling program for a prospect if
results do not merit further investment.
 
11
The global recession and tight financial markets may have impacts on our business and financial
condition that we currently cannot predict.
The current global recession and tight credit financial markets may have an impact on our business
and our financial condition, and we may face challenges if conditions in the financial markets do
not improve.  Our ability to access the capital markets may be restricted at a time when we would
like, or need, to raise financing, which could have an impact on our flexibility to react to changing
economic and business conditions.  The economic situation could have an impact on our lenders
or customers, causing them to fail to meet their obligations to us.  Additionally, market conditions
could have an impact on our commodity hedging arrangements if our counterparties are unable to
perform their obligations or seek bankruptcy protection.
We are subject to complex laws that can affect the cost, manner or feasibility of doing business.
Exploration, development, production and sale of oil and natural gas are subject to extensive
federal, state, local and international regulation.  We may be required to make large expenditures to
comply with governmental regulations.  Matters subject to regulation include:
·
drilling bonds;
· discharge permits for drilling operations;
 
  · reports concerning operations;
 
  · unitization and pooling of properties; and
the spacing of wells;
taxation.
·
·
Under these laws, we could be liable for personal injuries, property damage and other
damages.  Failure to comply with these laws also may result in the suspension or termination of our
operations and subject us to administrative, civil and criminal penalties.  Moreover, these laws
could change in ways that could substantially increase our costs.  Any such liabilities, penalties,
suspensions, terminations or regulatory changes could materially adversely affect our financial
condition and results of operations.
Our operations may incur substantial liabilities to comply with environmental laws and regulations.
Our oil and gas operations are subject to stringent federal and state laws and regulations relating to
the release or disposal of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental
protection.  These laws and regulations may require the acquisition of a permit before drilling
commences; restrict the types, quantities, and concentration of materials that can be released into
the environment in connection with drilling and production activities; limit or prohibit drilling
activities on certain lands lying within wilderness, wetlands, and other protected areas; and impose
substantial liabilities for pollution resulting from our operations.  Failure to comply with these laws
and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil, and criminal penalties,
incurrence of investigatory or remedial obligations, or the imposition of injunctive relief.
Market conditions or operational impediments may hinder our access to oil and gas markets or
delay our production.
In connection with our continued development of oil and gas properties, we may be
disproportionately exposed to the impact of delays or interruptions of production from wells in these
properties, caused by transportation capacity constraints, curtailment of production or the
interruption of transporting oil and gas volumes produced.  In addition, market conditions or a lack
of satisfactory oil and gas transportation arrangements may hinder our access to oil and gas
markets or delay our production.  The availability of a ready market for our oil and natural gas
production depends on a number of factors, including the demand for and supply of oil and natural
gas and the proximity of reserves to pipelines and terminal facilities.  Our ability to market our
production depends substantially on the availability and capacity of gathering systems, pipelines
and processing facilities owned and operated by third-parties.  Additionally, entering into
arrangements for these services exposes us to the risk that third parties will default on their
obligations under such arrangements.  Our failure to obtain such services on acceptable terms or
the default by a third party on their obligation to provide such services could materially harm our
business.  We may be required to shut in wells for a lack of a market or because access to gas
pipelines, gathering systems or processing facilities may be limited or unavailable.  If that were to
occur, then we would be unable to realize revenue from those wells until production arrangements
were made to deliver the production to market.
12
Crude oil and natural gas prices are volatile and a substantial reduction in these prices could
adversely affect our results and the price of our common stock.
Our revenues, operating results and future rate of growth depend highly upon the prices we receive
from crude oil and natural gas produced by the concession in which we have investments.
Historically, the markets for crude oil and natural gas have been volatile and are likely to continue
to be volatile in the future. The markets and prices for crude oil and natural gas depend on factors
beyond our control. These factors include demand for crude oil and natural gas, which fluctuates
with changes in market and economic conditions, and other factors, including:
·worldwide and domestic supplies of crude oil and natural gas;
  · actions taken by foreign oil and gas producing nations;
 ·political conditions and events (including instability or armed conflict) in crude oil or natural gas
producing regions;
  · the level of global crude oil and natural gas inventories;
  · the price and level of foreign imports;
  · the price and availability of alternative fuels;
  · the availability of pipeline capacity and infrastructure;
 ·the availability of crude oil transportation and refining capacity;
 
 ·domestic and foreign governmental regulations and taxes; and
  · the overall economic environment.
 
Significant  declines  in  crude  oil  and  natural  gas  prices  for  an  extended  period  may  have  the
following effects on our business:
· weather conditions;
·limiting our financial condition, liquidity, and ability to finance planned capital expenditures and
results of operations;
 ·reducing the amount of crude oil and natural gas that can be produced economically;
 ·causing us to delay or postpone some of our capital projects;
 ·reducing our revenues, operating income and cash flows;
 ·reducing the carrying value of our investments in crude oil and natural gas properties; or
 ·limiting our access to sources of capital, such as equity and long-term debt.
The current recession could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, results of
operations and cash flows.
The oil and gas industry is cyclical in nature and tends to reflect general economic conditions. The
U.S. and other world economies are in a recession, which could last well into 2010 and beyond.
The recession may lead to significant fluctuations in demand and pricing for crude oil and natural
gas production, such as the decline in commodity prices which occurred during 2008 and into
2009. If commodity prices decline, there could be additional impairments of our investment assets
or an impairment of goodwill.
Our business involves many operating risks that may result in substantial losses for which
insurance may be unavailable or inadequate.
Our oil and gas investments are subject to hazards and risks inherent in operating and restoring oil
and gas wells, such as fires, natural disasters, explosions, casing collapses, surface cratering,
pipeline ruptures or cement failures, and environmental hazards such as natural gas leaks, oil
spills and discharges of toxic gases. Any of these risks can cause substantial losses resulting from
injury or loss of life, damage to or destruction of property, natural resources and equipment,
pollution and other environmental damages, regulatory investigations and penalties, suspension of
our operations and repair and remediation costs. In addition, our liability for environmental hazards
may include conditions created by the previous owners of properties in which we have investments
or purchase or lease.
We do not believe that insurance coverage for all environmental damages that could occur is
available at a reasonable cost. Losses could occur for uninsurable or uninsured risks. The
occurrence of an event that is not fully covered by insurance could harm our financial condition and
results of operations.
13
Competition in our industry is intense and many of our competitors have greater financial and
technological resources.
We have investments in the competitive area of oil and gas exploration and production. Many
competitors are large, well-established companies that have larger operating staffs and
significantly greater capital resources.
Competition for experienced personnel may negatively impact our operations.
Our future profitability will depend on our ability to attract and retain qualified personnel. The loss of
any key executives or other key personnel could have a material adverse effect on investments
results and revenues. In particular, the loss of the services of our President, Dr. Daniel Peralta,
could adversely affect our South American oil and gas investment results.
International operations expose us to political, economic and currency risks.
With regard to our investments in oil and gas concessions located outside of the United States, we
are subject to the risks of doing business abroad, including,
· Currency fluctuations;
· Changes in tariffs and taxes; and
  · Political and economic instability.
Changes in currency exchange rates may affect the relative costs of operations in Argentina, and
may affect the cost of certain items required in oil and gas processing, thus possibly adversely
affecting our profitability.
There are inherent risks for the foreseeable future of conducting business internationally. Language
barriers, foreign laws and tariff and taxation issues all have a potential negative effect on our ability
to transact business. Changes in tariffs or taxes applicable to our investments in foreign operations
may adversely affect our profitability. Political instability may increase the difficulties and costs of
doing business. We may be subject to the jurisdiction of the government and/or private litigants in
foreign countries where we transact business, and may be forced to expend funds to contest legal
matters in those countries in disputes with those governments or with customers or suppliers.
We do not expect to pay dividends.
We have never paid dividends on our common stock. Management anticipates that any earnings
generated will be used to finance our current and planned business operations. For the
foreseeable future, we do not expect to pay cash dividends to holders of our common stock.
 
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments.
Not applicable.
Item 2. Properties.
As of December 31, 2009, our principal assets included Partial Rights Ownership in nine oil and
gas properties.
Developed and Undeveloped Acreage
The following table summarizes our estimated gross and net developed and undeveloped acreage
by concession at December 31, 2009.   Net acreage represents our percentage ownership of gross
acreage.  The following table does not include acreage in which our interest is limited to royalty
and overriding royalty interests.
14
Block Name
Tartagal Oriental
Morillo
Tonono
Jollin
Guemes
Rosario
Union
Valles
Cobres
Reserves
Developed Acreage  
  Net
  Gross  
 
 
  
0 
  
0 
  
  
 
66Km2   
  
32Km2   
  
  
0 
  
  
0 
  
  
0 
  
  
0 
  
  
0
6.6Km2  
3.2Km2
8971Km2   
   4510Km2   
   2467Km2   
   5756Km2   
   2558Km2
Undeveloped Acreage  
  Gross  
 
   7065Km2    635.85Km2
   3518Km2    316.62Km2
Net
1794Km2
902Km2
493Km2
1115Km2
511Km2
We expect to have completed our reservoir engineering analysis as of July 31, 2010.
Executive Offices
In November 2009, we entered into a one-year lease for our principal office in Scottsdale, Arizona,
at a monthly rental of $1,276. We anticipate that our current office space will accommodate our
operations for the foreseeable future.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Former Employee Wage Claims
On September 16, 2008, the Company was notified of a complaint filed with the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor & Industry by its former President and CEO alleging non-payment of wages in
the amount of $53,271. The Company also received notice of a similar complaint filed by a former
employee alleging non-payment of wages in the amount of $17,782. In October 2008, the Company
entered into repayment agreements with both of the former employees. As of the date of this report,
the Company has not made any payments to these two former employees pursuant to these
agreements. In addition, the employee that alleged non-payment of wages in the amount of
$17,782 has obtained a default judgment against the Company, entered on January 8, 2010 in the
Court of Common Pleas of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, Civil Division, in the amount of
$29,625.94 as to this wage claim. As of December 31, 2009, the Company has recorded an
accrued liability of $17,782 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We believe that
a portion of the claim is without merit and are vigorously contesting the claim as of the date of this
filing.
The Company has been notified by letter dated October 9, 2009 of a complaint filed with the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry by its former Chief Financial Officer alleging non-
payment of wages in the amount of $131,250. The Company has responded to the Department of
Labor & Industry that the wages owed this former officer are substantially less than alleged in this
claim and are vigorously contesting the claim as of the date of this filing. As of the date of filing, the
Company is awaiting a response from the Department of Labor and Industry and this matter is
disclosed in the contingent liabilities footnote to the consolidated financial statements.
Legal Fee Collection Claim
Delta Technologies, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and a discontinued operation
(“Delta Technologies”), has been notified by a collection agency on behalf of Wolf Block LLP (“Wolf
Block”), a law firm that had provided intellectually property legal services to Delta Technologies,
that it had been retained in an attempt to collect a past due amount of approximately $41,000. The
Company is in discussions with the collection agency and believes that the resolution of this matter
will have no material effect on the Company or its operations.
15
Item 4. Reserved.
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Shareholder Matters and Issuer Purchases
of Equity Securities.
Our common stock has been quoted on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board operated by the
National Association of Securities Dealers, since approximately February 1, 2001.
Our shares are listed under the symbol "DLTZ”. The quotations in the table below reflect inter-
dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down, or commission and may not represent actual
transactions. Prices commencing January 1, 2009 reflect the 1-for-10 reverse stock split effective
July 6, 2009.
4th Quarter
2008:
 
 
 
 
2009:
 
 
 
 
2010:
1st Quarter
2nd Quarter
3rd Quarter
1st Quarter
2nd Quarter
3rd Quarter
4th Quarter
1st Quarter
High   
   
  
0.07   
  
  
0.07   
0.08   
  
0.08   
  
  
    
0.60   
  
0.90   
  
  
0.39   
0.52   
  
    
  
  
0.50
Low  
 
0.01 
0.04 
0.04 
0.03 
  
0.30 
0.21 
0.05 
0.06 
  
0.15
During the last two fiscal years, no cash dividends have been declared on Delta's common stock
and Company management does not anticipate that dividends will be paid in the foreseeable
future. The payment of dividends is within the discretion of the board of directors and will depend
on the Company's earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, and other relevant factors.
There are no restrictions that currently limit the Company's ability to pay dividends on its common
stock other than those generally imposed by applicable state law.
As of April 13, 2010, there were approximately 100 record holders of our common stock.
Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
The following table sets forth the sales of unregistered securities by the Company in the year
ended December 31, 2009.
Total Offering Price/
Principal
  Underwriter  Underwriting Discounts
$0.35 per share/NA
NA
NA
$0.60 per share/NA
Date
April 21, 2009
April 27, 2009
Purchaser
Title and Amount(1) 
   
   
  28,572 shares of
  Consultant
common stock
  200,000 shares of
common stock
Consultant
August 24, 2009   64,584 shares of
Private Investor
common stock
October 27, 2009   130,000 shares of
Consultant
common stock
October 27, 2009   166,662 shares of
Private Investor
October 28, 2009   62,500 shares of
common stock
November 10,
2009
December 1,
2009
common stock
  130,000 shares of
common stock
  50,000 shares of
common stock
Private Investor
Private Investor
Private Investor
$0.08 per share/NA
$0.15 per share/NA
$0.06 per share/NA
$0.08 per share/NA
$0.08 per share/NA
$0.13 per share/NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
December 4,
2009
December 22,
2009
December 23,
2009
December 24,
2009
December 30,
2009
60,000 shares of
common stock
issued in
conversion of
$35,000 principal
amount of note
  25,000 shares of
common stock
  133,334 shares of
common stock
  333,334 shares of
common stock
  333,334 shares of
common stock
Private Investor
NA
$0.58 per share/NA
Private Investor
Private Investor
Private Investor
Private Investor
NA
NA
NA
NA
$0.13 per share/NA
$0.15 per share/NA
$0.15 per share/NA
$0.15 per share/NA
(1) The issuances to lenders, consultants and investors are viewed by the Company as exempt
from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“Securities Act”), alternatively, as
transactions either not involving any public offering, or as exempt under the provisions of
Regulation D, Regulation S or Rule 701 promulgated by the SEC under the Securities Act.
 
16
The Company has no equity compensation plans in effect, or any securities outstanding under
equity compensation plans, as of the date of this report.
Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
Not applicable.
Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should
be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto and the other
financial information included elsewhere in this report.
Certain statements contained in this report, including, without limitation, statements containing the
words "believes," "anticipates," "expects" and words of similar import, constitute "forward looking
statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such
forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties. Our actual results
may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of
certain factors, including our ability to create, sustain, manage or forecast our growth; our ability to
attract and retain key personnel; changes in our business strategy or development plans;
competition; business disruptions; adverse publicity; and international, national and local general
economic and market conditions.
GENERAL
On March 4, 2008, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”)
with Egani, Inc., an Arizona corporation (“Egani”). Pursuant to the Agreement, we acquired from
Egani 100% of the shares of stock held by Egani in Altony S.A., an Uruguay Sociedad Anonima,
(“Altony”) which owns 100% of the issued and outstanding membership interests in South
American Hedge Fund LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (sometimes herein referred to as
“SAHF”). At the closing of the Agreement, we issued 13,000,000 shares of our Common stock to
Egani for the purchase of Altony which constituted, following such issuance, a majority of the
outstanding shares of our common stock. Immediately following the closing of the Agreement,
Altony became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. For accounting purposes, the
transaction was treated as a recapitalization of the Company with Altony as the acquirer.
The Company’s principal business at this time is conducted by our subsidiary, South American
Hedge Fund, which has investments in oil and gas concessions in Argentina and intends to focus
its investments in the energy sector, including development of energy producing investments and
alternative energy production in Latin America and North America. Following the acquisition of
SAHF, management has continued to pursue selected business opportunities in the Middle East
and has also signed a purchase option agreement related to the acquisition of approximate
143,000 hectares with 29 mines located in the Northwest part of Argentina, south of the border with
Bolivia, with high lithium and borates brines concentration.
DECONSOLIDATION OF VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITY
As described in Part I of this report, as of December 31, 2009, the Company holds 45% ownership
interest in Delta –Envirotech, Inc. which is engaged  in activities related to environmental
remediation and other projects. These activities are managed and carried out by majority
stockholders  of Delta-Envirotech, Inc., (“Envirotech”), a joint venture company incorporated in the
state of Delaware with headquarters in Virginia and formed in January 2004. The Company’s
majority stockholders are Hi-Tech Consulting and Construction, Inc. and an unrelated
individual.  The Company holds 45% interest in Envirotech, which has entered into strategic
alliance agreements with several United States-based entities with technologies and products in
the environmental field to support its activities.
17
FASB ASC 810 “Consolidation” required the consolidation of a variable interest entity (VIE) if the
Company is deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the VIE. FASB ASC 810 requires an entity to
assess its equity investments and certain other contractual interests to determine whether they are
VIEs. As defined in FASB ASC 810, variable interests are contractual, ownership or other interests
in an entity that change with changes in entity’s net asset value. Variable interests in an entity may
arise from financial instruments, service contracts, guarantees, leases or other arrangements with
the VIE. An entity that will absorb a majority of the VIE’s expected losses orexpected residual
returns, as defined in FASB ASC 810, is considered the primary beneficiary of the VIE. The primary
beneficiary should include the VIE’s assets, liabilities and results of operations in its consolidated
financial statements until a reconsideration event, as defined in FASB ASC 810, occurs to require
deconsolidation of the VIE. At the deconsolidation date, the assets and liabilities of the VIE are
removed from the consolidated financial statements and any assets and liabilities of the Company
that were eliminated in consolidation are restored. The gain recognized from deconsolidating VIE
is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as gain on deconsolidation of the VIE.
As of December 2009, management has determined that Envirotech is not considered a VIE for the
year ending December 31, 2009, and accordingly Envirotech has been deconsolidated from the
accompanying consolidated financial statements effective December 31, 2009. As of December 31,
2009, the Company is not exercising significant influence over operating and financing policies of
Envirotech and therefore Envirotech is not considered a VIE. As a result of this deconsolidation, the
Company has removed the assets and liabilities of the VIE from the consolidated financial
statements and any assets and liabilities of Envirotech that were eliminated in consolidation are
restored at fair value.
Prior to December 31, 2009, the Company was deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the
Envirotech due to relatively significant financial support provided to this entity in terms of
investment of $375,000 (which represents 45% ownership of the Company) and notes receivable of
$810,867. However, due to significant losses of Envirotech and its deconsolidation as of December
31, 2009, the Company’s entire investment and notes receivable in the aggregate of approximately
$1,186,000 as of December 31, 2009 has been reduced to zero in order to account for restored
assets at fair value. On the other hand, as of December 31, 2009, the Company was not liable for
Envirotech’s liabilities and losses totaling approximately $882,000, net of the aforesaid losses on
investment and notes receivable in the aggregate of approximately $1,186,000 per agreed terms
with Envirotech and which resulted in a net gain on deconsolidation of approximately $882,000
recorded as a separate line item in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
As of December 30, 2009, the Company closed business operations of Altony SA and this
company is currently under a process of dissolution.
Reverse Stock Split
Effective July 6, 2009, we effected a 1:10 reverse split (the “Reverse Split”) of our outstanding
common stock, pursuant to a definitive information statement filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Following effectiveness of the Reverse Split, each ten (10) shares of our
common stock outstanding immediately prior to the effective date was automatically converted into
one (1) share of our common stock. By reason of the Reverse Split, the number of outstanding
shares of our common stock was reduced from 227,225,270 shares to 22,722,527 shares.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009, we had a gain from continuing operations of
approximately $835,000. The Company has an accumulated deficit of approximately $3,596,337
and working capital deficiency of approximately $967,042 as of December 31, 2009.  Additionally,
the Company may require additional funding to execute its strategic business plan for 2010. These
factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Successful business operations and its transition to attaining profitability is dependent upon
obtaining additional financing and achieving a level of revenue adequate to support its cost
structure. There can be no assurances that there will be adequate financing available to the
Company, if the Company requires financing. The accompanying consolidated financial statements
have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. This basis of
accounting contemplates the recovery of the Company’s assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in
the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any
adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or
the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
18
The Independent Auditors' Report and Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements accompanying this report state that substantial doubt has been raised about our ability
to continue as a going concern.
2009 COMPARED TO 2008
For accounting and financial reporting purposes only, our acquisition of Altony on March 4, 2008
was treated as a reverse merger, with Altony as the acquirer. Our consolidated financial statements
for the twelve months ended December 31, 2007 are those of Altony (including its SAHF subsidiary
on a consolidated basis). In 2009, we had a gain from continuing operations of approximately
$835,000, primarily as a result of an approximate $882,268 gain on the deconsolidation of
Envirotech, compared to a net loss from continuing operations of approximately $2,270,000 in the
twelve months ended December 31, 2008. Our general and administrative expenses decreased in
the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, to approximately $636,000, from general and
administrative expenses of approximately $1,490,000 in 2008.  In 2008, we also had a loss on the
sale of investments of $860,000, as compared with approximately $158,000 in 2009.  In the twelve
months ended December 31, 2009, we also had other income of approximately $582,000,
consisting of write-down of payroll and consulting accruals and settled accounts payable
originating more than two years ago and considered no longer payable..
PLAN OF OPERATION
The primary focus of the Company’s business is its South American Hedge Fund subsidiary that
has investments in oil and gas exploration and production in Argentina and will continue to focus
on the energy sector, including the development of a property for the production of lithium in
Argentina, and development and supply of energy and alternative energy sources in Latin America
and North America. As of December 31, 2008, the securities trading activities of South American
Hedge Fund were accounted for as discontinued operations.
Oil and Gas Investments
Our main source of revenue will derive from the sale of crude oil and natural gas produced from the
oil and gas concessions and exploration properties in which we have made investments. While we
are not the operators of these properties, we expect to have representation on the operating
committees that are responsible for managing the business affairs of these concessions. Our
ownership interests in these concessions range from 9% to 10%, and we have a 20% interest in the
blocks in which we have exploration rights.
Jollin and Tonono Concessions
In 2008, the majority owners of these concessions formed an Argentine-registered joint venture to
operate these concessions. Since SAHF was not registered in Argentina, it could not become an
official member of the joint venture. The other owners of the joint venture have agreed that SAHF
will be admitted as a member of the joint venture, upon the registration of SAHF as a foreign
company in Argentina. SAHF has applied for foreign registration and expects to become a member.
A well located in the Tonono Concession became operational for the commercial production of oil
in the first quarter of 2009. Delivery of the commercial production is currently expected in 2010.  A
well located in the Jollin Concession contains commercial quantities of natural gas. A natural gas
pipeline connecting the Jollin Concession to a major distribution pipeline is in the pre-construction
phase. The connecting pipeline when completed will be owned by the joint venture. It is expected
to be completed during the second quarter of 2010. Upon completion, it will permit the joint venture
to commence deriving additional revenue from the sale of natural gas.
Tartagal and Morillo Concessions
In 2008, the majority owners of the Tartagal and Morillo Concessions agreed to form an Argentine-
registered joint venture and applied for government approval of the license to operate the
concessions. SAHF received its foreign corporation registration in 2009 and will join the joint
venture when it formed and is registered with the government.
In March 2009, a Hong Kong public company, following approval by its shareholders, agreed to
acquire a 60% participation interest in these concessions for approximately $280 million. The
Company expects that the funds from this acquisition will be used for development and operating
expenses in 2009 and 2010. Deliveries of crude oil from these concession are expected to begin in
2010.
 
19
Exploration Rights
SAHF holds a 20% interest in the oil and gas exploration rights to five geographically defined areas
in the Salta Province of Northern Argentina. Provided certain development activities are under
taken by the majority owner, these exploration rights will remain in effect until the year 2010.
Middle East
Envirotech is the Middle East distributor of an organic supplement designed to increase crop yield.
During the second half of 2008, a Saudi Arabian farm operator purchased sample quantities of the
organic supplement for crop testing. Subsequent purchases in commercial quantities will depend
upon the evaluation of the crop yield that began in the second quarter of 2009 and is currently in
process.
FUNDING
Our current business plan for 2009 and beyond anticipates a substantial increase in revenue
primarily from our investments in oil and gas concessions in Argentina. If we do not achieve the
expected levels of revenue, we may be required to raise additional capital through equity and/or
debt financing.
LIQUIDITY
At December 31, 2009, we had a working capital deficit of approximately $967,042, compared with
a working capital deficit of approximately $2,427,390 million at December 31, 2008. The decrease
as of December 31, 2009 was due primarily to deconsolidation of Envirotech.
At December 31, 2009, we had total assets of approximately $1,750,000 compared to total assets
of approximately $1,795,000 at December 31, 2008. Cash increased approximately $90,000 for the
year ended December 31, 2009. Net cash used in operating activities in 2009 was approximately
$324,000, as compared with approximately $2.5 million in 2008; net cash provided by investing
activities was approximately $150,000 in 2009, as compared with approximately $2,285,000 in
2008, which latter period reflected the sales of assets and investments in our oil and gas
concessions in 2008. Cash used in operations activities  was offset by net cash provided in
investing activities of approximately $150,000, and by net cash from financing activities of
approximately $261,000.
 
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ISSUES
The Company's discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are
based upon the Company's financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of the
financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the
reported amount of assets, liabilities, and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets
and liabilities. On an on-going basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including those related
to intangible assets, income taxes and contingencies and litigation. The Company bases its
estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable
under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying
values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may
differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
NEW FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
For a summary of new financial accounting standards applicable to the Company, please refer to
the accompanying notes to the financial statements.
20
Critical Accounting Policies
The Securities and Exchange Commission recently issued “Financial Reporting Release No. 60
Cautionary Advice About Critical Accounting Policies” (“FRR 60”), suggesting companies provide
additional disclosures, discussion and commentary on their accounting policies considered most
critical to its business and financial reporting requirements. FRR 60 considers an accounting policy
to be critical if it is important to the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, and
requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in the application of the
policy. For a summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies, including the critical
accounting policies discussed below, please refer to the accompanying notes to the financial
statements. Foreign currency risk - The functional currency for some foreign operations is the local
currency. Assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated at balance sheet date rates of
exchange and income, expense and cash flow items are translated at the average exchange rate
for the period. The functional currency in South America is the U.S. dollar. Translation adjustments
are recorded in Cumulative Other Comprehensive Income.
The Company assesses potential impairment of its long-lived assets, which include its property
and equipment, investments, and its identifiable intangibles such as deferred charges under the
guidance of SFAS 144 “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” The
Company must continually determine if a permanent impairment of its long-lived assets has
occurred and write down the assets to their fair values and charge current operations for the
measured impairment.
Investments in non-consolidated affiliates – These investments consist of the Company’s
ownership interests in oil and gas development and exploration rights in Argentina, net of
impairment losses if any.
We evaluate these investments for impairment when indicators of potential impairment are present.
Indicators of impairment include, but are not limited to, levels of oil and gas reserves, availability of
pipeline (or other transportation) capacity and infrastructure and management of the operations in
which the investments were made.
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
Interest Rate Risk - Interest rate risk refers to fluctuations in the value of a security resulting from
changes in the general level of interest rates. Investments that are classified as cash and cash
equivalents have original maturities of three months or less. Our interest income is sensitive to
changes in the general level of U.S. interest rates.
We do not have significant short-term investments, and due to their short-term nature, we believe
that there is not a material risk exposure.
Credit Risk - Our accounts receivable are subject, in the normal course of business, to collection
risks. We regularly assess these risks and have established policies and business practices to
protect against the adverse effects of collection risks. As a result we do not anticipate any material
losses in this area.
Commodity Price Risk – We are exposed to market risks related to price volatility of crude oil and
natural gas. The prices of crude oil and natural gas affect our revenues, since sales of crude oil and
natural gas from our South American investments comprise nearly all of the components of our
revenue.  A decline in crude oil and natural gas prices will likely reduce our revenues, unless there
are offsetting production increases. We do not use derivative commodity instruments for trading
purposes.
The prices of the commodities that the Company produces are unsettled at this time.  At times the
prices seem to be drift down and then either increase or stabilize for a few days.  Current price
movement seems to be slightly up but with the prices of the traditionally marketed products
(gasoline, diesel, and natural gas as feed stocks for various industries, power generation, and
heating) are not showing material increases.  Although prices are difficult to predict in the current
environment, the Company maintains the expectation that demand for crude oil and natural gas will
continue to increase for the foreseeable future due to the underling factors that oil and natural gas
based commodities are both sources of raw energy and are fuels that are easily portable.
Foreign Currency Risk - Our financial results could be affected by factors such as changes in
foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in foreign markets. Because our
revenue is reported in U.S. dollars, fluctuating exchange rates of the local currency, when
converted into U.S. dollars, may have an adverse impact on our revenue and income. We have not
hedged foreign currency exposures related to transactions denominated in currencies other than
U.S. dollars. We do not engage in financial transactions for trading or speculative purposes.
21
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
22
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
 
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms
 
Consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2009 and 2008
 
Consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2009
and 2008
 
Consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity (deficiency) as of December 31,
2009 and 2008
 
Consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2009
and 2008
 
Notes to consolidated financial statements
 
 
23
Page
 
24-25
 
26
27
28-29
30-31
 
32-49
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Delta Mutual, Inc. and Subsidiaries:
 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  Delta  Mutual,  Inc.  and
Subsidiaries (the “Company”), as of December 31, 2009, and the related consolidated statement of
operations, changes in consolidated stockholders’ equity (deficit) and consolidated cash flows for
the  year  then  ended.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  are  the  responsibility  of  the
Company’s management.  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements
based on our audit. The consolidated financial statements of Delta Mutual, Inc. and Subsidiaries for
the year ended December 31, 2008, were audited by other auditors whose report thereon, dated
April 13, 2009, expressed an unqualified opinion with an emphasis of matter as to going concern.
 
We  conducted  our  audit  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting
Oversight Board (United States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material
misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles
used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation.  We believe that our audit provided a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Delta Mutual, Inc. and Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2009, and
the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2009 in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
 
The  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  have  been  prepared
assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.  As more fully described in Note 1,
the Company has an accumulated deficit of $3,580,837 and working capital deficiency of $967,042
as of December 31, 2009. Additionally, the Company is not generating sufficient cash flows to meet
its  regular  working  capital  requirements.  These  conditions  raise  substantial  doubt  about  the
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.  Management’s plans as to these matters are
also described in Note 1.  The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments
that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
 
/s/Jewett, Schwartz, Wolfe & Associates
 
Hollywood, Florida
 
April 15, 2010, except for Note 2 as to which the date is July 19, 2010.
200 South Park Road, Suite 150 • Hollywood, Florida 33021 • Main 954.922.5885 • Fax
Member - American Institute of Certified Public Accountants • Florida Institute of Certified Public
954.922.5957 • www.jsw-cpa.com
Private Companies Practice Section of the AICPA • Registered with the Public Company
Accountants
Accounting Oversight Board of the SEC
24
[LETTERHEAD OF WIENER, GOODMAN & COMPANY, P.C.]
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Delta Mutual, Inc. and Subsidiaries
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Delta Mutual, Inc. and
subsidiaries (“Delta” or the “Company”) as of December 31, 2008 and the related consolidated
statement of operations, stockholders’ deficiency and cash flows for the year then ended.  These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management.  Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audit.  The financial statements of
Delta Mutual, Inc. and Subsidiaries, for the year ended December 31, 2007, were audited by other
auditors whose report dated June 20, 2008, expressed an unqualified opinion on those statements.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles
used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation.  We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the 2008 financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial
position of Delta Mutual, Inc. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2008 and the results of their
operations and their cash flows for the year then ended, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company
will continue as a going concern.  Company management has embarked upon a new mission and
strategic direction, by establishing a series of subsidiaries and joint ventures, primarily engaged in
providing environmental and construction technologies and services to certain geographic
reporting segments.  During 2008, the Company has again changed direction and has invested in
oil and gas concessions in South America.  As more fully explained in Note 1 to the financial
statements, the Company has a deficiency in working capital at December 31, 2008, incurred
losses from operations, needs to obtain additional financing to meet its obligations on a timely
basis and to fulfill its proposed activities and ultimately achieve a level of sales adequate to support
its cost structure.
These uncertainties raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going
concern. Management’s plans are also described in Note 1.  The accompanying consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these
uncertainties should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
/s/ Wiener, Goodman & Company, P.C.
Eatontown, New Jersey
April 13, 2009
 
25
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
Current Assets:
Cash
Advances and other receivables
Total current assets
 
Property and equipment - net
Investments in non-consolidated affiliates
Other assets
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY (DEFICIT)
 
Current Liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses
Convertible debt
Notes payable
Total current liabilities
 
Commitments and Contingencies
 
Stockholders' Equity (Deficit):
Preferred stock $0.0001 par value-authorized 10,000,000 shares;
no shares issued and outstanding at December 31, 2009 and
December 31, 2008, respectively
Common stock $0.0001 par value - authorized 250,000,000 shares;
24,211,475 and 22,493,955 shares issued and outstanding at
  
December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008, respectively
  
Additional paid-in capital
  
Accumulated deficit
  
 
  
 
  
Noncontrolling interest
  
Total stockholders' equity (deficit)
 
  
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY (DEFICIT)  $
December 31,  December 31, 
 
 
2009
 (Restated)
 
 
  
  
 
13,957 
 $
  
- 
13,957 
  
  
  
804 
  
1,780,024 
  
  
650 
  
  
1,795,435 
 $
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
363,004 
 $
1,363,395 
  
253,740 
  
  
461,208 
2,441,347
2008
  (Restated)
   
   
102,008  $
137,776   
239,784   
    
-   
1,470,713   
39,508   
    
1,750,005  $
    
    
    
    
134,192  $
267,029   
-   
805,605   
1,206,826
-
-
2,421   
4,137,095   
(3,596,337)  
543,179   
    
-   
543,179   
    
1,750,005  $
2,249 
3,782,767 
(4,430,928)
(645,912)
  
- 
(645,912)
  
1,795,435
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
26
DELTA MUTUAL INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Years Ended December
2009
2008
31,
  
  (Restated)
-  $
(Restated)
 $
43,365 
  
  
493,904    1,490,333 
157,939   
860,000 
651,843    2,350,333 
  
(651,843)   (2,306,968)
  
26,386 
6,746 
- 
-
Revenue:
Sales commissions
 
Costs and expenses:
General and administrative expenses
Loss on sale of investments
 
 
Loss from continuing operations
 
Interest income
Interest expense
Other income
Gain on deconsolidation of variable interest entity
 
Income (Loss) from continuing operations before provision for income
taxes
 
Provision for income taxes
 
Net income (loss) from continuing operations
 
Discontinued operations
Loss on disposal of Far East operations and South American Hedge
-    (2,310,473)
Fund operations, and United States construction technology activities   
  
    
  
 
834,591  $ (4,584,309)
 $
Net income (loss)
  
  
 
  
Net income (loss) per common share:
  
  
  
Basic and diluted
(0.11)
 $
Net income (loss) from continuing operations
  
 
  
(0.11)
 $
Net loss from discontinued operations
  
  
 
(0.22)
Net income (loss) per common share
 $
  
 
  
   22,779,263    20,858,566 
Weighted average common shares - basic and diluted
-
834,591    (2,273,836)
  
- 
  
834,591    (2,273,836)
0.04  $
    
-  $
    
0.04  $
37,696   
(15,971)  
582,441   
882,268
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
27
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS'  EQUITY (DEFICIT)
DECEMBER 31, 2009 and 2008
(Restated)
Number of   (see note 13)   
  Common    Common    Paid in    Retained Earnings   Equity
  Shares
Stockholders'
Capital
(Deficit)
(Deficit)
Stock
Total
1,300  $ 2,598,700   $
1,869,468
4,469,468
789
7,099
(1,716,087)
(1,708,199)
106
238,394
-
238,500
23
143,577
-
143,600
1
-
-   
    
-
7,047
1,000
-
-
7,048
1,000
786,980    
     
-
-    
     
(4,584,309)
786,980 
  
(4,584,309)
2,219    3,782,797
(4,430,928)
(645,912)
13,000,000  $
1,055,000
7,888,295
Balance, January 1,
2008
 
Effect of reverse
acquisition
 
Issuance of common
stock for services
(valued at $0.20 -
$0.50 per share)
 
Issuance of common
stock for debt
(valued at $0.50 -
$0.70 per share)
 
Issuance of common
stock for interest
(valued at $0.50 -
$0.70 per share)
 
Contribution from
stockholder
 
Stock based
compensation
expense
 
Net loss
 
Balance, December
31, 2008, as
previously reported   22,184,915
230,057
11,563
-   
    
-
-
Restatement (see
Note 2) 
 
Balance December
31, 2008, as
restated
309,000
30
(30)
-
-
22,493,955  $
2,249  $ 3,782,767   $
(4,430,928)  $
(645,912)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
28
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY (DEFICIT)
DECEMBER 31, 2009 and 2008
(Restated)
Balance, January 1, 2009, as
restated (See Note 2)
 
Issuance of common stock for
services (valued at $0.60 per
share)
 
Issuance of common stock
toward debt conversion
(valued at $0.58 per share)
 
Issuance of common stock for
services (valued at $0.40 per
share)
 
Sales of common stock
(valued at $0.08 to $0.23 per
share)
 
Sale of common stock (valued
at $0.16125 per share)
 
Issuance of common stock for
services (valued at $0.15 per
share)
Number of   (see note 13)   
   
  Common    Common    Paid in    Accumulated   
  Shares
Capital
Deficit
Stock
Total
22,493,955
2,249   3,782,767
(4,430,928)  (645,912)
200,000
20    119,980
-    120,000
60,000
28,572
6
34,994
-    35,000
3
9,997
-    10,000
1,298,743
130    169,870
161,250
16
9,984
-    170,000
-    10,000
130,000
13
19,487
-    19,500
Sale of common stock (valued
at $0.06 per share)
 
Stock based compensation
expense
 
Stock based compensation
expense reversal
 
Net Income, as restated (See
Note 2)
 
Balance, December 31, 2009,
as restated (See Note 2)
166,662
-
-
-
17
9,983
-    590,235
-    (590,235)
-    10,000
-    590,235
-   (590,235)
-
-
834,591    834,591
24,211,275
2,421   4,737,095
(3,596,337)   543,179
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
29
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash flows from operating activities:
 
Net income (Loss)
 
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash used in
operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
Impairment charge
Loss on sale of investments
Gain on disposal of operations
Issuance of common stock for services and debt conversion
Stock based compensation expense
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
 
Net cash used in operating activities
 
Cash flows from investing activities:
Net cash acquired upon effect of reverse acquisition
Proceeds from sale of investments
Purchase of investments
Purchase of exploration rights
Purchase of concession investments
Years Ended December 31, 
 
 
 
 (Restated)
  
 
834,591  $ (4,584,309)
 $
2008
  (Restated)
2009
804   
-   
157,939   
-   
184,500   
-   
(1,501,812)  
    
(323,978)  
    
    
-   
206,832   
(55,460)  
-   
-
25,641 
467,995 
860,000 
(230,057)
238,500 
786,980 
(62,560)
  
(2,497,810)
  
  
57,633 
7,263,823 
(2,618,502)
(697,000)
(1,720,000)
Net cash provided by investing activities
 
Cash flows from financing activities:
Net proceeds from notes payable
Proceeds from issuances of common stock
Repayment of loan
Contribution from stockholder
Other proceeds
 
Net cash provided by  financing activities
 
Net increase in cash
Cash - Beginning of period
Cash - End of period
$
151,372   
    
    
90,657   
170,000   
-   
-   
-   
    
260,657   
    
88,051   
13,957   
102,008  $
2,285,954 
  
  
280,553 
- 
(60,000)
1,000 
4,260 
  
225,813 
  
13,957 
- 
13,957
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
30
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Continued)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities consists of:
 (Increase) decrease in advances and other assets
Decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses
 
 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Cash paid for interest
Cash paid for income taxes
 
Supplementary information:
Non-cash financing and investing activities
Issuance of common stock for debt
 
Issuance of common stock for in lieu of payment of accrued
expenses
 
Issuance of common stock for services and debt conversion
 
Adjustment of purchase price of investments and related debt
2008
(Restated)
Years Ended December 31, 
2009
 
 
 (Restated)
 
1,914 
(176,634) $
 $
(1,325,178)  
  
(64,474)
(62,560)
 $ (1,501,812) $
  
    
  
  
    
  
- 
 -  $
 $
- 
-  $
 $
  
    
  
  
    
  
    
  
  
143,600 
-  $
 $
$
  
 $
  
 $
-  $
    
184,500  $
    
-  $
7,048 
  
238,500 
  
580,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements
31
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
1. DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
ORGANIZATION
Delta Mutual, Inc.  was incorporated in Delaware on November 17, 1999.  In 2003, the Company
established  business  operations 
focused  on  providing  environmental  and  construction
technologies and services to specific geographic reporting segments in the Far East, the Middle
East,  and  the  United  States.  During  the  year  ended  December  31,  2008,  the  Company
discontinued  all  of  its  operations  in  the  Far  East  (Indonesia)  and  its  construction  technology
activities that were conducted through its wholly owned U.S. subsidiary, Delta Technologies, Inc.
The Company’s construction operations in Puerto Rico were discontinued in 2008.
Effective March 4, 2008, Delta entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, pursuant
to which Delta acquired from  Egani, Inc. shares of Altony SA, an Uruguayan Sociedad Anonima
(“Altony”),  which  owns  100%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  membership  interests  in  South
American Hedge Fund LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (sometimes herein referred to as
“SAHF”).  At the closing of the Agreement, Delta issued 130,000,000 shares of our common stock
to Egani, Inc. which constituted, following such issuance, a majority of the outstanding shares of
our common stock. Immediately following the closing of the Agreement, Altony became a wholly-
owned  subsidiary  of  the  Company.  For  accounting  purposes,  the  transaction  was  treated  as  a
recapitalization of the Company, as of March 4, 2008, with Altony as the acquirer.
The principal business of Altony SA is the ownership and management of South American Hedge
Fund,  which  maintains  its  business  office  in  Uruguay  and  has  investments  in  oil  and  gas
concessions in Argentina and intends to focus its investment activities in the energy sector. Delta
has also signed a purchase option agreement related to the acquisition of approximate 150,000
hectares in forty mines located in the Northwest part of Argentina, south of the border with Bolivia,
with high lithium and borates brines concentration. As of December 30, 2009, Altony SA closed its
business operations and is currently under a process of dissolution.
During 2009, the Company discontinued operations, and commenced dissolution of the following
inactive wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries: Delta Development Partners, L.P., Delta
Development  Partners  II  LP,  Guayanilla  and  Developers  Corp.,  Delta  TA  LP  and  Delta
Technologies Inc.
As  of  December  31,  2009,  Delta  terminated  the  operation  of  oil  sludge  processing  facilities  in
Bahrain and Kuwait and the manufacture of insulating concrete from ICF products in Saudi Arabia,
which are accounted for as discontinued operations. As of December 31, 2008, Delta terminated all
of the construction technology activities that were carried out by Delta Technologies, Inc. (a wholly
owned  subsidiary).  Also  as  of  December  31,  2008  the  securities  trading  activities  of  South
American Hedge Fund were accounted for as a discontinued operation.
32
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
Delta Mutual, Inc. and the above subsidiaries are collectively referred to as “the Company”.  All
significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
GENERAL
The  primary  focus  of  the  Company’s  business  is  its  SAHF,  LLC  subsidiary  (also  referred  to  as
“South American Hedge Fund”), which has investments in oil and gas concessions in Argentina
with focus on the energy sector, including the development and supply of energy and alternative
energy sources in Latin America and North America.
As of December 31, 2009, the Company holds 45% ownership interest in Delta–Envirotech, Inc.,
which  is  engaged  in  select  business  opportunities  in  the  Middle  East  related  to  environmental
remediation  and  other  projects.  These  activities  are  managed  and  carried  out  by  majority
stockholders  of  Delta-Envirotech,  Inc.,  (“Envirotech”)  a  company  incorporated  in  the  state  of
Delaware  with  headquarters  in  Virginia  and  formed  in  January  2004.  The  Company’s  majority
stockholders  are  Hi-Tech  Consulting  and  Construction, 
Inc.  and  an  unrelated
individual.  Envirotech has entered into strategic alliance agreements with several United States-
based entities with technologies and products in the environmental field to support its activities.
Envirotech was consolidated as the variable interest entity (VIE) up until September 30, 2009.
As  of  December  31,  2009  management  has  determined  that  Delta-Envirotech,  Inc.  is  not
considered  the  VIE  for  the  year  ending  December  31,  2009  and  accordingly  has  been
deconsolidated from the consolidated financial statements effective December 31, 2009 (see also
note 3).
On April 22, 2009, the Company's Board of Directors declared a one-for-ten reverse stock split of its
common stock.  All share and per share amounts have been restated to reflect the reverse stock
split  except  for  stockholders'  equity  (deficit).    See  Note    13,  "Stockholders'  Equity  (Deficit)",  for
further information.
GOING CONCERN
The  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  period  ended  December  31,  2009  have  been
prepared on a going concern basis which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of
liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The Company has a past history of
recurring losses from operations and has an accumulated deficit of approximately $3,596,000 and
working capital deficiency of approximately $967,000 as of December 31, 2009.  Additionally, the
Company will require additional funding to execute its future strategic business plan. Successful
business  operations  and  its  transition  to  attaining  profitability  is  dependent  upon  obtaining
additional financing and achieving a level of revenue adequate to support its cost structure.
The Company's business is subject to the risks of its oil and gas investments in South America.
The likelihood of success of the Company must be considered in light of the expenses, difficulties,
delays and unanticipated challenges encountered in connection with the operations of the oil and
gas concession in Argentina. There is no assurance that the Company will ultimately achieve a
profitable level of operations.
33
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
PRINCIPLES OF CONSOLIDATION
The Company's financial statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries where
its ownership is more than 50 percent of the common stock.
 
USE OF ESTIMATES
 
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles
generally accepted in the United States requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect
the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities known
to  exist  as  of    the  date  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  reported  amounts  of
revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Uncertainties with respect to such estimates
and  assumptions  are  inherent  in  the  preparation  of  the  Company’s  consolidated  financial
statements; accordingly, it is possible that the actual results could differ from these estimates and
assumptions  and  could  have  a  material  effect  on  the  reported  amounts  of  the  Company’s
consolidated financial position and results of operations.
 
REVENUE RECOGNITION
 
Revenues are recognized in accordance with SEC staff accounting bulletin, Topic 13, Revenue
Recognition, which specifies that only when persuasive evidence for an arrangement exists; the
fee is fixed or determinable; and collection is reasonably assured can revenue be recognized.
 
FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
 
Cash,  advances  and  other  receivables,  investments  in  non-consolidated  affiliates,  accounts
payable  and  accrued  expenses,  and  notes  payable  as  reflected  in  the  consolidated  financial
statements,  approximates  fair  value.    Fair  value  estimates  are  made  at  a  specific  point  in  time,
based  on  relevant  market  information  and  information  about  the  financial  instrument.  These
estimates are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment and
therefore cannot be determined with precision. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect
the estimates.
 
LONG-LIVED ASSETS
 
The Company reviews property and equipment, and finite-lived intangible assets  for impairment
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable
in  accordance  with  guidance  in  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  ("FASB")  Accounting
Standards Codification ("ASC") 360-15-35, "Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets" ("ASC
360-15-35"). If the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds the present value of the related
estimated future cash flows, the asset would be adjusted to its fair value and an impairment loss
would be charged to operations in the period identified. Because the Company discontinued its
operations in the Far East (Indonesia) as of the quarter ended June 30, 2008 and discontinued its
construction technology activities as of the quarter ended December 31, 2008, the property and
equipment and intangible assets related to these operations were evaluated for impairment. Based
on the results of that analysis, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $467,995 during the
year ended December 31, 2008.
34
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided for by the straight-line method
over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
INVESTMENTS
The Company accounts for non-marketable investments using the equity method of accounting if
the  investment  gives  it  the  ability  to  exercise  significant  influence  over,  but  not  control  of,  an
investee.  Significant  influence  generally  exists  if  there  is  an  ownership  interest  representing
between 20% and 50% of the voting stock of the investee. Under the equity method of accounting,
investments  are  stated  at  initial  cost  and  are  adjusted  for  additional  investments  and  their
proportionate share of earnings or losses and distributions. The Company records its share of the
investee’s  earnings  or  losses  in  earnings  (losses)  from  unconsolidated  entities,  net  of  income
taxes, in its consolidated statements of operations. Equity investments of less than 20% are stated
at cost. The cost is not adjusted for its proportionate share of earnings or losses. The Company
evaluates its equity method investments for impairment when events or changes in circumstances
indicate,  in  management’s  judgment,  that  the  carrying  value  of  such  investments  may  have
experienced  an  other-than-temporary  decline  in  value.  When  evidence  of  loss  in  value  has
occurred,  the  Company  compares  fair  value  of  the  investment  to  its  carrying  value  to  determine
whether impairment has occurred. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value and
management considers the decline to be other than temporary, the excess of the carrying value
over the estimated fair value is recognized as impairment in the consolidated financial statements.
Investments in non-consolidated affiliates consist of the Company’s ownership interests in oil and
gas development and exploration rights in Argentina, net of impairment losses if any.
The Company evaluates these investments for impairment when indicators of potential impairment
are present. Indicators of impairment include, but are not limited to, levels of oil and gas reserves,
availability of pipeline (or other transportation) capacity and infrastructure and management of the
operations in which the investments were made.
 
STOCK BASED COMPENSATION
 
The Company has  a stock-based compensation plan under which stock options are granted to
employees.  The  Company  accounts  for  the  measurement  and  recognition  of  compensation
expense  for  all  share-based  payment  awards  made  to  employees  and  directors,  including
employee stock options, based on estimated fair values.  Under authoritative guidance issued by
the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB),  companies  are  required  to  estimate  the  fair
value or calculated value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-
pricing model.  The value of awards that are ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense
over the requisite service periods in the Company’s statements of income.  The Company uses the
Black-Scholes  Option  Pricing  Model  to  determine  the  fair-value  of  stock-based  awards.  The
Company recognized stock based compensation expense of $786,980 in 2008 (none in 2009).
35
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
INCOME TAXES
 
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with the liability method. Under the liability
method,  deferred  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  based  upon  anticipated  future  tax
consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of assets
and liabilities and their respective tax bases. The Company establishes a valuation allowance to
the extent that it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be utilized against future
taxable income.
 
UNCERTAIN TAX POSITIONS
 
In  July  2006,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  guidance  codified  in
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740-10-25 “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income
Taxes”. ASC Topic 740-10-25 supersedes guidance codified in ASC Topic 450, “Accounting for
Contingencies”,  as  it  relates  to  income  tax  liabilities  and  lowers  the  minimum  threshold  a  tax
position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements from “probable” to
“more likely than not” (i.e., a likelihood of occurrence greater than fifty percent). Under ASC Topic
740-10-25, the recognition threshold is met when an entity concludes that a tax position, based
solely  on  its  technical  merits,  is  more  likely  than  not  to  be  sustained  upon  examination  by  the
relevant taxing authority. Those tax positions failing to qualify for initial recognition are recognized
in  the  first  interim  period  in  which  they  meet  the  more  likely  than  not  standard,  or  are  resolved
through  negotiation  or  litigation  with  the  taxing  authority,  or  upon  expiration  of  the  statute  of
limitations. De-recognition of a tax position that was previously recognized occurs when an entity
subsequently determines that a tax position no longer meets the more likely than not threshold of
being sustained.
 
The  Company  is  subject  to  ongoing  tax  exposures,  examinations  and  assessments  in  various
jurisdictions.  Accordingly,  the  Company  may  incur  additional  tax  expense  based  upon  the
outcomes of such matters. In addition, when applicable, the Company will adjust tax expense to
reflect  the  Company’s  ongoing  assessments  of  such  matters  which  require  judgment  and  can
materially increase or decrease its effective rate as well as impact operating results.
 
Under ASC Topic 740-10-25, only the portion of the liability that is expected to be paid within one
year is classified as a current liability. As a result, liabilities expected to be resolved without the
payment  of  cash  (e.g.  resolution  due  to  the  expiration  of  the  statute  of  limitations)  or  are  not
expected  to  be  paid  within  one  year  are  not  classified  as  current.  The  Company  has  recently
adopted  a  policy  of  recording  estimated  interest  and  penalties  as  income  tax  expense  and  tax
credits as a reduction in income tax expense.
 
Management believes that the Company does not have any significant uncertain tax positions exist
for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2009  and  2008,  respectively  and  considering  its  loss  making
history since inception. The Company has not made any provision for federal and state income tax
liabilities that may result from this uncertainty as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
Management  believes  that  this  will  not  have  a  material  adverse  impact  on  the  Company’s
consolidated financial position, its results of operations and its cash flows.
 
 
36
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. The Company’s
major taxing jurisdictions include the United States (including applicable states).
LEGAL COSTS AND CONTINGENCIES
In  the  normal  course  of  business,  the  Company  incurs  costs  to  hire  and  retain  external  legal
counsel to advise it on regulatory, litigation and other matters. The Company expenses these costs
as the related services are received.
If  a  loss  is  considered  probable  and  the  amount  can  be  reasonably  estimated,  the  Company
recognizes an expense for the estimated loss. If the Company has the potential to recover a portion
of  the  estimated  loss  from  a  third  party,  the  Company  makes  a  separate  assessment  of
recoverability and reduces the estimated loss if recovery is also deemed probable.
NET INCOME (LOSS) PER SHARE
Basic  and  diluted  net  income  (loss)  per  common  share  are  presented  in  accordance  with
Accounting  Standard  Codifications  (ASC)  Topic  260,  “Earning  per  Share”,  for  all  periods
presented. Stock subscriptions, options and warrants have been excluded from the calculation of
the  diluted  income  (loss)  per  share  for  the  periods  presented  in  the  statements  of  operations,
because  all  such  securities  were  anti-dilutive.  The  net  income  (loss)  per  share  is  calculated  by
dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the
periods.
FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSLATION
The functional currency for some foreign operations is the local currency. Assets and liabilities of
foreign operations are translated at balance sheet date rates of exchange and income, expense
and  cash  flow  items  are  translated  at  the  average  exchange  rate  for  the  period.  The  functional
currency in South America is the U.S. dollar. Translation adjustments are recorded in Cumulative
Other  Comprehensive  Income.  The  translation  gains  or  losses  were  not  material  for  the  years
ended  December  31,  2009  and  2008,  respectively.  Therefore,  there  were  no  adjustments  as  to
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss).
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
During the quarter ended June 30, 2008, the Company discontinued all its operations in the Far
East (Indonesia). During the quarter ended December 31, 2008, the Company discontinued all of
its construction technology activities that were carried out by its wholly owned subsidiary, Delta
Technologies,  Inc.  and  the  trading  of  securities  by  its  South  American  Hedge  Fund  subsidiary.
These discontinued operations resulted in a loss of $0 and $(2,310,473), respectively, for the years
ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
37
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
Summarized statement of loss for discontinued operations is as follows:
Net sales
Year Ended Dec. 31,
  2009   
  
   
 $
—  $ (2,077,576)
2008
Impairment
 
Provision for income taxes
 
Loss from operations, net of taxes
 
Gain on disposition of minority interest
 
Provision for income taxes
 
Loss from discontinued operations, net of taxes
 
OTHER CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
$
—   
    
—   
    
—   
    
—   
    
—
(467,994)
  
— 
  
— 
  
— 
  
230,057 
  
-0-  $ (2,310,473)
The Securities and Exchange Commission recently issued “Financial Reporting Release No. 60
Cautionary Advice About Critical Accounting Policies” (“FRR 60”), suggesting companies provide
additional disclosures, discussion and commentary on their accounting policies considered most
critical to its business and financial reporting requirements. FRR 60 considers an accounting policy
to be critical if it is important to the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, and
requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in the application of the
policy.  For  a  summary  of  the  Company’s  significant  accounting  policies,  including  the  critical
accounting  policies  discussed  below,  please  refer  to  the  accompanying  notes  to  the  financial
statements. Foreign currency risk - The functional currency for some foreign operations is the local
currency. Assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated at balance sheet date rates of
exchange and income, expense and cash flow items are translated at the average exchange rate
for the period. The functional currency in South America is the U.S. dollar. Translation adjustments
are recorded in Cumulative Other Comprehensive Income.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
 
During the second quarter of 2009, the Company implemented additional interim disclosures about
fair  value  of  financial  instruments,  as  required  by  FASB  ASC  Paragraph  825-10-65-1.  Prior  to
implementation,  disclosures  about  fair  values  of  financial  instruments  were  only  required  to  be
disclosed  annually.  As  the  required  modifications  only  related  to  additional  disclosures  of  fair
values  of  financial  instruments  in  interim  financial  statements,  the  adoption  did  not  affect  the
Company’s consolidated financial position or results of operations.
38
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
Beginning  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009,  the  Company  must  disclose  the  date  through  which
subsequent  events  have  been  evaluated,  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  in  FASB  ASC
Paragraph 855-10-50-1. With regards to the consolidated financial statements and notes to those
financial  statements  contained  in  this  Form  10-K,  the  Company  has  evaluated  all  subsequent
events  through  April  15,  2010  (the  date  the  Company’s  consolidated  financial  statements  are
issued).
 
In  September  2009,  the  FASB  implemented  certain  modifications  to  FASB  ASC  Topic  860,
Transfers and Servicing, as a means to improve the relevance, representational faithfulness, and
comparability of the information that a reporting entity provides in its financial statements about a
transfer of financial assets, the effects of a transfer on its financial position, financial performance,
and cash flows, and a transferor’s continuing involvement, if any, in transferred financial assets.
These  modifications  must  be  applied  as  of  the  beginning  of  each  reporting  entity’s  first  annual
reporting period that begins after November 15, 2009. The Company does not expect the adoption
of this standard to have an impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations, financial
condition or cash flows.
During  the  third  quarter  of  2009,  the  Company  adopted  the  FASB  Accounting  Standards
Codification  and  the  Hierarchy  of  Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles  in  accordance  with
FASB  ASC  Topic  105,  “Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles”  (the  “Codification”).    The
Codification has become the source of authoritative U.S. generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities. Rules and interpretive
releases of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under authority of federal securities
laws  are  also  sources  of  authoritative  GAAP  for  SEC  registrants.  Effective  with  the  Company’s
adoption  on  July  1,  2009,  the  Codification  has  superseded  all  prior  non-SEC  accounting  and
reporting standards. All other non-grandfathered non-SEC accounting literature not included in the
Codification has become non-authoritative. As the adoption of the Codification only affected how
specific  references  to  GAAP  literature  have  been  disclosed  in  the  notes  to  the  Company’s
consolidated financial statements, it did not result in any impact on the Company’s consolidated
results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
 
The  FASB  has  published  FASB  Accounting  Standards  Update  No.  2009-12, Fair  Value
Measurements and Disclosures (Topic 820)—Investments in Certain Entities That Calculate Net
Asset  Value  per  Share  (or  Its  Equivalent).  This  Update  amends  Subtopic  820-10, Fair  Value
Measurements and Disclosures—Overall, to permit a reporting entity to measure the fair value of
certain  investments  on  the  basis  of  the  net  asset  value  per  share  of  the  investment  (or  its
equivalent). This Update also requires new disclosures, by major category of investments, about
the attributes of investments included within the scope of this amendment to the Codification. The
guidance in this Update is effective for interim and annual periods ending after December 15, 2009.
The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have an impact on the Company’s
consolidated results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
2.  RESTATEMENT
 
In the second quarter of 2010, the Company identified the number of common shares issued and
outstanding was understated by approximately 375,000 shares, or 1.6% as of December 31, 2009.
The  Company  also  determined  that  approximately,  29,000  shares  had  been  issued  in  lieu  of
payment for consulting services performed by third parties and approximately 37,000 shares were
issued to third parties for cash that was used for travel expense by the Company. Accordingly, the
Company recorded additional expense of $15,500 for the year ending December 31, 2009, which
resulted  in  a  reduction  of  net  income  from  $850,091,  as  previously  reported,  to  $834,591  as
restated. An increase of approximately 309,000 shares outstanding is attributable to the net impact
of the reverse merger in 2008 and, accordingly, $30 was reclassified from additional paid in capital
to common stock. The Company has reflected the impact of these adjustments and the increase in
shares outstanding in its Consolidated Financial Statements for the years ending December 31,
2009 and 2008.
 
3.  ACQUISITION
Effective March 4, 2008, the Company entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement,
pursuant to which the Company acquired from Egani, Inc. all the shares of stock of Altony SA, an
Uruguayan  Sociedad  Anonima  (“Altony”),  which  owns  100%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding
membership interests in South American Hedge Fund LLC, a Delaware limited liability company
(sometimes  referred  to  as  “SAHF”).  At  the  closing  of  the  Agreement,  the  Company  issued
13,000,000 shares of its common stock to Egani, Inc. which constituted, following such issuance, a
majority of the outstanding shares of its common stock. Immediately following the closing of the
Agreement, Altony became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. For accounting purposes,
the transaction was treated as a recapitalization of the Company, as of March 4, 2008, with Altony
as the acquirer.
39
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
The acquired assets and liabilities assumed of Delta Mutual from the reverse acquisition are as
follows:
Cash
Prepaid expenses
Property and equipment
Accumulated depreciation
Intangible asset-net
Other assets
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses
Convertible debt
Notes payable
Minority interests
Common stock
Deficit
57,623 
 $
1,924 
  
462,842 
  
(94,719)
  
126,317 
  
650 
  
  
(173,370)
   (1,225,674)
  
(397,340)
(240,655)
  
  
(225,797)
  
(7,888)
   1,716,087 
 $
-0-
4.  VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITY
 
FASB ASC 810 “Consolidation” required the consolidation of a variable interest entity (VIE) if the
Company is deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the VIE. FASB ASC 810 requires an entityto
assess its equity investments and certain other contractual interests to determine whether they are
VIEs. As defined in FASB ASC 810, variable interests are contractual, ownership or other interests
in an entity that change with changes in entity’s net asset value. Variable interests in an entity may
arise from financial instruments, service contracts, guarantees, leases or other arrangements with
the  VIE.  An  entity  that  will  absorb  a  majority  of  the  VIE’s  expected  losses  orexpected  residual
returns, as defined in FASB ASC 810, is considered the primary beneficiary of the VIE. The primary
beneficiary should include the VIE’s assets, liabilities and results of operations in its consolidated
financial statements until a reconsideration event, as defined in FASB ASC 810, occurs to require
deconsolidation of the VIE. At the deconsolidation date, the assets and liabilities of the VIE are
removed from the consolidated financial statements and any assets and liabilities of the Company
that were eliminated in consolidation are restored. The gain recognized from deconsolidating VIE
is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as gain on deconsolidation of the VIE.   
 
As of December 31, 2009, management determined that Delta-Envirotech, Inc. is not considered a
variable  interest  entity  (VIE)  for  the  year  ending  December  31,  2009  and  accordingly  has  been
deconsolidated from the accompanying consolidated financial statements effective December 31,
2009.  As  of  December  31,  2009,  majority  stockholders  of  Envirotech  are  exercising  significant
influence over operating and financing policies of Envirotech, as well as, managing its business
activities  and therefore is not considered the VIE. As a result of this deconsolidation, the Company
has removed the assets and liabilities of the VIE from the consolidated financial statements and
any assets and liabilities of Envirotech that were eliminated in consolidation are restored at fair
value.
 
 
40
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
Prior  to  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  was  deemed  to  be  the  primary  beneficiary  of  the
Envirotech  due  to  relatively  significant  financial  support  provided  to  this  entity  in  terms  of
investment of $375,000 (which represents 45% ownership of the Company) and notes receivable of
$810,867. However, due to significant losses of Envirotech and its deconsolidation as of December
31, 2009, the Company’s entire investment and notes receivable in the aggregate of approximately
$1,186,000 as of December 31,  2009  had been reduced to zero in order to account for restored
assets at fair value. On the other hand, as of December 31, 2009, the Company was not liable for
Envirotech’s liabilities and losses totaling approximately $882,000, net of the aforesaid losses on
investment and notes receivable in the aggregate of approximately $1,186,000 per agreed terms
with Envirotech and which resulted in a net gain on deconsolidation of approximately $882,000
recorded as a separate line item in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. 
 
5. PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
December 31,  December 31,
2009
2008
Equipment
 
Leasehold improvements
 
Less accumulated depreciation
$
  
  
  
  
  
 $
6,277  $
    
7,807   
14,084   
(14,084)  
    
0  $
6,277 
  
7,807 
14,084 
(13,280)
  
804
During  2008,  the  Company  discontinued  its  operations  in  the  Far  East  (Indonesia)  and
discontinued its construction technology activities. During the third and fourth quarters of 2008, the
Company  wrote  off  $268,127,  the  value  of  the  equipment  that  was  used  in  its  Indonesian
operations.  During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  the  Company  wrote  off  $77,125,  the  value  of  the
manufacturing  equipment  that  was  used  to  produce  its  insulating  concrete  form  (ICF)  building
product.
 
Depreciation expense for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 amounted to $804 and
$0, respectively.
41
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
6. INVESTMENT IN NONCONSOLIDATED AFFILIATES
 
As of December 31, 2009 the Company has a 10% ownership interest in the Jollin and Tonono oil
and  gas  concessions  located  in  Northern  Argentina.  During  2007,  SAHF  purchased  a  47%
ownership of these concessions and paid the purchase price by issuing a non-interest bearing note
in the principal amount of $1,820,000 to Oxipetrol-Petroleros de Occidente S.A. (Oxipetrol), one of
the other owners, with a maturity date of July 2008. The Company’s purchase price was based
upon the price tendered by the original purchasers of the concessions that was and accepted by
the Argentine government, who formerly owned these properties. The government uses a number
of factors In determining the selling prices for oil and gas concession in Argentina, including the
location and size of the concession and the current market prices of crude oil and natural gas. Prior
to the maturity date, the Company and Oxipetrol mutually agreed to reduce the principal amount of
the Company’s note primarily because of changes in oil and gas prices. Based upon the purchase
price  reduction,  the  Company  repaid  Oxipetrol  $1,270,000  at  the  maturity  date.  Based  on  these
circumstances, the Company recorded a one time, retroactive adjustment, reducing the value of this
investment by $550,000 at December 31, 2008.
During 2008, SAHF exchanged 50% of its ownership in this investment with a third party for no
cash consideration, however, the acquirer contractually agreed to assume 50% of the Company’s
obligations with respect to future development expenses. The Company recorded a $635,000 loss
on disposition of this investment in its consolidated statement of operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2008, majority owners of the Jollin and Tonono concessions
formed an Argentine-registered joint venture and paid, in the aggregate, approximately $848,000 of
development  costs,  all  of  which  were  capitalized.  Since  the  Company  was  not  registered  as  a
foreign company in Argentina, it could not become a member of the joint venture in 2008. The other
owners of these concessions have agreed that, upon admission of the Company as a member of
the joint venture, the Company will retain its 23.5% ownership. However, the Company’s weighted
average pro-rata portion of the 2008 aggregate development cost, of approximately $223,024, all of
which is included in accounts payable in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet at December
31, 2008, will be repaid to the other members from its pro-rata share of the future earnings. As of
December  31,  2009,  the  Company  recorded  a  reversal  of  $223,024  to  adjust  balances  in
investments and accounts payable as a result of aggregate development cost no longer considered
payable. The Company has applied for foreign registration in Argentina and should be admitted as
a member of the joint venture in the second quarter of 2010.
On September 25, 2009, the Company sold 13.5% of its ownership interest in Jollin and Tonono to
Maxi-Petroleros De Occidente S.A. ("Maxipetrol") for $206,832.  Maxipetrol, prior to the sale, owned
48% of the Jollin and Tonono oil and gas concession.  In connection with the sale, Maxipetrol will
assume full responsibility to develop the oil and gas concession until production is achieved in the
blocks.  This obligation includes all costs of the full amount attached to the concession contract
with the government.  Any prior unpaid costs accrued by the Company, will also be assumed by
Maxipetrol.  The Company through SAHF will retain 10% of the total concession in the carryover
mode  ("no  cost  obligations  to  SAHF")  and  will  begin  receiving  revenue  from  Jollin  and  Tonono
blocks when the first well will be approved for commercial exploration.  The Company recorded a
$157,939 loss on the disposition of its 13.5% investment to Maxipetrol and the loss is included in its
statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2009.
 
During  2008,  the  Company  purchased  40%  of  the  oil  and  gas  exploration  rights  to  five
geographically  defined  areas  in  the  Salta  Province  of  Northern  Argentina  from  Kestal,  SA,  a
company  that  acquired  100%  of  these  explorations  rights  from  the  government  of  Argentina  in
2007.  Kestal  retained  a  60%  interest.  The  price  Kestal  paid  to  acquire  these  rights  from  the
government was determined by the process described above.  In 2009, SAHF assigned 50% of its
rights to a third party.  As of December 31, 2009, SAHF owns 20% of the rights to this oil and gas
concession.  The Company paid the $697,000 purchase price in cash and incurred no additional
costs  or  expenses  related  to  this  investment  in  2008.  The  Company  expects  that  in  2010,
substantially all of the exploration costs required to retain the exploration rights will be borne by the
majority owner.
42
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
The Company has 9% ownership of the Tartagal and Morillo oil and gas concessions located in
Northern  Argentina.  During  2007,  the  Company  purchased  an  18%  ownership  of  these
concessions and paid the purchase price by issuing a non-interest bearing note in the principal
amount of $480,000 to Oxipetrol, one of the other owners, with a maturity date of July 2008. The
purchase  price  for  this  investment  was  based  on  the  original  price  paid  to  the  Argentine
government  to  acquire  these  concessions,  following  the  process  described  above.  Prior  to  the
maturity date, the Company and Oxipetrol mutually agreed to reduce the principal amount of the
Company’s  note  primarily  because  of  changes  in  oil  and  gas  prices.  Based  upon  the  purchase
price  reduction,  the  Company  repaid  Oxipetrol  $450,000  at  the  maturity  date.  Based  on  these
circumstances, the Company recorded a one time, retroactive adjustment reducing the value of this
investment by $30,000 at December 31, 2008.
During 2008, SAHF exchanged 50% of its ownership in this investment with a third party for no
cash consideration, however, the acquirer contractually agreed to assume 50% of the Company’s
obligations with respect to future development expenses. The Company recorded a $225,000 loss
on disposition of this investment in its consolidated financial statements.
In March 2009, a Hong Kong public company purchased 60% of the ownership in the Tartagal and
Morillo Concessions, from the other majority owners, for total consideration of approximately $270
million.  These  funds  will  be  used  for  development  and  operating  expenses  in  2009  and
beyond.  The Company through SAHF will retain 9% of the total concession in the carryover mode
("no cost obligations to SAHF") and will begin receiving revenue from Tartagal and Morillo blocks
when the first well will be approved for commercial exploration.
The  Company  evaluated  these  investments  for  impairment  and  concluded  that,  except  as
described  above,  no  loss  in  value  occurred  as  of  December  31,  2009.  The  following  table
summarizes the Company’s investments in these nonconsolidated affiliates.
 
 
43
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
At December 31, 2007
 
Adjustment of purchase price
 
Disposition of investment, net
 
Additional investment in 2008
 
Equity in net earnings (loss)
 
At December 31, 2008
Total
Concession  Exploration   
  
 Investments   Rights
  
   
   
 $ 2,300,000  $
  
    
(580,000)  
  
  
    
(860,000)  
  
  
    
223,024   
  
  
    
—   
  
  
    
   1,083,024
—  $2,300,000 
  
(580,000)
  
(860,000)
  
697,000    920,024 
  
- 
  
697,000    1,780,024
—   
    
—
—
Additional investments in 2009
  
  
 
Adjustment of additional investment during 2009 and 2008   
 
  
  
Disposition of investment, net
  
 
At December 31, 2009
 $
349,000   
    
(293,540)  
    
(364,771)
—    349,000 
    
  
(293,540)
—   
    
  
(364,771)
—   
    
  
773,713  $ 697,000  $1,470,713
7.  FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The Company adopted FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”)
on January 1, 2008, for all financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair
value in the condensed consolidated financial statements on a recurring basis or on a nonrecurring
basis  during  the  reporting  period.  While  the  Company  adopted  the  provisions  of  ASC  820  for
nonfinancial  assets  and  liabilities  that  are  recognized  or  disclosed  at  fair  value  in  the  financial
statements on a recurring basis, no such assets or liabilities existed at the balance sheet date. As
permitted by ASC 820, the Company delayed implementation of this standard for all nonfinancial
assets  and  liabilities  recognized  or  disclosed  at  fair  value  in  the  financial  statements  on  a
nonrecurring basis and adopted these provisions effective January 1, 2009.
The fair value is an exit price, representing the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid
to  transfer  a  liability  in  an  orderly  transaction  between  market  participants  at  the  measurement
date.    The  Company  utilizes  market  data  or  assumptions  that  market  participants  would  use  in
pricing the asset or liability.  ASC 820 establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes
the inputs used in measuring fair value.  These tiers include:  Level 1, defined as observable inputs
such as quoted market prices in active markets; Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices
in  active  markets  that  are  either  directly  or  indirectly  observable;  and  Level  3,  defined  as
unobservable  inputs  about  which  little  or  no  market  data  exists,  therefore  requiring  an  entity  to
develop its own assumptions.
As  of  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  held  certain  financial  assets  that  are  measured  at  fair
value on a recurring basis.  These consisted of cash and cash equivalents and investments in non-
consolidated affiliates.  The fair value of the cash and cash equivalents is determined based on
quoted  market  prices  in  public  markets  and  is  categorized  as  Level  1.    The  investment  in  non-
consolidated  affiliates  is  determined  by  the  Company  to  develop  its  own  assumptions  and  is
categorized as Level 3.  The Company does not have any financial assets measured at fair value
on a recurring basis as Level 2 and there were no transfers in or out of Level 2 or Level 3 during the
year ended December 31, 2009.
44
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
The  following  table  sets  forth  by  level,  within  the  fair  value  hierarchy,  the  Company’s  financial
assets accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2009.
Total
Cash and cash equivalents  $102,008   $ 102,008
Non-consolidated affiliates
Total
1,470,713   
 $1,572,721  $ 102,008
-
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets
Significant Other
Observable Inputs
(Level 1)
$
   
  $
(Level 2)
-
-
-
Significant
Unobservable
Inputs (Level 3)
$ -
    1,470,713
  $ 1,470,713
The Company had no financial assets accounted for on a non-recurring basis as of December 31,
2009.
There were no changes to the Company’s valuation techniques used to measure asset fair values
on a recurring or nonrecurring basis during the year December 31, 2009 and the Company did not
have  any  financial  liabilities  as  of  December  31,  2009.  The  Company  has  other  financial
instruments, such as advances and other receivables, accounts payable and other liabilities, notes
payable and other assets, which have been excluded from the tables above. Due to the short-term
nature  of  these  instruments,  the  carrying  value  of  advances  and  other  receivables,  accounts
payable and other liabilities, notes payable and other assets approximate their fair values.
8. NOTES PAYABLE
Notes payable to three investors, interest at 8%,
due August 10, 2011
 
Note payable to third party, interest at 6%, due
April 2009 (1)
 
Notes payable to stockholders and related
parties, interest at 6%, due June 20, 2012
 
 Notes payable to third parties, interest at rates
of 4% to 6%, due August 10, 2011
December 31,  December 31,
2009
2008
$
$
150,655  $
150,655
-
30,000
401,210
280,553
253,740   
805,605  $
- 
461,208
(1) During 2009, the Company converted this note including interest payable  in to equity by issuing
common stock.
The Company included accrued interest payable on the aforesaid notes in accrued expenses for
the years ending December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
45
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
9. CONVERTIBLE DEBT
In connection with the March 4, 2008 merger, the Company assumed convertible debt obligations
of $397,340. A note in the principal amount of $193,740 was not repaid at its maturity date. The
Company  is  currently  negotiating  amended  terms  with  the  noteholder.  If  the  Company  and  the
noteholder can not agree upon an amendment to the note, including an extension of the maturity
date, the Company may receive a notice of default. If the Company receives a notice of default and
fails to repay the note, the lender could initiate legal proceedings and obtain a judgment against the
Company.
In April 2008, the Company issued 230,057 shares of common stock in payment of the aggregate
principal amount of $143,600 of convertible notes and issued 11,563 shares of common stock in
payment of the accrued interest of $7,048.
At December 31, 2009, the Company reclassified convertible debt of $253,740 into notes payable
based on an arrangement with respective noteholders.
For  the  years  ended  December  31,  2009  and  2008,  the  Company  included  unpaid  interest
expense in accrued expenses on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
10. INCOME TAXES
 
The Company has not made provision for income taxes in the years ended December 31, 2009
and 2008, respectively, since the Company has the benefit of net operating losses carried forward
in these periods.
 
Deferred income tax assets consist of:
-  $
December
31, 2009
December
 
31, 2008  
 $ 1,397,000  $ 1,728,000 
  
  
   (1,397,000)   (1,728,000)
  
  
 $
-
Net operating loss carryforwards
 
Less valuation allowance
 
Deferred income tax assets, net
 
Due to uncertainties surrounding the Company’s ability to generate future taxable income to realize
these  assets,  a  full  valuation  has  been  established  to  offset  the  net  deferred  income  tax  asset.
Based on management’s assessment, utilizing an effective combined tax rate for federal and state
taxes  of  approximately  39%,  the  Company  has  determined  it  to  be  more  likely  than  not  that  a
deferred income tax asset of approximately $1,397,000 and $1,728,000 attributable to the future
utilization  of  the  approximately  $3,581,000  and  $4,431,000  in  eligible  net  operating  loss
carryforwards as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, will not be realized. The Company
will  continue  to  review  this  valuation  allowance  and  make  adjustments  as  appropriate.  The  net
operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in varying amounts from year 2019 to 2029.
46
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
The  Company  is  subject  to  taxation  in  the  United  States  and  certain  state  jurisdictions.  The
Company’s tax years for 2002 and forward are subject to examination by the United States and
applicable state tax authorities due to the carry forward of unutilized net operating losses.
11. OTHER INCOME
 
During the year ended December 31, 2009, the Company determined and analyzed that certain
balances  in  accounts  payable  and  accrued  expenses  were  very  old  and  no  longer  considered
payable  under  any  contractual  obligations  amounted  to  approximately  $582,000.  For  the  year
ended  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  had  included  $582,000  as  other  income  in  the
accompanying statements of operations through a resolution of the board of directors.
 
12.   STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
The Company issues shares of its common stock to non-employees as stock-based compensation.
The Company accounts for the services using the fair market value of the services rendered. For
the  years  ended  December  31,  2009  and  2008,  the  Company  issued  330,000  and  1,055,000
shares, respectively, and recorded compensation expense of $139,500 and $238,500, respectively,
in conjunction with the issuance of these shares.
The  Company  had  outstanding  employee  stock  options  of  350,000  that  were  exercisable  as  of
January 1, 2009.  As of December 31, 2009, none of the eligible employees exercised such options
and  therefore  the  options  either  were  cancelled  or  expired  upon  termination  of  employee  stock
option plan through a resolution of the board of directors.
13.   STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
 
On April 22, 2009, the Company’s board of directors approved amendments to the Certificate of
Incorporation  to:  (1)  effect  a  1  for  10  reverse  split  of  all  the  outstanding  common  stock;  and  (2)
authorize a new class of 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and to
authorize  the  board  of  directors  to  issue  one  or  more  series  of  the  preferred  stock  with  such
designations, rights, preferences and restrictions as determined by majority vote of the directors.
Thereafter  on  April  23,  2009,  the  Company  received  written  consent  from  stockholders  of  the
Company  holding  a  majority  of  the  outstanding  shares  of  common  stock  approving  the
Amendments. The effective date of the Amendments  is  the  date  the  reverse  stock  split  is  made
effective  for  trading  purposes  by  the  Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority  (FINRA).  FINRA
approved  the  reverse  split  for  trading  purposes  effective  July  6,  2009.  See  accompanying
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the impact on the Company's loss per share amounts as
a result of the reverse stock split.  By reason of the reverse split, the number of outstanding shares
of our common stock was reduced from 227,225,270 to 22,722,527.
All share and per share data (except par value) have been adjusted to reflect the effect of the stock
split  for  all  periods  presented  except  for  stockholders'  deficit.  As  a  result,  there  is  no  overall
financial effect of the reverse split, however, the number of outstanding employee stock options has
been  reduced  from  3,500,000  to  350,000  and  the  exercise  price  for  the  respective  options  has
increased by a factor of 10 (see note 11).
47
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
As of December 31, 2009, the board of directors had not authorized the issuance of any series of
preferred stock.
 
The  Company  issues  shares  of  common  stock  for  services  and  repayment  of  debt  and  interest
valued  at  fair  market  value  at  time  of  issuance.  For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2008,  the
Company issued 230,057 shares of common stock upon the conversion of convertible notes in the
principal  amount  of  $143,600,  valued  at  $0.50  -  $0.70  per  share;  and  issued  11,563  shares  of
common stock for payment of accrued interest in the amount of $7,048, valued at $0.50 - $0.70 per
share.
 
For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  issued  60,000  shares  to  an  unrelated
individual, valued at $0.60 per share towards conversion of notes payable and accrued interest of
$35,000 in common stock.
 
For the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, the Company issued 358,582 and 1,055,000
shares  of  common  stock,  respectively,  valued  at  $0.15  -  $0.60  and  $0.20  -  $0.70  per  share,
respectively, for services valued at $149,500 and $238,500, respectively.
During the year 2009, the Company received $170,000 pursuant to subscription agreements to
purchase 1,298,748 shares of common stock from various unrelated individuals. As of December
31, 2009, the Company issued shares to all these individuals.
14. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
POLITICAL RISK
The Company is exposed in the inherent risks for the foreseeable future of conducting business
internationally. Language barriers, foreign laws and tariffs and taxation issues all have a potential
effect on the Company’s ability to transact business. Political instability may increase the difficulties
and  costs  of  doing  business.  Accordingly,  events  resulting  from  changes  in  the  political  climate
could have a material effect on the Company.
OPERATING LEASES
The Company’s lease for its principal office space in Arizona became effective December 1, 2009
for  a  period  of  13  months.  Future  minimum  lease  payment  under  operating  leases  for  the  year
ending December 31, 2010 approximate $16,000. The Company recorded lease rental expenses
for the years ending December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated
statements of operations.
48
DELTA MUTUAL, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Former Employee Wage Claims
On  September  16,  2008,  the  Company  was  notified  of  a  complaint  filed  with  the  Pennsylvania
Department of Labor & Industry by its former President and CEO alleging non-payment of wages in
the amount of $53,271. The Company also received notice of a similar complaint filed by a former
employee alleging non-payment of wages in the amount of $17,782. In October 2008, the Company
entered into repayment agreements with both of the former employees. As of the date of this report,
the  Company  has  not  made  any  payments  to  these  two  former  employees  pursuant  to  these
agreements.  In  addition,  the  employee  that  alleged  non-payment  of  wages  in  the  amount  of
$17,782 has obtained a default judgment against the Company, entered on January 8, 2010 in the
Court  of  Common  Pleas  of  Bucks  County,  Pennsylvania,  Civil  Division,  in  the  amount  of
$29,625.94  as  to  this  wage  claim.  As  of  December  31,  2009,  the  Company  has  recorded  an
accrued liability of $17,782 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Delta believes
that a portion of the claim is without merit, and is vigorously contesting the claim as of the date of
this filing.
The  Company  has  been  notified  by  letter  dated  October  9,  2009  of  a  complaint  filed  with  the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry by its former Chief Financial Officer alleging non-
payment of wages in the amount of $131,250. The Company has responded to the Department of
Labor & Industry that the wages owed this former officer are substantially less than alleged in this
claim and are vigorously contesting the claim as of the date of this filing. As of the date of filing, the
Company  is  awaiting  a  response  from  the  Department  of  Labor  and  Industry  and  this  matter  is
disclosed in the contingent liabilities footnote to the consolidated financial statements.
Legal Fee Collection Claim
Delta Technologies, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and a discontinued operation
(“Delta Technologies”), has been notified by a collection agency on behalf of Wolf Block LLP (“Wolf
Block”), a law firm that had provided intellectually property legal services to Delta Technologies,
that  it  had  been  retained  in  an  attempt  to  collect  a  past  due  amount  of  approximately
$41,000    reduce  as  per  letter.  The  Company  is  in  discussions  with  the  collection  agency  and
believes  that  the  resolution  of  this  matter  will  have  no  material  effect  on  the  Company  or  its
operations.
15. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
 
On April 26, 2010, the Company’s Board of Directors approved five-year term executive
employment agreements (“Employment Agreements”) between the Company and Dr. Daniel R.
Peralta, the Company’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and Malcolm W. Sherman, the
Company’s Executive Vice President, effective March 22, 2010 and March 23, 2010,
respectively.  Dr. Peralta’s Employment Agreement provides for a fixed annual salary of $500,000;
Mr. Sherman’s Employment Agreement provides for a fixed annual salary of $350,000. Under the
Employment Agreements, both executives are eligible for participation in a bonus pool with other
senior executives, the quarterly bonus amounts being based on financial performance comparisons
with prior fiscal quarters, beginning with the quarterly reports of the Company for the year 2006 and
each subsequent year during the respective terms of each of the Employment Agreements. Such
bonuses will be pooled with those of other senior executives and be computed based on a total
bonus pool equal to 15% of the net profits of the Company as set forth in the Company’s SEC
filings.
 
The Company’s Board of Directors, with the agreement of the two executives, conditioned approval
of the Employment Agreements on limitation of the salary of Dr. Peralta to $200,000, and the salary
of Mr. Sherman to $150,000, until the cash flow of the Company was sufficient to pay the salaries
specified in the Employment Agreements and meet other operating obligations of the
Company.  Further, there would be no accruals of unpaid salaries under this agreement with the
two executives.
 
 
49
Item 9. Changes In and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A (T). Controls and Procedures.
As supervised by our board of directors and our chief executive and principal financial officers,
management has established a system of disclosure controls and procedures and has evaluated
the effectiveness of that system.  The system and its evaluation are reported on in the below
Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.  Our chief executive
and financial officer have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in the
1934 Securities Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(e)) as of December 31, 2009, were not effective, based
on the evaluation of these controls and procedures required by paragraph (b) of Rule 13a-15 due to
the possibility that stock issuances might not be correctly recorded for financial statement reporting
purposes.
Management's Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over
financial reporting, as such term is defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(the "Exchange Act").  Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles.
Management assessed the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December
31, 2009. We carried out this assessment using the criteria of the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal Control—Integrated Framework.
Management concluded in this assessment that as of December 31, 2009, our internal control over
financial reporting was not effective for the reason stated above. Management has taken steps
following March 31, 2010, to eliminate weaknesses in our disclosure controls and procedures
related to stock issuances and believes that such disclosure controls and procedures are effective,
and our internal control over financial reporting in effective, as of the date of this report.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our registered public accounting firm
regarding internal control over financial reporting.  Management's report was not subject to
attestation by our registered public accounting firm, pursuant to temporary rules of the Securities
and Exchange Commission that permit us to provide only management's report in this annual
report.
There have been no significant changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined
in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) during the fourth quarter of 2009 that
have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over
financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information.
None.
50
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance.
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
As of the date of this report, the executive officers and director of Delta Mutual, Inc. were as follows:
NAME
Daniel R. Peralta
 
Malcolm W. Sherman
Michael Gilburd
AGE
56
74
66
TITLE(S)
President, CEO and Director
   
  Executive Vice President and
Director
Interim Chief Financial Officer
Daniel R. Peralta joined the Company on January 20, 2009 as President and CEO and a
director. Dr. Peralta is also President and a director of Egani, Inc., a financial and international
business consulting firm. He also serves as President and a director of Egani S.A., an affiliated
company. Since July of 2008, Dr. Peralta has served as an advisor to the Company’s wholly owned
subsidiary, South American Hedge Fund, for its oil and gas activities in Argentina. He has also
served in various advisory capacities to the Argentine government and as a board member of the
Central Bank of Argentina and Vaisala oy Finland-Argentina. He is the author of several
publications on finance and economic development in South America. Dr. Peralta received a
doctoral degree in business administration from Belgrano University (Buenos Aires, Argentina) and
a bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering form the National Technical University of
Argentina.
Malcolm W. Sherman was appointed to fill a vacancy on our board of directors on July 11, 2008. He
was appointed Executive Vice President on July 28, 2008. Mr. Sherman also serves as President
and a director of Security Systems International, Inc., a company that provides security systems for
government building, industrial facilities, oil refineries and other facilities in the Middle East. From
May 2000 to July 2005, Mr. Sherman served as director of marketing for ZAFF International Ltd. a
Saudi Arabian technology company. During his career, Mr. Sherman also served as a director of
two public companies. He was a member of the founding team of Taser International, Inc. and
served on its board from 1993 to 1999. He also served as executive vice president and director of
Ronco, Inc. from 1981 to 1989. Mr. Sherman received a B.S. degree in business administration
from the University of Miami.
Michael Gilburd was appointed as Interim Chief Financial Officer, effective November 1, 2009,
pursuant to the Company’s agreement with Valucorp, Phoenix, Arizona. Under the Valucorp
agreement, Valucorp has provided Mr. Gilburd, a principal of Valucorp, as our Interim Chief
Financial Officer. Mr. Gilburd has more than thirty years experience in financial transaction services
and corporate development. Since 1999, his primary employment is as President of ValuCorp, a
national firm offering expert business valuation services and consulting on creating, improving and
preserving value, capital markets and corporate finance advisory, transaction and fairness
opinions, restructuring advisory, and management consulting. From 1995 to 1999, his primary
employment was as Managing Director of Corporate Finance for two American Express
(NYSE:AXP) companies and for five previous years he was National Director of Corporate Finance
and a member of the International Corporate Finance Committee for BDO Seidman. Mr. Gilburd is
also a member of the Board of Directors of Associated Physicians Group, O'Fallon, Illinois. He
previously concurrently served as a Director of Freedom Golf Corporation (FGLC: OTCBB), as Vice
President - Corporate Development of LJ International Inc. (NasdaqNM: JADE), and as the
Managing Director of Corporate Development of Arrowhead Health, Arizona's leading family
medicine and pain and rehabilitation facility. Mr. Gilburd received a Master of Science in Taxation
from Bentley College, Massachusetts, in 1972, and a Bachelor of Science degree in Accounting
from Long Island University, N.Y. in 1965.
AUDIT COMMITTEE
Our board of directors currently serves as our audit committee. The audit committee is responsible
for recommending independent auditors and reviewing management actions in matters relating to
audit functions. The committee reviews, with independent auditors, the scope and results of its
audit engagement, the system of internal controls and procedures and reviews the effectiveness of
procedures intended to prevent violations of laws.
51
The audit committee, consistent with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and the rules adopted
thereunder, meets with management and the auditors prior to filing of officers’ certifications with the
SEC to receive information concerning, among other things, significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal controls.
CODE OF CONDUCT
We have a corporate code of conduct and a corporate disclosure policy in place, which provide for
internal procedures concerning the reporting and disclosure of corporate matters that are material
to our business and to our stockholders. Our corporate code of conduct includes a code of ethics for
our officers and employees as to workplace conduct, dealings with customers, compliance with
laws, improper payments, conflicts of interest, insider trading, company confidential information,
and behavior with honesty and integrity. Our corporate disclosure policy includes guidelines for
publicly disseminating financial and other material developments to the investing public. A copy of
this code of conduct is published on our website www.deltamutual.com. We intend to disclose any
future amendments to, or waivers from, certain provisions of our Code of Conduct on this website
within five business days following the date of such amendment or waiver.
COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION 16(a) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
We believe that during 2009, all of our officers and directors complied with the reporting
requirements of Section 16(a), except as follows.
 
In 2008, prior to his being appointed an officer and director on January 20, 2009, Daniel Peralta,
who together with his wife Laura M. Gallo, controls Egani, Inc., the owner of in excess of 10% of our
common stock, failed to file Form 3 Initial Statements of Beneficial Ownership within 10 days of
acquisition of such shares on March 4, 2008.  Such Form 3’s were filed on July 28, 2008 by Laura
M. Gallo and on July 29, 2008 by Daniel Peralta.
 
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
Compensation paid by the Company and its subsidiaries to the Company’s Executive Officers (the
“Named Executives”).
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Name and
Principal
Position  Year
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Stock
Awards
($)
Option
Awards
($)
Change in
Pension
Value and
Nonquali-
fied Deferred
Compensation
All
Other
Non-Equity
Incentive
Plan
Compensation
($)
Earnings
($)
Compen-
sation
Total
($)
2009 $
-0-
2008 $ 8,125
2007 $97,500
2008 $39,704
2007 $91,000
2009 $25,938
2008 $
-0-
2009 $
-0-
2009
Daniel
Peralta,
Chief
Executive
Officer (1)
Peter F.
Russo,
President
and CEO
(2)
Peter F.
Russo,
President
and CEO
 
Martin G.
Chilek,
Chief
Financial
Officer
Martin G.
Chilek,
Chief
Financial
Officer (3)
Malcolm
W.
Sherman,
Executive
Vice
President
(4)
Michael
Gilburd,
Interim
Chief
Financial
Officer (5)
 
 
52
$
-0-
$ 8,125
$97,500
$39,704
$91,000
$25,938
$
$
-0-
-0-
$ 10,000  $10,000
(1) Mr. Peralta was appointed Chief Executive Officer on January 20, 2009.
(2)Mr. Russo resigned as President and a director effective July 25, 2008.While he served as a
director of the Company he received no additional compensation for serving in that capacity.
(3) Mr. Chilek resigned as Chief Financial Officer on August 12, 2009.
(4)Mr. Sherman served without compensation as an executive officer and director of the Company
in 2008.
(5)Pursuant to the Agreement between the Company and Valucorp, Mr. Gilburd was appointed
Interim Chief Financial Officer, effective November 1, 2009.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION NARRATIVE
Any compensation arrangements to which Dr. Peralta and Mr. Sherman may be parties in their
capacity as executive officers of the Company have not yet been established by the Board of
Directors.
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR-END
There were no outstanding option and stock awards at December 31, 2009 to the Company’s
Named Executives.
DIRECTORS' COMPENSATION
We do not compensate directors in their capacity as such nor do we compensate our directors for
attendance at meetings. We do reimburse our officers and directors for reasonable expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
53
STOCK INCENTIVE OR OPTION PLANS
In October 2009, we terminated our 2004 Stock Option Plan, pursuant to which 900,000 shares
remained available for the grant of options.
OTHER PLANS
We have not adopted any other deferred compensation, pension, profit sharing, stock option plan or
programs for the benefit of our officers or employees. During 2008, the Company suspended the
health and dental insurance benefit plans that were available to all full time employees.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related
Stockholder Matters.
The following table sets forth information, as of April 1, 2010, with respect to the beneficial
ownership of the Company's Common Stock by each person known by the Company to be the
beneficial owner of more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding Common Stock and by directors
and officers of the Company, both individually and as a group:
Number of Shares Owned
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
 
Daniel R. Peralta (1)
 
Malcolm W. Sherman (2)
 
All Officers and Directors as a Group (3
persons)
Beneficially
Percentage** 
   
 
48.02%
13,000,000   
    
  
3.69%
1,000,000
14,000,000
51.21%
** Based on 27,073,996 shares outstanding on March 31, 2010.
(1Dr. Peralta is the beneficial owner of 13,000,000 shares owned directly by Egani, Inc., which is
owned by Daniel R. Peralta and Laura Monica Gallo, husband and wife, each of whom owns 50%
of the outstanding equity interests of Egani, Inc. Dr. Peralta is the President and controls the
operations of Egani, Inc. The address of Egani, Inc. is 8260 East Raintree Drive, Scottsdale, AZ
85206. 10,000 shares of common stock are owned directly by Dr. Peralta’s son, Santiago Peralta.
Dr. Peralta disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares held by his son. Dr. Peralta’s address is
c/o Delta Mutual, Inc., 14301 North 87th Street, #310, Scottsdale, AZ 85260.
(2) Mr. Sherman owns beneficially 1,000,000 shares owned by Security Systems International, Inc.
of which Mr. Sherman is the president and a director and the majority stockholder. The address of
Security Systems International, Inc. is 9034 East Caribbean Lane, Scottsdale, AZ 85260. Mr.
Sherman’s address is c/o Delta Mutual, Inc. 14301 North 87th Street, #310, Scottsdale, AZ 85260.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
Effective March 4, 2008, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the
“Agreement”) with Egani, Inc., an Arizona corporation, (“Egani”), providing for the acquisition by the
Company from Egani 100% of the shares of stock held by it in Altony SA, an Uruguay Sociedad
Anonima (“Altony”), which owns 100% of the issued and outstanding membership interests in
South American Hedge Fund LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“SAHF”). In connection
with the Agreement, we issued 13,000,000 shares of our common stock to Egani, and also issued
1,000,000 shares to Security Systems International, Inc.(“SSI”), owned by Malcolm Sherman, our
Executive Vice President and director, pursuant to a Consulting Services Agreement, dated
September 10, 2007, between the Company and SSI. At the Closing of the purchase of all of the
shares of stock of Altony on March 4, 2008, we issued to Egani 13,000,000 shares of our common
stock, which constitutes following such issuance a majority of our outstanding shares of common
stock. The stockholders of Egani are Daniel R. Peralta and Monica Laura Gallo, husband and wife,
each a beneficial owner of 6,500,000 million shares of our common stock. The consideration
furnished by Egani was comprised of all of the outstanding shares of stock of Altony SA and 100%
of the membership interests in South American Hedge Fund LLC, valued at $2,600,000 based on
the market value of 13,000,000 shares of our common stock on March 4, 2008, that we issued to
acquire these assets. The sources of funds used by the beneficial owners of Egani to acquire
control of the Company were personal funds.
54
During 2008, Egani made loans to the Company as set forth below:
Maturity Date
Principal
 
Amount   
 
 
    
  $ 21,000   
    
 
 
 
9,550   
 
 
 
    
  13,350   
 
 
 
    
  $ 43,900
Interest
Rate  
  
6% June 20, 2012
  
6% June 20, 2012
  
6% June 20, 2012
Date of Note
 
March 6, 2008
 
April 28, 2008
 
September 18, 2008
 
Total
 
On October 3 and November 20, 2008, the Company issued to Santiago Peralta, the son of Daniel
Peralta, demand 6% promissory notes in the respective principal amounts of $10,000 and $14,000,
representing amounts loaned to the Company by Mr. Peralta on these dates.  Mr. Peralta has
extended the maturity date on this loan to June 20, 2012.
During 2008, SSI made loans to the Company as set forth in the table below:
Date of Note
 
March 6, 2008
 
April 15, 2008
 
May 14, 2008
 
July 7, 2008
 
September 19, 2008
 
October 22, 2008
 
December 15, 2008
 
Total
Interest
Rate
Principal
Amount   
 
 
    
  $100,000   
 
 
    
  20,000   
 
 
 
    
  16,900   
 
 
 
    
 
  22,413   
 
 
    
  16,650   
 
 
 
    
  28,500   
 
    
 
 
 
 
8,190   
 
    
 
  $212,653
Maturity Date
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
  
6%June 20, 2012
During 2009, SSI made loans to the Company as set forth in the table below:
Date of Note
January 22, 2009
Interest
Rate
Principal
 
Amount   
  $ 7,686   
  15,950   
 
 
 
5,000   
5,000   
 
 
 
 
8,577   
 
  19,767   
  15,487
Maturity Date
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
6%June 20, 2012
Total  $ 77,467
On November 28, 2009, Daniel Peralta, Santiago Peralta and Malcolm Sherman extended the due
dates on all loans by them to the Company to June 20, 2012.
 
55
Item 14.  Principal Accountant Fees and Services
 
(1) Aggregate fees for the last two years:
(2) Audit related fees:
 
 
 
(3) Tax fees:
2008    2009  
  
 
 $ 37,240  $24,000 
  
  
  2008    2009  
  
  
 $ 37,240  $24,000 
  
  
  
  
  2008    2007  
  
  
  
 $
-0-  $
(4) All other fees: NA
 
(5) Audit committee pre-approval processes, percentages of services approved by audit committee,
percentage of hours spent on audit engagement by persons other than principal accountant's full
time employees: NA
 
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
 
(a)(3) Exhibits
Exhibit No.   Description of Exhibits 
 
3.1
Articles of Incorporation of the Company, as currently in effect, incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Amendment No. 1 to the Company's Registration
Statement on Form 10-SB filed with the Commission on June 15, 2000.
Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation, filed September 1, 2004. Incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1a to the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K,
filed with the Commission on September 3, 2004.
Form of Restatement of Certificate of Incorporation of Delta Mutual, Inc., as amended.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1b to the Company's Quarterly Report
on Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on November 15, 2004.
3.1a
3.1b
3.2
By-Laws of the Company. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 to
Amendment No. 1 to the Company's Registration Statement on Form 10-SB filed with
the Commission on June 15, 2000.
Amendment to Article III, Section I of the By-Laws. Incorporated herein by reference
to the Company's quarterly report on Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on
November 21, 2000.
3.2a
56
3.1c
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation, filed June 26,2007.
Incorporated herein by reference to, Exhibit 3.1c to the Company's quarterly report on
Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on August 10, 2007.
Form of Restatement of Certificate of Incorporation of Delta Mutual, Inc., as amended.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1d to the Company's quarterly report on
Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on August 10, 2007.
Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation, filed May 13, 2009.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1e to the Company’s Quarterly Report
on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on August 6, 2009.
Form of Restatement of Certificate of Incorporation of the Company, as amended.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1f to the Company’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on August 6, 2009.
Delta Mutual, Inc. 2004 Stock Option Plan. Incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit B to the Company's Definitive Proxy Statement, filed with the Commission on
June 16, 2004.
4% Convertible Promissory Note of the Company due May 2006 issued in the
principal amount of $193,740 on May 12, 2004. Incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 4.6 to the Company's Quarterly Report on Form 10-QSB, filed with the
Commission on November 15, 2004.
Amendment, dated as of May 2, 2006, to 4% Convertible Promissory Note in the
principal amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6a to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed with the Commission on April 2,
2007.
Amendment, dated as of July 6, 2006, to 4% Convertible Promissory Note in the
principal amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6b to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed with the Commission on April 2,
2007.
Amendment, dated as of September 8, 2006, to 4% Convertible Promissory Note in
3.1d
3.1e
3.1f
4.2a
4.6
4.6a
4.6b
4.6c
the principal amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6c to
the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed with the Commission on April
2, 2007.
Amendment, dated as of November 21, 2006, to 4% Convertible Promissory Note in
the principal amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6d to
the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed with the Commission on April
2, 2007.
Amendment, dated April 4, 2007, to 4% Convertible Promissory Note in the Principal
Amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6e to the
Company's quarterly report on Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on August
10, 2007.
Amendment, dated September 7, 2007 to Convertible Promissory Note in the
principal amount of $193,740. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.6f to the
Company's quarterly report on Form 10-QSB, filed with the Commission on
November 9, 2007.
Strategic Alliance Agreement, dated September 10, 2003, between Delta-Envirotech,
Inc. and ZAFF International Ltd. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to
the Company's current report on Form 8-K, filed with the Commission on January 22,
2004.
Agreement, dated January 14, 2004, by and between Delta Mutual, Inc. and Hi-Tech
Consulting and Construction, Inc. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.16 to
the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed with the Commission on April
6, 2004.
4.6d
4.6e
4.6f
10.15
10.16
57
10.26
Executive Employment Agreement, dated May 23, 2005, between Delta Mutual, Inc.
10.33e
10.35
10.36
and Martin G. Chilek. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.26 to the
Company's Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the Commission on May 25, 2005.
Form of Amended and Restated 8% Term Notes issued March 6, 2008 by Delta
Mutual, Inc. in the aggregate principal amount of $150,655. Incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 10.33e to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed
with the Commission on April 15, 2008.
Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, dated March 4, 2008, between Delta
Mutual, Inc. and Egani, Inc. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.35 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the Commission on March 11,
2008.
Consulting Services Agreement, dated September 10, 2007, between Delta Mutual,
Inc. and Security Systems International, Inc. Incorporated herein by reference to
10.37
10.37a
10.37b
10.38
10.38a
10.39
10.39a
10.40
10.40a
58
Exhibit 10.36 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the
Commission on March 11, 2008.
Form of 6% promissory notes issued March 6, 2008 by the Company in the aggregate
principal amount of $121,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the Commission on March 11,
2008.
Amendment, dated as of September 2, 2008, to 6% Promissory Note in the principal
amount of $21,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.37a to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
Amendment, dated as of September 18, 2008, to 6% Promissory Note in the principal
amount of $100,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.37b to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $20,000 on
April 15, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on July 3, 2008.
Amendment, dated as of October 8, 2008, to 6% Promissory Note in the principal
amount of $20,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.38a to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $9,550 on
April 28, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.39 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on July 3, 2008.
Amendment, dated as of October 10, 2008, to 6% Promissory Note in the principal
amount of $9,550. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.39a to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6 % Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $16,900 on
May 14, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.40 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on July 3, 2008.
Amendment, dated as of November 4, 2008, to 6% Promissory Note in the principal
amount of $16,900. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.40a to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
10.42
10.43
10.44
10.45
10.46
10.47
10.48
10.48a
10.49
10.49a
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $22,413 on
July 7, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November 18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $13,350 on
September 18,2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.43 to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $16,650 on
September 19,2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.44 to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $10,000 on
October 3, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.45 to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November 18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note of the Company issued in the principal amount of $28,500 on
October 22, 2008. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.46 to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on November
18, 2008.
6% Promissory Note dated as of November 20, 2008 by Delta Mutual, Inc. to
Santiago Peralta in the principal amount of $14,000. Incorporated herein by reference
to Exhibit 10.47 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the
Commission on April 14, 2009.
Amendment dated as of November 24, 2008 to 6% promissory notes issued to Egani,
Inc. in the aggregate principal amount of $43,900. Incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.48 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the
Commission on April 14, 2009.
Second Amendment, dated as of April 16, 2009, to 6% promissory notes issued to
Egani, Inc. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.48a to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on May 20, 2009.
Amendment dated as of December 14, 2008 to 6% promissory notes issued to
Security Systems International, Inc. in the aggregate principal amount of $136,900.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.49 to the Company’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on April 14, 2009.
Second Amendment, dated as of April 16, 2009, to 6% promissory notes issued to
Security Systems International, Inc. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.49a to the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission
on May 20, 2009.
10.50
6% Promissory Note dated as of December 15, 2008 to Security Systems
International, Inc. in the principal amount of $8,190. Incorporated herein by reference
to Exhibit 10.50 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the
Commission on April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of January 22, 2009 to Security Systems International,
Inc. in the principal amount of $7,686. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.51 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on
April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of February 10, 2009 to Security Systems International,
Inc. in the principal amount of $15,950. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.52 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on
April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of February 18, 2009 to Security Systems International,
Inc. in the principal amount of $5,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.53 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on
April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of February 19, 2009 to Malcolm W. Sherman in the
principal amount of $5,000. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.54 to the
Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on April 14,
2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of March 20, 2009 to Security Systems International,
Inc. in the principal amount of $19,767. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.55 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on
April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of March 25, 2009 to Security Systems International,
LLC in the principal amount of $8,577. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.56 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on
April 14, 2009.
6% Promissory Note dated as of April 2, 2009 to Security Systems International, LLC
in the principal amount of $14,987. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.57
to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on April
14, 2009.
Amended and Restated 6% Promissory Noted dated as of April 15, 2009 to Security
Systems International LLC. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.57a to the
Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed with the Commission on August 6,
2009.
10.51
59
10.52
10.53
10.54
10.55
10.56
10.57
10.57a
10.58
Agreement, dated as of November 1, 2009, between the Company and Valucorp.
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.58 to the Company's Annual Report on
Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on April 15, 2010.
Note Extension Agreement, dated December 31, 2009, between the Company and
10.59
Neil Berman, the Anthony Panariello Trust, the Danielle Panariello Trust and the
Michaela Panariello Trust. Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.59 to the
Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Commission on April 15,
2010.
Delta Mutual, Inc. Code of Conduct and Business Ethics. Incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 10.25 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB, filed
with the Commission on April 14, 2005.
Certification of Chief Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, filed herewith.
Certification of Chief Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18
U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
of 2002, filed herewith.
SIGNATURES
14.
31
32
60
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the Company caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
 
Dated:  July 21, 2010
 
  
 
 
 
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following person on behalf of the Registrant in the capacities indicated, on July 21,
2010.
 
/s/ Daniel R. Peralta
Dr. Daniel R. Peralta, President, Chief Executive Officer
and Director
DELTA MUTUAL, INC.
 
 
 
By:/s/ Daniel R. Peralta  
Dr. Daniel R. Peralta
President, Chief Executive Officer,
Principal Financial Officer and Director
/s/ Malcolm W. Sherman
Malcolm W. Sherman
Executive Vice President and Director
 
 
61