
10KSB 1 ksb.htm KSB
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-KSB
[ X ] ANNUAL REPORT  UNDER  SECTION  13  0R  15(d)  OF  THE  SECURITIES  EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 0R 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE
ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended  December 31, 2004
For the transition period from____________to____________
Commission file number  000-27753
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
(Name of Small Business Issuer in its charter)
Incorporated in the State of Nevada
98-0206979
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Third Floor, 346 Kensington High Street, London, UK
(Address of principal executive offices)
Issuer’s telephone number: 011-44-20-7371-6668
W14 8NS  
(Zip Code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Name of each exchange on which registered
None
N/A
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
shares of common stock - $0.001 par value
(Title of Class)
Indicate by check mark whether the issuer (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or
15(d) of the Exchange Act during the last 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was
required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
[ ] Yes [ X ] No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-B is
not contained in this form, and no disclosure will be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in
definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-KSB or
any amendment to this Form 10-KSB. [  ]
 
Page - 1
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act).
[  ] Yes [ X ] No
State issuer’s revenues for its most recent fiscal year.  $ 363,053
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates
computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was sold, or the average bid and
asked price of such common equity, as of a specified date within the past 60 days: $29,649,598 as of
November 10, 2005 ($0.66 close)
State the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer’s classes of common equity, as of the
latest practicable date.
shares of common stock - $0.001 par value
59,498,090
Class
Outstanding at November 10, 2005
Documents incorporated by reference: Exhibit 3.1 (Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation)
filed on May 14, 2002 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-K/A (Annual Report); Exhibit 3.2 (By-laws) filed
on October 21, 1999 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 10 (Registration Statement); Exhibit 4.1 (1999
Employee Stock Option / Warrant Plan) filed on September 11, 2000 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form S-8
(Registration Statement); Exhibit 4.2 (Rights Agreement) filed on March 6, 2002 as an Exhibit to Brek’s
Form 8-K (Current Report); Exhibit 4.3 (2001 Employee Stock Option / Warrant Plan) filed on July 10,
2002 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form S-8 (Registration Statement); Exhibit 10.1 (Stock Purchase
Agreement) filed on March 29, 2000 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB (Annual Report); Exhibit
10.2 (Stock Purchase Agreement) filed on September 18, 2002 as an attached Exhibit to Brek’s Form
10-K/A (Annual Report); Exhibit 10.3 (Purchase Agreement) filed on July 31, 2002 as an Exhibit to
Brek’s Form 8-K (Current Report); Exhibit 10.4 (Share Purchase Agreement) filed on November 21,
2005 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB (Annual Report); and Exhibit 10.5 (License Agreements)
filed on November 21, 2005 as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB (Annual Report).
Transitional Small Business Disclosure Format (Check one): Yes [  ] No [ x ]
Page - 2
Item 1. Description of Business.
PART I
(a)  Business Development
Brek Energy Corporation is a Nevada corporation in the oil and gas business. Brek was in the
business of developing electronic payment processing systems from its inception until July 2001 when
it acquired shares in Gasco Energy, Inc., an oil and gas exploration company. In July 2002, Brek
exchanged its shares in Gasco for a leasehold interest in 25% of Gasco’s undeveloped properties in
Utah, Wyoming and California, which it owns and operates through subsidiaries, and sold its
electronic payment processing subsidiary. Since then, Brek has focused on the development of its
natural gas and oil properties. On March 12, 2002, Brek acquired shares in Vallenar Energy Corp., an
oil and gas exploration company. On June 28, 2002, Brek increased its shareholding in Vallenar to
51.53%. See “Business of Brek” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operations”
below for more information.
Brek has an authorized capital of 300,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001 of
which 59,498,090 shares are issued and outstanding.
Neither Brek nor any of its subsidiaries has been involved in any bankruptcy, receivership or similar
proceedings. There have been no material reclassifications, mergers, consolidations or purchases or
sales of a significant amount of assets not in the ordinary course of Brek’s business.
(b)  Business of Brek
Brek is a natural gas and petroleum exploitation, development, and production company engaged in
the acquisition, operation and development of unconventional hydrocarbon prospects, primarily in the
Rocky Mountain region. Brek, through its subsidiaries, conducts its principal business, which is (1) the
acquisition of leasehold interests in petroleum and natural gas rights, either directly or indirectly, and
(2) the exploitation and development of properties subject to these leases. Brek is currently focusing
on drilling efforts in the Riverbend Project located in the Unita Basin of northeastern Utah, targeting
the Wasatch, Mesaverde and Blackhawk formations. See “Item 2. Description of Property” below for
more information.
Brek is the majority owner of Vallenar Energy Corp., an oil and gas company with a strategy of
structuring and developing an economically viable enhanced oil recovery project in Texas. See “Item
2. Description of Property” below for more information.
Brek is in the early stages of development and has insufficient operating history on which to base an
evaluation of its business and prospects. Any evaluation must be made in light of the risks frequently
encountered by companies in their early stages of development, particularly for companies in high risk
sectors such as natural gas and oil.
Products and Services
The discovery of natural gas or oil and the ability to produce either one in commercial quantities is
very speculative. Even assuming that Brek obtains the necessary financing for drilling, if Brek or its
operator does not discover and produce commercial quantities of natural gas or oil, it will not have any
products or services to offer and its business could fail. The principal uses for natural gas and oil are
heating, manufacturing, power, and transportation.
Natural gas is gathered through connections between Brek’s natural gas wells and the pipeline
transmission system. Natural gas sales are by contract, and Brek, through its operator, will enter into a
contract with the natural gas company that purchases most of the natural gas produced in the area.
Natural gas purchasers pay well operators 100% of the sale proceeds of natural gas on or about the
25th of each month for the previous month’s sales. The operator is responsible for all distributions to
the working interest and royalty owners. There is no standard price for natural gas and prices will
fluctuate with the seasons and the general market conditions. See Exhibit 10.7 - Natural Gas
Purchase Agreement for more details.
Brek primarily produces natural gas, and also produces condensate (oil). During the fiscal year ended
December 31, 2004, Brek produced 58,907.61 Mcf of natural gas and 834.08 Bbl of oil. Brek sells its
product to purchasers in the geographic area of the properties. Natural gas, after processing, is
distributed through pipelines. Brek recognizes revenue from the sale of natural gas when it reaches
the customer’s point of purchase in the gas transmission system. The amount Brek recognizes for
each well will be based on the percentage of Brek’s net revenue interest in the well, and the remainder
will be allocated to other persons holding a net revenue interest.
 
Page - 3
Market
Brek currently derives its revenue principally from the sale of natural gas. As a result, Brek’s revenues
are determined, to a large degree, by prevailing natural gas prices. Brek currently sells the majority of
its natural gas on the open market at prevailing market prices. The market price for natural gas is
dictated by supply and demand, and Brek cannot accurately predict or control the price it receives for
its natural gas. See Exhibit 10.7 - Natural Gas Purchase Agreement for more details.
The market for natural gas and oil production is regulated by both the state and federal governments.
The overall market is mature and, with the exception of natural gas, all producers in a producing
region will receive the same price.
The availability of a ready market for any natural gas or oil produced by Brek depends on numerous
factors beyond the control of management, including but not limited to, the extent of domestic
production and imports of oil, the proximity and capacity of natural gas pipelines, the availability of
skilled labor, materials and equipment, the effect of state and federal regulation of natural gas and oil
production, and federal regulation of natural gas sold in interstate commerce. Natural gas and oil
produced by Brek or its operator in Utah is sold to various purchasers who service the areas where
Brek’s wells are located. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2004, Brek’s wells are not
subject to any agreements that would prevent Brek from either selling its production on the spot market
or committing such gas to a long-term contract; however, there can be no assurance that Brek will
continue to have ready access to suitable markets for its future natural gas and oil production.
The marketability of Brek’s natural gas has not posed a problem for Brek. Natural gas can be easily
sold wherever it is produced in the States that Brek operates subject to the transportation cost.
However, the natural gas produced by Brek can be difficult to sell since transportation requires a
pipeline. In the areas that Brek is presently pursuing new drilling activity for natural gas, other
companies have been delayed up to a year because of the unavailability of a pipeline. No assurance
can be given that natural gas wells drilled by Brek or its operator will be placed on line within a year
after the well is drilled and completed.
Distribution Methods of Products and Services
Natural gas will be delivered to the purchaser via gathering lines into the main gas transmission line or
pipeline. See Exhibit 10.7 - Natural Gas Purchase Agreement for more details.
Management anticipates that Brek’s products will be sold to any number of purchasers in the area of
its properties, however, no assurance can be given that Brek will be able to make such sales or that if
it does, it will be able to receive a price that is sufficient to make its operations profitable.
Competition
Brek’s natural gas and oil exploration activities take place in a highly competitive and speculative
business atmosphere. In seeking suitable natural gas and oil properties for acquisition, Brek competes
with a number of other companies operating in its areas of interest, including large oil and gas
companies and other independent operators with greater financial resources. Management does not
believe that Brek’s competitive position in the natural gas and oil industry will be significant.
Competition in the natural gas and oil exploration industry also exists in the form of competition to
acquire the most promising acreage blocks and obtaining the most favorable prices for transporting the
product. Brek is relatively small compared to other natural gas and oil exploration companies and may
have difficulty acquiring additional acreage or projects, and may have difficulty arranging for the
transportation of product, if Brek is successful in its exploration efforts.
The natural gas industry is very competitive, particularly with respect to the acquisition of drilling rigs
and natural gas exploration services from independent contractors. Brek anticipates a tight market for
obtaining drilling rigs and services, and the manpower to run them. The current high level of drilling
activity in Brek’s areas of exploration may have a significant adverse impact on the timing and
profitability of Brek’s operations. In addition, Gasco Energy, Inc., the operator on the properties, will be
required to obtain drilling permits for its wells, and there is no assurance that such permits will be
available in a timely manner or at all.
 
Page - 4
The price of natural gas is affected by continuous shifts in supply and demand and is controlled by
domestic and world markets. Natural gas is becoming the preferred source of energy over other fossil
fuels because it is an environmentally friendlier source of energy. The demand for natural gas is
increasing and whether or not their will be an adequate supply is very uncertain. Numerous well-
established companies are focusing significant resources on exploration. These companies may be
able to compete more effectively than Brek. Due to these factors, Brek expects competition to intensify
in the natural gas industry in general and for the acquisition of drilling rigs and natural gas exploration
services from independent contractors.
Government Controls and Regulations
Brek, or a venture in which it participates, will be required to obtain local government and other permits
for drilling oil or gas wells.
Brek and its operators are subject to stringent federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing
the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection.
These laws and regulations may require the acquisition of permits before drilling commences, limit or
prohibit operations on environmentally sensitive lands such as wetlands or wilderness areas, result in
capital expenditures to limit or prevent emissions or discharges, and place restrictions on the
management of wastes. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the
assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties, the imposition of remedial obligations, and
the issuance of injunctive relief. Any changes in environmental laws and regulations that result in
more stringent and costly waste handling, disposal or cleanup requirements could have a material
adverse effect on our operations. While management believes that Brek and its operators are in
substantial compliance with current environmental laws and regulations and that continued
compliance with existing requirements would not materially affect Brek, there is no assurance that this
trend will continue in the future.
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended, also
known as “CERCLA” or “Superfund”, and comparable state laws impose liability without regard to
fault or the legality of the original conduct, on certain classes of persons who are considered to be
responsible for the release of a hazardous substance into the environment. Under CERCLA, these
“responsible persons” may be subject to joint and several liability for the costs of cleaning up the
hazardous substances that have been released into the environment, for damages to natural
resources, and for the costs of certain health studies, and it is not uncommon for neighboring
landowners and other third parties to file claims for personal injury and property damage allegedly
caused by the release of hazardous substances into the environment.
Brek also may incur liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, also known as
“RCRA”, which imposes requirements relating to the management and disposal of solid and
hazardous wastes. While there exists an exclusion from the definition of hazardous wastes for “drilling
fluids, produced waters, and other wastes associated with the exploration, development, or production
of crude oil, natural gas or geothermal energy”, in the course of Brek’s operations, Brek may generate
ordinary industrial wastes, including paint wastes, waste solvents, and waste compressor oils that may
be regulated as hazardous waste.
Brek currently owns or leases, and has in the past owned or leased, through its operators, properties
that for a number of years have been used for the exploration and production of natural gas and oil.
Although Brek and its operators have utilized operating and disposal practices that were standard in
the industry at the time, hydrocarbons or other wastes may have been disposed of or released on or
under the properties owned or leased by Brek or on or under other locations where such wastes have
been taken for disposal. In addition, some of these properties may have been operated by third parties
whose disposal or release of hydrocarbons or other wastes was not under Brek’s control. These
properties and the wastes disposed thereon may be subject to CERCLA, RCRA, and analogous State
laws. Under such laws, Brek could be required to remove or remediate previously disposed wastes or
property contamination or to perform remedial operations to prevent future contamination.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, as amended, also known as the “Clean Water Act”
and analogous State laws impose restrictions and strict controls regarding the discharge of pollutants,
including produced waters and other oil and natural gas wastes, into state or federal waters. The
discharge of pollutants into regulated waters is prohibited, except in accord with the terms of a permit
issued by EPA or the state. The Clean Water Act provides civil and criminal penalties for any
discharge of oil in harmful quantities and imposes liabilities for the costs of removing an oil spill.
The Clean Air Act, as amended (the “CAA”), restricts the emission of air pollutants from many sources,
including natural gas and oil operations. New facilities may be required to obtain permits before work
can begin, and existing facilities may be required to incur capital costs in order to remain in
compliance. In addition, more stringent regulations governing emissions of toxic air pollutants are
being developed by the EPA, and may increase the costs of compliance for some facilities.
Page - 5
Under the National Environmental Policy Act (the “NEPA”), a federal agency, in conjunction with a
permit holder, may be required to prepare an environmental assessment or a detailed environmental
impact statement, also known as an “EIS” before issuing a permit that may significantly affect the
quality of the environment. Brek or its operators are currently in negotiations with the U.S. Bureau of
Land Management or “BLM” regarding the preparation of an EIS in connection with certain proposed
exploration and production operations in the Uinta Basin of Utah. Brek expects that the EIS will take
approximately 18 to 24 months to complete. Until the EIS is completed and issued by the BLM, Brek
will be limited in the number of natural gas and oil wells that it or its operator can drill in the areas
undergoing EIS review. While Brek does not expect that the EIS process will result in a significant
curtailment in future natural gas and oil production from this particular area, Brek can provide no
assurance regarding the outcome of the EIS process.
Brek and its subsidiaries are in compliance with the foregoing legislation and will continue to comply
with the legislation in the future. Management believes that compliance with the foregoing legislation
will not adversely affect Brek’s business operations in the future or its competitive position.
Effect of Existing or Probable Governmental Regulations on Brek’s Business
Brek’s business is subject to various levels of government controls and regulations, which are
supplemented and revised from time to time, including various laws and regulations of the United
States, the State of Utah, the State of Wyoming, the State of California, the State of Texas, and the
municipalities in which it operates that govern the exploration, development and production of natural
gas and oil. Brek will have to abide and follow the procedures established by the entities in those
jurisdictions. For instance, the Texas Railroad Commission determines all procedures and regulations
that concern oil and natural gas exploration and production activities in the State of Texas. Brek is
unable to predict what additional legislation or revisions may be proposed that might affect its
business or when any such proposals, if enacted, might become effective. Such changes, however,
could require increased capital and operating expenditures and could prevent or delay certain
operations by Brek or one of its subsidiaries.
Dependence on One or a Few Major Customers
Brek does not independently market its production: it depends entirely upon the operators of its wells
to market and sell all of its production. As Brek does not yet rely upon the revenue from its production,
an operator’s refusal to market and sell the production on Brek’s behalf would not have a material
adverse affect on its business, except to the extent that Brek does not have storage facilities and
would be obligated to take delivery of its production. Brek’s management does not believe that any of
its operators is likely to refuse to market and sell its production.
Patents/Trade Marks/Licences/Franchises/Concessions/Royalty Agreements or Labour
Contracts
Neither Brek nor its subsidiaries currently own any patents or trade marks. Also, they are not party to
any license or franchise agreements, concessions, royalty agreements or labor contracts arising from
any patents or trade marks.
Brek’s web site is copyrighted upon loading. www.brekenergy.com is a registered domain name of
Brek. Brek and its subsidiaries will seek further trademark protection for any associated domain
names.
Estimate of Research and Development Costs
Brek did not perform any research activities in the past two fiscal years ended 2004 and 2003. Brek
spent $1,661,077 and $306,485 on exploration and development activities during the two fiscal years
ended 2004 and 2003 respectively. Also, Brek did not spend any funds on geological and economical
evaluations of its properties during the same time period.
Number of Total Employees and Number of Full Time Employees
As of December 31, 2004 Brek had no employees.
RISK FACTORS
Brek is in the early stages of development and an investment in Brek’s business involves a high
degree of risk. You should consider each of the following risk factors and the other information in this
Annual Report, including Brek’s financial statements and the related notes, in evaluating Brek’s
business and prospects. The risks and uncertainties described below are not the only ones that impact
on Brek’s business. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to Brek or that Brek
currently considers immaterial may also impair its business operations. If any of the following risks
actually occur, Brek’s business and financial results could be harmed. In that case, the trading price of
Brek’s shares of common stock could decline.
 
Page - 6
Risks associated with Brek’s business and properties:
1.  Brek is in the early stages of development and may not be able to continue as a going
concern and may not be able to raise additional financing.
 
Brek has a working capital deficiency. This factor raises substantial doubt about Brek’s ability to
continue as a going concern. These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going
concern basis, which implies that Brek will continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in
the normal course of business. Brek has never paid any dividends. Brek is unlikely to pay dividends in
the immediate or foreseeable future. There is no guarantee that Brek will be able to raise any equity
financing. Brek has a working capital deficit of $789,409 and has accumulated losses of $61,335,708
since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding Brek’s ability to continue as a going
concern.
These factors may make it more difficult for Brek to raise additional equity or debt financing needed to
run its business and is not viewed favorably by analysts or investors. Brek urges potential investors to
review this report before making a decision to invest in Brek.
2.  Brek has a limited history.
 
Brek has a limited operating history upon which an evaluation of its future success or failure can be
made. You should be aware of the difficulties normally encountered by new natural gas exploration
companies similarly situated to Brek and the high rate of failure of such enterprises. Many of these
risks and uncertainties are described in more detail elsewhere in this “Risk Factors” section. Brek’s
likelihood of success must be considered in light of the problems, expenses, difficulties, complications
and delays encountered in connection with the exploration of the properties that Brek plans to
undertake. These potential problems include, but are not limited to, unanticipated problems relating to
exploration, and additional costs and expenses that may exceed current estimates. You should
consider the likelihood of Brek’s future success to be highly speculative in view of its limited operating
history, as well as the complications frequently encountered by other companies in the early stages of
development. If Brek realizes problems, additional costs, difficulties, complications or delays in
connection with its exploration activities, it will have a material adverse effect on its business
operations, results of operations and financial condition, and as a result, its business could suspended
or fail.
 
Brek has limited financial resources to support it. Brek’s accumulated net losses since inception on
September 16, 1998 are $61,335,708. For the 12 months ended December 31, 2004, operating
expenses increased by $64,760. Based upon current plans, Brek expects to incur approximately
$17,000 per month in operating losses over the 18 months, primarily due to expenses associated with
the proposed natural gas and oil exploration programs on its properties. See “Management Discussion
and Analysis” on page 25 for more details.
Brek cannot guaranty that it will be successful in generating revenues in the future or that it will be able
to raise any working capital for operating funds. Failure to generate sufficient revenues or raise any
financing may cause Brek to suspend or cease operations.
Brek’s ability to maintain profitability and positive cash flow is dependent upon its ability to continue to
generate revenues from its planned business operations and to control operating costs. Without the
generation of any revenues or any capital being raised in an equity or debt financing, Brek will run out
of operating funds within three months.
3.  Brek has limited control over activities on properties that Brek does not operate and
depends on Gasco Energy, Inc. to manage, drill and operate the wells, which could negatively
impact on the exploration and development of Brek’s properties and on Brek’s business
operations.
Substantially all of Brek’s business operations are conducted through joint operating agreements
under which Brek owns partial interests in natural gas and oil properties. If Brek does not operate the
properties in which it owns an interest, Brek does not have control over normal operating procedures,
expenditures or future development of underlying properties. The failure of an operator of Brek’s wells
to adequately perform operations, or an operator’s breach of the applicable agreements, could reduce
Brek’s production and revenues and have a negative impact on Brek’s business operations. The
success and timing of Brek’s drilling and development activities on properties operated by others
therefore depends upon a number of factors outside of Brek’s control, including the operator’s timing
and amount of capital expenditures, expertise and financial resources, inclusion of other participants
in drilling wells, and use of technology. Because Brek does not have a majority interest in most wells
that Brek does not operate, Brek may not be in a position to remove the operator in the event of poor
performance.
 
Page - 7
4.  Brek’s partners and third party operators could suffer financial hardship, which could
negatively impact on the exploration and development of Brek’s properties.
Liquidity and cash flow problems encountered by Brek’s partners or the co-owners of Brek’s properties
may prevent or delay the drilling of a well or the development of a project. Brek’s partners and working
interest co-owners may be unwilling or unable to pay their share of the costs of projects as they
become due. In the case of a farm-out partner, Brek would have to find a new farm-out partner or
obtain alternative funding in order to complete the exploration and development of the prospects
subject to the farm-out agreement. In the case of a working interest owner, Brek could be required to
pay the working interest owner’s share of the project costs. Brek cannot assure you that it would be
able to obtain the capital necessary to fund either of these contingencies or that Brek would be able to
find a new farm-out partner.
5.  Brek’s estimated reserves are based on many assumptions, which may be inaccurate, and
any material inaccuracies in the estimated reserve or underlying assumptions will materially
affect the quantities and present value of Brek’s reserves and negatively impact Brek’s
business operations.
Estimating accumulations of gas and oil is complex and is not exact because of the numerous
uncertainties inherent in the process. The process relies on interpretations of available geological,
geophysical, engineering and production data. The extent, quality and reliability of this technical data
can vary. The process also requires certain economic assumptions, some of which are mandated by
the SEC, such as gas and oil prices, drilling and operating expenses, capital expenditures, taxes and
availability of funds.
Actual future production, gas and oil prices, revenues, taxes, development expenditures, operating
expenses and quantities of recoverable gas and oil reserves most likely will vary from Brek’s
estimates. Any significant variance could materially affect the quantities and present value of its
reserves. In addition, Brek may adjust estimates of proved reserves to reflect production history, results
of exploration and development, and prevailing gas and oil prices. If the estimated reserves are
materially inaccurate, this will negatively impact Brek and its business operations.
6.  As a result of Brek’s reserves and production being concentrated in a small number of
properties, any production problems or significant decrease in reserve estimates related to any
property could negatively impact Brek’s business operations.
Brek’s current reserves and production primarily come from producing properties in Utah and
Wyoming. If mechanical problems, depletion or other events reduced a substantial portion of the
production, Brek’s cash flows would be adversely affected. If the actual reserves associated with
Brek’s fields are less than its estimated reserves, Brek’s business operations and financial condition
could be negatively impacted.
7.  The exploration and development of Brek’s oil & gas properties require substantial capital,
which Brek may not be able to obtain, which in turn could lead to a loss of Brek’s interest in
certain oil & gas properties and a decline in Brek’s natural gas and oil reserves.
Brek’s current operating funds are less than necessary to complete Brek’s proposed oil & gas
exploration programs, and therefore Brek will need to obtain additional financing in order to complete
each of the proposed oil & gas exploration programs. As of September 30, 2005, Brek had cash in the
amount of $19,293. Brek currently has limited operations and minimal income. Brek’s natural gas and
oil exploration programs call for significant expenses in connection with the exploration of the
respective natural gas and oil properties. While Brek does not need to participate in every well that the
operator decides to drill, if Brek does not participate in the well and pay its portion of the costs of
drilling, Brek will lose some interest in that well. If Brek decides to participate in every well that is
drilled, it will need to raise approximately $1 million for each well that it decides to participate in to
maintain its interest in the natural gas and oil properties.
Brek has relied in the past primarily on the sale of equity capital to fund working capital and the
acquisition of its prospects and related leases. Failure to generate operating cash flow or to obtain
additional financing could result in substantial dilution of its property interests, or delay or cause
indefinite postponement of further exploration and development of its prospects with the possible loss
of its oil & gas properties.
 
Brek will require significant additional capital to fund its future activities and to service current and any
future indebtedness. In particular, Brek face uncertainties relating to its ability to generate sufficient
cash flows from operations to fund the level of capital expenditures required for its natural gas and oil
exploration and production activities and its obligations under various agreements with third parties
relating to exploration and development of certain prospects. Brek’s failure to find the financial
resources necessary to fund its planned activities and service its debt and other obligations could
adversely affect Brek’s ability to continue as a going concern.
 
Page - 8
Brek can provide no assurance that it will be able to find the required capital. Obtaining additional and
acceptable financing would be subject to a number of factors, including the market prices for natural
gas and oil, investor acceptance of Brek’s natural gas and oil properties, and investor sentiment.
These factors may make the timing, amount, terms or conditions of the financing unavailable and
unacceptable to Brek. The most likely source of future capital presently available to Brek is through the
sale of equity capital. However, any sale of share capital will result in dilution to existing shareholders.
The only other anticipated alternatives for the financing of Brek’s proposed natural gas and oil
exploration programs exploration would be private loans or the offering by Brek of an interest in its
natural gas and oil properties to be earned by another party or parties carrying out further exploration
thereof, which is not presently contemplated.
8.  Brek’s and its operator’s ability to market and transport the natural gas and oil that is
discovered on Brek’s properties is essential to Brek’s business operations, but is subject to
certain requirements.
Several factors beyond Brek’s control may adversely affect its ability to market the natural gas and oil
that it discovers. These factors include the proximity, capacity and availability of natural gas and oil
pipelines and processing equipment, market fluctuations of prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure,
allowable production, and environmental protection. The extent of these factors cannot be accurately
predicted, but any one or a combination of these factors may result in Brek’s inability to sell its natural
gas and oil at prices that would result in an adequate return on Brek’s invested capital.
Currently, all of Brek’s natural gas that is being produced is being transported and delivered via
pipelines that are owned and controlled by the operator of the property or by a third party. The pipeline
owners have set gas quality requirements for the transportation of gas on their pipeline. These
requirements could and most likely, would be imposed on all companies delivering gas into their main
pipeline. If pipeline owners should require companies to meet more strict quality requirements, there is
no assurance that Brek could meet the new requirements in the short term future or secure a substitute
facility in order to deliver the gas that is produced. It is possible that Brek would need to make
significant capital expenditures to meet the new gas quality requirements and/or to transport the gas
itself. During this process and/or adding new transportation facilities, Brek’s business operations
would be negatively impacted in both time and capital expenditures.
9.  As a result of substantially all of Brek’s producing properties are located in the Rocky
Mountains, Brek is vulnerable to certain risks associated with primarily operating in one
geographical area.
All of Brek’s production is currently located in, and all of its future production is anticipated to be
located in, the Rocky Mountain Region of the United States. The natural gas prices that Brek and other
companies in the Rocky Mountain region have received and are currently receiving are at a discount
to natural gas prices in other parts of the United States. Factors that can cause price volatility for
natural gas and crude oil within this region are:
• the availability of gathering systems with sufficient capacity to handle local production;
• seasonal fluctuations in local demand for production;
• local and national gas storage capacity;
• interstate pipeline capacity; and
• the availability and cost of gas transportation facilities from the Rocky Mountain region.
10.  Brek’s business operations could negatively be impacted if there is a shortage of supplies,
equipment and personnel for the exploration and development on Brek’s properties.
Brek’s ability to conduct operations in a timely and cost effective manner depends on the availability of
supplies, equipment and personnel. The natural gas and oil industry is cyclical and experiences
periodic shortages of drilling rigs, supplies and experienced personnel. Shortages can delay
operations and materially increase operating and capital costs, which could negatively impact on
Brek’s business operations and financial position.
11.  Seasonal weather conditions and lease stipulations adversely affect Brek’s ability to
conduct drilling activities in some of the areas where its properties are located.
Natural gas and oil operations in the Rocky Mountains are adversely affected by seasonal weather
conditions and lease stipulations designed to protect various wildlife. In certain areas, including the
Uinta Basin, drilling and other natural gas and oil activities can only be conducted during the spring
and summer months. This limits Brek’s or its operator’s ability to operate in those areas and can
intensify competition during those months for drilling rigs, oil field equipment, services, supplies and
qualified personnel, which may lead to periodic shortages. These constraints and the resulting
shortages or high costs could delay Brek’s or its operator’s operations and materially increase Brek’s
operating and capital costs.
 
Page - 9
12.  Brek may suffer losses or incur liability for events that Brek or the operator of a property
have chosen not to insure against.
Although management believes the operator of any property in which Brek may acquire interests will
acquire and maintain appropriate insurance coverage in accordance with standard industry practice,
Brek may suffer losses from uninsurable hazards or from hazards, which Brek or the operator have
chosen not to insure against because of high premium costs or other reasons. Brek may become
subject to liability for pollution, fire, explosion, blowouts, cratering and oil spills against which Brek
cannot insure or against which Brek may elect not to insure. Such events could result in substantial
damage to natural gas and oil wells, producing facilities and other property and personal injury. The
payment of any such liabilities may have a material adverse effect on Brek’s financial position and
business operations.
13.  Brek may incur losses or a reduction in its reserves as a result of title deficiencies in the oil
& gas properties Brek invests in, which could negatively impact Brek’s business operations.
If an examination of the title history of a property that Brek has purchased reveals a natural gas or
petroleum lease that has been purchased in error from a person who is not the owner of the mineral
interest desired, Brek’s interest would be worthless. In such an instance, the amount paid for such
natural gas or petroleum lease would be lost and Brek’s estimated or proven reserves would be
decreased and Brek’s business would be negatively impacted.
It is Brek’s practice, in acquiring natural gas and petroleum leases, or undivided interests in natural
gas and petroleum leases, not to undergo the expense of retaining lawyers to examine the title to the
mineral interest to be placed under lease or already placed under lease. Rather, Brek will rely upon
the judgment of natural gas and petroleum lease brokers or landmen who perform the fieldwork in
examining records in the appropriate governmental office before attempting to acquire a lease in a
specific mineral interest.
Prior to the drilling of a natural gas or petroleum well, however, it is the normal practice in the natural
gas and petroleum industry for the person or company acting as the operator of the well to obtain a
preliminary title review of the spacing unit within which the proposed natural gas or petroleum well is
to be drilled to ensure there are no obvious deficiencies in title to the well. Frequently, as a result of
such examinations, certain curative work must be done to correct deficiencies in the marketability of
the title, and such curative work entails expense. The work might include obtaining affidavits of
heirship or causing an estate to be administered.
14.  Brek may not be able manage growth of its business operations effectively, which could
result in a negative impact on Brek’s business operations and financial condition.
If Brek is unable to manage growth effectively, its business, financial condition, and results of
operations condition will be negatively affected. Because of Brek’s small size, growth in accordance
with its plan of operations, if achieved, will place a significant strain on its financial, technical,
operational and management resources. As Brek expands its activities and increases the number of
projects it is evaluating or in which it participates, there will be additional demands on Brek’s financial,
technical and management resources. Brek’s systems, procedures or controls may not be adequate to
support its business operations and Brek’s management may not be able to achieve the execution
necessary to successfully implement Brek’s plan of operations. The failure to continue to upgrade its
technical, administrative, operating and financial control systems or the occurrence of unexpected
expansion difficulties, including the recruitment and retention of experienced managers, geoscientists
and engineers, could have a negative impact on Brek’s business, financial condition, and results of
operations and its ability to timely execute its plan of operations.
Risks associated with Brek’s industry:
15.  Due to the speculative nature of natural gas exploration, there is substantial risk that Brek
will be unable to locate commercial quantities of natural gas, which in turn will negatively
impact Brek’s business operations.
The search for commercial quantities of natural gas as a business is extremely risky. The properties
may not contain commercially exploitable quantities of natural gas. The exploration expenditures to be
made by Brek may not result in the discovery of commercial quantities of natural gas. Problems such
as unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions are involved in natural gas exploration and
often result in unsuccessful exploration efforts. Brek may not be able to discover and produce
commercial quantities of natural gas from its properties. If Brek does not discover and produce
commercial quantities of natural gas, it will not have any products or services to offer and its business
could fail.
 
Page - 10
16.  The natural gas and oil markets are volatile markets that have a direct impact on Brek’s
revenues and profits and the market conditions will effect whether Brek will be able to continue
its operations.
Brek’s revenues, operating results, cash flow and future rate of growth are very dependent upon
prevailing prices for natural gas and oil. Historically, natural gas and oil prices and markets have been
volatile and not predictable, and they are likely to continue to be volatile in the future. Prices for natural
gas and oil are subject to wide fluctuations in response to relatively minor changes in the supply of
and demand for natural gas and oil, market uncertainty and a variety of additional factors that are
beyond our control, including:
• political conditions in both natural gas and oil producing and exporting countries
• the supply and price of both domestic and foreign natural gas and oil
• the worldwide and regional demand for energy
• the effect of domestic and foreign government regulation of production and transportation
• the price and availability of alternative energy sources
• weather conditions
• acts of war, terrorism and vandalism
• market manipulation
Lower natural gas and oil prices may not only decrease Brek’s revenues on a per unit basis but also
may reduce the amount of natural gas and oil that Brek can produce economically. A substantial or
extended decline in natural gas and oil prices may materially and adversely affect Brek’s business
operations, financial condition, and ability to finance planned capital expenditures.
17.  Competition in the natural gas and oil industry is intense and Brek may not be able to
compete effectively with its competitors.
Brek’s ability to acquire additional natural gas and oil properties and develop new and existing
properties in the future will depend on its ability to conduct operations, to evaluate and select suitable
properties, to attract qualified personnel, and to consummate transactions in this intensely competitive
environment. Brek competes with other natural gas and oil companies and other independent
operators possessing greater financial resources and technical facilities than Brek in connection with
the acquisition of natural gas and oil properties and in connection with the recruitment and retention of
qualified personnel. There is significant competition for the limited number of natural gas and oil
opportunities and, as a result, Brek may be unable to acquire an interest in attractive natural gas and
oil exploration properties on terms it considers acceptable on a continuing basis. Brek also competes
for the equipment and labor required to operate and to develop natural gas and oil properties.
Management believes that Brek’s competitive position in the natural gas and oil industry is significant
at this time.
Also, larger competitors may be able to absorb the burden of any changes in federal, state and local
laws and regulations more easily than Brek can, which would adversely affect Brek’s competitive
position. Also, these competitors may be able to pay more for natural gas and oil properties and may
be able to define, evaluate, bid for and acquire a greater number of properties than Brek can. In
addition, some of Brek’s competitors have been operating in the natural gas and oil industry for a
much longer time than Brek and have demonstrated the ability to operate through industry cycles.
18.  Brek is subject to complex laws and regulations, including environmental regulations,
which could negatively impact the business operations and financial condition of Brek.
Development, production and sale of natural gas and oil in the United States are subject to extensive
laws and regulations, including environmental laws and regulations. Brek may be required to make
large expenditures to comply with environmental and other governmental regulations. Matters subject
to regulation include:
• location and density of wells
• the handling of drilling fluids and obtaining discharge permits for drilling operations
• emissions into the environment
• accounting for and payment of royalties on production from state, federal and Indian lands
• bonds for ownership, development and production of natural gas and oil properties
• transportation of natural gas and oil
• storage and disposition of hazardous waste
• operation of wells and reports concerning operations
• taxation
 
Page - 11
Under the various complex laws and regulations, Brek could be liable for personal injuries, property
damage, oil spills, discharge of hazardous materials, remediation and clean-up costs and other
environmental damages. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations also may result in the
suspension or termination of Brek’s operations and subject Brek to administrative, civil and criminal
penalties. Moreover, these laws and regulations could change in ways that substantially increase
Brek’s costs. Accordingly, any of these liabilities, penalties, suspensions, terminations or regulatory
changes could negatively impact Brek’s business operations and financial condition.
19.  The natural gas and oil industry involves numerous uncertainties and operating risks that
could negatively impact Brek’s business operations and financial condition.
Brek’s development, exploitation and exploration activities may be unsuccessful for many reasons,
including weather, cost overruns, equipment shortages and mechanical difficulties. Moreover, the
successful drilling of a natural gas well or an oil well does not ensure a profit on investment. A variety
of factors, both geological and market-related, can cause a well to become uneconomical or only
marginally economical. In addition to their cost, unsuccessful wells can impede Brek’s efforts to
replace reserves.
The natural gas and oil business involves a variety of operating risks, including:
    • fires
    • explosions
    • blow-outs and surface cratering
    • uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, and formation water
    • natural disasters, such as adverse weather conditions
    • pipe, cement, or pipeline failures
    • casing collapses
    • embedded oil field drilling and service tools
    • abnormally pressured formations
    • environmental hazards, such as natural gas leaks, oil spills, pipeline ruptures, and discharge of
toxic gases
If Brek or its operators experience any of these problems, it could affect well bores, gathering systems
and processing facilities, which could adversely affect Brek’s or the operator’s ability to conduct
operations. Brek could also incur substantial losses as a result of:
    • injury or loss of life
    • severe damage to and destruction of property, natural resources, and equipment
    • pollution and other environmental damage
    • clean-up responsibilities
    • regulatory investigation and penalties
    • suspension of business operations
    • repairs to resume business operations
Brek does not carry business interruption insurance at levels that would provide enough funds for it to
continue operating without access to other funds. For some risks, Brek may not obtain insurance if
management believes the cost of available insurance is excessive relative to the risks presented. In
addition, pollution and environmental risks generally are not fully insurable. If a significant accident or
other event occurs and is not fully covered by insurance, it could negatively impact Brek’s business
operations enough to force Brek to cease business operations.
Risks associated with Brek and its subsidiaries:
20.  Brek’s stock price is volatile and may fluctuate, which will have a direct impact on your
investment in Brek.
The stock markets in general, and the stock prices of natural gas and oil companies in particular, have
experienced extreme volatility that often has been unrelated to the operating performance of any
specific public company. Brek’s stock price may be impacted by factors that are unrelated or
disproportionate to its operating performance and the trading price of Brek’s shares of common stock
may not be an accurate reflection of their value. The market price of Brek’s common stock may
fluctuate significantly in response to a number of factors, some of which are beyond Brek’s control,
such as interest rates, increased competition, general economic, political and market conditions,
recessions, or changes in government regulations, including environmental regulations, and some of
which are within Brek’s control, such as actual or anticipated variations in Brek’s operating results,
announcements of new projects and properties, new customers, acquisition of potential natural gas
and oil entities and prospects, Brek’s ability or inability to generate new revenues, and results of
exploration and development. These market fluctuations may adversely affect the market price of
Brek’s shares of common stock.
 
Page - 12
21.  A small number of Brek’s stockholders own a substantial amount of Brek’s shares of
common stock, and if such stockholders were to sell those shares in the public market within a
short period of time, the price of Brek’s shares of common stock could drop significantly.
Because a small number of Brek’s stockholders own a substantial amount of Brek’s shares of common
stock, those shareholders will be able to significantly decide who will be directors and any other
stockholders may not be able to elect any directors. Also, sales of a large number of shares of Brek’s
shares of common stock or even the availability of a substantial number of shares of common stock for
sale could have the effect of reducing the price per share of Brek’s common stock, especially if the
shares of common stock continue to be thinly traded.
 
As of November 10, 2005, 59,498,090 shares of common stock were issued and outstanding, of which
15,100,008 shares were freely tradeable and 35,973,912 shares were, to the best of Brek’s
knowledge, subject to Rule 144. The remaining 8,424,170 shares of common stock were restricted
from trading. As of November 10, 2005, 18,784,460 share purchase warrants exercisable into one
share of common stock each were outstanding; and 1,580,000 stock options, exercisable into one
share of common stock each, were outstanding. An additional 3,320,000 stock options could be
granted under Brek’s 2001 Stock Option Plan. At November 10, 2005, if all the share purchase
warrants and all the granted options were exercised, the number of issued and outstanding shares of
common stock would increase by 20,364,460 to 79,862,550.
22.  A change of control of Brek can be delayed, impeded or effected by the directors and
management, who collectively own 24.5% of the outstanding shares or by the implementation
of Brek’s rights agreement by the board of directors.
 
Brek’s directors and management own an aggregate of 14,574,456 shares of common stock and as a
result have the ability to influence the vote for a change of voting control of Brek or the vote to approve
or reject any offer for the purchase and sale of Brek’s assets.
Also, upon the happening of certain events, the board of directors could vote to implement Brek’s
rights agreement, which would delay, impede or effect a change in control of Brek or could impede a
merger, consolidation, takeover or other business combination involving Brek or discourage a
potential acquirer from making a tender offer or otherwise attempting to obtain control of Brek. See
“Dividends” on page 19 and Exhibit 4.2 - Rights Agreement for more details
23.  Brek is unable to implement its rights agreement at this time and as a result may be unable
to delay, impede, or effect a change of control of Brek.
 
As of November 10, 2005, Brek has 59,498,090 shares of common stock issued and outstanding and
is authorized to issue up to 300 million shares of common stock. If the rights agreement were
implemented today, Brek could be required to issue an additional 297,490,450 shares of common
stock on a non-diluted basis, assuming all rights under the rights agreement were exercised. As a
result, Brek would not have enough shares in treasury to issue rights to all shareholders. This does not
include any shares that may be issued upon exercise of warrants or stock options. Effectively, Brek’s
board of directors will not be able to implement the rights agreement until the number of authorized
shares of common stock is increased to satisfy share issuances for the exercise of all warrants and
stock options and for the implementation of the rights agreement. As a result, Brek will not be able to
discourage a potential acquirer from making a tender offer or otherwise attempting to obtain control of
Brek by implementing the rights agreement. See “Dividends” on page 20 and Exhibit 4.2 - Rights
Agreement for more details
24.  Brek may not be able to attract and retain qualified personnel necessary for the
implementation of its plan of operations and exploration programs.
Brek’s current management is inexperienced in operating a natural gas and oil business. Brek may
need to hire or retain qualified management, employees or consultants with expertise in natural gas
and oil exploration and development. Brek’s success depends on its ability to attract, retain and
motivate qualified personnel. Key personnel represent a significant asset, and the competition for
these personnel is intense in the natural gas and oil industry. Brek does not maintain key person life
insurance on any of its personnel. The loss of one or more of its key employees or its inability to
attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel could negatively impact Brek’s ability to implement its
plan of operations and to complete its natural gas and oil programs.
 
Page - 13
25.  Brek’s officers and directors have conflicts of interest in that they are officers and directors
of other companies that will prevent them from devoting full-time to Brek’s business
operations, which may negatively impact on Brek’s business operations.
Brek’s officers and directors have conflicts of interest in that they are officers and directors of other
companies. Management’s other activities will prevent them from devoting full-time to Brek’s business
operations. This will impede Brek’s growth and business operations and may reduce its financial
results because of the slow down in operations.
26.  Brek has not and does not expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Brek has never paid cash dividends on its shares of common stock and has no plans to do so in the
foreseeable future. Brek intends to retain earnings, if any, to develop and expand its business
operations.
27.  “Penny Stock” rules may make buying or selling Brek’s shares of common stock difficult,
and severely limit their market and liquidity.
Trading in Brek’s shares of common stock is subject to certain regulations adopted by the SEC
commonly known as the “penny stock” rules. Currently, Brek’s shares of common stock qualify as
penny stocks and are covered by Section 15(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which
imposes additional sales practice requirements on broker/dealers who sell the shares of common
stock in the aftermarket. The “penny stock” rules govern how broker-dealers can deal with their clients
and “penny stocks”. For sales of Brek’s shares of common stock, the broker/dealer must make a
special suitability determination and receive from you a written agreement prior to making a sale to
you.
These additional burdens imposed upon broker-dealers by the “penny stock” rules may discourage
broker-dealers from effecting transactions in Brek’s shares of common stock, which could severely
limit their market price and liquidity of its shares of common stock. This could prevent you from
reselling your shares and may cause the price of the shares to decline. See “Penny Stock rules” on
page 25 for more details.
Item 2. Description of Property.
Corporate Headquarters
Brek operates out of the president’s own office located at Third Floor, 346 Kensington High Street,
London, United Kingdom, W14 8NS. Brek’s telephone number is 011-44-207-371-6668. The office
space was provided to Brek by Richard N. Jeffs, the president of Brek, on a rent-free basis. There is no
written agreement in existence for this rental arrangement. However, Brek does provide the president
with a budget of $20,000 per month to cover his office and related costs.
Property
A.  Petroleum and Natural Gas Properties
Riverbend Project, Utah
The Riverbend Project comprises approximately 129,514 gross acres in the Uinta Basin of
northeastern Utah, of which Brek holds leasehold interests in approximately 17,881 net acres as of
December 31, 2004. Brek’s interest is concentrated on three tight-sand formations in the Uinta basin:
the Wasatch, Mesaverde and Blackhawk formations.
During the year ended December 31, 2004, Brek participated in the drilling and completion of three
wells in the Riverbend area, farmed out the drilling of two wells, and did not participate in the drilling of
one proposed well. So far in 2005, Brek has farmed out the drilling of three wells, and did not
participate in the drilling of twenty proposed wells. Brek has received notice from the operator that it
proposes to drill two wells in Utah and must decide whether to participate in them by December 8,
2005. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis on page 25.
On April 8, 2004, Brek exercised its rights under the July 16, 2002 purchase agreement with Gasco
Energy, Inc. to acquire 3,266 net acres located in the Uinta Basin in Utah for approximately $800,000.
This purchase included six wells producing nominal amounts of natural gas that the former owner had
drilled to earn the acreage. See Exhibit 10.3 - Purchase Agreement for more details.
 
Page - 14
In July 2004, Gasco Energy, Inc. expanded its gas gathering system in the Riverbend area to carry the
gas produced in this area to a major pipeline. Gasco gathers the majority of Brek’s natural gas
produced in the Riverbend area, markets it and sells it.
During January 2005, Brek exercised its rights under the July 16, 2002 purchase agreement with
Gasco Energy, Inc. to acquire approximately 4,000 net acres in the Riverbend Area for a purchase
price of approximately $833,000. See Exhibit 10.3 - Purchase Agreement for more details.
Greater Green River Basin Project, Wyoming
As of December 31, 2004, Brek had a leasehold interest in approximately 125,572 gross acres and
21,307 net acres in this area. Brek holds a non-operated interest in one shut in well in this area and a
non-operated interest in one producing well in this area. Brek may consider other proposals for this
area such as the farm-out or unitization of some of its acreage if necessary to extend leases.
Crocker Canyon Prospect, California
Brek has a leasehold interest in approximately 3,868 gross acres and 880 net acres in Kern and San
Luis Obispo Counties of Southern California. Brek has farmed out the drilling of one well to preserve
acreage but has no other drilling or development plans for this acreage during 2005. Brek plans to
continue paying leasehold rentals and other minimum geological expenses to preserve acreage on
these prospects.
The farmout agreement, effective May 1, 2005, is between Brek and Gasco as Farmor, and Venoco,
Inc. as Farmee. Venoco, can earn an undivided working interest in the farmout lands by drilling a test
well on the property. Venoco was required to spud the test well by November 1, 2005, but has elected
to extend the spud date by six months as permitted by the farmout agreement.
Rocksprings Prospect, Edwards County, Texas
In March 2002, Brek acquired 2,512,500 shares of common stock of Vallenar Energy Corp. which,
together with the 733,333 shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of preferred stock of
Vallenar Energy Corp. held by Brek, represents approximately 25% of Vallenar Energy Corp.’s equity.
On June 28, 2002, Brek acquired an additional 2 million shares of common stock of Vallenar Energy
Corp. from third parties for $10,000 and subscribed for an additional 800,000 shares of common stock
of Vallenar Energy Corp. at $0.50 per share ($400,000). At December 31, 2002, Brek held a 51.53%
equity interest in Vallenar Energy Corp. For as long as at least one-half of the preferred stock is
outstanding, it is entitled as a class to at least 29.69% of the total voting power of Vallenar Energy
Corp. Brek is entitled to designate one director who must sit on the executive committee of the board
or additional voting rights accrue to the preferred stock. All decisions of this executive committee must
be unanimous. Brek has been playing an active role in the management of Vallenar Energy Corp.
since 2002.
Vallenar Energy Corp. holds leases covering approximately 51,194 gross and 8,865 net acres in the
Rocksprings Prospect, which is located in central Edwards County, Texas, and is a part of the
Geronimo Creek Prospect. The Geronimo Creek Prospect is a shallow, heavy oil play within the
Cretaceous aged Glen Rose limestone and Travis Peak sandstone. It is a north-south oriented, faulted
anticline having approximately 75 feet of closure covering approximately 29,500 acres. During 2002,
Vallenar drilled one well, the results were inconclusive, and no further work has been performed.
B.  Reserve Estimates
The following table summarizes Brek’s estimated reserve data as of December 31, 2004, as estimated
by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., independent petroleum engineers. The present value of
future net cash flows is based on prices at December 31, 2004, of $5.11 per Mcf of natural gas and
$42.25 per bbl of oil. All of Brek’s proved reserves are located within the state of Utah.
Net Reserves
Future Net Reserves (US$)
Category
Oil
(Barrels)
Gas
(MCF)
Total
Present Worth
at 10%
Proved
Developed
Producing
Non-Producing
Proved
Undeveloped
 
Total Proved
 
Page - 15
7,330
2,677
41,488
51,495
613,588
2,197,200
370,854
5,868,868
1,462,700
14,818,800
6,853,310
18,478,700
1,323,400
737,200
3,651,900
5,712,500
Actual future prices and costs may be materially higher or lower than the prices and costs as of the
date of any estimate. No estimates of proved reserves comparable to those included herein have been
included in reports to any federal agency other than the Securities and Exchange Commission.
C.  Volumes, Prices and Operating Expenses
The following table presents information regarding the production volumes, average sales prices
received and average production costs associated with Brek’s sales of natural gas for the periods
indicated.
For the Years Ended
Natural gas production (Mcf)
Average sales price per Mcf
Oil production (Bbl)
Average sales price per Bbl
Expenses per Mcfe:
Lease Operating
General and administrative
Depletion and impairment
December 31
2004     2003     2002  
5,628   
  58,908   
n/a 
n/a 
3.95   
5.54  $
$
n/a 
 
25.14   
834   
$ 43.66  $ 32.78   
n/a 
  
    
 
n/a 
 
nil   
5.97  $ 51.01   
$
n/a 
n/a 
nil
nil
nil
D.  Development, Exploration and Acquisition Capital Expenditures
During the year ended December 31, 2004, Brek spent $2,461,077 in development and exploration
activities, which included the acquisition of acreage in the Riverbend Area for approximately
$800,000. During the year ended December 31, 2003, Brek spent $306,485 in development and
exploration activities, including property acquisition costs. During the year ended December 31, 2002,
Brek spent $2,032,860 in development and exploration activities, including property acquisition costs,
net of impairment charges of $16,634,187. As of December 31, 2004, Brek held a 25% working
interest in 258,954 gross acres and 40,068 net acres located in Utah, Wyoming and California. Brek
also owns a 51.53% interest in 51,194 gross acres and 8,865 net acres located in Edwards County,
Texas. As of December 31, 2004, Brek held an interest in 10 gross (1.61 net to Brek’s interest)
producing gas wells and 1 gross (0.14 net) shut-in gas well located on these properties.
The following table presents information regarding Brek’s net costs incurred in the purchase of proved
and unproved properties and in exploration and development activities:
Property Acquisition Costs:
Unproved
Proved
Exploration and Development
Costs:
Impairment Charges:
 
Total
2003
For the Years Ended December 31  
2004
 
 
  
$2,832,860  $2,032,860  $ 18,137,141 
 
nil
2002
nil
nil
$1,967,562  $ 306,485  $
 
 
    
$4,800,422  $2,339,345  $
529,906 
nil    ($16,634,187)
  
2,032,860
nil
E.  Productive Wells and Acreage
The following summarizes Brek’s productive and shut-in gas wells as of December 31, 2004.
Productive wells are producing wells and wells capable of production. Shut-in wells are wells that are
capable of production but are currently not producing. Gross wells are the total number of wells in
which Brek has an interest. Net wells are the sum of Brek’s fractional interests owned in the gross
wells.
Producing gas wells
Shut-in gas wells
 
 
Page - 16
Productive Gas
Wells
Gross
10.0
1.0
Net
1.61
0.14
On April 8, 2004, Brek exercised its rights, as per the July 16, 2002 purchase agreement with Gasco
Energy, Inc., to acquire working interests in six producing wells, 3,266 net acres and gathering system
assets located in the Uinta Basin in Utah for approximately $800,000. See Exhibit 10.3 - Purchase
Agreement for more details.
F.  Undeveloped Acreage
The following table sets forth the undeveloped and developed leasehold acreage, by area, held by
Brek as of December 31, 2004. Undeveloped acres are acres on which wells have not been drilled or
completed to a point that would permit the production of commercial quantities of oil and gas,
regardless of whether or not such acreage contains proved reserves. Developed acres are acres,
which are spaced or assignable to productive wells. Gross acres are the total number of acres in
which Brek has a working interest. Net acres are the sum of Brek’s fractional interests owned in the
gross acres. The table does not include acreage that Brek has a contractual right to acquire or to earn
through drilling projects, or any other acreage for which Brek has not yet received leasehold
assignments. In certain leases, Brek’s ownership is not the same for all depths; therefore, the net acres
in these leases are calculated using the greatest ownership interest at any depth. Generally this
greater interest represents Brek’s ownership in the primary objective formation.
Undeveloped Acres
Developed Acres
Utah
Wyoming
California
Texas
Total Acres
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
129,514
125,572
3,868
51,194
 
310,148
17,881
21,307
880
8,865
 
48,933
360
80
-
-
 
440
51
9
-
-
 
60
G.  Drilling Activity
The following table sets forth Brek’s drilling activity during the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003
and 2002. In the table, “gross” refers to the total wells in which Brek has a working interest, and “net”
refers to gross wells multiplied by Brek’s working interest. A productive well is an exploratory or a
development well that is not a dry well.
Exploratory Wells
Productive
Dry
Inconclusive
Total Wells
Development Wells
Productive
Dry
Total Wells
2004
Gross
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0
0.0
3.0
Net
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.4
2003
Gross
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Net
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Gross
3.0
0.0
1.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
H.  Present Activity
2002
Net
0.3
0.0
1.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
Brek will continue to review drilling proposals that it receives from the operators, and will participate, if
its financial resources permit.
I.  Delivery Commitments
Brek Energy is not obligated to provide a fixed and determinable quantity of oil or gas in the near
future under existing contracts or agreements
Page - 17
Item 3. Legal Proceedings.
Brek is not a party to any pending legal proceedings and, to the best of Brek’s knowledge, none of
Brek’s property or assets are the subject of any pending legal proceedings, except for the following:
Temporary Order - British Columbia Securities Commission
On November 14, 2002, Brek became aware that itself, Vallenar Energy Corp., Richard Jeffs, and
Vallenar Energy Corp’s president and CEO, Jeff Paquin, had been named in a Temporary Order and
Notice of Hearing regarding certain alleged violations of the British Columbia Securities Act (the
“BCSA”). This Temporary Order and Notice of Hearing (the “Temporary Order”) alleged that Messrs.
Jeffs and Paquin, together with others, engaged in acts in furtherance of trades of shares of Brek (and
other issuers) and advised persons to purchase shares of Brek (and other issuers) without being
registered under the British Columbia Securities Act. The Temporary Order required Messrs. Jeffs and
Paquin to resign from their positions as officers of Brek and Vallenar Energy Corp., and prohibited
them and Brek and Vallenar Energy Corp. from trading in any securities and from engaging in investor
relations activities in British Columbia. Management believed that neither it nor Vallenar Energy Corp.
violated the BCSA or engaged in any activity that would require them to be registered under the
BCSA.
As a result of the Temporary Order, Richard N. Jeffs resigned as both the CEO and president of Brek
on November 20, 2002. On December 5, 2002, the British Columbia Securities Commission released
a decision not to extend the Temporary Order against Brek, Mr. Jeffs, Vallenar Energy Corp. and Mr.
Paquin, among others, as a result of there being insufficient evidence of any wrongdoing.
On April 1, 2003, the British Columbia Securities Commission withdrew the notice of hearing and has
not, to the best of management’s knowledge, issued any further notices or orders against Brek or its
officers or directors. As of December 31, 2004, Brek and Vallenar Energy Corp., to the best of
management’s knowledge, were no longer under investigation by the British Columbia Securities
Commission.
Bermuda lawsuit - Transworld Payment Solutions N.V. et al. vs. Brek Energy Corporation et al.
On February 25, 2003, Transworld Payment Solutions N.V. and First Curacao International Bank N.V.,
the debtor and the guarantor respectively of a note receivable, commenced legal action against Brek
and others in the Supreme Court of Bermuda claiming that Brek and its former subsidiary, First Ecom
Systems Limited, had promised to develop and supply them with certain software pursuant to three
license agreements dated October 19, 2001. The plaintiffs were seeking rescission of all agreements
between the parties or, alternatively, damages for misrepresentation and breach of agreements. The
plaintiffs commenced the lawsuit approximately one week before they had to make their first
instalment payment pursuant to a share purchase agreement dated October 19, 2001. At that time, the
plaintiffs were obligated to make an instalment payment in the amount of $1,901,107. The plaintiffs
have not made any instalment payments as required pursuant to the terms and conditions of the share
purchase agreement. See Exhibit 10.4 - Share Purchase Agreement and Exhibit 10.5 - License
Agreements for more details.
Brek and the other defendants filed a defence and counterclaim on May 8, 2003 with the Supreme
Court of Bermuda. In their counterclaim, the defendants were seeking specific performance of the
share purchase agreement or, alternatively, damages for breach of contract. Although the directors
believed that the plaintiffs’ claims were without merit as there was no condition to develop software for
the plaintiffs, due to lack of financial resources Brek did not pursue its counterclaim. No party has
taken any further action since Brek filed its defence and counterclaim.
Texas lawsuit - Burlington Resources Oil & Gas Company, LP vs. Brek Petroleum Inc.
On June 9, 2003, Burlington Resources Oil & Gas Company, LP (“Burlington”) filed a Petition in the
District Court in Midland County, Texas of the 142nd Judicial District claiming that Brek Petroleum Inc.
failed to pay for costs incurred by Burlington in drilling oil and gas wells located in Midland County,
Texas. Burlington claimed damages in the amount of $658,831. On July 16, 2003, Brek Petroleum Inc.
filed its Original Answer to the Petition.
On March 1, 2004, the parties reached a settlement and entered into a Settlement Agreement and
Release whereby Brek Petroleum Inc. agreed to pay Burlington a total of $691,874 in 12 equal
monthly payments. The total of the settlement comprised the original amount claimed for damages,
Burlington’s legal fees of $3,278, and court-imposed interest. As of December 31, 2004, Brek
Petroleum Inc. had delivered eight of the monthly payments to Burlington. On July 14, 2005, Brek
Petroleum Inc. delivered the twelfth and final monthly payment to Burlington.
 
Page - 18
Item 4. Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders.
No matter was submitted to a vote of security holders, through the solicitation of proxies or otherwise,
during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year covered by this report.
PART II
Item 5. Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters.
(a) Market Information
Brek’s common stock traded on the Nasdaq National Market System under the symbol “FECC” from
June 6, 2000 until February 19, 2002 when the symbol was changed to “BREK”. Prior to that, BREK
traded on the NASD OTC Bulletin Board under the symbol “FECC” since March 8, 1999. On
December 3, 2002, Brek was removed from the Nasdaq National Market System for failing to maintain
minimum listing requirements.
Brek’s common stock has also traded on the Berlin over-the-counter stock exchange since January
27, 2000 and has been listed on the Bermuda Stock Exchange since December 23, 1999.
Subsequent to December 3, 2002, Brek’s shares of common stock were quoted on the NASD OTC
Bulletin Board under the symbol “BREK”. On May 23, 2003, Brek’s shares of common stock ceased to
be quoted on the NASD OTC Bulletin Board and Brek’s shares of common stock were quoted on the
gray market under the same symbol, “BREK”.
The table below gives the high and low bid information for each fiscal quarter for the last two fiscal
years and for the interim period ended November 9, 2005. The bid information was obtained from Pink
Sheets LLC and reflects inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and
may not represent actual transactions.
High & Low Bids
Period ended
9 November
2005
30 September
2005
High
$0.70
$0.68
Low
$0.64
Source
Pink Sheets
LLC
$0.34
Pink Sheets
LLC
30 June 2005
$0.44
$0.29
Pink Sheets
LLC
31 March 2005
$0.47
$0.33
Pink Sheets
31 December
2004
30 September
2004
30 June 2004
$0.42
$0.30
$0.32
LLC
$0.30
Pink Sheets
LLC
$0.21
Pink Sheets
LLC
$0.18
Pink Sheets
LLC
31 March 2004
$0.25
$0.05
Pink Sheets
31 December
2003
30 September
2003
30 June 2003
$0.07
$0.05
$0.23
LLC
$0.03
Pink Sheets
LLC
$0.03
Pink Sheets
LLC
$0.10
Pink Sheets
LLC
31 March 2003
$0.24
$0.17
Pink Sheets
LLC
(b) Holders of Record
Currently, there are approximately 245 holders of record of Brek’s shares of common stock. As of
December 31, 2004, there were approximately 219 holders of records of Brek’s shares of common
stock.
(c) Dividends
Brek has never declared or paid dividends on its shares of common stock. Brek intends to follow a
policy of retaining earnings, if any, to finance the growth of the business and does not anticipate
paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. The declaration and payment of future dividends
on the shares of common stock will be the sole discretion of the board of directors and will depend on
Brek’s profitability and financial condition, capital requirements, statutory and contractual restrictions,
future prospects and other factors deemed relevant by the board of directors.
On December 5, 2001, the Board of Directors of Brek adopted a shareholder rights plan (the “Rights
Plan”). The purpose of the Rights Plan is to deter, and protect Brek’s shareholders from, certain
coercive and otherwise unfair takeover tactics and enable the Board of Directors to represent
effectively the interests of shareholders in the event of a takeover attempt. The Rights Plan does not
deter negotiated mergers or business combinations that the Board of Directors determines to be in the
best interests of Brek and its shareholders. In connection with the adoption of the Rights Plan, Brek
entered into a rights agreement with U.S. Bank, N.A. dated as of March 1, 2002.
 
Page - 19
On March 20, 2002, the Board of Directors declared a dividend of one common share purchase right (a
“Right”) for each outstanding share of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, of Brek. The
dividend was payable on March 20, 2002 to the stockholders of record on that date. Upon the
happening of certain events, the board of directors could vote to implement Brek’s rights agreement,
which would delay, impede or effect a change in control of Brek or could impede a merger,
consolidation, takeover or other business combination involving Brek or discourage a potential
acquirer from making a tender offer or otherwise attempting to obtain control of Brek. Once the Rights
become exercisable, each Right entitles the registered holder to purchase from Brek five shares of
common stock at a price of $0.01 per share, subject to adjustment. The description and terms of the
Rights are set forth in the rights agreement. See Exhibit 4.2 - Rights Agreement for more details.
(d)  Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
There have been no sales of unregistered securities within the last three years that would be required
to be disclosed pursuant to Item 701 of Regulation S-B, except for the following:
March 2002 - $0.50 Offering
On or about April 9, 2002, Brek issued 2,845,000 shares of common stock at $0.50 per share
producing aggregate proceeds of $1,397,500, which was net of related share issue cost of $25,000,
received by Brek. The sales were to 14 investors, of which 12 were non-US persons outside the
United States and two were accredited investors in the United States. Of these investors, one was a
director and executive officer of Brek, one was a director of Brek, and one was an executive officer of
Brek. The issuances and sales were exempt under Section 4(2) under the Securities Act of 1933, and
Regulations S and D thereunder. All expenditures of proceeds were for normal overhead and other
general corporate purposes.
July 31, 2002 - Purchase Agreement with Gasco Energy, Inc.
On July 31, 2002, Brek issued an aggregate 4,125,000 common shares in exchange for an undivided
interest in oil and gas properties at a deemed value of $2,862,750. Brek issued 1,237,500 shares of
common stock to Richard N. Jeffs, 1,237,500 shares of common stock to Wet Coast Management
Corp., a company controlled by Mr. Jeffs, 825,000 shares of common stock to Nicolas Mathys, and
825,000 shares of common stock to Ralph Fuoss in exchange for an undivided interest in Gasco
Energy, Inc’s undeveloped mineral leases. Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933
and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with. The
offering was not a public offering and was not accompanied by any general advertisement or any
general solicitation. No offer was made or accepted in the United States and the share certificates
representing the shares were legended with the applicable trading restrictions. See Exhibit 10.3 -
Purchase Agreement for more details.
August 23, 2002 - Penalty Payment
On August 23, 2002, Brek issued 80,000 common shares, at a deemed value of $56,800, to certain
subscribers of the March 28, 2002 private placement as a 10% penalty for failing to make its S-3
Registration Statement effective within 120 days, as required under the terms of their private
placement agreements. Brek issued 68,000 shares of common stock to Warwick Ventures Ltd. and
12,000 shares of common stock to Ultratech Capital Management.
September 10, 2002 - Severance
On September 10, 2002, Brek issued 100,000 common shares at a price of $0.70 to Gregory Pek,
Brek’s former Chief Executive Officer, as part of his severance package. See Item 10 - “Executive
Compensation” below for more information.
September 24, 2002 - Settlement of accrued bonuses
On September 24, 2002, Brek issued 50,000 shares of common stock at $0.68 per share to each of
two directors and an officer of Brek in settlement of $102,000 in accrued bonuses payable. Brek
issued 50,000 shares of common stock to Ian Robinson, 50,000 shares of common stock to Ravi
Daswani, and 50,000 shares of common stock to Kenneth Telford. See Item 10 - “Executive
Compensation” below for more information.
Page - 20
October 3, 2002 - Exercise of stock options
On September 19, 2002, 50,000 employee stock options, issued under the 2001 stock option warrant
plan, were exercised at $0.40 per share for cash proceeds of $20,000. Upon receipt of the exercise
price in full, Brek issued 50,000 shares of common stock to Steve Corbin on October 3, 2002.
2002 - Stock Options Granted
Under the 2001 Stock Option/Warrant Plan, Brek granted the following share purchase options to
employees, directors and consultants of Brek during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2002:
Date of Grant
July 15, 2002
Number of
Options
420,000
Exercise Price
$0.55
On July 15, 2002, Brek granted options to employees and directors to purchase up to 370,000 shares
of Brek’s common stock at a price of $0.55 per share. The options vested immediately and expire on
July 15, 2007.
On July 15, 2002, Brek also granted options to officers to purchase up to 50,000 shares of Brek’s
common stock at a price of $0.55 per share. The options vested at 25% every 6 months and expire 3
months after termination of employment. These options expired during the first quarter of 2003.
April 14, 2003 - $0.18 Offering
On March 20, 2003, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 277,776 shares of common
stock at an offering price of $0.18 per share. The offering price was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no
relationship to its assets, book value, revenues or other established criteria of value. All the restricted
shares issued in this offering were issued for investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
On April 14, 2003, Brek raised $49,999 in cash from this offering and issued an aggregate 277,776
restricted shares to four non-US investors outside the United States, one of which was an executive
officer of Brek.
Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated
pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Management is satisfied that the
requirements of the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with. The offering was not a public offering and was
not accompanied by any general advertisement or any general solicitation. Brek received from each
subscriber a completed and signed subscription agreement containing certain representations and
warranties, including, among others, that (a) the subscriber was not a U.S. person, (b) the subscriber
subscribed for the shares for their own investment account and not on behalf of a U.S. person, and (c)
there was no prearrangement for the sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was made or accepted
in the United States and the share certificates representing the shares have been legended with the
applicable trading restrictions.
April 14, 2003 - $0.18 Shares for Debt Offering
On March 20, 2003, the board of directors approved a debt offering at a settlement price of $0.18 per
share. The settlement price was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book
value, revenues or other established criteria of value. All the restricted shares of common stock issued
in this debt settlement were issued for investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
On April 14, 2003, Brek settled $337,647 of debt by issuing an aggregate 1,875,817 shares of
common stock at a settlement price of $0.18 per share of common stock to 15 non-US creditors
outside the United States, five of which were directors and/or executive officers of Brek.
 
For this shares for debt offering, Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Rule
903 of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the registration and prospectus
delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with. The offering was not
a public offering and was not accompanied by any general advertisement or any general solicitation.
Brek received from each creditor a completed and signed subscription agreement containing certain
representations and warranties, including, among others, that (a) the creditor was not a U.S. person,
(b) the creditor subscribed for the shares for their own investment account and not on behalf of a U.S.
person, and (c) there was no prearrangement for the sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was
made or accepted in the United States and the share certificates representing the shares have been
legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
Page - 21
January 15, 2004 - $0.05 Offering
On January 15, 2004, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 11,000,000 units at an
offering price of $0.05 per unit. Each unit consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one
restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into one restricted share of common stock.
The restricted warrant is exercisable for 12 months at an exercise price of $0.35 per warrant. The
value of the units was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book value,
revenues or other established criteria of value. All the restricted units issued in this offering were
issued for investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
 
In March 2004, Brek raised $437,500 in cash from this offering and issued an aggregate 8,750,000
restricted units to the six non-US subscribers outside the United States and an additional 875,000
restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside the United States, who was an executive
officer of Brek.
Also, in March 2004 and in May 2004 and as part of this same offering, Brek issued an aggregate
1,375,000 restricted units as settlement of $68,750 of debt owed to five creditors of Brek, who had
previously provided services to Brek. Of the five creditors, two were non-US persons outside the
United States and three were accredited investors in the United States. Of these creditors, one was an
executive officer and one was a director of Brek.
Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated
pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange Commission for the private placement in March
2004 and two of the debt settlements. Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption
from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been
fully complied with. The offering was not a public offering and was not accompanied by any general
advertisement or any general solicitation. Brek received from each subscriber a completed and signed
subscription agreement containing certain representations and warranties, including, among others,
that (a) the subscriber was not a U.S. person, (b) the subscriber subscribed for the shares for their own
investment account and not on behalf of a U.S. person, and (c) there was no prearrangement for the
sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was made or accepted in the United States and the share
certificates representing the shares have been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
Finally, Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Rule 506 Regulation D
promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange Commission for the other three debt
settlements. Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with.
Specifically, the offer was made to only accredited investors, as that term is defined under applicable
federal and state securities laws. The share certificates representing the shares have been legended
with the applicable trading restrictions.
January 29, 2004 - $0.20 Offering
On January 29, 2004, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 7,500,000 units at an
offering price of $0.20 per unit. Each unit consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one
restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into one restricted share of common stock.
The restricted warrant is exercisable for three years at an exercise price of $0.30 per warrant. The
value of the units was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book value,
revenues or other established criteria of value. All the restricted units issued in this offering were
issued for investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
On May 24, 2004, Brek raised $700,000 in cash from this offering and issued an aggregate 3,500,000
restricted units to 10 accredited subscribers in the United States and an additional 350,000 restricted
units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside the United States, who was an executive officer of
Brek.
On May 28, 2004, Brek raised an additional $50,000 in cash from this offering and issued an
additional 250,000 restricted units to one non-US subscriber outside the United States and an
additional 25,000 restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside the United States, who
was an executive officer of Brek.
On November 30, 2004, Brek raised an additional $110,000 in cash from this offering and issued an
additional 550,000 restricted units to two non-US subscribers outside the United States and one
accredited subscriber in the United States, and an additional 55,000 restricted units as a finder’s fee to
one non-US finder outside the United States, who was an executive officer of Brek.
 
Page - 22
For the accredited subscribers in the United States, management is satisfied that the requirements of
the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933
have been fully complied with, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of that
Act and Rule 506 Regulation D promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Specifically, the offer was made to only accredited investors, as that term is defined
under applicable federal and state securities laws. The share certificates representing the shares have
been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
For the non-US subscribers outside the United States, Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities
Act of 1933 and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully
complied with. The offering was not a public offering and was not accompanied by any general
advertisement or any general solicitation. Brek received from each subscriber a completed and signed
subscription agreement containing certain representations and warranties, including, among others,
that (a) the subscriber was not a U.S. person, (b) the subscriber subscribed for the shares for their own
investment account and not on behalf of a U.S. person, and (c) there was no prearrangement for the
sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was made or accepted in the United States and the share
certificates representing the shares have been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
May 3, 2004 - $0.15 Offering
On May 3, 2004, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 5,000,000 units at an offering
price of $0.15 per unit. Each unit consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one restricted
warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into one restricted share of common stock. The
restricted warrant is exercisable for three years at an exercise price of $0.25 per warrant. The value of
the units was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book value, revenues or
other established criteria of value. All the restricted units issued in this offering were issued for
investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
On May 6, 2004, Brek raised $700,000 in cash from this offering and issued an aggregate 4,666,667
restricted units to two non-US subscribers outside the United States, one of which was an executive
officer of Brek, and an additional 66,667 restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside
the United States, who was an executive officer of Brek.
Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated
pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Management is satisfied that the
requirements of the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with. The offering was not a public offering and was
not accompanied by any general advertisement or any general solicitation. Brek received from each
subscriber a completed and signed subscription agreement containing certain representations and
warranties, including, among others, that (a) the subscriber was not a U.S. person, (b) the subscriber
subscribed for the shares for their own investment account and not on behalf of a U.S. person, and (c)
there was no prearrangement for the sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was made or accepted
in the United States and the share certificates representing the shares have been legended with the
applicable trading restrictions.
October 1, 2004 - $0.20 Offering
On October 14, 2004, Brek raised $279,392 in cash from this offering and issued 1,396,956 restricted
units to First Griffin Group LLC at an offering price of $0.20 per unit. Each unit consisted of one
restricted share of common stock and one restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into
one restricted share of common stock. The restricted warrant is exercisable for two years at an
exercise price of $0.35 per warrant. The value of the units for the offering was arbitrarily set by Brek
and had no relationship to its assets, book value, revenues or other established criteria of value. All
the restricted units issued in this offering were issued for investment purposes in a “private
transaction”. For this offering, Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933. Management
is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery
requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully complied with. The offering was not a public
offering and was not accompanied by any general advertisement or any general solicitation. The
share certificates representing the shares have been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
October 27, 2004 - $0.20 Offering
On October 27, 2004, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 6,000,000 units at an
offering price of $0.20 per unit. Each unit consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one
restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into one restricted share of common stock.
The restricted warrant is exercisable for two years at an exercise price of $0.35 per warrant. The value
of the units was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book value, revenues or
other established criteria of value. All the restricted units issued in this offering were issued for
investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
 
Page - 23
On November 30, 2004, Brek raised $765,000 in cash from this offering and issued an aggregate
3,825,000 restricted units to three accredited subscribers in the United States, one of which was a
director of Brek, and an additional 382,500 restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder
outside the United States, who was an executive officer of Brek.
On December 21, 2004, Brek raised an additional $100,000 in cash from this offering and issued an
additional 500,000 restricted units to one accredited subscriber in the United States and an additional
50,000 restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside the United States, who was an
executive officer of Brek..
For the accredited subscribers in the United States, management is satisfied that the requirements of
the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933
have been fully complied with, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of that
Act and Rule 506 Regulation D promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Specifically, the offer was made to only accredited investors, as that term is defined
under applicable federal and state securities laws. The share certificates representing the shares have
been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
December 22, 2004 - $0.30 Offering
On December 22, 2004, the board of directors authorized the issuance of up to 3,666,667 units at an
offering price of $0.30 per unit. Each unit consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one
restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant is convertible into one restricted share of common stock.
The restricted warrant is exercisable for two years at an exercise price of $0.50 per warrant. The value
of the units was arbitrarily set by Brek and had no relationship to its assets, book value, revenues or
other established criteria of value. All the restricted units issued in this offering were issued for
investment purposes in a “private transaction”.
Brek raised $1,000,000 in cash from this offering, which had five closings between January 2005 and
July 2005, and issued an aggregate 3,333,336 restricted units to six accredited subscribers in the
United States and four non-US subscribers outside the United States and an additional 333,334
restricted units as a finder’s fee to one non-US finder outside the United States, who was an executive
officer of Brek.
For the accredited subscribers in the United States, management is satisfied that the requirements of
the exemption from the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933
have been fully complied with, which exemption is specified by the provisions of Section 4(2) of that
Act and Rule 506 Regulation D promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Specifically, the offer was made to only accredited investors, as that term is defined
under applicable federal and state securities laws. The share certificates representing the shares have
been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
For the non-US subscribers outside the United States, Brek relied upon Section 4(2) of the Securities
Act of 1933 and Rule 903 of Regulation S promulgated pursuant to that Act by the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Management is satisfied that the requirements of the exemption from the
registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 have been fully
complied with. The offering was not a public offering and was not accompanied by any general
advertisement or any general solicitation. Brek received from each subscriber a completed and signed
subscription agreement containing certain representations and warranties, including, among others,
that (a) the subscriber was not a U.S. person, (b) the subscriber subscribed for the shares for their own
investment account and not on behalf of a U.S. person, and (c) there was no prearrangement for the
sale of the shares with any buyer. No offer was made or accepted in the United States and the share
certificates representing the shares have been legended with the applicable trading restrictions.
(e)  Penny Stock Rules
Trading in Brek’s shares of common stock is subject to the “penny stock” rules. The SEC has adopted
regulations that generally define a penny stock to be any equity security that has a market price of less
than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. These rules require that any broker-dealer who
recommends Brek’s shares of common stock to persons other than prior customers and accredited
investors, must, prior to the sale, make a special written suitability determination for the purchaser and
receive the purchaser’s written agreement to execute the transaction. Unless an exception is
available, the regulations require the delivery, prior to any transaction involving a penny stock, of a
disclosure schedule explaining the penny stock market and the risks associated with trading in the
penny stock market. In addition, broker-dealers must disclose commissions payable to both the broker-
dealer and the registered representative and current quotations for the securities they offer. The
additional burdens imposed upon broker-dealers by such requirements may discourage broker-
dealers from effecting transactions in Brek’s shares of common stock, which could severely limit their
market price and liquidity of Brek’s shares of common stock.
 
Page - 24
The “penny stock” rules also imposes additional sales practice requirements on broker/dealers who
sell penny stock. These rules require a one page summary of certain essential items. The items
include the risk of investing in penny stocks in both public offerings and secondary marketing; terms
important to in understanding of the function of the penny stock market, such as “bid” and “offer”
quotes, a dealers “spread” and broker/dealer compensation; the broker/dealer compensation, the
broker/dealers duties to its customers, including the disclosures required by any other penny stock
disclosure rules; the customers rights and remedies in causes of fraud in penny stock transactions;
and, the NASD’s toll free telephone number and the central number of the North American
Administrators Association, for information on the disciplinary history of broker/dealers and their
associated persons.
Item 6. Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation.
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of certain significant factors that will affect or
have affected our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31,
2004 and 2003. Certain statements under this section may constitute “forward-looking statements”.
You should read the following in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related
notes appearing elsewhere herein.
OVERVIEW
Until 2002, we focused our operations on the electronic payment processing business. During 2001
and 2002, we disposed of our electronic payment processing businesses. In July, 2002, we acquired a
25% working interest in the undeveloped oil and gas leases owned by Gasco Energy, Inc. in Utah,
Wyoming and California, and we acquired a 51.53% non-dilutable voting interest in Vallenar Energy
Corp., a company engaged in oil and gas exploration in Texas.
Since we acquired our oil and gas interests, we have focused our attention on our oil and gas
operations, primarily in Utah and Wyoming. We are not the operator on any of the properties. The main
focus of our oil and gas exploration business is in the United States.
As of the date of this filing, we have participated in the drilling or re-completion of eleven wells and
have ten producing wells in which we have net revenue interests of between 8% and 20%. One well,
an earning well drilled by Burlington in 2002, generated some revenue for two years but is now shut
in. We are still paying for work on one well that was completed during the summer of 2005. We believe
that this work will increase the production in the well, with a corresponding increase in revenue.
We have farmed out the drilling of six wells. Under the farmout agreements, we agreed to forfeit 100%
of our interest in five wells and wellbores and 75% of our interest in one well and wellbore, and to
relinquish 70% of our leasehold interest in the acreage surrounding four wells and 75% in the acreage
surrounding two wells in exchange for the right to back in to a 7.5% working interest in four wells and
wellbores when the farmee has recovered 100% of its drilling and operating costs, an over-riding
royalty interest in the revenue from one well convertible to a wellbore interest when the farmee has
recovered 100% of its drilling and operating costs, and 7.5% of the revenue that we would have
earned from one well had we not relinquished our well and wellbore interests in the well.
We transferred one-half of our interest in two wells and wellbores and all of our interest in one well and
wellbore, all in Utah, to a small drilling fund for which the fund paid us its share of the drilling and
completion costs. We used the recovered funds to invest in drilling other wells. The well in which we
transferred all of our interest was an earning well.
We did not consent to the drilling of twenty wells proposed by Gasco and have yet to consent to
participate in the drilling of two wells (consent is due December 8, 2005). As a result of our non-
consent, Gasco has drilled (or will drill in the case of three) the wells bearing 100% of the costs and is
entitled to all of the revenue generated from the sale of oil and gas until they have recovered 300% of
their drilling costs, 150% of the costs of newly acquired equipment in the well, and 100% of the
operating costs and the costs of any newly acquired surface equipment beyond the wellhead
connections, at which time we are entitled to our percentage of the revenue. The average cost of these
non-consent wells is approximately $3.5 million, so we do not expect to see any revenue from them for
some time, if ever. We have not, however, forfeited any leasehold interests and can participate in
future drilling that is proposed for other locations on the same leases.
Page - 25
FINANCIAL CONDITION
We had net income of $6,494 during the year ended December 31, 2004. As of December 31, 2004,
we had a cash balance of $230,848, trade accounts receivable of $56,802, prepaids of $1,238 and a
receivable due from a related company of $116,594, when these current assets are offset against our
current obligations of $1,026,158 in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $168,733 in amounts
due to related parties, we were left with a working capital deficit of $789,409 at December 31, 2004.
The receivable due from a related company was due from a company controlled by relatives of two of
the officers and was repaid during the second quarter of 2005.
We do not believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2004, or the date of this filing
are sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs. In order to satisfy our operational and working
capital requirements for the next year we must raise funds through private loans, private placement of
our common shares or issuance of shares for debt.
Our independent auditors have added an explanatory paragraph to their audit opinions issued in
connection with our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years 2004 and 2003, which states
that our ability to continue as a going concern depends upon our ability to resolve liquidity problems,
principally by obtaining capital and generating sufficient revenues to become profitable. Our ability to
achieve and maintain profitability and positive cash flow is dependent upon our ability to locate
profitable oil and gas properties, generate revenues from our oil and gas production and control
production costs. Based upon current plans, we expect our net income to be marginal or to incur
operating losses in future periods. We cannot assure that we will be able to generate revenues in the
future. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be
necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Included in the $168,733 that is due to related parties at December 31, 2004, is $144,406 in directors’
fees that accrued during 2002 and 2003, and $24,327 that directors, officers or companies controlled
by directors or officers paid to some of our creditors on our behalf. None of the amounts due to related
parties bear interest or have any fixed terms of repayment. During the year ended December 31, 2004,
we repaid $36,346 in related party debt by issuing 726,900 shares of our common stock.
COMPARISON OF THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2004 AND 2003
Overall Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2004, we had net income of $6,494, or $0.01 per share, which was
an increase of $268,373 from our net loss of $261,879 or $(0.01) per share for year ended December
31, 2003. The decrease in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2004, as compared to the year
ended December 31, 2003, was primarily due to a decrease in general and administrative expenses
from our discontinuing our operations in Hong Kong in the first quarter of 2003 and an increase in
revenue from production of our Utah oil and gas wells in 2004.
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $363,053 compared to $22,077 for the year
ended December 31, 2003. Revenues from the Wyoming oil and gas properties for the years ended
December 31, 2004 and 2003 were $8,801 and $22,077. Revenue from the Utah oil and gas
properties was $354,252 and $nil for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003. During 2004, we
commenced production on our Utah properties and our plans are to participate in more drilling on our
Utah properties if we are financially able. We expect revenues to increase from our Utah properties
primarily due to increases in production and the price of gas.
 
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses increased to $351,900 for the year ended December 31, 2004, from
$287,140 for the year ended December 31, 2003, due primarily to increases in administration, office
and rent of $79,081 and travel and promotion of $102,061 offset by a decrease in management and
professional fees of $116,382. Our travel and office expenses increased because we increased our
investing and financing activities. Our professional fees decreased because we no longer consult
Hong Kong professionals, who are considerably costlier than North American professionals. We
expect our operating expenses to increase as we increase our investing and financing activities.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income decreased to $nil from $10,498 for the year ended December 31, 2004 and
2003 primarily due to the decrease in cash float in our bank accounts.
 
Page - 26
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or
future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors, nor do we
have any non-consolidated, special-purpose entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2004, we had a cash balance of $230,848 and negative cash flows from
operations of $452,286 for the year then ended. During the year ended December 31, 2004 we funded
our operations through revenues from our oil and gas properties of $363,053 and the private
placement of 23,438,623 units for which we received cash of $3,141,893. In return for arranging the
private placement, we issued 1,804,167 units to an officer to pay finder’s fees of $226,250. We also
repaid $32,405 in debt by issuing 648,100 units and we repaid debt of $36,345 to an officer by issuing
726,900 units. Each unit consists of one common share and one warrant exercisable for the purchase
of one share.
The notes to our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2004, contain footnote
disclosure regarding our uncertain ability to continue as a going concern. We have not generated
sufficient revenues to cover our expenses, and we have an accumulated deficit of $61,335,708. While
we believe that we will begin to generate more oil and gas revenue during the year, as of December
31, 2004, we had $1,194,891 in current liabilities and we cannot assure that we will succeed in
generating revenue sufficient to meet our ongoing cash needs.
Below is a discussion of our sources and uses of funds for the year ended December 31, 2004.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2004 was $452,286,
primarily as a result of an increase in trade accounts receivable of $50,774, an increase in prepaids of
$1,238, an increase in amounts due from a related party of $116,594, a decrease in accounts payable
and accrued liabilities of $288,954, and a decrease in amounts due to related parties of $5,879, offset
by net income of $6,494 and an adjustment to minority interest of $4,659.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2004, we generated $3,141,893 in cash from the issuance of
23,438,623 units.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2004, we invested $2,461,077 in our oil and gas properties.
Contingencies and Commitments
 
We had no contingencies or long-term commitments at December 31, 2004, except for the Transworld
litigation and the Burlington settlement payable which are disclosed in the commitments and
contingencies section of the footnotes to our consolidated financial statements, appearing elsewhere
herein.
As is customary in the oil and gas industry, we may at times have agreements that permit us to earn
acreage or wells. If we do not pay our portion of the costs as required by these agreements, we will not
be entitled to the acreage or wells.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of Consolidation
 
Our consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of our subsidiaries. All
significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting
period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
 
Page - 27
Our financial statements are based on a number of significant estimates, including the estimates of the
oil and gas reserve quantities that are the basis for the calculation of depletion and impairment of oil
and gas properties.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying values reflected in the consolidated balance sheets for cash and cash equivalents, trade
accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values because of
the short term nature of these instruments. The fair value of the note receivable of $1 is an estimate
based on the value we expect to realize within the next twelve months. Amounts due to related parties
approximate their fair value due to the related party nature of the debt and the amount receivable from
a related party approximates its fair value because it was repaid in the second quarter of 2005.
 
Revenue Recognition
We recognize oil and gas revenue as income when the oil or gas is produced and sold.
Oil and Gas Properties
We follow the full-cost method of accounting whereby all costs related to the acquisition of oil and gas
leases and acquisition and development of oil and gas properties are capitalized into a single cost
center (“full-cost pool”). These costs include lease acquisition costs, geological and geophysical
expenses, overhead directly related to exploration and development activities and costs of drilling both
productive and non-productive wells. Proceeds from property sales are generally credited to the full-
cost pool without gain or loss recognition unless such a sale would significantly alter the relationship
between capitalized costs and the proved reserves attributable to these costs. A significant alteration
would typically involve a sale of 25% or more of the proved reserves related to a single full cost pool.
We compute the depletion of exploration and development costs and depreciation of production
equipment using the units-of-production method based upon estimated proven oil and gas reserves.
We withhold the costs of unproved properties from the depletion base until they are either developed
or abandoned. We review the properties periodically for impairment. We transfer total well costs to the
depletable pool even when multiple targeted zones have not been fully evaluated. For depletion and
depreciation purposes, we convert relative volumes of oil and gas production and reserves at the
energy equivalent rate of six thousand cubic feet of natural gas to one barrel of crude oil.
Under the full-cost method of accounting, capitalized oil and gas property costs less accumulated
depletion and net of deferred income taxes may not exceed an amount equal to the present value,
discounted at 10%, of estimated future net revenues from proved oil and gas reserves plus the cost or
estimated fair value, if lower, of unproven properties. Should capitalized costs exceed this ceiling,
impairment is recognized. The present value of estimated future net revenues is computed by applying
current prices of oil and gas to estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves as of period-
end, less estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing the proved
reserves assuming the continuation of existing economic conditions. Our oil and gas wells began
producing during the first quarter of 2003. We recorded no depletion during the years ended
December 31, 2004 or 2003 because at December 31, 2002, our oil and gas properties were either
written down to a nominal value or written down to their net present value, based on a December 31,
2004 reserves study. (Note 4)
Stock-based Compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation using Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25
(“APB 25”) and related interpretations. Under APB 25, compensation expense is recognized for stock
options with an exercise price that is less than the market price on the grant date of the option. For
stock options with exercise prices at or above the market value of the stock on the grant date, we
adopted the disclosure-only provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123
“Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation” (“SFAS 123”) for the stock options granted to the
employees and directors of the Company. Accordingly, we have recognized no compensation cost for
these options. We have recognized compensation expense in the accompanying financial statements
for stock options that we issued to our outside consultants. If we had determined compensation
expense for the options granted to our employees and directors based on the fair value at the grant
date for options, consistent with the provisions of SFAS 123, our net loss and net loss per share for the
years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 would have been increased to the pro forma amounts
indicated below:
Page - 28
For the
Year
Ended
December
31, 2004
For the
Year
Ended  
 December
31, 2003
Net Income (loss) attributable to common
shareholders:
 
As reported
Stock-based employee compensation
determined under the fair value
based method
Pro forma
Net loss per common share:
 
As reported
Pro forma
$
   
   
   
  $
   
   
  $
  $
-
6,494   $ (261,879 )
  
  
(490 )
6,494   $ (262,369 )
  
 
(0.01 )
(0.01 )
0.01   $
0.01   $
The fair value of the common stock options that we granted during the years ended December 31,
2004 and 2003, for disclosure purposes was estimated on the grant dates using the Black Scholes
Pricing Model and the following assumptions.
Expected dividend yield
Expected price volatility
Risk-free interest rate
Expected life of options
2004
-
2003
-
131% - 151% 131% - 151%
3% to 5.5% 3% to 5.5%
5 years
5 years
We account for equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with the provisions of
SFAS 123, and Emerging Issues Task Force No. 96-18 (“EITF 96-18”). We account for all transactions
in which we receive goods or services as consideration for the issuance of equity instruments based
on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument, whichever is
more reliably measurable.
We account for the re-pricing and re-issuing of stock options under the variable accounting provisions
of FIN 44.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin SAB No. 106 (“SAB 106”)
in September 2004 regarding the application of SFAS 143 for oil and gas producing entities that follow
the full-cost accounting method. SAB 106 states that after adoption of SFAS 143, the future cash
outflows associated with settling asset retirement obligations that have been accrued on the balance
sheet should be excluded from the present value of estimated future net cash flows used for the full
cost ceiling test calculation. We have calculated our ceiling test computation in this manner since the
adoption of SFAS 143, and therefore the adoption of SAB 106 in the third quarter of 2004, did not have
a material effect on our financial statements.
During March 2004, the Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) determined that mineral rights as
defined in EITF Issue 04-2, “Whether Mineral Rights are Tangible or Intangible Assets”, are tangible
assets and should not be considered intangible assets in SFAS 141, “Business Combinations”
(“SFAS 141”) and SFAS 142, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” (”SFAS 142”). The FASB, in
agreement with this determination, amended SFAS 141 and 142 through the issuance of FASB Staff
Position (“FSP”) FSP 141-1 and 142-1. In addition, the proposed FSP 142-b confirms that SFAS 142
did not change the balance sheet classification or disclosures of mineral rights of oil and gas
producing entities. We classify our oil and gas leaseholds as tangible oil and gas properties which is
consistent with EITF 04-02, FSP 141-1 and 142-1 and therefore such pronouncements did not have a
material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Contractual Obligations
 
The only contractual obligation we had at December 31, 2004, was the following Burlington settlement
payable:
On March 1, 2004, the Company and Burlington Resources Oil & Gas Company, LP (“Burlington”)
entered into a settlement agreement whereby the Company agreed to pay Burlington a total of
$691,874, in twelve equal monthly payments, commencing August 14, 2004.
Page - 29
Internal and External Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations principally through the subscription of common shares and through
shares for debt.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation will have a material impact on our future operations.
Uncertainties Relating to Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-KSB Annual Report contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. You can identify these statements by our use of
words such as “plan”, “expect”, “aim”, “believe”, “project”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “estimate”, “will”,
“should”, “could” and other expressions that indicate future events and trends. All statements that
address expectations or projections about the future, including statements about our strategy for
participating in drilling programs, increasing revenues, and raising capital from external sources are
forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements are made as of the date of filing of this Form 10-KSB and we disclaim
any duty to update these statements.
Certain parts of this Form 10-KSB may contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 based on current managements expectations. Our actual results
could differ materially from those in our forward looking statements due to a number of uncertainties
including, but not limited to, those discussed in this section. Factors that could cause our future results
to differ from these expectations include general economic conditions, particularly as they affect our
ability to raise sufficient working capital, the costs of bringing our oil and gas properties into
production, and the market for our production. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data
and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among
reasonable alternatives requires the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do
not occur, our outcome may vary substantially from our anticipated or projected results, and
accordingly, we express no opinion on the achievability of those forward-looking statements and give
no assurance that any of the assumptions relating to the forward-looking statements are accurate.
We may, from time to time, make oral forward-looking statements. We strongly advise you to read the
foregoing paragraphs and the risk factors described in this annual report and in our other documents
filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission for a description of certain factors
that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the oral forward-looking statements.
We disclaim any intention or obligation to update or revise any oral or written forward-looking
statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Item 7. Financial Statements
See audited financial statements for the period ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 attached as
Exhibit A to this Form 10-KSB.
Item 8. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial
Disclosure.
There are no changes in and disagreements with Brek’s accountants on accounting and financial
disclosure. Brek’s principal independent accountant since November 24, 2004 to the current date is
Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc., 16140 Sand Canyon Avenue, Suite 100, Irvine
California, 92618
Effective November 24, 2004, Brek’s board of directors approved a change in Brek’s independent
auditors. None of the reports of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants on the financial
statements of Brek’s for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2000 and 2001 contained any adverse
opinion or disclaimer of opinion, or was qualified or modified as to uncertainty, audit scope or
accounting principles. Although audited statements prepared by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered
Accountants contained a going concern qualification, such financial statements did not contain any
adjustments for uncertainties stated therein, nor have there been at any time, disagreements between
Brek and Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants on any matter of accounting principles or
practices, financial statement disclosure or auditing scope or procedure.
Brek retained the accounting firm of Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc., to serve as its
independent accountants to audit its financial statements beginning with the year ended December
31, 2002. This engagement became effective November 24, 2004. Prior to its engagement as Brek’s
independent auditors, Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc., had not been consulted by
Brek either with respect to the application of accounting principles to a specific transaction or the type
of audit opinion that might be rendered on Brek’s financial statements or on any other matter that was
the subject of any prior disagreement between Brek and its previous certifying accountants.
 
Page - 30
Item 8A.     Controls and Procedures.
Brek maintains disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information
required to be disclosed in Brek’s Securities Exchange Act of 1934 reports is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and that such
information is accumulated and communicated to Brek’s management, including its chief executive
officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required
disclosure. Based on their most recent evaluation, which was completed within 90 days of the filing of
this Form 10-KSB, Brek’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer believe Brek’s disclosure
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-14 and 15d-14) are effective to
ensure that information required to be disclosed by Brek in this report is accumulated and
communicated to Brek’s management, including its principal executive officer and principal financial
officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. Based upon the
foregoing, Brek’s chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that Brek’s disclosure
controls and procedures are effective in connection with the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-
KSB for the year ended December 31, 2004.
There were no significant changes in Brek’s internal controls or other factors that could significantly
affect these controls subsequent to the date of their evaluation, including any significant deficiencies
or material weaknesses of internal controls that would require corrective action.
Item 8B. Other Information
During the fourth quarter of the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-KSB, Brek reported all information
that was required to be disclosed in a report on Form 8-K, except for the following.
Item 3.02 - Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities
On October 1, 2004, Brek issued 1,396,956 restricted units to First Griffin Group LLC. Each unit
consisted of one restricted share of common stock and one restricted warrant. Each restricted warrant
is convertible into one restricted share of common stock. The restricted warrant is exercisable for two
years at an exercise price of $0.35 per warrant. See “Item 5(d) - Recent Sale of Unregistered
Securities” above for more details.
PART III
Item 9. Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons; Compliance with Section
16(a) of the Exchange Act.
(a) Identify Directors and Executive Officers
Each director of Brek or its subsidiaries holds office until (i) the next annual meeting of the
stockholders, (ii) his successor has been elected and qualified, or (iii) the director resigns.
Brek’s and its subsidiaries’ management teams are listed below.
Management
Teams
Brek Energy
Corporation
Richard N. Jeffs
Director,
CEO, President,
and
Chief Financial
Gregory Pek
Ian Robinson
Michael L.
Nazmack
Eugene
Sweeney
Shawne Malone
Officer
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
John daCosta
Treasurer
Anne McFadden
Corporate
Secretary
Brek Petroleum
Vallenar Energy
Inc.
Director
and
President
Corp.
Director
and
President
Brek Petroleum
(California), Inc.
Director, President,
Chief Financial Officer,
and
Corporate Secretary
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Treasurer and
Treasurer and
Corporate
Secretary
n/a
Corporate Secretary
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Page - 31
Richard N. Jeffs  - Mr. Jeffs (60 years old) has been the president and chief executive officer of Brek
since February 2004 and a director and the chief financial officer of Brek since January 2005. Mr. Jeffs
has also been the sole director and president of Brek Petroleum Inc, since February 2004. Finally, Mr.
Jeffs has been the sole director and officer of Brek Petroleum (California), Inc. since July 2004. In the
past five years, Mr. Jeffs’ has been a self-employed businessman since 1990 and a director of a
private venture capital company since 1999.
Potential conflict of interest: Richard N. Jeffs, Brek’s president and chief executive officer, is an officer
and director of Trilogy Metals Inc., an inactive reporting company, which may impact the amount of his
time spent on Brek’s business operations. Mr. Jeffs may have demands placed on his time, which will
detract from the amount of time he is able to devote to Brek. Mr. Jeffs devotes at least 40 hours per
week of his business time and attention to Brek’s activities as required. Although Mr. Jeffs has other
current business interests he will attend to Brek’s business as his first priority. Brek consents to and
understands this potential conflict of interest.
Gregory Pek - Mr. Pek (50) has been a director of Brek since March 1999. Mr. Pek was a co-founder
of Brek and was the president and chief executive officer of Brek from March 1999 until June 2000. Mr.
Pek was the chairman of the board of Brek from June 2000 until November 2000. Mr. Pek was the
president and co-chief executive officer of Brek from October 2000 until August 2001. From August
2001 until October 2002, Mr. Pek was the chief executive officer of Brek. Finally, from November 2003
until January 2005, Mr. Pek was the chief financial officer of Brek. Since December 2002, Mr. Pek has
been a director and officer of Global Financial Network Limited, a private Hong Kong company. From
1994 to 1999, Mr. Pek was an executive officer of both David Resources Company Limited, a
petroleum and wine trading company, and Kong Tai International Holdings Company Limited, a real
property investment company. From September 1998 to February 1999, Mr. Pek was a director of
Singapore Hong Kong Properties Investment Limited, another real property investment company. Mr.
Pek obtained a Bachelor of Commerce from the University of British Columbia in 1978. In 1981, Mr.
Pek received his chartered accountant designation after articling with Clarkson Gordon.
Ian Robinson - Mr. Robinson (66) has been a director of Brek since April 2001. Since 1995, Mr.
Robinson has been the owner and managing director of Robinson Management Limited, a business
consulting firm. In 1962, Mr. Robinson received his CPA designation from the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of Australia.
Michael L. Nazmack - Mr. Nazmack (55) has been a director of Brek since March 31, 2003. Mr.
Nazmack, a graduate of Penn State University with degrees in Mechanical and Civil and Structural
Engineering, was granted his Professional Engineer’s Certificate from the states of California and
Alaska in 1979. From 1977 until 1984 he worked for Santa Fe International Corporation on a number
of oil and gas related projects and was the Project Engineer for the North Slope of Alaska’s oil field
development, responsible for the planning, engineering and construction of over one billion dollars
worth of oil and gas pipelines. From 1986 to 2003, Mr. Nazmack was the president of Longstown
Development Corporation, a developer of 300 retirement condominium units. From 1993 to 2002, Mr.
Nazmack was also the vice-president York Condominium Constructors, Inc., which built another 300
retirement condominium units. For both these projects, Mr. Nazmack designed the units and the site
layout, did the construction surveying, personally handled the permitting, sales, and the business,
legal, and engineering matters on a daily basis. From February 1997 to May 2005, Mr. Nazmack was
the Chairman of the board of York Industries, Inc. Mr. Nazmack was responsible for executive
decisions such as purchasing of new machinery and computers and deciding to build a new facility.
Once the decision was made Mr. Nazmack was responsible for the design and managed the
construction of the new 60,000 square foot factory building, which York Condominium Constructors,
Inc. built in 2001.
Eugene Sweeney - Mr. Sweeney (38) has been a director of Brek since October 2004. Mr. Sweeney
has been an investment strategist for Griffin Asset Management LLC since September 2004. Mr.
Sweeney was an equity and options trader from September 1999 to September 2004, working for
Bushwood Trading until November 2001, then Stafford Trading until June 2002, and the TD Securities
until September 2004.
Shawne Malone - Mr. Malone (37) has been a director of Brek since October 2004. In the past five
years, Mr. Malone’s business experience has consisted of being an options specialist for TD Options
LLC in New York, a subsidiary of TD Bank, a large multinational bank with headquarters in Toronto,
Canada, from March 1999 to June 2004.  Mr. Malone has experience trading options on a variety of
assets from equities to commodities to convertible bonds.  Mr. Malone is a co-founder of, and since
July 2004, has been the Co-CEO of Griffin Asset Management LLC, a money management firm
headquartered in Chicago.  Mr. Malone graduated from The Pennsylvania State University in 1997
with a BS in Finance and International Business.
(b) Identify Significant Employees
Brek has no significant employees.
 
Page - 32
(c) Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among the directors, executive officers or persons nominated or
chosen by Brek to become directors or executive officers, with the exception that Anne McFadden is
the sister-in-law of Richard N. Jeffs.
(d) Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
(1)No bankruptcy petition has been filed by or against any business of which any director was a
general partner or an executive officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior
to that time.
(2)No director has been convicted in a criminal proceeding and is not subject to a pending criminal
proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other minor offences).
(3)No director has been subject to any order, judgement, or decree, not subsequently reversed,
suspended or vacated, of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining,
barring, suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of business, securities or
banking activities.
(4)No director has been found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil action), the Securities
Exchange Commission or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal
or state securities or commodities law, that has not been reversed, suspended, or vacated.
(e) Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act.
All reports were filed with the SEC on a timely basis and Brek is not aware of any failures to file a
required report during the period covered by this annual report, with the exception of the following.
Richard N. Jeffs, Gregory M. Pek, Ian Robinson, Michael L. Nazmack, James Pratt and Ravi Daswani
all failed to file a Form 5 or to provide Brek with a written representation that a Form 5 was not
required.
The other affiliates, in lieu of filing a Form 5, provided Brek with a written representation that a Form 5
was not required.
(f) Audit Committee Financial Expert
Brek has no financial expert. Management believes the cost related to retaining a financial expert at
this time is prohibitive. Further, because of Brek’s limited operations, management believes the
services of a financial expert are not warranted.
(g) Identification of Audit Committee
Brek’s Audit Committee currently consists of Gregory Pek, Ian Robinson and Eugene Sweeney. The
Audit Committee is responsible for (i) reviewing the scope of and the fees for the annual audit, (ii)
reviewing with the independent auditors the corporate accounting practices and policies, (iii)
reviewing with the independent auditors their final report, and (iv) being available to the independent
auditors during the year for consultation purposes. Each of the members of the Audit Committee was
independent within the meaning of Rule 4200(a)(15) of the NASD listing standards.
As of December 31, 2004, Brek did not have a written audit committee charter or similar document.
(h) Code of Ethics
Brek has adopted a code of ethics that applies to all its executive officers and employees, including its
CEO and CFO. A copy of Brek’s adopted code of ethics is attached to this annual report. See Exhibit
99.1 - Code of Ethics for more information. Also, Brek’s code of ethics has been posted on its website
at www.brekenergy.com. Brek undertakes to provide any person with a copy of its code of ethics free
of charge. Please contact Peter Forward at (604) 648-0511 to request a copy of Brek’s code of ethics.
Management believes Brek’s code of ethics is reasonably designed to deter wrongdoing and promote
honest and ethical conduct; provide full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in public
reports; comply with applicable laws; ensure prompt internal reporting of code violations; and provide
accountability for adherence to the code.
Page - 33
Item 10. Executive Compensation.
Brek has paid no compensation to its named executive officers during its 2004 fiscal year.
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Year
(b)
2002
2003
2004
($)
(c)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
Name and
principal position
(a)
Richard N. Jeffs
CEO / President
Oct 2002 - Nov
2002
Feb 2004 - Present
CFO
Jan 2005 - Present
Gregory M. Pek
CEO / President
Mar 1999 - Oct
2000
Aug 2001 - Oct
2002
Co-CEO /
President
Oct 2000 - Aug
2001
CFO
Nov 2003 - Jan
2005
Kenneth G. C.
Telford
CFO
July 2000 - Oct
2003
Ian Robinson
Chairman
Jan 2001 - present
($)
(d)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
nil
 
nil
 
nil
($)
(e)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
27,871 [4]
nil
 
nil
2002
189,286
2003
2004
[3]
65,575
nil
2002
297,806
2003
2004
[8]
50,909
n/a
2002
40,500
2003
2004
[11]
nil [12]
nil
34,000 [9]
nil
 
n/a
34,000 [13]
nil
 
nil
17,209 [4]
7,742 [4]
n/a
nil
 
nil
 
nil
Annual compensation
Long-term compensation
Awards
Payouts
Salary
Bonus
Other
annual
compen-
sation
Restricted
stock
awards
Securities
underlying
options/
SARs
LTIP
Payouts
All other
compen-
sation
($)
(f)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
nil
 
nil
 
nil
nil
 
nil
 
n/a
nil
 
nil
 
nil
(#)
(g)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
25,000 [5]
nil
 
nil
50,000 [5]
nil
 
n/a
25,000 [5]
nil
 
nil
($)
(h)
nil
 
n/a
 
nil
nil
 
nil
 
nil
nil
 
nil
 
n/a
nil
 
nil
 
nil
($)
(i)
nil [1]
n/a
226,250
[2]
70,000 [6]
50,000 [7]
nil
nil
50,000 [10]
n/a
nil
13,500 [14]
nil
[1] Richard N. Jeffs was owed $24,000 for consulting fees at December 31, 2002.
[2 ] Richard N. Jeffs was paid 1,804,167 units valued at $226,250 for finder’s fee. The fair market value
of Brek’s shares of common stock at the time of the issuances of these shares ranged from $0.15 per
share to $0.38 per share. See “Item 5.(d) Recent Sale of Unregistered Securities” above for more
details.
[3] Gregory Pek accrued $159,038 in additional salary in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2002.
[4] Other annual compensation consisted of housing expense, directors fees, and employer
contributions to the mandatory provident fund in Hong Kong, which is a similar program to Social
Security in the United States.
[5] On July 15, 2002, Brek granted these stock options to the named executive officer. The fair market
value of Brek’s shares of common stock at the time of the granting of these stock options was $0.73
per share.
[6] On September 10, 2002, Gregory Pek received 100,000 shares of common stock as severance
valued at $70,000. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of common stock at the time of the issuance
of these shares was $0.72 per share.
[7] On April 14, 2003, Gregory Pek received 277,778 shares of common stock as settlement for
$50,000 debt at a settlement price of $0.18 per share. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of
common stock at the time of the issuance of these shares was $0.21 per share.
[8] Kenneth Telford accrued $54,000 in additional salary in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2002.
[9] Kenneth Telford received 50,000 shares of common stock in payment of a bonus accrued during
2001 in the amount of $34,000. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of common stock at the time of
the issuance of these shares was $0.68 per share.
[10] On April 14, 2003, Kenneth Telford received 277,778 shares of common stock as settlement for
$50,000 debt at a settlement price of $0.18 per share. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of
common stock at the time of the issuance of these shares was $0.21 per share.
[11] Ian Robinson accrued $13,500 in additional salary for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2002.
[12] Ian Robinson accrued $12,000 in additional salary for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2003.
[13] Ian Robinson received 50,000 shares of common stock in payment of salary accrued during 2001
in the amount of $34,000. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of common stock at the time of the
issuance of these shares was $0.68 per share.
[14] On April 14, 2003, Ian Robinson received 75,000 shares of common stock as settlement for
$13,500 debt at a settlement price of $0.18 per share. The fair market value of Brek’s shares of
common stock at the time of the issuance of these shares was $0.21 per share. The debt represented
the accrued directors’ fees set out in footnote #11 above.
 
Page - 34
Grant of Stock Options
Brek did not grant any stock options or stock appreciation rights during the last completed fiscal year.
Existing Stock Options
No stock options or stock appreciation rights were exercised during the last completed fiscal year.
Existing stock options in the hands of named executive officers and senior management as of
December 31, 2004, were as follows:
Name
Shares
acquired on
exercise
Richard N. Jeffs
Gregory M. Pek
Ian Robinson
(#)
0
0
0
Value
realized
Number of securities
underlying unexercised
options/SARs at FY-end
Value of unexercised
in-the-money
options/SARs at FY-end
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Exercisable
150,000 (1)
100,000
100,000
(#)
Unexercisable Exercisable Unexercisable
($)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Kenneth Telford
(1)  Stock options  granted  to  Wet  Coast  Management  Corp.,  which  Richard  N.  Jeffs i s the  sole
shareholder.
250,000
Nil
0
0
0
0
Long Term Incentive Plan Awards
Brek did not award any long term incentive plans during the last completed fiscal year.
Director Compensation
Currently, there are no written arrangements between Brek and any of its directors or between any of
the subsidiaries and any of its directors whereby such directors are compensated for any services
provided as directors. From time to time, certain directors who are not employees may receive grants
of options to purchase shares of common stock of Brek.
Termination of Employment
There are no other employment agreements between Brek or the subsidiaries and any named
executive officer, and there are no employment agreements or other compensating plans or
arrangements with regard to any named executive officer that provide for specific compensation in the
event of resignation, retirement, other termination of employment, a change of control of Brek, or from a
change in a named executive officer’s responsibilities following a change in control.
Compensation Committee
Brek’s compensation committee was established on January 31, 2005. Each of Ian Robinson, Michael
L. Nazmack and Eugene Sweeney were appointed as a member of Brek’s compensation committee
and will serve as a member for one year or until the member resigns or is removed from the committee
by a majority vote of the board of directors. Each member is a non-employee member of Brek’s Board
of Directors. The Compensation Committee reviews and determines Brek’s executive compensation
objectives and policies, administers Brek’s stock plans and grants stock options.
Page - 35
Item 11. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Holders and Management.
(a) Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners (more than 5%)
(3)
Amount and Nature of
Beneficial Owner
15,077,336 [2] [3]
(4)
Percent
of Class [1]
23.4% [4]
(1)
Title of Class
shares of
common stock
(2)
Name and Address of Beneficial
Owner
Richard N. Jeffs
Third Floor
346 Kensington High Street
London, UK, W14 8NS
[1] Based on 59,498,090 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of November 10, 2005,
unless indicated otherwise.
[2] This number includes 1,267,389 shares of common stock that are beneficially owned indirectly.
[3] This number includes 4,762,501 warrants that that can be exercised into one share of common
stock per warrant and 150,000 stock options that can be exercised into one share of common stock per
stock option.
[4] Based on 64,410,591 shares of common stock on the assumption that all the warrants and stock
options in footnote #3 above are exercised. 
 
 (b) Security Ownership of Management
(1)
(2)
(3)
Title of Class
Name and Address of Beneficial
Amount and Nature of
Beneficial Owner
15,077,336 [2] [3]
(4)
Percent
of Class [1]
23.4% [4]
1,890,278 [5]
3.17% [6]
870,000 [7] [8]
1.46% [9]
810,980
1.36%
1,546,033 [10] [11]
2.59% [12]
355,592 [13] [14]
0.6% [15]
shares of
common stock
shares of
common stock
shares of
common stock
shares of
common stock
shares of
common stock
shares of
common stock
Owner
Richard N. Jeffs
Third Floor
346 Kensington High Street
London, UK, W14 8NS
Gregory M. Pek
902 Henley Building 5
Queens Road Central, Hong Kong 
Ian Robinson
902 Henley Boulevard
5 Queen Road
Central, Hong Kong
Michael L. Nazmack
3280 Forrest Lane
York, Pennsylvania, 17402
Eugene Sweeney
345 N. Lasalle
Chicago, Illinois, 60610
Shawne Malone
151 W. Burton Place
Coach House #2
Chicago, Illinois, 60610
Directors and Executive Officers
(as a group)
31.39% [17]
20,550,219 [16]
shares of
common stock
[1] Based on 59,498,090 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of November 10, 2005,
unless indicated otherwise.
[2] This number includes 1,267,389 shares of common stock that are beneficially owned indirectly.
[3] This number includes 4,762,501 warrants that that can be exercised into one share of common
stock per warrant and 150,000 stock options that can be exercised into one share of common stock per
stock option.
[4] Based on 64,410,591 shares of common stock on the assumption that all the warrants and stock
options in footnote #3 above are exercised. 
[5] This number includes 100,000 stock options that can be exercised into one share of common stock
per stock option.
[6] Based on 59,598,090 shares of common stock on the assumption that all stock options in footnote
#5 above are exercised. 
[7] This number includes 125,000 shares of common stock that are beneficially owned indirectly.
[8] This number includes 100,000 stock options that can be exercised into one share of common stock
per stock option.
[9] Based on 59,598,090 shares of common stock on the assumption that all stock options in footnote
#8 above are exercised. 
[10] This number includes 718,742 shares of common stock that are beneficially owned indirectly.
[11] This number includes 718,742 warrants that that can be exercised into one share of common stock
per warrant.
[12] Based on 60,216,792 shares of common stock on the assumption that all warrants in footnote #11
above are exercised. 
[13] This number includes 69,520 shares of common stock that are beneficially owned indirectly.
[14] This number includes 144,520 warrants that that can be exercised into one share of common stock
per warrant.
[15] Based on 59,642,610 shares of common stock on the assumption that all warrants in footnote #14
above are exercised. 
[16] This number includes 5,625,763 warrants that that can be exercised into one share of common
stock per warrant and 350,000 stock options that can be exercised into one share of common stock per
stock option.
[17] Based on 65,473,853 shares of common stock on the assumption that all warrants and stock
options listed above in footnotes #3, #5, #8, #11 and #14 are exercised. 
 
Page - 36
(c) Changes in Control
Brek is not aware of any arrangement that may result in a change in control of Brek.
Item 12. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions.
(a) Transactions with Related Parties
During the last two fiscal years, no director, executive officer or security holder has had any direct or
indirect material interest in any transaction or a series of similar transactions that exceeded $60,000 to
which Brek or any of its subsidiaries was a party, except for the following:
Brek granted an option on May 1, 2004, to Griffin Asset Management, LLC, a drilling fund, which gave
the drilling fund the right to contribute 50% of the drilling and completion costs of any well in which
Brek participates in Utah and Wyoming in exchange for 50% of Brek’s production and working interest
in the well. This right increases to 100% if Brek elects not to participate in the well. The drilling fund
must pay Brek a fee equal to 7.5% of the estimated costs of the work when it elects to participate
(adjusted when the work is finished to equal 7.5% of the actual costs), and a 7% royalty (subject to
adjustment in certain circumstances). The agreement ends on the earlier of April 30, 2012, and the
date on which the drilling fund acquires an interest 100 wells. The drilling fund has not exercised any
rights under this agreement. See Exhibit 10.6 - Option to Acquire Interests in Oil and Gas Properties
for more details.
Each of Eugene Sweeney and Shawne Malone has a beneficial interest in Griffin Asset Management,
LLC. Both Mr. Sweeney and Mr. Malone are directors of Brek. Mr. Sweeney has a 50% beneficial
interest in Griffin Asset Management, LLC. Mr. Malone is the Co-CEO of and has the other 50%
beneficial interest in Griffin Asset Management, LLC.
Item 13. Exhibits.
(a) Index to and Description of Exhibits.
Exhibit
 
 
Exhibit A
 
 
3.1
3.2
4.1
4.2
10.1
10.2
10.3
Description
Status
Audited Financial Statements for the period ended December 31, 2004
Included
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation filed as an Exhibit to Brek’s
Form 10-K/A filed on May 14, 2002, and incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
Bylaws filed as an Exhibit to Brek’s registration statement on Form 10 filed on
October 21, 1999, and incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
Rights Agreement dated March 1, 2002 between Brek Energy Corporation and
U.S. Bank N.A., filed as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form 8-K (Current Report) filed on
March 6, 2002, and incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
2001 Employee Stock Option / Warrant Plan, filed as an Exhibit to Brek’s Form
S-8 (Registration Statement) filed on July 10, 2002, and incorporated herein by
reference.
 
 
Stock Purchase Agreement dated March 16, 2000 among Brek Energy
Corporation, Balaji Exports Ltd., Rajan Chellarm Mahboobani, Ravi
Kishinchand Daswani, and Asia Internet Limited, filed as an attached exhibit to
Brek’s Form 10-KSB (Annual Report) filed on March 29, 2000, and
incorporated herein by reference.
Stock Purchase Agreement dated March 12, 2002 between Vallenar Energy
Corp. and Brek Energy Corporation, filed as an attached exhibit to Brek’s Form
10-K/A (Annual Report) filed on September 18, 2002, and incorporated herein
by reference.
 
 
Purchase Agreement dated July 16, 2002 among Gasco Energy, Inc.,
Filed
Filed
Filed
Filed
Filed
Filed
Filed
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
21
31
 
 
32
99.1
Pannonian Energy Inc., San Joaquin Oil & Gas Ltd., Brek Energy Corporation,
Brek Petroleum Inc., Brek Petroleum (California), Inc. and certain stockholders,
filed as an attached exhibit to Brek’s Form 8-K (Current Report) filed on July 31,
2002, and incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
Share purchase agreement dated October 19, 2001 among First Ecom.com,
Inc., First Commerce Asia Limited, FEDS Acquisition Corporation, First Ecom
Systems Limited, Transworld Payment Solutions NV, and First Curacao
International Bank NV, filed as an attached exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB
(2002 - Annual Report) filed on November 21, 2005, and incorporated herein
by reference.
 
 
License agreements dated October 19, 2001 among First Ecom.com, Inc., First
Ecom Systems Limited, and Transworld Payment Solutions NV, filed as an
attached exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB (2002 - Annual Report) filed on
November 21, 2005, and incorporated herein by reference.
 
 
Option to Acquire Interests in Oil and Gas Properties dated May 1, 2004
between Brek Petroleum Inc. and Griffin Asset Management, LLC
 
 
Natural Gas Purchase Agreement dated December 23, 2004 between Brek
Petroleum Inc. and Riverbend Gas Gathering, L.L.C.
 
 
List of Subsidiaries, filed as an attached exhibit to Brek’s Form 10-KSB (2002 -
Annual Report) filed on November 21, 2005, and incorporated herein by
reference.
 
 
Certifications pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
 
Certification pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
 
 
Code of Ethics.
Filed
Filed
Included
Included
Filed
Included
Included
Included
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
 
 
(1) Audit Fees
The aggregate fees billed for each of the last two fiscal years for professional services rendered by the
principal accountant for Brek’s audit of annual financial statements and for review of financial
statements included in Brek’s Form 10-QSB’s or services that are normally provided by the accountant
in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements for those fiscal years were:
 
2004 - $0- Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2003 - $0 - Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2004 - $0 - Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
2003 - $0- Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
Page - 37
(2) Audit-Related Fees
 
The aggregate fees billed in each of the last two fiscal years for assurance and related services by the
principal accountants that are reasonably related to the performance of the audit or review of Brek’s
financial statements and are not reported in the preceding paragraph were:
 
2004 - $0- Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2003 - $0 - Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2004 - $0 - Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
2003 - $0- Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
 
(3) Tax Fees
 
The aggregate fees billed in each of the last two fiscal years for professional services rendered by the
principal accountant for tax compliance, tax advice, and tax planning were:
 
2004 - $0- Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2003 - $0 - Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2004 - $0 - Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
2003 - $0- Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
 
(4) All Other Fees
 
The aggregate fees billed in each of the last two fiscal years for the products and services provided by
the principal accountant, other than the services reported in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) above were:
 
2004 - $0- Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2003 - $0 - Hall & Company, Certified Public Accountants Inc.
2004 - $0 - Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
2003 - $0- Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, Chartered Accountants
 
(5) Brek’s audit committee’s pre-approval policies and procedures described in paragraph (c)(7)(i) of
Rule 2-01 of Regulation S-X were that the audit committee pre-approve all accounting related
activities prior to the performance of any services by any accountant or auditor.
 
(6) The percentage of hours expended on the principal accountant’s engagement to audit Brek’s
financial statements for the most recent fiscal year that were attributed to work performed by persons
other than the principal accountant’s full time, permanent employees was nil %.
Page - 38
SIGNATURES
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, Brek has caused
this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned duly authorized person.
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
 
By: Richard N. Jeffs      
Name:  Richard N. Jeffs
Title: Director and CEO
Dated: November   , 2005
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the following persons on behalf
of Brek and in the capacities and on the dates indicated have signed this report below.
Signature
/s/ Richard N. Jeffs
/s/ Gregory Pek
/s/ Ian Robinson
/s/ Michael L. Nazmack
/s/ Eugene Sweeney
Title
Date
President, CEO, Principal Executive Officer,
CFO, Principal Financial Officer
November 2005
and a member of the Board of Directors
Member of the Board of Directors
Member of the Board of Directors
Member of the Board of Directors
Member of the Board of Directors
November 2005
November 2005
November 2005
November 2005
/s/ Shawne Malone
Member of the Board of Directors
November 2005
Page - 39
Page - 40
Exhibit 31
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION 
CERTIFICATIONS PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
CERTIFICATION
 
I, Richard N. Jeffs, certify that:
 
1.   I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-KSB of Brek Energy Corporation;
 
2. Based on my knowledge, this quarterly report does not contain any untrue statement of a material
fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
 
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this
report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash
flows of the small business issuer as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
 
4. The small business issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f)) for the small business issuer and have:
 
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the
small business issuer, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the small business issuer’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the small business issuer’s internal control over financial
reporting that occurred during the small business issuer’s most recent fiscal quarter (the small
business issuer’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the small business issuer’s internal control over financial
reporting; and
 
5. The small business issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most
recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the small business issuer’s auditors
and the audit committee of the small business issuer’s board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent functions):
 
(a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control
over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the small business issuer’s
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
 
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the small business issuer’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
 
Date: November   , 2005
 
 /s/ Richard N. Jeffs
Richard N. Jeffs
Chief Executive Officer
Page - 41
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION 
CERTIFICATIONS PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
CERTIFICATION
 
I, Richard N. Jeffs, certify that:
 
1.   I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-KSB of Brek Energy Corporation;
 
2. Based on my knowledge, this quarterly report does not contain any untrue statement of a material
fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
 
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this
report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash
flows of the small business issuer as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
 
4. The small business issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f)
and 15d-15(f)) for the small business issuer and have:
 
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the
small business issuer, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
 
(b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
(c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the small business issuer’s disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
(d) Disclosed in this report any change in the small business issuer’s internal control over financial
reporting that occurred during the small business issuer’s most recent fiscal quarter (the small
business issuer’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the small business issuer’s internal control over financial
reporting; and
 
5. The small business issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most
recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the small business issuer’s auditors
and the audit committee of the small business issuer’s board of directors (or persons performing the
equivalent functions):
 
(a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control
over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the small business issuer’s
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
 
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the small business issuer’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
 
Date: November   , 2005
 
 
/s/ Richard N. Jeffs
Richard N. Jeffs
Chief Financial Officer
Page - 42
Page - 43
Exhibit 32
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Brek Energy Corporation (“Brek”) on Form 10-KSB for the
period ending December 31, 2004 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date
hereof (the “Report”), I, Richard N. Jeffs, President and Chief Executive Officer of Brek and a member
of the Board of Directors, certify, pursuant to s.906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
 
(1)   The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
(2)   The information contained in the Report fairly represents, the financial condition and result of
operations of the Company.
 
 
/s/ Richard N. Jeffs
Richard N. Jeffs
Chief Executive Officer
 
 
November   , 2005
Page - 44
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of Brek Energy Corporation (“Brek”) on Form 10-KSB for the
period ending December 31, 2004 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date
hereof (the “Report”), I, Richard n. Jeffs, Chief Financial Officer of Brek and a member of the Board of
Directors, certify, pursuant to s.906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
 
(1)   The Report fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
(2)   The information contained in the Report fairly represents, the financial condition and result of
operations of the Company.
 
 
 
/s/ Richard N. Jeffs
Richard N. Jeffs
Chief Financial Officer
 
November   , 2005
Page - 45
Page - 46
Exhibit A
Financial Statements
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY AND
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Page - 47
16140 SAND CANYON AVE., SUITE 100
IRVINE, CALIFORNIA 9261840
HALL&COMPANY Certified Public Accountants, Inc.         (949) 910-HALL (4255)
TAX, FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS ADVISORY SERVICES            FAX (949) 910-4256
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
September 21, 2005
 
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Brek Energy Corporation (Formerly First Ecom.com, Inc.)
London, United Kingdom
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Brek Energy Corporation as of
December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders'
equity, and cash flows for the two years then ended. These financial statements are the responsibility
of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control
over financial reporting. Our audits included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as
a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstance, but not for the purpose
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial
reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes
assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
consolidated financial position of Brek Energy Corporation as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, and
the results of its operations and its cash flows for the two years then ended in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
HALL & COMPANY
Irvine, California
Page - 48
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
December 31,
2003
ASSETS
2004
230,848  $
56,802   
1,238   
116,594   
    
405,482   
    
4,800,422
Current Assets
 
Cash
Trade accounts receivable
Prepaids
Due from related party
 
 
 
Oil and gas properties (Note 4)
 
 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
2,318 
 
6,028 
 
- 
 
- 
 
  
 
8,346 
 
  
 
2,339,345 
 
  
 
  
$ 5,205,904  $ 2,347,691 
  
 
 
  
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
$ 1,026,158  $ 1,347,517 
210,957 
 
 
  
 
  
1,558,474 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
65,342
Current Liabilities
 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Due to related parties (Note 5)
 
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
 
Minority interest
168,733   
    
    
1,194,891   
    
    
    
70,001
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Share capital (Note 6)
Authorized
300,000,000 common shares, $0.001 par value
Issued and outstanding
55,331,420 and 28,713,630 common shares
Additional paid in capital
Common stock purchase warrants
Deficit
 
 
 
TOTAL STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS'
EQUITY
55,331
8,515,348
28,714 
 
  56,706,041    54,021,239 
 
8,016,124 
  (61,335,708)   (61,342,202)
 
  
  
 
 
  
723,875
3,941,012
$ 5,205,904  $ 2,347,691
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
Page - 49
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenue
 
 
Expenses
 
Operating expenses
General and administrative
 
Total operating expenses
 
Income (Loss from operations)
 
Other Income (expenses)
Interest income
Other income
 
Total other (expenses) income
 
Net Income (Loss) before Minority Interest
The Years Ended
Ended December 31,
2004
363,053  $
    
    
    
    
    
351,900   
    
351,900   
    
11,153   
    
    
-   
-   
    
-   
    
11,153
2003
22,077 
  
  
  
  
  
287,140 
  
287,140 
  
(265,063)
  
  
6,572 
3,926 
  
10,498 
  
(254,565)
$
Minority Interest
 
 
Net Income (Loss)
 
 
 
 
Basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share
 
Weighted Average Shares Outstanding
(4,659)
(7,314)
 
  
 
  
 
6,494  $ (261,879)
$
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
(0.01)
$
  
 
  41,903,934    28,105,904
0.01  $
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
Page - 50
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY AND
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2004 and 2003
Common Stock
Accumulated
Common
Issued
Additional
Stock
Other
Number
of
Shares
Amount   Capital
Paid in    Purchase   Comprehensive  
(Loss) Income
Warrants
Total
26,560,037 $ 26,561 $53,635,745 $ 8,016,124 $
277,776
1,875,817  
-
Balance January 1,
2003
 
Issuance of common
shares for cash
Issuance of common
shares for debt
Net loss for the year  
 
 
 
 
Balance,
December 31, 2003  28,713,630  
 
   
Units issued for
cash
 23,438,623  
Units issued for debt  3,179,167  
Finders fees
-  
Common stock
purchase warrants,
277
49,723
1,876  
-
335,771  
-
-  
-
28,714   54,021,239   8,016,124
(61,080,323)$ 598,107
-
50,000
-   337,647 
(261,879)
(261,879)
(61,342,202)  723,875
23,438   2,332,981  
218,071  
3,179  
-  
(226,250)
785,474  
73,750  
-
-   3,141,893 
-   295,000 
-  
(226,250)
360,000
(360,000)
expired
Net income for the
year
 
 
Balance,
December 31, 2004  55,331,420 $ 55,331 $56,706,041 $ 8,515,348 $
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6,494
6,494
(61,335,708)$3,941,012
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
Page - 51
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
The Years Ended
CASH FLOWS (USED IN) PROVIDED BY
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
 
Net income (loss) for the year
 
Adjustments to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash
used in operating activities:
Minority interest
Issuance of shares in settlement of debt
Finders fees paid with shares for debt
 
 
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Increase in trade accounts receivable
(Increase) decrease in prepaids
Increase in amounts due from related party
(Decrease) increase in accounts payable and accrued
liabilities
(Decrease) increase in amounts due to related parties
 
 
NET CASH (USED IN) PROVIDED BY OPERATING
ACTIVITIES
 
CASH FLOWS (USED IN) INVESTING ACTIVITIES
$
December 31, 
2004
2003
6,494  $(261,879)
4,659   
-   
-
7,314 
- 
- 
  
11,153    (254,565)
  
(5,150)
32,447 
-
(50,774)  
(1,238)  
(116,594)
(288,954)   365,058 
(5,879)   117,212
(452,286)   255,002
(2,461,077)   (306,485)
 
  
 
  
  (2,461,077)   (306,485)
Cash spent on oil and gas properties
 
 
NET CASH (USED IN) INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
CASH FLOWS PROVIDED BY FINANCING
ACTIVITIES
 
    
 
    
 
  3,141,893   
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
    
 
 
 
    
 
NET CASH PROVIDED BY FINANCING ACTIVITIES   3,141,893   
    
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
228,530   
    
 
2,318   
Cash at the beginning of year
    
 
 
    
230,848  $
Cash at the end of year
    
 
 
    
Supplemental cash information:
    
    
 
Cash paid during the year/period for:
    
-  $
Interest
    
 
Non Cash Transactions:
    
Issuance of common shares in settlement of debt
Issuance of common shares in settlement of amounts
due to related parties
Issuance of common shares to an officer in payment of
finders fees
Expiry of common stock purchase warrants
Issuance of common stock purchase warrants
50,000 
  
  
50,000 
  
(1,483)
  
3,801 
  
  
2,318 
  
  
  
  
  
- 
  
  
32,405  $ 65,675
226,250  $
360,000  $
859,224  $
$
 
 
 
 
 
$
 
 
$
$
$
$
$
36,345  $ 271,972
- 
- 
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
Page - 52
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 1 - ORGANIZATION AND PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES
Organization
First Ecommerce Asia Limited (“FEAL”) was incorporated in Hong Kong on September 16, 1998. On
January 28, 1999, FEAL, entered into an agreement and plan of merger with JRL Resources Corp.,
(“JRL Resources”) a company incorporated in the State of Florida on November 13, 1996. Pursuant to
the terms of the agreement, plan of merger and related agreements, 3,015,000 newly issued shares of
JRL Resources and 985,000 shares held by existing shareholders of JRL Resources were exchanged
for two shares of FEAL. As a result of this business combination FEAL became a wholly-owned
subsidiary of JRL Resources.
The merger between JRL Resources and FEAL was a merger of a private operating company, (FEAL)
into a public shell corporation, with nominal net assets, that resulted in the owners and management of
the private company (FEAL) obtaining operating control of the combined company after the
transaction. For accounting purposes, the transaction has been treated as a reverse merger, of JRL
Resources by FEAL with FEAL deemed to be the accounting acquirer.
Pursuant to an agreement and plan of merger dated February 12, 1999, JRL Resources was merged
with and into Brek Energy Corporation (formerly First Ecom.com, Inc.) (“BREK” or the Company”), a
company incorporated in the State of Nevada on February 12, 1999, with no shares issued and
outstanding. Pursuant to the agreement and plan of merger, all of the 12,040,000 outstanding common
shares of JRL Resources were exchanged on a one-for-one basis for newly issued shares of BREK,
with BREK being the surviving corporation. For accounting purposes, this merger is treated as a re-
incorporation of JRL Resources as BREK.
The Company was originally established to facilitate electronic payment processing of e-commerce
transactions for merchants and banks across the Internet. The Company developed an electronic
gateway to convert consumers’ credit card information, collected by merchants on the Internet, into a
format that could be processed by banks. The Company disposed of its payment processing business
on September 30, 2002.
During 2001, the Company changed its primary business to that of oil and gas exploration and on July
19, 2001, acquired a 26% non-dilutable voting interest in Gasco Energy, Inc., (“Gasco”). On July 16,
2002, the Company exchanged all of its shareholdings in Gasco for an undivided interest in all of
Gasco’s undeveloped mineral leases in Utah, Wyoming, and California. At the same time, the
Company acquired an additional undivided interest in Gasco’s undeveloped mineral leases from
certain third parties in exchange for the issuance of 4,125,000 shares of the Company. The main focus
of the Company’s oil and gas exploration business has been centered in the United States.
In March 2002, the Company acquired a 26% non-dilutable voting interest in Vallenar Energy Corp.
(“Vallenar”) another company engaged in oil and gas exploration. On June 28, 2002, the Company
increased its ownership of Vallenar to 51.53%.
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the financial statements of the Company and its
subsidiaries. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the balance sheets and statements of cash flows, the Company considers all highly
liquid debt instruments purchased with maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Page - 53
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES, continued
Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting
period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The Company’s financial statements are based on a number of significant estimates, including oil and
gas reserve quantities which is the basis for the calculation of depletion and impairment of oil and gas
properties.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to a concentration of credit risk consist
primarily of cash and cash equivalents. The Company places its cash with various major financial
institutions and, by policy, limits the amount of credit exposure with any one financial institution.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying values reflected in the consolidated balance sheets for cash and cash equivalents, trade
accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values because of
the short term nature of these instruments. The fair value of the note receivable of $1 is an estimate
based on the value the Company expects to realize within the next twelve months. Amounts due to
related parties approximate their fair value due to the related party nature of the debt and the amount
receivable from a related party approximates its fair value because it was repaid in the second quarter
of 2005.
 
Revenue Recognition
Oil and gas revenue is recognized as income when the oil or gas is produced and sold.
Long-Lived Assets
At December 31, 2004 the Company’s only long lived asset is its oil and gas properties. At December
31, 2004 the Company determined that the oil and gas properties reflect their fair value and did not
recognized an impairment loss.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on pre-tax financial accounting income. The Company recognizes
deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases
of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the
differences are expected to be recovered. The Company provides a valuation allowance for deferred
tax assets for which it does not consider realization of such assets to be more likely than not.
Research and Development and Advertising
Research and development and advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Research and
development costs amounted to $Nil in each of the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003.
Advertising costs amounted to $18,368 and $2,037 for the years ended December 31, 2004 and
2003.
Comprehensive Income
Comprehensive income reflects changes in equity that results from transactions and economic events
from non-owner sources. The Company had no comprehensive income for the years ended December
31, 2004 and 2003.
Page - 54
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES, continued
Oil and Gas Properties
The Company follows the full cost method of accounting whereby all costs related to the acquisition of
oil and gas leases and acquisition and development of oil and gas properties are capitalized into a
single cost center (“full cost pool”). Such costs include lease acquisition costs, geological and
geophysical expenses, overhead directly related to exploration and development activities and costs
of drilling both productive and non-productive wells. Proceeds from property sales are generally
credited to the full cost pool without gain or loss recognition unless such a sale would significantly
alter the relationship between capitalized costs and the proved reserves attributable to these costs. A
significant alteration would typically involve a sale of 25% or more of the proved reserves related to a
single full cost pool.
Depletion of exploration and development costs are computed using the units of production method
based upon estimated proven oil and gas reserves. The costs of unproved properties are withheld
from the depletion base until such time as they are either developed or abandoned. The properties are
reviewed periodically for impairment. Total well costs are transferred to the depletable pool even when
multiple targeted zones have not been fully evaluated. For depletion and depreciation purposes,
relative volumes of oil and gas production and reserves are converted at the energy equivalent rate of
six thousand cubic feet of natural gas to one barrel of crude oil.
Under the full cost method of accounting, capitalized oil and gas property costs less accumulated
depletion and net of deferred income taxes may not exceed an amount equal to the present value,
discounted at 10%, of estimated future net revenues from proved oil and gas reserves plus the cost or
estimated fair value, if lower, of unproven properties. Should capitalized costs exceed this ceiling,
impairment is recognized. The present value of estimated future net revenues is computed by applying
current prices of oil and gas to estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves as of period-
end, less estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing the proved
reserves assuming the continuation of existing economic conditions. The Company’s oil and gas wells
began producing during the first quarter of 2003, no depletion was recorded during the years ended
December 31, 2004 or 2003 because at December 31, 2002, the Company’s oil and gas properties
were either written down to a nominal value or written down to their net present value, based on a
December 31, 2004 reserves study. (Note 4)
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share (“EPS”)
Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss attributable to the common stockholders by
the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the reporting period. The shares
of restricted common stock granted to certain officers, directors and employees of the Company are
included in the computation only after the shares become fully vested. Diluted net income per common
share includes the potential dilution that could occur upon exercise of the options and warrants to
acquire common stock computed using the treasury stock method which assumes that the increase in
the number of shares is reduced by the number of shares which could have been repurchased by the
Company with the proceeds from the exercise of the options and warrants (which were assumed to
have been made at the average market price of the common shares during the reporting period). The
outstanding common stock options and warrants have not been included in the computation of diluted
net loss per share during all periods because their inclusion would have been anti-dilutive.
As of December 31, 2004, the Company had 55,331,420 shares of common stock issued and
outstanding. The Company also had 1,580,000 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of
outstanding options and 28,361,472 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of outstanding
warrants. Additional options or warrants may be granted to purchase 3,420,000 shares of common
stock under the Company’s 2001 stock option plan.
Page - 55
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES, continued
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation using Accounting Principles Board Opinion
No. 25 (“APB 25”) and related interpretations. Under APB 25, compensation expense is recognized for
stock options with an exercise price that is less than the market price on the grant date of the option.
For stock options with exercise prices at or above the market value of the stock on the grant date, the
Company adopted the disclosure-only provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.
123 “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation” (“SFAS 123”) for the stock options granted to the
employees and directors of the Company. Accordingly, no compensation cost has been recognized for
these options. Compensation expense has been recognized in the accompanying financial statements
for stock options that were issued to our outside consultants. Had compensation expense for the
options granted to our employees and directors been determined based on the fair value at the grant
date for options, consistent with the provisions of SFAS 123, the Company’s net loss and net loss per
share for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 would have been increased to the pro forma
amounts indicated below:
For the
For the
Year Ended  
December
31, 2004
Year Ended  
December
31, 2003
Net Income (loss) attributable to common
shareholders:
 
As reported
Stock-based employee compensation
determined under the fair value
based method
Pro forma
Net loss per common share:
 
As reported
Pro forma
$
   
   
   
  $
   
   
  $
  $
-
6,494   $ (261,879 )
  
  
(490 )
6,494   $ (262,369 )
  
 
(0.01 )
(0.01 )
0.01   $
0.01   $
The fair value of the common stock options granted during the years ended December 31, 2004 and
2003, for disclosure purposes was estimated on the grant dates using the Black Scholes Pricing
Model and the following assumptions.
Expected dividend yield
Expected price volatility
Risk-free interest rate
Expected life of options
2004
-
2003
-
131% - 151% 131% - 151%
3% to 5.5% 3% to 5.5%
5 years
5 years
The Company accounts for equity instruments issued to non-employees in accordance with the
provisions of SFAS 123, and Emerging Issues Task Force No. 96-18 (“EITF 96-18”). All transactions
in which goods or services are consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are
accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity
instrument, whichever is more reliably measurable.
Page - 56
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES, continued
Stock-based Compensation, continued
The Company accounts for the re-pricing and re-issuing of stock options under the variable accounting
provisions of FIN 44.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin SAB No. 106 (“SAB 106”)
in September 2004 regarding the application of SFAS 143 for oil and gas producing entities that follow
the full cost accounting method. SAB 106 states that after adoption of SFAS 143, the future cash
outflows associated with settling asset retirement obligations that have been accrued on the balance
sheet should be excluded from the present value of estimated future net cash flows used for the full
cost ceiling test calculation. The Company has calculated its ceiling test computation in this manner
since the adoption of SFAS 143 and therefore when SAB 106 was adopted in the third quarter of
2004, it did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
During March 2004, the Emerging Issues Task Force (“EITF”) determined that mineral rights as
defined in EITF Issue 04-2, “Whether Mineral Rights are Tangible or Intangible Assets”, are tangible
assets and should not be considered intangible assets in SFAS 141, “Business Combinations”
(“SFAS 141”) and SFAS 142, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” (”SFAS 142”). The FASB, in
agreement with this determination, amended SFAS 141 and 142 through the issuance of FASB Staff
Position (“FSP”) FSP 141-1 and 142-1. In addition, the proposed FSP 142-b confirms that SFAS 142
did not change the balance sheet classification or disclosures of mineral rights of oil and gas
producing entities. The Company classifies its oil and gas leaseholds as tangible oil and gas
properties which is consistent with EITF 04-02, FSP 141-1 and 142-1 and therefore such
pronouncements did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of
operations.
In March 2004, the FASB issued consensus on EITF 03-6, “Participating Securities and the Two-
Class Method Under FASB Statement No. 128, Earnings Per Share,” related to calculating earnings
per share with respect to using the two-class method for participating securities. This pronouncement
is effective for all periods after March 31, 2004, and requires prior period to be restated. As the
Company only has one class of shares and has incurred net losses in the current and prior periods,
the adoption of EITF 03-6 did not have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or
results of operations.
In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123(R), “Share-Based Payment” (“SFAS 123(R)”),
which is a revision of SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation. SFAS 123 (R) is
effective for public companies for the first fiscal year beginning after June 15, 2005, supersedes APB
Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and amends SFAS 95, Statement of Cash
Flows.
SFAS 123(R) requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock
options, to be recognized in the income statement based on their fair values. Pro-forma disclosure is
no longer an alternative. The new standard will be effective for the Company, in the quarter beginning
July 1, 2005. SFAS 123(R) permits companies to adopt its requirements using either a “modified
prospective” method or a “modified retrospective” method. Under the “modified prospective” method,
compensation cost is recognized in the financial statements beginning with the effective date, based
on the requirements of SFAS 123(R) for all share-based payments granted after that date, and based
on the requirements of SFAS 123 for all unvested awards granted prior to the effective date of SFAS
123(R). Under the “modified retrospective” method, the requirements are the same as under the
“modified prospective” method, but it also permits entities to restate financial statements of previous
periods, either for all periods presented or to the beginning of the fiscal year in which the statement is
adopted, based on previous pro forma disclosures made in accordance with SFAS 123. The Company
has not yet determined which of the methods it will use upon adoption. The Company has not yet
completed its evaluation but expects the adoption of SFAS 123(R) to have an effect on the financial
statements similar to the pro forma effects reported in the Stock Based Compensation disclosure
above.
 
Page - 57
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 2 - SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES, continued
Reclassifications
Certain prior year amounts in the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been
reclassified to conform to the current year’s presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on the
results of operations of financial position for any year presented.
NOTE 3 - NOTE RECEIVABLE
At December 31, 2002, as a result of a dispute with Transworld, the Company undertook an
assessment on its notes receivable and recorded an impairment charge of $1,901,106 to reduce the
carrying value of the asset to $Nil which is the estimated fair value that the Company expects to
receive within the next twelve months. (Note 12)
NOTE 4 - OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
The Company has a 25% interest in 129,514 gross acres (17,881 net acres) in the Uinta Basin region
in Utah, 125,572 gross acres (21,307 net acres) in the Greater Green River Basin of Wyoming and
3,868 gross acres (880 net acres) in Kern County and San Luis Obispo County in California and a
50% interest in 51,194 gross acres (8,865 net acres) in Edwards County in Texas.
The following table presents the Company’s oil and gas property acquisitions, exploration and
development expenditures and an adjustment for impairment charges:
Property acquisition costs
Exploration and development
expenditures
 
Less: Impairment charges
Page - 58
December 31,
$ 18,937,141  $ 18,137,141
2003
2004
2,497,468
836,391 
 
    21,434,609    18,973,532 
    (16,634,187)   (16,634,187)
   
  
  $ 4,800,422  $ 2,339,345
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 4 - OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES, continued
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company’s proved and unproved oil and gas properties
consisted of leasehold interests and exploration and development costs related to their interests in
Texas, Utah, Wyoming and California. The Company’s proven and unproven properties are evaluated
periodically for the possibility of potential impairment. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the
Company’s oil and gas properties were valued as follows:
Proved and Unproved Properties
Property acquisition costs:
Utah
Wyoming
California
Texas
Exploration & development costs:
 
Wyoming
Utah
California
Texas
December 31,
2004
December
31, 2003
$ 2,832,560 $ 2,032,560
100
100
100
100
100
100
-  
   
-    
306,485  
     1,967,562     
-  
   
-    
   $ 4,800,422     $2,339,345
During the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, no impairment charges were recorded against
the Texas, California and Wyoming properties. At December 31, 2002, the Company recorded
impairment charges against their Utah properties based on a December 31, 2004, reserves study. As
a result of this study the Company valued the Utah oil and gas properties at an amount equal to the
present value, discounted at 10%, of the estimated future net revenues from proved oil and gas
reserves of approximately $5.7 million (calculated, based on estimated net revenues of $18.5 million)
plus the cost, or estimated fair value, if lower of unproved properties, less estimated future
expenditures to be incurred in developing and producing the proved reserves of approximately
$900,000. The present value of estimated future net revenues was computed by applying current
prices of oil and gas to estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves as of December 31,
2004, assuming the continuation of existing economic conditions.
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
During the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company paid $nil and $30,000 in
consulting fees to a director of the Company. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company was
indebted to this director in the amount of $123,463.
During the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company paid $nil and $12,000 in
consulting fees to a director of the Company. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company was
indebted to this director in the amount of $12,000.
Page - 59
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 5 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS, continued
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company had $33,270 and $22,403 in accounts payable to
directors, former directors or companies controlled by directors.
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company had $116,594 and $nil in accounts receivable from a
limited partnership controlled by relatives of two of the Company’s directors. These funds were repaid
during the second quarter of 2005.
At December 31, 2004, an officer of the Company received shares in payment of finder’s fees of
$226,250 and in payment of debt of $25,951. (Note 6)
During the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company settled $271,972 in related party debt by
issuing 1,510,958 common shares at $0.18 per share. (Note 6)
NOTE 6 - COMMON STOCK
On April 14, 2003, the Company issued 277,776 common shares at $0.18 per share by way of a
private placement for total proceeds of $50,000.
On April 14, 2003, the Company converted $308,947 in accounts payable and $28,700 in loans
payable into 1,875,817 common shares at $0.18 per share. (Note 5)
On March 3, 2004, the Company issued a total of 8,750,000 units at $0.05 for each unit, by way of a
private placement for cash of $437,500. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of one year and will expire on March 3, 2005. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $109,375 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Note 9)
On March 3, 2004, the Company issued a total of 875,000 units, to an officer of the Company, at $0.05
for each unit, for finders’ fees of $43,750. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of one year and will expire on March 3, 2005. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $10,938 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Notes 5 and 9)
On March 3, 2004, the Company issued a total of 519,020 units, to an officer of the Company, at $0.05
for each unit, in exchange for debt totaling $25,951. Each unit is comprised of one common share and
one common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35.
The warrants have a term of one year and will expire on March 3, 2005. The fair value of the warrants
was estimated to be $6,488 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Note 9)
On May 6, 2004, the Company issued a total of 4,666,667 units at $0.15 for each unit, by way of a
private placement for cash of $700,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.25. The
warrants have a term of three years and will expire on May 6, 2007. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $175,000 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Note 9)
On May 6, 2004, the Company issued a total of 66,667 units, to an officer of the Company, at $0.15 for
each unit, for finders’ fees of $10,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one common
share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.25. The warrants
have a term of three years and will expire on May 6, 2007. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $2,500 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Notes 5 and 9)
Page - 60
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 6 - COMMON STOCK, continued
On May 6, 2004, the Company issued a total of 855,980 units at $0.05 for each unit, in exchange for
debt totaling $42,799. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one common share purchase
warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The warrants have a term of one
year and will expire on May 6, 2005. The fair value of the warrants was estimated to be $10,700 and
has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
 
On May 24, 2004, the Company issued a total of 2,000,000 units at $0.20 for each unit, by way of a
private placement for cash of $375,000 and an accounts receivable for $25,000. Each unit is
comprised of one common share and one common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to
purchase one common share for $0.30. The warrants have a term of three years and will expire on
May 24, 2007. The fair value of the warrants was estimated to be $100,000 and has been recorded as
a separate component of stockholders’ equity. The $25,000 account receivable was collected in July,
2004. (Note 9)
On May 24, 2004, the Company issued a total of 1,500,000 units at $0.20 for each unit, by way of a
private placement for cash of $300,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on May 24, 2006. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $75,000 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Note 9)
On May 24, 2004, the Company issued a total of 350,000 units to an officer of the Company, at $0.20
for each unit, for finders’ fees of $70,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The
warrants have a term of three years and will expire on May 24, 2007. The fair value of the warrants
was estimated to be $17,500 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Notes 5 and 9)
On May 28, 2004, the Company issued a total of 250,000 units at $0.20 for each unit, by way of a
private placement for cash of $50,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one common
share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The warrants
have a term of three years and will expire on May 28, 2007. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $12,500 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Note 9)
On May 28, 2004, the Company issued a total of 25,000 units to an officer of the Company, at $0.20 for
each unit, for finders’ fees of $5,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one common
share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The warrants
have a term of three years and will expire on May 28, 2007. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $1,250 and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity.
(Notes 5 and 9)
On October 14, 2004, the Company issued a total of 1,396,956 units at $0.20 per unit by way of a
private placement for cash of $279,392. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on October 14, 2006. The fair value of the warrants
was estimated to be $69,848 (25% of the $279,392 in proceeds received from the sale of the units)
and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On November 30, 2004, the Company issued a total of 550,000 units at $0.20 per unit by way of a
private placement for cash of $110,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The
warrants have a term of three years and will expire on November 30, 2007. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $27,500 (25% of the $110,000 in proceeds received from the sale of the
units) and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
Page - 61
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 6 - COMMON STOCK, continued
On November 30, 2004, the Company issued a total of 55,000 units, to an officer of the Company at
$0.20 per unit for finders’ fees of $11,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The
warrants have a term of three years and will expire on November 30, 2007. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $2,750 (25% of the $11,000 in debt) and has been recorded as a
separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On November 30, 2004, the Company issued a total of 75,000 units at $0.20 per unit by way of a
private placement for cash of $15,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one common
share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.30. The warrants
have a term of two years and will expire on November 30, 2006. The fair value of the warrants was
estimated to be $3,750 (25% of the $15,000 in proceeds received from the sale of the units) and has
been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On November 30, 2004, the Company issued a total of 3,750,000 units at $0.20 per unit by way of a
private placement for cash of $750,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on November 30, 2006. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $187,500 (25% of the $750,000 in proceeds received from the sale of
the units) and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On November 30, 2004, the Company issued a total of 382,500 units, to an officer of the Company at
$0.20 per unit for finders’ fees of $76,500. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on November 30, 2006. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $19,125 (25% of the $76,500 in debt) and has been recorded as a
separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On December 21, 2004, the Company issued a total of 500,000 units at $0.20 per unit by way of a
private placement for cash of $100,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on December 21, 2006. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $25,000 (25% of the $500,000 in proceeds received from the sale of the
units) and has been recorded as a separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
On December 21, 2004, the Company issued a total of 50,000 units, to an officer of the Company at
$0.20 per unit for finders’ fees of $10,000. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one
common share purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one common share for $0.35. The
warrants have a term of two years and will expire on December 21, 2006. The fair value of the
warrants was estimated to be $2,500 (25% of the $10,000 in debt) and has been recorded as a
separate component of stockholders’ equity. (Note 9)
Page - 62
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 7 - STOCKHOLDER RIGHTS PLAN
On March 1, 2002, the Company approved a Rights Agreement whereby a dividend was declared of
one right for each share of the Company’s common stock issued and outstanding on March 20, 2002,
including any shares issued subsequent to March 20, 2002. Each right entitles the holder to purchase
5 shares of the Companies common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per right, if certain events
occur relating to a person or group acquiring or attempting to acquire 10% or more of the outstanding
common shares of the Company without the approval of the Company’s board of directors. The rights
are exerciseable until December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company had reserved 276,657,100 and 143,568,150 shares for
the potential rights for the issued, outstanding and subscribed shares and 147,624,025 and
17,118,410 for the potential exercise of outstanding options and warrants.
NOTE 8 - STOCK OPTIONS
The Company’s 2001 stock option/warrant plan provides for the granting of up to 5,000,000 stock
options or warrants to officers, consultants, directors and key employees. All share options/warrants
granted under the 2001 option/warrant plan either vest immediately, at 25% per quarter over a period
of one year or on a performance basis. The options do not cancel upon termination of employment and
all options, if remaining unexercised, expire five years after the date of issue.
During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company no stock options were granted or cancelled.
During the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company did not grant any additional options to
purchase shares of common stock to employees, directors or consultants. During the first quarter of
2003, the Company cancelled 50,000 options to purchase shares of commons stock, with an exercise
price of $0.55 per share.
The following is a summary of the activity of the Company’s 2001 stock option/warrant plan for the
year ended December 31, 2004:
Outstanding, at December 31, 2002
Cancelled
 Outstanding, at December 31,
2003 and 2004
Shares
Under
Option 
 
    
 1,630,000  $
 
(50,000)
Weighted
Average  
Exercise
Price 
  
0.40 
0.55
1,580,000  $
0.44
The weighted average fair value of the options granted in 2004 and 2003 was $0.65.
At December 31, 2004 and 2003 the weighted-average remaining contractual life of the outstanding
options was 1.64 and 2.45 years.
Page - 63
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 8 - STOCK OPTIONS, continued
The following table presents additional information related to the options outstanding as of December
31, 2004.
Exercise Price per Share
$0.40
$0.55
 
Total
Number of
Number of
Shares
Outstanding
1,210,000
370,000
Shares
Exercisable
1,210,000
370,000
1,580,000
1,580,000
During the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company did not recorded any
compensation costs.
NOTE 9 - WARRANTS
During the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company did not issue or cancel any warrants.
During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company issued 26,617,790 warrants exercisable at
between $0.25 and $0.35 for one to three year periods. (Note 6) During the year ended December 31,
2004, 516,667 warrants expired.
Warrants Outstanding
At December 31, 2004, the Company had the following share purchase warrants outstanding:
Number of Shares
Exercise Price Per
Expiry Date
Share
0.35
11.40
7.80
11.40
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.30
0.35
0.35
0.25
0.30
0.30
0.30
March 3, 2005
March 5, 2005
March 9, 2005
March 9, 2005
May 6, 2005
May 24, 2006
October 14, 2006
November 30, 2006
November 30, 2006
December 21, 2006
May 6, 2007
May 24, 2007
May 28, 2007
November 30, 2007
10,144,020
1,076,167
26,923
223,925
855,980
1,500,000
1,396,956
75,000
4,132,500
550,000
4,733,334
2,350,000
275,000
605,000
27,944,805
Page - 64
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 10 - INCOME TAXES
Income tax expense has not been recognized for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 and
no taxes were payable at December 31, 2004 or 2003, because the Company has incurred losses
since its inception.
The components of the Company’s net losses are as follows:
United States of America
Hong Kong
Other countries (British Virgin Islands,
Bermuda and Canada)
2003
2004
$(4,275,642) $(4,043,273)
(13,312)
( 126)
- 
$(4,275,768) $(4,056,585)
-
As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, the Company had the following deferred tax assets that primarily
relate to net operating losses. A 100% valuation allowance has been established, as management
believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Federal loss carryforwards
State loss carryforwards, Nevada
Foreign loss carryforwards
 
Less: Valuation allowance
2004
2003 
   
   
  
  $ 10,113,232  $ 8,916,052 
   
- 
2,925,763 
   
   
  
    (13,039,015)   (11,841,815)
- 
   $
-   
2,925,783
-   $
The Company’s valuation allowance increased during 2004 and 2003 by $1,197,200 and $1,134,246.
At December 31, 2004 and 2003 the Company had the following net operating loss carryforwards
(“NOL’s”):
United States
Foreign (Hong Kong, Bermuda and British
Virgin Islands)
2004
   
  
  $35,023,896  $30,748,254
2003
20,282,399    20,282,273 
   
 
  $55,306,295  $51,030,527
The federal NOL’s expire through December 31, 2024 and the Hong Kong NOL’s can be carried
forward indefinitely.
Page - 65
BREK ENERGY CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
December 31, 2004
NOTE 11 - SEGMENTED INFORMATION
During the year ended December 31, 2002, the Company disposed of its payment processing
business, the Company now has only one business, an oil and gas business in the United States of
America.
NOTE 12 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Lease Commitments
The Company had no lease commitments at December 31, 2004 or 2003.
Rent expense for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, was $nil and $11,441.
Going Concern
During the year ended December 31, 2002, the Company changed its business direction and has
been focusing on its oil and gas business. As such, the Company has accumulated a deficit in excess
of approximately $61 million to date and additional financing will be required by the Company to
support development of its oil and gas properties until such time as the Company achieves positive
cash flow from operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to
continue as a going concern. The Company’s ability to achieve and maintain profitability and positive
cash flow is dependent upon its ability to locate profitable oil and gas properties, generate revenues
from its oil and gas production and control production costs. Based upon current plans, the Company
expects to incur operating losses in future periods. There is no assurance that the Company will be
able to generate revenues in the future. The accompanying financial statements do not include any
adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Contingent liability
In February 2003 the debtor and guarantor of the note receivable commenced legal action against the
Company, in Bermuda, claiming that the Company and its former subsidiary, First Ecom Systems
Limited, had promised to develop and supply them with certain software. As a result of this litigation
the debtor ceased making the required installment payments on March 1, 2003. Although the directors
believed that this lawsuit is without merit as there was no condition to develop software for the debtor,
due to lack of financial resources the Company did not defend its position and no further actions by
either party have transpired since February 2003. (Note 3)
Commitments
On March 1, 2004, the Company entered into a settlement agreement whereby the Company agreed
to pay a total of $691,874, in twelve equal monthly payments, commencing August 14, 2004.
 
As is customary in the oil and gas industry, the Company may at times have commitments in place to
reserve or earn certain acreage positions or wells. If the Company does not pay such commitments,
the acreage positions or wells may be lost.
NOTE 13 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company has an option to acquire an additional 2.5% interest in certain of their undeveloped
mineral leases by paying $5,250,000 on or before January 1, 2004 and if they exercise this option, the
Company has the option of acquiring an additional undivided 2.5% interest by paying $5,250,000 on
or before January 1, 2005. The Company did not exercise either of these options.
Common Shares and Warrants
During 2005, the Company issued 3,333,335 units for cash of $1,000,000 and 333,334 units, to an
officer, as a finder’s fee of $100,000, for arranging placement of these units. The units were issued at
$0.30 per unit. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one share purchase warrant, each
warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of the Company’s common stock, is exercisable at
$0.50 per share and expires within two years of the date of issuance. The fair value of the warrants
was estimated to be $275,000 (25% of the $1,100,000 in debt or proceeds received from the sale of
the units).
 
On July 25, 2005, an officer of the Company exchanged 400,000 warrants for 400,000 shares of the
Company’s stock at $0.25 per share. 
 
On September 29, 2005, an officer of the Company exchanged 100,000 warrants for 100,000 shares of
the Company's stock, at $0.25 per share.
Page - 66
Page - 67
Exhibit 10.6
OPTION TO ACQUIRE INTERESTS
IN OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
This agreement dated for reference May 1, 2004, is between Brek Petroleum, Inc., a Nevada
corporation (“Brek”), and Griffin Asset Management, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company
(“Griffin”). Brek and Griffin are collectively referred to as the Parties and individually as a Party.
RECITALS
A. On July 16, 2002, Brek and others entered into a purchase agreement with Gasco Energy, Inc.
Pannonian Energy Inc. and San Joachin Oil & Gas Ltd. (together, “ Gasco”) under which Brek
acquired interests in certain oil and gas leases, wells, related equipment, and other lands and
participatory rights in Wyoming, Utah and California identified in the agreement (the “Gasco
Agreement”). Brek has 25% of whatever interest Gasco had on July 16, 2002. Gasco is usually but not
always the operator. Gasco and Brek are entitled to a share of production net of various royalties,
overriding royalties and other burdens (the “Burdens”) that must be paid before any production is
distributed to Brek and Gasco (the “Net Interest”).
B. Griffin wishes to acquire an interest in production from wells that Brek is entitled to drill under the
Gasco Agreement on leases in Wyoming and Utah by contributing to the drilling costs as described by
Gasco or another operator in its written notices and authorizations for expenditure (“AFEs”) or by Brek
in an AFE if Brek initiates a drilling program.
 
Now therefore, in consideration of the foregoing recitals and the following respective representations,
warranties, covenants and agreements, and other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and
sufficiency of which the Parties acknowledge, the Parties agree as follows:
AGREEMENT
ARTICLE I
Offer to Acquire
Section 1.1   The Interest. Brek grants Griffin the right to acquire an interest in production by
contributing cash for the drilling of wells on the Wyoming and Utah properties that it owns together with
Gasco or has a right to acquire as described in the Gasco Agreement (the “Properties”). This right
applies to drilling programs for a total of one hundred wells to be drilled on the Properties for which
Brek receives a notice and AFE from Gasco or another joint owner, or for which Brek initiates a drilling
program, after the day on which both Parties have signed this agreement (the “Effective Date”). The
right is subject to the following terms and conditions:
 
a.  Griffin may contribute 50% of the amount of Brek’s portion of the AFE in return for 50% of Brek’s
working interest in each well and 50% of Brek’s Net Interest minus a 7% royalty (the “Royalty”)
payable to Brek (“Griffin’s Net Interest”). Griffin’s Net Interest cannot be less than 75% of 50% of Brek’s
Net Interest. If Griffin’s Net Interest is less than 75% of 50% of Brek’s Net Interest, then the Royalty
must be adjusted: i.e, if the sum of the Burdens is more than 18%, then the Royalty is reduced so that
the sum of the two is equal to 25% and Griffin’s Net Interest is equal to 75% of 50% of Brek’s Net
Interest; if the sum of the burdens and the Royalty is less than 25%, then Brek is entitled to the entire
Royalty, and Griffin’s net interest is more than 75%.1
1.For example: if Brek’s share of production equals $100,000 and the Burdens equal 12.5%, then
Brek’s Royalty is equal to 7% and Griffin’s Net Interest is equal to 80.5% of $50,000; if the Burdens
equal 20%, then Brek’s Royalty is equal to 5% and Griffin’s Net Interest is equal to 75% of $50,000.
 
Page - 68
b.   Gasco, or another party with the right to initiate drilling, delivers to Brek notices that it intends to
drill in accordance with the terms of the joint operating agreement that governs the drill site (“JOA”).
These notices are written or, if a drill rig is on the site, telephoned. Brek has 30 days from its receipt of
a written notice and 48 hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays) from a telephoned
notice in which to notify Gasco that it consents to the drilling. Brek will deliver the notice to Griffin on
the next business day following the day that it receives the notice. Griffin will inform Brek within twenty-
one days if it elects to contribute, or within 36 hours of the telephoned notice. Griffin is liable for its
portion of all costs of the drilling program in accordance with the terms of the governing JOA as of the
date on which it notifies Brek that it intends to contribute to the drilling program.
 
c.  The operator delivers to Brek invoices for drilling in accordance with the terms of the governing
JOA. Brek will deliver each invoice to Griffin on the next business day following its receipt with an
invoice for its contribution. Griffin will pay its contribution directly to the operator within the time
required by the JOA and deliver confirmation to Brek that it has paid its contribution. If Griffin fails to
pay the invoiced contribution as required, then it is deemed to have elected to decline to participate
and loses its right to contribute and share in the production of the well.
 
d.  If Brek initiates a drilling program then the notice provisions and response times of the governing
JOA apply to AFEs and invoices.
 
e.  If Griffin elects to contribute, Griffin will pay Brek a fee equal to 7.5% of the amount of Griffin’s
contribution to the drilling and completion costs (the “Fee”) as consideration for the right to contribute
and acquire the working interests and net share of production. Griffin will pay the Fee when it delivers
its written consent to Brek. The amount of the Fee must be adjusted when the well is completed to
reflect the actual costs: if the costs are more than the AFE, then Griffin will pay Brek 7.5% of the
difference; if the costs are less, then Brek will refund 7.5% of the difference to Griffin.
 
f.  When Griffin has paid its contributions for drilling and completion and the Fee to Brek, it has earned
its working interest and share of production and is subject to the terms of the governing JOA. Brek then
will inform Gasco (or whoever is the operator if Gasco is not) of Griffin’s interest with instructions to
record Griffin’s interest and send Griffin’s net share of production on Griffin’s instructions. Nothing in
this agreement grants Griffin a right to acquire an interest in the Properties or a right under the Gasco
Agreement.
 
g.  If Griffin fails to contribute its portion of the costs that accrue to its working interest in wells, then its
entire interest reverts to Brek and Griffin is not entitled to any further share of production or the return of
any costs that it has contributed.
 
h.  If Griffin elects to contribute to an AFE for drilling a well but does not elect to contribute to the
completion of a well following the drilling, then its entire interest reverts to Brek and Brek is entitled to
100% of the working interest and the share of production to which Griffin would otherwise be entitled.
 
i.  Griffin’s right is not exclusive. If Griffin declines to contribute to a well, then Brek may invite others to
contribute to the drilling of the well that Griffin declined.
 
Section 1.2   Invited Participants. Griffin may invite others to participate in its contribution and share
of production. If it does, then it must deliver to Brek a notice with the name, address, and payment
instructions of the invited participant. When Griffin has earned its interest, Brek will instruct Gasco to
make a division order in the favor of the invited participants. Nothing in this arrangement, however,
requires that Brek or Gasco deal directly with the invited participants or relieves Griffin of any
obligations under this agreement; all dealings are between Griffin and the invited participants and
Brek is entitled to rely on Griffin’s instructions and representations in connection with the invited
participants and their participation until they have earned their interests, at which point they will deal
directly with the operator under the JOA.
 
Page - 69
Section 1.3   Non-consent. If Brek elects not to participate in a drilling program, then Griffin may
contribute Brek’s portion to earn Brek’s entire interest and the well is counted as one well for the
purpose of counting the 100 wells in which Griffin can acquire an interest under this agreement. If Brek
does not participate at Griffin’s request, then the well is counted as two wells. In either case, if Griffin
contributes Brek’s portion of a drilling program, Brek remains entitled to the Royalty and the Fee
calculated on the whole of Griffin’s participation and interest.
 
Section 1.4   Conflict of Terms. Where the terms of this agreement and a governing JOA conflict, the
terms of this agreement prevail unless they cause a Party to breach the JOA, in which case the terms
of the JOA prevail.
 
Section 1.5   Programs Underway. The Parties acknowledge that Brek received two AFEs from
Gasco during the month of April before the terms of this agreement were finalized for which drilling
programs are underway. Griffin may contribute to the AFEs. The Parties will work out the terms of
payment for these two wells if Griffin elects to contribute.
 
Section 1.6   Notice to Others. Brek will notify the other parties to a JOA of the terms of this agreement
as required by the governing JOA.
 
Section 1.7  Term. This agreement and Griffin’s right to acquire the interests described above end
when Griffin has acquired its interests in 100 wells under this agreement or at the end of eight years
from the date of this agreement, whichever is the earlier.
 
Section 1.8  Force Majeure. If Gasco or Brek is unable to drill on the Properties during the term of this
agreement because of force majeure (as defined in Article XI of the AAPL Form 610-Model Form
Operating Agreement-1982 attached to the Gasco Agreement as Exhibit D, a copy of which Griffin
acknowledges having received) then Brek will inform Griffin and Article XI in the exhibited model form
operating agreement applies.
ARTICLE II
Representations and Warranties of Brek
Brek represents to Griffin as follows:
 
Section 2.1  Organization and Qualification. Brek is a corporation duly organized, validly existing
and in good standing under the laws of Nevada, and has the requisite corporate power and authority
to own or lease all material property that it purports to own or lease and to carry on its business as now
being conducted. It is duly qualified as a foreign corporation, and is in good standing in each
jurisdiction where the character of its properties owned or held under lease or the nature of its
activities makes such qualification necessary, unless the failure to so qualify would not have a
material adverse effect on its business or financial condition. It is qualified, to its Knowledge and
where qualification is required, with all applicable governmental authorities to own and operate the
properties and interests which are the subject matter of this agreement.
 
Section 2.2  Authorization of Agreement. It has full right, power and authority to enter into this
agreement and to deliver the interests to Griffin. The execution and delivery of this agreement and the
performance of the transactions contemplated by it have been duly authorized by its board of directors.
The consummation of the transactions contemplated herein do not and will not, whether with or
without the giving of notice or passage of time or both, conflict with or constitute a breach of, or default
under, or result in the creation or imposition of any tax, lien, charge or encumbrance upon the
properties or interests which are the subject matter of this agreement pursuant to any contract,
indenture, mortgage, deed of trust, loan or credit agreement, note, license, lease or other agreement or
instrument to which it is a party or by which it may be bound, or to which any of its property or assets is
subject, nor will such action result in any violation of the provisions of its articles of incorporation or
bylaws or any applicable treaty, law, statute, rule, regulation, judgment, order, writ or decree of any
government, governmental instrumentality or court, domestic or foreign, having jurisdiction over it or
any of its properties.
 
Page - 70
Section 2.3  Title to the Properties. Brek makes the following representations and warranties
regarding the interests which are the subject matter of this agreement.
 
a.  No Liens. To its Knowledge it will convey the interests to the Purchasers as required from time to
time free and clear of all liens, restrictions and encumbrances created by, through or under it or any
Affiliate which would have a material adverse affect upon the value, operation or use of the interests
unless they were created as a result of a drilling program to which Griffin contributed under this
agreement. As used in this agreement, “Affiliate” means, with respect to a specific person or entity,
another person or entity that directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, Controls or is
Controlled by or is under common Control with the specified person or entity; and “Control,” and its
correlative forms, means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the
direction of the management or policies of a person or entity, whether through the ability to exercise
voting power, by contract or otherwise.
 
Section 2.4  Absence of Further Requirements. Except for applicable reporting requirements under
the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, or any other applicable legislation, no
filing with, or consent, approval, authorization, order, registration, notification or decree of any court or
governmental authority or agency, domestic or foreign, is necessary or required for the performance of
its obligations hereunder or in connection with the sale and delivery of the interests hereunder or the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by this agreement.
 
Section 2.5  No Bankruptcy. No bankruptcy proceedings are pending, being contemplated by or, to
its Knowledge, threatened against it.
 
Section 2.6  No Broker Fees. It has not engaged any broker, finder or investment banker for which
Griffin could be liable for any fees or commissions in connection with the transactions contemplated
hereby.
 
Section 2.7  Compliance with Law. To its Knowledge, all of the properties owned or operated by it
are so operated in compliance with applicable laws and regulations (including, without limitation,
Environmental Laws) in all material respects. With respect to Environmental Laws, compliance
therewith is deemed to include, without limitation that, to its Knowledge:
 
a.  With respect to the properties operated by it, it has acquired all material permits, licenses and
authorization required under any Environmental Laws in order to conduct its business as it has been
historically conducted and such is in compliance with all such permits, licenses and authorizations;
 
b.  With respect to the properties operated by it, there has been no material Release by it or by any
other person of any Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or Contaminants or any other wastes
produced by, or resulting from, any business, commercial, or industrial activities operations, or
processes, on, beneath, or adjacent to any of the properties for which it may be held liable under any
Environmental Laws; and
 
c.  There exists no written or tangible report, synopsis or summary of any asbestos, toxic waste or
Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or Contaminants investigation made with respect to all or any
portion of the properties operated by it.
 
Page - 71
The following definitions apply to the foregoing provisions regarding Environmental Laws:
 
i.  “Environmental Laws” means all federal, state and local laws, regulations, rules and ordinances
relating to pollution or protection of the environment, including, without limitation, laws relating to
Releases or threatened Releases of Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or Contaminants into the
indoor or outdoor environment (including, without limitation, ambient air, surface water, groundwater,
land, surface and subsurface strata) or otherwise relating to the manufacture, processing, distribution,
use, treatment, storage, Release, transport or handling of Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or
Contaminants.
 
ii.  “Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or Contaminants” means all substances defined as such
in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollutant Contingency Plan, 40 C.F.R. §300.6, or
defined as such under any Environmental Laws.
 
iii.  “Release” means any release, spill, emission, discharge, leaking, pumping, injection, deposit,
disposal, discharge, dispersal, leaching or migration into the indoor or outdoor environmental
(including, without limitation, ambient air, surface water, groundwater and surface or subsurface strata)
or into or out of any property, including the movement of Hazardous Substances, Oils, Pollutants or
Contaminants through or in the air, soil, surface water, groundwater or arty property.
 
d.  Litigation. No action, suit, proceeding, claim or investigation by any person, entity, administrative
agency or governmental body is pending before or, to its Knowledge, threatened against it by any
governmental authority that impedes or is likely to impede its ability to consummate the transactions
contemplated by this agreement.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF Griffin
ARTICLE III
Griffin hereby represents and warrants to the Brek as follows:
 
Section 3.1  Organization and Qualification. Griffin is a limited liability company formed and in good
standing under the laws of Delaware  and has the power and authority to carry on its business as it
applies to this agreement.
 
Section 3.2  Authorization of Agreement. It has full right, power and authority to enter into this
agreement. The execution and delivery of this agreement and the performance of the transactions
contemplated hereby have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate or other action. The
consummation of the transactions contemplated herein do not and will not, whether with or without the
giving of notice or passage of time or both, conflict with or constitute a breach of, or default under, or
result in the creation or imposition of any tax, lien, charge or encumbrance upon pursuant to any
contract, indenture, mortgage, deed of trust, loan or credit agreement, note, license, lease or other
agreement or instrument to which it is a party or by which it may be bound, or to which any of its
property or assets of it is subject, nor will such action result in any violation of the provisions of its
articles of incorporation or bylaws or other organizational document, if any, or any applicable treaty,
law, statute, rule, regulation, judgment, order, writ or decree of any government, governmental
instrumentality or court, domestic or foreign, having jurisdiction over it or any of its properties. This
agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered by it and constitutes a legal, valid and
binding obligation of it, enforceable against it in accordance with its terms (except as may be limited by
bankruptcy, insolvency, moratorium, reorganization or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors
generally and the availability of equitable remedies).
 
Section 3.3  Absence of Further Requirements. No filing with, or consent, approval, authorization,
order, registration, notification or decree of, any court or governmental authority or agency, domestic or
foreign, is necessary or required for the performance of its obligations hereunder or the consummation
of the transactions contemplated by this agreement.
 
Page - 72
Section 3.4  No Bankruptcy. No bankruptcy proceedings are pending, being contemplated by or, to
its Knowledge, threatened against it.
 
Section 3.5  No Broker Fees. It has not engaged any broker, finder or investment banker for which it
could be liable for any fees or commissions in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby.
 
Section 3.6  Litigation. No action, suit, proceeding, claim or investigation by any person, entity,
administrative agency or governmental body is pending before or, to its Knowledge, threatened
against it by any governmental authority that impedes or is likely to impede its ability to consummate
the transactions contemplated by this agreement.
ARTICLE IV
Survival of Representations and Warranties and Indemnification
Section 4.1  Survival of Representations and Warranties. The representations and warranties
contained in Articles II and III of this agreement as well as those contained in this Article shall survive
the Effective Date and shall not be deemed to merge into any conveying documents executed as of
the Effective Date or subsequently as provided for in this agreement.
 
Section 4.2  Indemnification. With respect to those warranties and representations of Brek contained
in Article II of this agreement, Brek will hold harmless, indemnify and defend Griffin from and against
all suits, causes of action, proceedings, liabilities, damages, penalties, assessments, injuries, fees and
costs, including reasonable attorneys fees (whether suit is instituted or not) arising from or related to
their breach of such warranties and representations.
ARTICLE V 
Miscellaneous
Section 5.1  Notices. Any notice or communication required or permitted hereunder shall be
sufficiently given if in writing and (i) delivered in person or by overnight delivery or courier service or
(ii) sent by facsimile or electronic transmission (provided that any notice given pursuant to clause (ii) is
also confirmed by the means described in clause (1), as follows:
 
To Brek:
Brek Petroleum, Inc.
Attention: Rick Jeffs
42 Brook Street
London W1K 5DB
E-mail: rick@brekenergy.com
R.H. Daignault Law Corporation
1100 Melville Street, Suite 600
Vancouver, BC, V6E 4A6
Attention: Rene Daignault
E-mail: Rene@rhdlawcorp.com
 
Page - 73
To Griffin:
 
Griffin Asset Management, LLC
Attention: Shawne Malone
1529 S. State St. Suite 4L
Chicago, Il 60605
347-733-2565
E-mail: Shawnepmalone@yahoo.com
Such notice or other communication shall be deemed given when so delivered personally, or sent by
facsimile or electronic transmission (or, if it is transmitted during non-business hours at the recipient’s
location, at the opening of business on the next business day), or, if sent by overnight delivery or
courier service, when delivered. Griffin will notify Brek concurrently by email of any notice that it is
sending by another means under this agreement.
 
Section 5.2  Knowledge. As used herein, the term “Knowledge” means (i) with respect to Brek, the
actual knowledge of officers and employees of them involved in the transactions contemplated by this
agreement or in the ownership or operation of the properties or interests which are the subject matter
of this agreement, and (ii) with respect to a Griffin, the actual knowledge of officers and employees of it
involved in the transactions contemplated by this agreement. “Known” shall have a correlative
meaning.
 
Section 5.3  Governing Law. Except as otherwise provided for herein or any exhibit hereto, this
agreement and the legal relations between the Parties shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the internal laws of the State of Colorado without taking into account provisions
regarding choice of law.
 
Section 5.4  Entire Agreement. This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the Parties
with respect to the matters herein and supersedes all prior agreements and understandings between
the Parties with respect thereto.
 
Section 5.5  Amendments and Waivers. This agreement may not be amended except upon a written
consent authorized and approved by each Party. By an instrument in writing, Griffin may waive
compliance by the Brek with any term or provisions of this agreement that Brek was or is obligated to
comply with or perform; provided, however, that such waiver shall not operate as a waiver of; or
estoppel with respect to, any other or subsequent failure. No failure to exercise and no delay in
exercising any right, remedy or power hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any
single or partial exercise of any right, remedy or power hereunder preclude any other or further
exercise thereof or the exercise of any right, remedy or power hereunder shall operate as a waiver
thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right, remedy or power hereunder preclude any
other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, remedy or power provided herein or
by law or in equity. The waiver by any Party of the time for performance of any act or condition
hereunder shall not constitute a waiver of the act or condition itself.
 
Section 5.6  Time. Time is of the essence of this agreement and any amendment to it.
 
Section 5.7  Severability. If any provision of this agreement, or the application thereof to any Party,
place or circumstance, shall be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or
void, the remainder of this agreement and such provisions as applied to other parties, places and
circumstances shall remain in full force and effect only if, after excluding the portion deemed to be
unenforceable, the remaining terms shall provide for the consummation of the transactions
contemplated hereby is substantially the same manner as originally set forth at the later of the date this
agreement was executed or last amended.
 
Section 5.8  Counterparts. This agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts, each of which
shall constitute one and the same instrument.
 
Page - 74
Section 5.9  Interpretation of Agreement. The article, section and other headings used in this
agreement are for reference purposes only and shall not constitute a part hereof or affect the meaning
or interpretation of this agreement.
 
Section 5.10  Expenses. Whether or not the transactions contemplated by this agreement are
consummated, all costs and expenses incurred in connection with this agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby, will be paid by the Party incurring such costs and expenses, including but not
limited to the cost of legal counsel, accountants and any other professionals.
 
Section 5.11  Specific Performance. The Parties agree that irreparable damage would occur in the
event that any of the provisions of this agreement were not performed in accordance with their specific
terms or were otherwise breached. It is accordingly agreed that the Parties shall be entitled to an
injunction or injunctions to prevent breaches of this agreement and to enforce specifically the terms
and provisions hereof in any court of the United States or any state having jurisdiction, this being in
addition to any other remedy to which they are entitled at law or in equity.
 
Section 5.12  No Circumvention. Griffin will not circumvent Brek and deal directly with Gasco in any
manner in connection with any of Brek’s properties that are subject to the Gasco Agreement, whether
those properties are the subject of this agreement or excluded from it.
 
Section 5.13  Attorneys’ Fees. If any legal action is brought for the enforcement of this agreement or
because of an alleged dispute, breach or default in connection with this agreement, the prevailing
Party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees and other costs incurred in such action or
proceeding, in addition to any other relief to which it may he entitled.
 
Section 5.14  Binding Effect. This agreement is binding upon and inures to the benefit of the Parties
and their respective successors and permitted assigns.
 
Section 5.15  Third Parties. Except as otherwise provided herein, this agreement does not benefit or
create any right or cause of action or remedy of any nature whatsoever in any person or entity other
than the Parties.
 
Section 5.16  No Presumption of Drafting. Each Party participated in the drafting of this agreement
and therefore no presumption that either Party or any other drafted it applies in any interpretation,
construction, or enforcement of this agreement.
 
In witness whereof, each Party has executed this agreement as of the date written below.
 
Griffin Asset Management, LLC
a Delaware limited liability company
By: /s/ Shawne Malone
Its: President
On: June 1, 2004
________________________________
Brek Petroleum, Inc., a Nevada corporation
By: /s/ Richard N. Jeffs
Its: President
On: May 28, 2004
Page - 75
Page - 76
Exhibit 10.7
NATURAL GAS PURCHASE AGREEMENT
Date: December 23, 2004
Seller:
Buyer:
BREK PETROLEUM, INC.
RIVERBEND GAS GATHERING, L.L.C.
1100 Melville Street, Suite 600
Vancouver BC V6E 4A
14 Inverness Drive East, Suite H-236
Englewood, Colorado 80112
Telephone: Telephone: (303) 483-0044
Facsimile: (303) 483-0011
E-Mail:  mchoury@gascoenergy.com
Contact: Marl J. Choury
Tax ID No.: 43-2049794
Telephone:
Facsimile: 604 664 0672
E-mail: rick@jeffsco.com
anne@dacostacorp.com
Contact: Rick Jeffs
Anne McFadden
Tax ID No.: 98-0355707
 
Seller owns or controls quantities of natural gas which it desires to sell to Buyer, and Buyer desires to
purchase quantities of natural gas from Seller, all on the terms and provisions set forth below. Seller
and Buyer therefore agree as follows:
1. Seller’s Commitment  of  Natural  Gas. Subject to  the  terms  of  this  Agreement  and  the  terms  and
conditions set forth in the form of Confirmation Letter attached as Exhibit “A” hereto and as may be
executed  by  the  parties  from  time  to  time,  Seller  hereby  commits  to  this Agreement  all  of  Seller’s
natural  gas  (hereinafter  “Gas”)  produced  and  saved from  the  leases  and  leasehold  interests  now
owned and as described on Exhibit “B” and any leases and leasehold interests hereinafter acquired
within the Area of Mutual Interests depicted on Exhibit “B-1” (hereinafter collectively “the Leases”) for a
period of fifteen (15) years from the effective date. Thereafter, this Agreement and Seller’s commitment
of  Gas  hereunder  shall  continue automatically  for  consecutive  renewal  terms  of  one  (1)  year  until
terminated by either party providing written notice to the other party at least ninety. (90) days prior to
the expiration of the primary term, or any subsequent renewal term. Seller covenants and agrees to
sell and deliver the same to Buyer at the points of delivery set forth in the Confirmation Letters to be
executed by the parties without other disposition except as herein otherwise provided. The foregoing
shall  be  covenants  running  with  the  land  and  any  conveyance, assignment,  sale  or  other  transfer,
including any contribution to the drilling and/or exploration effort of another producer, of all or a portion
of  the Leases covered by these covenants shall include and be subject thereto. Seller shall require
any  purchaser,  assignee  or  transferee  of  any  portion  of  Seller’s interest  in  the  Leases  to  ratify  this
Agreement and to expressly assume and agree to the terms hereto to the extent of the portion of the
Leases  received from  Seller  by  that  party.  Seller  agrees  to  notify  Buyer  promptly  of  any such
conveyance, assignment, transfer or contribution.
 
 
2.  Nomination Confirmation. Approximately ten  (10)  business  days  prior  to  the  first  day  of  each
production  month  or at  a time  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  parties,  Seller  and  Buyer  will  reach
agreement on the quantities of natural gas to be purchased and sold during that period at the points of
delivery set forth in the Confirmation Letter. Seller shall transmit this “nomination confirmation” via fax
and e-mail to Buyer.
 
3. Purchase Price. The purchase price for sold volumes shall be set forth in the Confirmation Letter(s)
as executed by and between the parties from time to time. The purchase price, however, shall at all
times  be  equal  to  the  amount  per  MMBtu  paid  to  and received by Gasco Energy, Inc. or any of its
subsidiaries or affiliates (“GASCO”), on all gas sold during same timeframe from said points of delivery
under such purchase agreements, either with Seller or with third parties as  may be entered into by
GASCO from time to time. Said amount shall equal the gross sales price of the gas sold minus: (a) a
gathering and transportation fee of  not more than $0.23 per MMBtu adjusted as provided herein; (b)
fuel,  line  loss, shrinkage  and  unaccounted  for  gas  not  to  exceed  6%  under  normal  operating
conditions; and (c) compression charges in an amount not to exceed $0.07 per MMBtu per stage of
compression from the points of delivery to the receipt point(s) on the Questar mainline, adjusted as
provided herein. The parties acknowledge and agree that the deductions authorized under 3.(b) above
may temporarily exceed 6% due to unavoidable losses resulting from construction, maintenance and
other necessary and appropriate operations on the gathering system. In no event shall the deductions
provided for in 3.(b) above exceed 6% for more than 15 consecutive days or 30 days in the aggregate
during  any 1 2 month  period  or  a  maximum  of  8%.  The  gathering  fee  and  compression  fee  will be
adjusted on an annual basis in proportion to the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for
All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as published by the United States Department of Labor. The adjustment
shall  be  made  effective  January 1  of each  year  beginning  January  1,  2006,  and  shall  reflect  the
percentage  change i n the  aforesaid  Consumer  Price  Index  for  All  Urban  Consumers  (CPI-U)  as  it
existed for January of the immediately preceding year. In no event will the adjustment in any year be
less than a 2% nor more than a 4% increase over the previous year’s fees.
 
Page - 77
4. Additional Fees. In addition, Seller shall pay its proportionate share on a leasehold basis of meter
fees in the amount of $250.00 per month per well for each well up to the first 50 wells connected to
Seller’s gas gathering system. For each well over 50 wells, Seller shall pay its proportionate share of a
meter  fee  of  $150.00 per month per well. The metering fee will be adjusted on an annual basis in
proportion to the percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as
it existed for January of the immediately preceding year. In no event will the adjustment in any year be
less than a 2% or more than a 4% increase over the previous year’s fees. Seller shall pay Buyer $0.03
per MMBtu as a marketing fee for the marketing of Seller’s gas and shall reimburse Buyer for Seller’s
proportionate share of any third party marketing fees incurred by Buyer up to $0.05 per MMBtu. The
combined total of such marketing fees shall not exceed $0.08 per MMBtu.
 
5. Payment. Buyer shall pay Seller by check, using its best efforts to courier the check to Seller by the
end of fourteen days following the Buyer’s receipt of payment for the sale of Seller’s gas. The parties
will review this payment provision after six months. Any change to this payment provision requires the
written  consent o f both  parties.  In  the  event  of  any  inaccuracy  in  or  dispute  as  to  any  billing or
payment, the parties shall cooperate in good faith to resolve such matter expeditiously.  Buyer  shall
send a statement to Seller with the check detailing the following: (a) total volume (MMBtu) and gallons
per  Mcf  of  Seller’s  gas measured  at  the  points  of  delivery  and  total  field  volume;  (b)  total  fuel gas
quantity and lost and unaccounted for gas quantity attributable to Seller’s sold volumes; (c) gas plant
products, if any, and the volume of residue gas attributable to Seller’s sold volumes. At the request of
Seller, or if required by law, rule or regulation, Buyer shall withhold from sums otherwise due Seller
hereunder  and  shall  pay  all  production,  severance  or  similar  taxes  and  all royalties,  overriding
royalties and similar burden payments levied, assessed, charged against, or attributable to the natural
gas  sold  hereunder  prior t o delivery  to  Buyer  hereunder.  Seller  shall  furnish  such  assessments,
statements, invoices,  division  orders,  or  other  documents  as  Buyer  may  reasonably  require for  the
purpose of identifying each such payment and the persons entitled thereto.
 
Each party shall have the right, at its own expense, and upon reasonable notice and at reasonable
times, to inspect and audit the books and records of the other party to the extent necessary to verify the
accuracy of any charge, adjustment, payment or computation hereunder. In addition, Buyer shall make
available upon request and Seller shall have the right, at its own expense and upon reasonable notice
and at reasonable times, to inspect and audit the books, records and natural gas purchase and sales
agreements of GASCO to the extent necessary to verify the gross sales price and net sales amounts
received by GASCO, together with all gathering, transportation, compression, and other charges paid
by Gasco for gas transported from the points of delivery common to GASCO and Seller. All charges
and payments shall be conclusively deemed final unless objected to in writing within twelve months
following the month of delivery of the natural gas which is the subject of such charge or payment.
6. Measurement and Title. The measurement of natural gas delivered hereunder shall be performed by
Buyer at the inlet of Buyer’s metering facilities located at Seller’s lease line or separation point or at
such other points of delivery as may be mutually agreed upon in writing by the parties from time to time
and  as  set  forth  in Confirmation Letter(s). Title shall pass to Buyer at said points of delivery. Seller
shall have responsibility for and assume any liability with respect to natural gas prior to delivery to
Buyer at the points of delivery, and Buyer shall have responsibility for and assume any liability with
respect to natural gas after delivery to Buyer at the points of delivery. Seller warrants that it will have
and deliver good and merchantable title to all natural gas sold hereunder, tree of all liens, claims, and
encumbrances.  Buyer,  at  its  expense, shall  furnish,  install,  operate,  and  maintain  a  suitable  orifice
meter  at all points of delivery of the gas covered hereby. Each meter installed by Buyer shall  be  a
meter acceptable in the industry and each meter shall be installed and operated in accordance with
the  requirements  of  applicable  provisions i n ANSI/API  2530,  “Orifice  Metering  of  Natural  Gas”
(American  Gas  Association  Gas Measurement  Committee  Report  No.3)  of  the  Natural  Gas
Department of the American Gas Association as amended from time to time, or by any other method
commonly used in the industry and mutually acceptable to the parties. In the event of  any question
arising as to the accuracy of any meters, the meter or meters shall be tested upon demand of either
party.  The  expense  of  any  such  test  shall  be borne by  the  party  demanding  same  if  the  meter
registration is found to be correct, and by Buyer if found to be incorrect Seller may, at its option and
sole expense,  install,  maintain,  and  operate  check  meters  and  other  equipment t o check  Buyer’s
meters  provided,  however,  that  such  check  meters  and  other equipment shall not  interfere  with  the
operation of any of Buyer’s facilities. At least semi--annually, Buyer shall calibrate all meters installed
at  Seller’s points  of  delivery  in  accordance  with  industry  standards  and  make  adjustments as
necessary.
 
7.  Indemnification.  Seller shall  indemnify  Buyer  and  save  it  harmless  from  all  losses,  costs,  and
liabilities of whatsoever nature (including, without limitation, attorneys fees and costs) arising out of
claims of title, personal injury or death, and property damage from natural gas delivered hereunder or
charges thereon which attach prior to the passage of title to Buyer. Buyer shall indemnify Seller and
save  it  harmless  from  all  losses,  costs,  and  liabilities  of  whatsoever  nature (including,  without
limitation, attorneys fees and costs) arising out of claims of title, personal injury or death, and property
damage from natural gas delivered hereunder or charges thereon which attach after the passage of
title to Buyer. In the event of any claim adverse to Seller’s title, Buyer may, but shall not be required to,
withhold payment for the natural gas at issue pending the resolution of such claim or the posting of
security in form and amount acceptable to Buyer.
 
Page - 78
8.  Force Maieure. The term  “force  majeure”  as  used  in  this  Agreement  shall  mean  any  cause  or
causes not reasonably within the control of the party claiming suspension and which, by the exercise
of  reasonable  diligence,  such  party  is  unable  to  prevent  or  overcome. Such  term  shall  likewise
include, but not be limited to: Acts of God; acts, omissions to act and or delays in action of an Indian
Tribe or federal, state or local government or any agency thereof; compliance with rules, regulations or
orders  of  any  governmental  authority  or  any  office,  department,  agency  or instrumentality  thereof;
strikes,  lockouts  or  other  industrial  disturbances; acts  of  the  public  enemy;  wars;  blockades;
insurrections; riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquake; fires; storms; floods; washouts; winter
weather, spring thaw or other inclement weather; civil disturbances; interruptions by governmental or
court orders; present and future valid orders of any regulatory body having jurisdiction; explosions; the
interruption o r suspension of the receipt or delivery of Gas hereunder due to the inability, failure  or
refusal of any party not a party to this Agreement to receive or deliver such gas; breakage or accident
to,  or  routine  maintenance  and  repair of, machinery  or  lines  or  pipes,  compressors  or  plants;  well
blowouts; freezing of Wells, or lines of pipe, sudden partial or sudden entire failure of gas wells; failure
to  obtain  materials  and  supplies  due  to  governmental  regulations; or  the inability  of  either  party  to
acquire, or the delays on the part of such party in acquiring at reasonable cost and after the exercise of
reasonable diligence, materials and supplies; permits and consents, and easements and/or rights-of-
way.
 
In the event either party hereto is rendered, wholly or in part, by force majeure, unable to carry out its
obligations  under  this  Agreement  other  than  to  indemnify or  to  make  payments  of  any  amount  due
hereunder, it is agreed that, upon such party giving notice and full particulars of such force majeure, in
writing (which can be effected by facsimile, an e-mail, or other electronic media) to the other party as
soon as possible after the occurrence of the causes relied on, then the obligation of the party giving
such  notice,  so  far  as  they  are affected  by  such  force  majeure,  shall  be  suspended  during  the
continuance of  any inability s o caused, but  for  no  longer  period,  and  such  cause  shall,  so  far  as
possible,  be  remedied with all reasonable dispatch; provided, however, that this provision shall not
require  the  settlement  of  strikes,  lockouts  or  litigation  by  acceding  to the demands  of  the  opposing
parties  when  such  course  is  inadvisable  in  the discretion  of  the  party  hereto  having  the  difficulty.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Buyer’s inability to make payments to Seller for gas that is lost due to
explosion, breakage or accident of Buyer’s pipelines, compressors or plants not reasonably within the
control of Buyer or which, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, Buyer was unable to prevent or
control, shall constitute an event of force majeure hereunder.
9. Quality. All natural gas delivered to Buyer shall meet the quality and pressure specifications and
requirements of the receiving pipeline. Seller shall be solely responsible for, and shall indemnify and
save Buyer harmless against, all fees, charges, penalties, losses, costs, and liabilities of whatsoever
nature (including without limitation, attorneys fees and costs) arising out of Seller’s failure to deliver
natural gas meeting the applicable specifications and requirements. Buyer shall, concurrent with the
execution  of 
this  Agreement, deliver  to  Seller,  in  writing,  the  applicable  specifications  and
requirements for the gas to be delivered hereunder.
 
Buyer may test Seller’s gas delivered hereunder for adherence to such specifications, such testing to
be in accordance with generally accepted industry standards and procedures. If the gas delivered by
Seller  does  not  meet  the  specifications set forth  above,  Buyer  may,  at  its  option,  refuse  to  accept
delivery of said gas into its gathering facilities. If Seller shall deliver gas to Buyer which exceeds the
maximum pressure specifications, or fails to meet the quality specifications above referenced, Seller
shall be responsible for any damages caused to Buyer’s gathering facilities and any other damages
resulting  from Seller’s  delivery  of  such  non-conforming  gas.  If  Seller  fails  to  conform  its  gas to  the
specifications and requirements, Buyer may, at its option, elect to accept such non-conforming gas,
condition the same to conform to the above specifications and charge Seller a mutually acceptable
condition fee. If neither party elects to condition the gas to conform to the above specifications, then
Seller, at its option and upon sixty (60) days prior written notice to Buyer, shall have the right to obtain
the release of such non-conforming gas from the Agreement.
 
Should Buyer  elect  to  accept  and  pay  for  non-conforming  gas,  Buyer  shall  not  be deemed to  have
waived any of its rights hereunder and shall nevertheless be entitled, at any time and from time to time,
to  enforce  the  quality  provisions  hereof a n d refuse  to  accept  delivery  of  any  volumes  of  non-
conforming gas from Seller.
 
At least semi-annually, Buyer shall take samples from each of Seller’s wells at the points of delivery
and  have  such  samples  analyzed  by  chromatograph  analysis o r other  mutually  agreeable  and
generally  accepted  industry  methodology  to determine  the  liquids  content  by  component  and  the
heating value of such gas. Buyer shall have the right to take and analyze a spot gas sample prior to
the regularly scheduled sampling. Additionally, upon Seller’s written request to Buyer and at Seller’s
sole cost and expense, Buyer shall take and analyze gas samples more frequently. All gas samples
taken hereunder shall be taken at such times as are reasonably mutually agreeable so to produce a
representative sample of  the  gas  produced  and  Seller  shall  be  pennitted  to  be  present  at  such
sampling and  permitted  to  take  its  own  split  sample.  The  gross  heating  value  calculation of  such
samples will use the BTU values assigned to the various hydrocarbon components as adjusted and
updated  from  time  to  time  by  using  as  a  base  those values  set  forth  in  the  most  current  GPA
publication  2145  in  effect  at  the time the  gross  heating  value  calculation  is  derived  under  the
provisions of this agreement.
 
Page - 79
10. Miscellaneous.
a.  Imbalances.  Each party  shall  use  commercially  reasonable  efforts  to  avoid  the  imposition  of
imbalance charges and shall be responsible for the payment of any imbalance charges resulting from
its actions or inactions.
 
b . Notice.  Any  notice  hereunder  shall  be  in  writing  any  may  be  personally  delivered, s e n t by
recognized overnight express courier, e-mail, or by facsimile, to the address or facsimile number set
forth above (or to such other address or facsimile number as a party may direct by written notice to the
other) and shall be effective upon receipt.
c. Governing Law. This agreement  shall  be  construed  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  State  of
Colorado, excluding any conflict of law rule, which would result in the application of the law of another
jurisdiction.
 
d. Waiver. N o waiver of any breach of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of any other o r any
subsequent breach.
 
e. Successors and Assigns. This agreement  shall  be  binding  upon  and  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the
respective successors and assigns of the parties. However, no party may assign this agreement, or
any  rights  hereunder,  without  the  prior  written  consent  of the other  party,  not  to  be  unreasonably
withheld.
 
f. Partial Invalidity.  If  any  provision  of  this  agreement  is  determined  to  be  invalid or  unenforceable,
such  determination  shall  not  affect  the  validity  or enforceability  of  any  other  provision  of  this
agreement.
 
g. Integration. This agreement together with future Exhibit “A” confirmation letter(s) sets forth the entire
agreement of the parties as to the subject matter hereof and 10 supersedes all prior understandings
and agreements, whether oral or written. Any amendment of supplement hereto shall be in writing.
 
Paragraph headings used herein are for convenience only and. shall not be used in construing this
Agreement.
 
h. Authority. Each party represents that it has full authority to enter into this agreement and to perform
its obligations hereunder.
 
Page - 80
i. Arbitration. In the event of any dispute hereunder, an authorized representative of each of the parties
shall endeavor in good faith to resolve the matter in a timely manner. Any dispute not so resolved shall
be submitted to a qualified arbitrator, acceptable to both parties, having expertise in the subject matter
of  the dispute,  in  arbitration  proceedings  conducted  in  Denver,  Colorado,  in  accordance with  the
commercial Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association. The arbitrator may, but shall not
be required to, award fees and costs (including attorneys’ fees and costs) to the prevailing party.
 
j .  Rules and  Regulations.  This agreement  is  subject  to  all  laws,  rules,  regulations,  and  orders  of
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof.
 
k. Confidentiality. The terms and provisions of this Agreement are confidential and proprietary to the
parties and shall not be disclosed by either party to third persons without the prior written consent of
the other party, except as may be required by law.
 
l. Conflict with  Confinnation  Letter. In  the event  of  a  conflict  between  any  term  or  provision  of  this
Agreement and any term or provision of a Confirmation letter issued hereunder, the term or provision
of the Confirmation Letter shall control.
Executed as of the date written above.
Seller:
Buyer:
BREK PETROLEUM, INC.
RIVERBEND GAS GATHERING, L.L.C.
By: /s/ Richard N. Jeffs      
Title:  President
By: /s/ Michael K. Decker      
Title:  Executive V.P. and COO
Date: December 17, 2004
Date: December 23, 2004
Page - 81
EXHIBIT “A”
CONFIRMATION LETTER ISSUED UNDER
NATURAL GAS PURCHASE AGREEMENT
Date:
Seller:                       Buyer:
BREK PETROLEUM, INC.   
1100 Melville Street, Suite 600
Vancouver BC V6E 4A6 Telephone:
Facsimile: (604) 664-0672
 
E-mail:________________________________
RIVERBEND GAS GATHERING, L.L.C.
14 Inverness Drive East, Suite H-236
Englewood, Colorado 80112
Telephone: (303) 483-0044
Facsimile: (303) 483-0011
 
E-mail:________________________________
Contact:________________________________    
 
T
No:________________________________
x ID
a
Contact:________________________________   
 
T
No:________________________________
x ID
a
Buyer and Seller confirm the following transaction between Buyer and Seller pursuant to the Natural
Gas Purchase Agreement identified above:
Confirmation Date:________________________________
Period of Delivery:________________________________
Purchase Price:[insert  contract  price  or  prices,  i.e.  final  sale  price,  incremental volumes  based  on
index, shortfalls, etc.]
Quantity: 100% of Seller’s production from the points of delivery.
Points of Delivery: Well or Lease meter facilities located at:
In the event  of  a  conflict  between  any  terms  or  provision  of  the  Natural  Gas  Purchase Agreement
identified  above  and  any  term  or  provision  of  this  Confirmation Letter,  the  term  or  provision  of  this
Confirmation Letter shall control.
 
 
 
Page - 82
Page - 83
Exhibit 99.1
Code of Ethics
Brek Energy Corporation
Code of Ethics
Overview
 
Brek has adopted a code of ethics (the “Code”) that is applicable to every officer, director, employee
and consultant of the company and its affiliates (collectively the “Employee” or “Employees”). The
Code reaffirms the high standards of business conduct required of all Employees. The Code is part of
Brek’s continuing efforts to (1) ensure that it complies with all applicable laws, (2) have an effective
program in place to prevent and detect violations of law, and (3) educate and train its Employees to be
aware and understand ethical business practices. In most circumstances, the Code sets standards that
are higher than the law requires.
 
Brek has also adopted eight corporate values: Focus, Respect, Excellence, Accountability, Teamwork,
Integrity, Open Communications and Positive Attitude. See Schedule “A” for a statement on each
value. The values have been adopted to provide a framework for all Employees in conducting
themselves in their jobs. These values are not intended to substitute for the Code, but will serve as
guidelines in helping the Employees to conduct Brek’s business in accordance with the Code.
 
The Code is not intended to cover every possible situation in which an Employee may find himself or
herself. It is meant to give each Employee the boundaries within which Brek expects each Employee
to conduct himself or herself while representing Brek. An Employee may find himself or herself in a
situation where there is no clear guidance given by the Code. If that occurs, return to the objective
stated below: common sense, good judgment, high ethical standards and integrity, and refer to Brek‘s
values. In addition, there are many resources upon which an Employee may rely, including the
President and other Brek officers and management. Together all Employees can continue to make
Brek a company that sets a standard for all natural gas and oil exploration companies.
 
Objective
 
One of Brek’s objectives is to conduct all business operations in the utmost ethical manner utilizing
common sense, good judgment, high ethical standards and integrity. Brek cares about its Employees,
shareholders, clients, suppliers, and the communities in which it conducts its business operations. In
the course of meeting its business objectives, Brek considers it essential that all Employees
understand and comply with the Code and therefore share and participate in Brek’s way of conducting
business.
 
Standard of Conduct
 
Brek insists that all aspects of its business operations are conducted with honesty, integrity and
fairness, and with respect for the interests of those affected by its business and activities. Brek also
expects the same in its relationships with all those with whom it does business.
Page - 84
Each Employee must maintain and foster integrity and honesty in all dealings with clients and all
business transactions. Each Employee must commit to act according to the highest ethical standards
and is expected to apply ethical business practices in administrative and financial aspects of the
business operations of Brek.
 
No code of conduct can hope to lay down appropriate behavior for every situation, nor should it seek
to do so. Each Employee is required to make a careful and considered judgment of what is right and
proper in any particular situation.
 
It is the obligation of every Employee in conducting the business operations of Brek to be responsible,
honest, trustworthy, conscientious, and dedicated to the highest standards of ethical business
practices. Accordingly, all Employees are required to avoid not only impropriety, but also the
appearance of impropriety in conducting the business operations of Brek.
 
Obeying the Law
 
All Employees of Brek are required to comply with (1) the letter and the spirit of laws and regulations of
the countries in which Brek conducts business operations, (2) the accepted business practices in
commercial markets, and (3) any contractual terms and conditions applicable to any business
transaction.
 
It is expected that each Employee will use common sense, good judgment, high ethical standards and
integrity in all the Employee’s business dealings.
 
Each Employee must commit to know and abide by all applicable laws and regulations. Employees
are expected to be familiar with the Code as it applies to their duties. Each Employee is required to
follow and to comply with the Code. A refusal by any Employee to agree to be bound by the Code will
be grounds for discipline up to and including dismissal.
 
A breach of any law, regulation or ethical standard by any Employee will not be justified by the pursuit
of profit or the departure from acceptable practice by competitors.
 
Enforcement of Code
 
The Code will be enforced at all levels fairly and without prejudice. Any breach of any standard of the
Code may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
 
Richard N. Jeffs, Brek’s CEO and President, has been appointed as Compliance Officer of Brek,
responsible for overseeing compliance with, and enforcement of, the Code. John daCosta, Brek’s
Treasurer, has been appointed as Assistant Compliance Officer. If an Employee encounters a
situation that the Employee is not able to resolve by reference to the Code, the Employee should ask
for help from the Compliance Officer or the Assistant Compliance Officer if they need assistance in
understanding or interpreting any part of the Code.
 
Any Employee who, in good faith, has reason to believe any operation or activity of Brek is in violation
of the law or of the Code must call the matter to the attention of the Compliance Officer. See Schedule
“B” for a non-exhaustive list of reportable violations.
 
If the Employee has reason to believe that it would be inappropriate to report the operation or activity
to the Compliance Officer, the Employee should report it to the Assistant Compliance Officer. All
reports will be reviewed and investigated and as necessary under the circumstances, and the
reporting Employee should provide sufficient information to enable a complete investigation to be
undertaken.
 
Any Employee who makes an allegation in good faith reasonably believing that a person has violated
the law or the Code will be protected against retaliation.
Page - 85
Violations of the law or the Code will subject Employees to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment. In addition, Employees involved may subject themselves and Brek to
severe penalties, including fines and possible imprisonment. Compliance with the law and high
ethical standards in the conduct of Brek’s business should be a top priority for each Employee.
 
Insider Trading, Securities Compliance and Public Statements
 
Securities laws prohibit anyone who is in possession of material, non-public information (“Insider
Information”) about a company from purchasing or selling stock of that company, or communicating
the information to others. Information is considered “material” if a reasonable investor would consider
it to be important in making a decision to buy or sell that stock. Some examples include financial
results and projections, new products, acquisitions, major new contracts or alliances prior to the time
that they are publicly announced. Employees who become aware of such Inside Information about
Brek must refrain from trading in the shares of Brek until the Inside Information is publicly announced.
 
Employees must also refrain from disclosing the insider Information to persons who do not have a
need to know, whether they are inside Brek or outside, such as spouses, relatives or friends.
 
Brek makes regular formal disclosures of its financial performance and results of operations to the
investment community. Brek also regularly issues press releases. Other than those public statements,
which go through official channels, Employees are prohibited from communicating outside Brek about
Brek’s business, financial performance or future prospects. Such communications include questions
from securities analysts, reporters or other news media, but also include seemingly innocent
discussions with family, friends, neighbors or acquaintances.
 
Financial Reporting
 
Brek is required to maintain a variety of records for purposes of reporting to the government. Brek
requires all Employees to maintain full compliance with applicable laws and regulations requiring that
its books of account and records be accurately maintained. Specifics of these requirements are
available from the Compliance Officer.
 
Accuracy of Records
 
Brek’s accounting records and supporting documents must accurately describe and reflect the nature
and result of Brek’s business operations. All activities and results of Brek’s business operations must
be presented in a fair and balanced manner.
 
All business transactions must be properly authorized as well as completely and accurately recorded
on Brek’s books. Procedures for doing so must comply with Brek’s financial policy and follow Brek’s
policy for authorization and documentation, as well as follow generally accepted accounting practices.
Budget proposals and other financial evaluations and forecasts must fairly represent all information
relevant to the business transaction. In addition, no unrecorded cash funds or other asset accounts will
be established or maintained for any purpose. Misapplication or improper use of corporate or property
or false entry to records by any Employee or by others must be reported to Brek’s Board of Directors.
Page - 86
Record Keeping and Retention
 
To help maintain the integrity of Brek’s record-keeping and reporting systems, each Employee must
know his or her area’s records retention procedures, including how data is stored and retrieved. It is
that person’s responsibility to know how to document and transact any entries or records that he or she
is responsible for. All Employees are expected to comply fully and accurately with all audits, including
responding in a timely fashion to requests for records or other material from or on behalf of Brek’s
auditors or management.
 
Communicating Accurate and Timely Information
 
In all interactions and communications, whether with shareholders, the public, clients, government
agencies, or others inside or outside of Brek, each Employee is expected to be truthful and forthright.
This includes making accurate statements, not misrepresentations or statements intended to mislead
or misinform; and responding promptly, accurately, and with full disclosure to requests from
governmental agencies for information or documents.
 
Confidentiality
 
Employees must respect the confidentiality of information received in the course of business dealings
and must never use such information for personal gain. Information given by Employees in the course
of business dealings must be true and fair and never designed to mislead.
 
Confidential information can only be revealed upon written authorization of management.
 
Employees must not use or disclose Brek’s trade secrets, proprietary, or confidential information, or
any other confidential information gained in the performance of Brek as a means of making private
profit, gain or benefit.
 
Employees must not use Internet bulletin boards or chat rooms to discuss matters or opinions related
to Brek or any of its industries, or to respond to comments about Brek. In today’s electronic age,
posting information on Internet bulletin boards or even communicating in chat rooms is the same as
“speaking to the media”.
 
Environmental, Health and Safety
 
Brek is committed to running its business in an environmentally sound and sustainable manner. Brek’s
objective is to ensure that its business operations have the minimum adverse environmental impact
commensurate with the legitimate needs of its business operations.
 
Brek is committed to protecting the health and safety of its Employees, as well as the environment in
general. Brek expects employees to obey all laws and regulations designed to protect the
environment, and the health and safety of all Employees, and to obtain and fully observe all permits
necessary to do business.
Page - 87
Natural gas and oil exploration and development is a dangerous business. At the very least, all
Employees should be familiar with and comply with safety regulations applicable to their work areas.
Brek will make, to the extent possible, reasonable accommodations for the known physical or mental
limitations of its Employees. Employees who require a special accommodation should contact the
Compliance Officer. Brek will then engage in an interactive process to determine what reasonable
accommodations may exist.
Declaration of Interest
 
Each Employee is expected to avoid any activity, investment or association that interferes with the
independent exercise of his or her judgment in Brek’s best interests (“Conflicts of Interest”). Conflicts
of Interest can arise in many situations and occur most often in cases where the Employee or the
Employee’s family obtains some personal benefit at the expense of Brek’s best interests.
 
No Employee, or any member of Employee’s immediate family, is allowed to accept money, gifts of
other than nominal value, unusual entertainment, loans, or any other preferential treatment from any
customer or supplier of Brek where any obligation may be incurred or implied on the giver or the
receiver or where the intent is to prejudice the recipient in favor of the provider. Likewise, no Employee
is allowed to give money, gifts of other than nominal value, unusual entertainment or preferential
treatment to any customer or supplier of Brek, or any employee or family members thereof, where any
obligation might be incurred or implied, or where the intent is to prejudice the recipient in favor of Brek.
No Employee is allowed to solicit or accept kickbacks, whether in the form of money, goods, services
or otherwise, as a means of influencing or rewarding any decision or action taken by a foreign or
domestic vendor, customer, business partner, government employee or other person whose position
may affect Brek’s business.
 
No Employee will use Brek’s property, services, equipment or business for personal gain or benefit.
 
Each Employee is required to reveal any personal interest that may impinge or might reasonably be
deemed by others to impinge on the Employee’s business dealings with any industry partners of Brek.
 
Employees may not: (1) act on behalf of, or own a substantial interest in, any company or firm that
does business, or competes, with Brek; (2) conduct business on behalf of Brek with any company or
firm in which the Employee or a family member has a substantial interest or affiliation. Exceptions
require advance written approval from Brek’s Board of Directors. 
 
Employees should not create the appearance that they are personally benefiting in any outside
endeavor as a result of their employment by Brek, or that Brek is benefiting by reason of their outside
interests. Any Employee who is not sure whether a proposed action would present a conflict of interest
or appear unethical should consult with the Compliance Officer.
 
Brek expects its Employees to avoid (1) personal activities and financial interests that could conflict
with their responsibilities and obligations and (2) giving assistance to competitors, which could be in
conflict with the interests of Brek or its clients. All Employees are required to seek the consent of Brek
management if they intend to become partners or shareholders in companies outside Brek’s corporate
structure.
Page - 88
Fair Competition
 
Brek’s policy is to comply fully with competition and antitrust laws throughout the world. Brek is
committed to vigorous yet fair competition and supports the development of appropriate competition
laws. Each Employee must avoid any business arrangement that might prevent the effective operation
of fair competition. It is advised that each Employee consult with the Compliance Officer before
attending a meeting with a party who may be viewed as a competitor.
International Trade
 
Brek must comply with a variety of laws around the world regarding its activities. In some cases, the
law prohibits the disclosure of information, whether the disclosure occurs within the U.S. or elsewhere,
and whether or not the disclosure is in writing.
 
U.S. law and the Code prohibits giving, offering, or promising anything of value to any public official in
the U.S. or any foreign country to influence any official act, or to cause an official to commit or omit any
act in violation of his or her lawful duty. The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act precludes payments to non-
U.S. government officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business, even if the payment is
customary in that country. This law applies anywhere in the world to U.S. citizens, nationals, residents,
businesses or employees of U.S. businesses. Because Brek is a U.S. company, this law applies to
Brek and all of its subsidiaries. Any questions on this policy should be directed to the Compliance
Officer.
 
Government Relations
 
Brek is prohibited by law from making any contributions or expenditures in connection with any U.S.
national election. This includes virtually any activity that furnishes something of value to an election
campaign for a federal office. Use of Brek’s name in supporting any political position or ballot
measure, or in seeking the assistance of any elected representative, requires the specific approval of
the President of Brek. Political contributions or expenditures are not to be made out of Brek’s funds in
any foreign country, even if permitted by local law, without the consent of the President of Brek.
 
Vendors, Contractors, Consultants and Temporary Workers
 
Vendors, contractors, consultants or temporary workers who are acting on Brek’s behalf, or are on
Brek’s property, are expected to follow the law, the Code, and honor Brek’s values. Violations will
subject the person or firm to sanctions up to and including loss of the contract, the contracting or
consulting agreement, or the discharge from temporary assignment.
 
Compliance with the Code
 
It is the responsibility of Brek’s Board of Directors to ensure that the standards embodied in the Code
are communicated to, understood and observed by all Employees. Brek’s Board of Directors will not
criticize management for any loss of business resulting from adherence to the Code. Equally, Brek’s
Board of Directors undertakes that no Employee will suffer as a consequence of bringing to their
attention, or that of senior management, a breach or suspected breach of the Code.
Page - 89
The standards set out in the Code directly reflect Brek’s high ethical standards. Brek expects and
requires each and every Employee, as a representative of Brek, to fulfill Brek’s ethical commitment in
a way that is visible to the outside world with which Brek conducts its business operations.
 
Each Employee is responsible for complying with the standards set out in the Code and must ensure
that their personal conduct is above reproach.
 
Each Employee has an obligation to assure that the conduct of others around him or her complies with
the Code.
All Employees have a legal, moral, and ethical duty to report to Brek’s Board of Directors and the
appropriate authorities any known or suspected violations of law, regulations or corporate policy,
including the Code.
 
Breaches of law, regulations and the standards of conduct listed above may lead to serious
consequences for the Employee concerned.
 
Annual Acknowledgement
 
Each Employee will be required to sign a statement annually that he or she has read and understands
Brek’s Code of Ethics. This statement will also require that the Employee state that he or she is in full
compliance with the Code. The form of statement is attached as Schedule “C”.
Page - 90
Schedule “A”
VALUES
FOCUS: We exist only because we are in the natural gas and oil business.
 
RESPECT: We value all people, treating them with dignity at all times.
 
EXCELLENCE: We strive for “Best in Class” in everything we do.
 
ACCOUNTABILITY: We do what we say we will do and expect the same from others.
 
TEAMWORK: We believe that cooperative action produces superior results.
 
INTEGRITY: We are honest with each other, our customers, our partners, our shareholders and
ourselves
 
OPEN COMMUNICATION: We share information, ask for feedback, acknowledge good work, and
encourage diverse ideas.
 
POSITIVE ATTITUDE: We work hard, are rewarded for it, and maintain a positive attitude with a good
sense of perspective, humor and enthusiasm.
Page - 91
Schedule “B”
Reportable Violations - Anonymous Reporting Program
 
Accounting Error
Accounting Omissions
Accounting Misrepresentations
Auditing Matters
Compliance/Regulation Violations
Corporate Scandal
Domestic Violence
Discrimination
Embezzlement
Environmental Damage
Ethics Violation
Fraud
Harassment
Industrial Accidents
Misconduct
Mistreatment
Poor Customer Service
Poor Housekeeping
Sabotage
Securities Violation
Sexual Harassment
Substance Abuse
Theft
Threat of Violence
Unfair Labor Practice
Unsafe Working Conditions
Vandalism
Waste
Waste of Time and Resources
Workplace Violence
Page - 92
Schedule “C”
Acknowledgement and Certification Statement
I acknowledge and certify that I have read and understand the information set forth in the Code of
Ethics of Brek Energy Corporation and will comply with these principles in my daily work activities. I
am not aware of any violation of the standards of Brek’s Code of Ethics.
Date:
_________________________________________________________________________________
 
Name (print):
_________________________________________________________________________________
 
Position:
_________________________________________________________________________________
Address:
_________________________________________________________________________________
 
Signature:
_________________________________________________________________________________
Page - 93