
FORM 52-109“
CERTTFI CA TTON 0F INTERIM FILINGS
FULL CERTIFICATE

I, John H. Van de Pol, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Oﬂicer of Painted Pony Petroleum Ltd.,

certify the following:

1. Review: I have reviewed the interim ﬁnancial report and interim MD&A (together, the "interim
Wings") of Painted Pony Petroleum Ltd. (the “issuer") for the interim period ended June 30, 2016.

2. Na misrepresemaa‘ons: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim ﬁlings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the
circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by the interim ﬁlings.

3. Fair presentation: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the interim
ﬁnancial report together with the other ﬁnancial information included in the interim ﬁlings fairly
present in all material respects the ﬁnancial condition, ﬁnancial performance and cash ﬂows of the
issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim ﬁlings.

4. Responsibility: The issuer’s other certifying ofﬁcer and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures ("DC&P“) and internal control over ﬁnancial
reporting ("ICFR"), as those terms are deﬁned in National Instrument 52-109 Certiﬁcation of
Disclosure in Issuers ' Annual and Interim Filings, for the issuer.

5. Design: Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the issuer’s other
certifying ofﬁcer and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim ﬁlings
(a) designed DC&P, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable

assurance that

(i) material information relating to the issuer is made known to us by others,
particularly during the period in which the interim ﬁlings are being prepared; and

(ii) information required to be disclosed by the issuer in its armual ﬁlings, interim
ﬁlings or other reports ﬁled or submitted by it under securities legislation is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods speciﬁed in
securities legislation; and

(b) designed ICFR, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of ﬁnancial reporting and the preparation of ﬁnancial
statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer’s GAAP.


5.1 Control ﬁammark: The control framework the issuer’s other certifying ofﬁcer and I used to
design the issuer’s ICFR is the COSO Framework published by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.

5.2 N/A

5.3 N/A

6. Repairing changes in ICFR: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in the
issuer’s ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on April 1, 2016 and ended on June 30,
2016 that has materially aﬁected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the issuer’s ICFR.

Date: August 10, 2016

signed “John H. Van de Pol ”

John H. Van de Pol

Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Ofﬁcer

