
8-K 1 d243600d8k.htm 8-K 8-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report: August 18, 2016 (August 18, 2016)
(Date of Earliest Event Reported)
PENN VIRGINIA CORPORATION
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
Virginia
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation)
1-13283
(Commission
File Number)
Four Radnor Corporate Center; Suite 200
100 Matsonford Road, Radnor, Pennsylvania
23-1184320
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
19087
(Address of Principle Executive Offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (610) 687-8900
Not Applicable
(Former Name or Former Address, If Changed Since Last Report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions (see General Instruction
A.2. below):
¨ Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
¨
¨
¨
Item 7.01Regulation FD Disclosure.
As previously disclosed, Penn Virginia Corporation (the “Company”) and certain of its
subsidiaries (collectively with the Company, the “Debtors”) filed a voluntary petition for relief (the
“Bankruptcy Filing”) under chapter 11 of title 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code (“Chapter
11”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Virginia (the “Bankruptcy
Court”) and entered into a Restructuring Support Agreement (together with all exhibits and
schedules thereto, the “Restructuring Support Agreement”), by and among (i) the Debtors; (ii)
lenders holding approximately 100% of the principal amount of the approximately $112.6 million
in loans outstanding under the Debtors’ senior secured reserve-based revolving credit facility;
and (iii) holders of approximately 86% of the principal amount of the Debtors’ $1,075 million in
outstanding senior unsecured notes (the “Notes”).
The Company has been engaging in discussions with ETC Texas Pipeline, Ltd. (“ETC”)
regarding, among other things, a restructuring of that certain Gas Processing Agreement, dated
as of January 1, 2011 and that certain Individual Transaction Confirmation, dated January 1,
2011, and various related agreements entered into in connection therewith (collectively, the “ETC
Agreements”). The parties have reached an agreement in principle on the terms of amendments
to the ETC Agreements.
In connection with these negotiations, the Bankruptcy Filing and the Restructuring Support
Agreement and pursuant to certain confidentiality agreements, the Company provided certain
non-public information to certain holders of the Notes (the “Disclosure Information”). The
Disclosure Information is included in Exhibit 99.1 hereto. The Company is making the
disclosures herein in accordance with the terms of the confidentiality agreements and Regulation
FD.
The financial projections or forecasts included in the Disclosure Information (the “projections”)
were not prepared with a view toward public disclosure or compliance with the published
guidelines of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) or the guidelines
established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants regarding projections or
forecasts. The projections do not purport to present the Company’s financial condition in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The Company’s
independent accountants have not examined, compiled or otherwise applied procedures to the
projections and, accordingly, do not express an opinion or any other form of assurance with
respect to the projections. The inclusion of the projections should not be regarded as an
indication that the Company or its affiliates or representatives consider the projections to be a
reliable prediction of future events, and the projections should not be relied upon as such.
Neither the Company nor any of its affiliates or representatives has made or makes any
representation to any person regarding the ultimate outcome of the Company’s Chapter 11
process or its future performance compared to the projections, and none of them undertakes any
obligation to publicly update the projections to reflect circumstances existing after the date when
the projections were made or to reflect the occurrence of future events, even in the event that any
or all of the assumptions underlying the projections are shown to be in error.
In accordance with General Instruction B.2 of Form 8-K, Exhibit 99.1 is being furnished and shall
not be deemed to be “filed” for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the “Exchange Act”), or otherwise subject to the liabilities of that section, and shall not
be deemed to be incorporated by reference into any of the Company’s filings under the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) or the Exchange Act, whether made before or after
the date hereof and regardless of any general incorporation language in such filings, except to
the extent expressly set forth by specific reference in such a filing.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained herein, and in the Exhibits hereto, that are not descriptions of
historical facts are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Because such statements include risks,
uncertainties and contingencies, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or
implied by such forward-looking statements. These risks, uncertainties and contingencies
include, but are not limited to, the following:
•  the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern, to meet financial obligations
during the Chapter 11 process and to maintain contracts that are critical to the Company’s
operations;
•  the ability of the Company and certain of its creditors to develop and consummate one or
more plans of reorganization with respect to the Chapter 11 process, including with
respect to claims of senior noteholders, trade creditors and equity holders, among others,
thereunder;
•  the Bankruptcy Court’s rulings in the Chapter 11 case and the outcome of the Chapter 11
process in general;
•  the length of time that certain of the Company’s creditors will operate under the Chapter
11 case;
•  risks associated with third-party motions in the Chapter 11 case, which may interfere with
the Company’s creditors’ ability to develop and consummate one or more plans of
reorganization once such plans are developed;
•  the effect of the Chapter 11 filings on the Company’s relationships with third parties,
regulatory authorities and employees;
•  the potential adverse effects of the Chapter 11 process on the Company’s liquidity, results
of operations, or business prospects, the Company’s ability to execute its business and a
potential restructuring plan;
•  increased administrative and legal costs related to the Chapter 11 process and other
litigation and the inherent risks involved in a bankruptcy process;
•  the sufficiency of the liquidity purported to be made available by the Company’s third
party loans and receivables financing approved in connection with the Chapter 11
process; and
•  other factors set forth in our periodic filings with the Commission, including the risks set
forth in Item 1A of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015 filed with the Commission on March 15, 2016.
Additional information concerning these and other factors can be found in our press releases and
public periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Many of the factors that will
determine our future results are beyond the ability of management to control or predict. Readers
should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s
views only as of the date hereof. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements
attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these
cautionary statements. We undertake no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking
statements, or to make any other forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new
information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by applicable law.
The Company cautions that the trading in its securities during the pendency of Chapter 11
proceedings is highly speculative and poses substantial risks. If a plan of reorganization is
approved through the Chapter 11 process, it is likely that Company’s existing common stock will
be extinguished, and existing equity holders will likely not receive consideration in respect of
their existing equity interests. Accordingly, the Company’s future performance and financial
results may differ materially and/or adversely from those expressed or implied in any forward-
looking statements made by the Company in this Current Report.
Item 9.01Financial Statements and Exhibits.
(d) Exhibits
Exhibit No.  
99.1
Description
Disclosure Information provided in connection with discussions with certain of
the Company’s creditors.
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
Penn Virginia Corporation
           (Registrant)
By: /s/ Nancy M. Snyder
Name: Nancy M. Snyder
 Title: Executive Vice President,
Chief Administrative Officer,
General Counsel and Corporate
 
Secretary
Date: August 18, 2016
Exhibit Index
Exhibit No.  
99.1
Description
Disclosure Information provided in connection with discussions with certain of
the Company’s creditors.