
8-K 1 d221609d8k.htm 8-K 8-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report: August 17, 2016 (August 11, 2016)
(Date of Earliest Event Reported)
PENN VIRGINIA CORPORATION
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in Charter)
Virginia
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation)
1-13283
(Commission
File Number)
Four Radnor Corporate Center; Suite 200
100 Matsonford Road, Radnor, Pennsylvania
23-1184320
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
19087
(Address of Principle Executive Offices)
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (610) 687-8900
Not Applicable
(Former Name or Former Address, If Changed Since Last Report)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions (see General Instruction
A.2. below):
¨ Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.14d-2(b))
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17
CFR 240.13e-4(c))
¨
¨
¨
Item 1.03Bankruptcy or Receivership.
As previously disclosed, Penn Virginia Corporation (the “Company”) and certain of its
subsidiaries (collectively with the Company, the “Debtors”) filed voluntary petitions for relief (the
“Chapter 11 Cases”) under chapter 11 of title 11 of the United States Code (the “Bankruptcy
Code”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Virginia (the “Bankruptcy
Court”). Prior to commencing the Chapter 11 Cases, the Debtors entered into a Restructuring
Support Agreement, dated as of May 9, 2016 (together with all exhibits and schedules thereto,
the “Restructuring Support Agreement”), by and among (i) the Debtors; (ii) lenders holding
approximately 100% of the principal amount of the approximately $112.6 million in loans
outstanding under the Debtors’ senior secured reserve-based revolving credit facility (the “RBL
Facility”); and (iii) holders of approximately 86% of the principal amount of the Debtors’ $1,075
million in outstanding senior unsecured notes (the “Notes”).
On June 24, 2016, the Debtors filed the First Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization
of Penn Virginia Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates [Docket No. 350] (the “First Amended Plan”)
and the Disclosure Statement for the First Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of
Penn Virginia Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates and Amended Exhibits Thereto (the
“Disclosure Statement”). On June 28, 2016, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order approving the
Disclosure Statement and certain related rights offering procedures (the “Rights Offering
Procedures”) and solicitation procedures. On August 3, 2016, the Debtors filed the Second
Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of Penn Virginia Corporation and Its Debtor
Affiliates [Docket No. 501], to which certain technical modifications were made and filed on
August 10, 2016 (as so modified, the “Plan”). On August 11, 2016, the Bankruptcy Court entered
an order (the “Confirmation Order”) confirming the Plan. Copies of the Plan and the Disclosure
Statement are filed as Exhibits 2.1 and 2.2 hereto, respectively, and are incorporated herein by
reference. The Debtors plan to emerge from the Chapter 11 Cases after satisfying the remaining
conditions to effectiveness contemplated under the Plan (the first business day on which all
conditions to effectiveness of the Plan have been satisfied or waived in accordance with the
Plan, the “Effective Date”).
The following is a summary of the material matters contemplated to occur either pursuant to or in
connection with the confirmation and implementation of the Plan. This summary only highlights
certain of the substantive provisions of the Plan and is not intended to be a complete description
of, or a substitute for a full and complete reading of, the Plan. This summary is qualified in its
entirety by reference to the full text of the Plan. Capitalized terms used but not defined in this
Current Report on Form 8-K have the meanings set forth in the Plan.
The Plan contemplates, among other things, that, upon the Effective Date:
•  holders of claims arising under the Notes and certain other unsecured claims (the
“General Unsecured Claims”) will each receive their pro rata share of (i) 100 percent of
the New Common Stock (as defined below), subject to dilution on account of the Rights
Offering (as defined below) and the Commitment Premium (as defined below) and
(ii) subscription rights to participate in the Rights Offering;
•  claims arising under the Debtors’ debtor-in-possession credit facility (the “DIP Facility”)
described below will be paid in full from cash on hand and proceeds from the Exit Facility
(as defined below) and the Rights Offering;
•  claims arising under the RBL Facility will be paid in full from cash on hand and proceeds
from the Exit Facility and the Rights Offering; and
•  the Company’s current preferred stock and common stock will be canceled, extinguished
and discharged.
Certain Agreements in Connection with the Plan
Debtor-In-Possession Financing. Under the terms of the Restructuring Support Agreement,
certain lenders under the RBL Facility agreed to provide the DIP Facility to the Debtors pursuant
to the terms of a DIP Facility credit agreement. The DIP Facility was approved by the Bankruptcy
Court and provides for a multi-draw senior secured superpriority term loan credit facility in the
aggregate amount of up to $25 million. Pursuant to the Plan, any amounts outstanding under the
DIP Facility will be paid in full in cash upon emergence. The Company has not drawn any
amounts from the DIP Facility and does not expect to do so prior to emergence.
Backstop Commitment Agreement. In connection with the Restructuring Support Agreement,
the Company entered into a backstop commitment agreement (the “Backstop Commitment
Agreement”), attached as Exhibit C to the Restructuring Support Agreement, with the commitment
parties thereto (collectively, the “Backstop Parties”), pursuant to which certain holders of the
Notes (in their capacity as Backstop Parties) agreed to provide a $50.0 million commitment to
backstop the Rights Offering. Under the Backstop Commitment Agreement, the Company has
agreed to pay the Backstop Parties, on the closing date of the transactions contemplated by the
Backstop Commitment Agreement, a commitment premium equal to 6.0 percent of the Rights
Offering Amount (as defined below) (the “Commitment Premium”). If the transactions
contemplated by the Backstop Commitment Agreement are consummated, the Commitment
Premium will be payable in shares of New Common Stock (as defined below). The Company
would instead be required to pay, in cash, a termination fee equal to 4.0 percent of the Rights
Offering Amount upon the occurrence of certain termination events as set forth in the Backstop
Commitment Agreement. Pursuant to the Backstop Commitment Agreement, the Company will
also be required to (A) reimburse the Backstop Parties (i) for reasonable and documented fees
and expenses of counsel, consultants and a financial advisor, and any other advisors or
consultants as may be reasonably determined by holders of the Notes that are party to the
Restructuring Support Agreement and the Backstop Parties, in consultation with the Company,
and (ii) for filing fees, if any, required by antitrust laws and reasonable and documented
expenses related to such filings and (B) indemnify the Backstop Parties under certain
circumstances for losses arising out of the Backstop Commitment Agreement, the Plan and the
transactions contemplated thereby.
Rights Offering. In accordance with the Plan, the Backstop Commitment Agreement, and the
Rights Offering Procedures, the Company is offering eligible creditors, including the Backstop
Parties, shares of New Common Stock of the reorganized Company upon emergence from the
Chapter 11 Cases for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $50 million (the “Rights
Offering Amount”). Pursuant to the Backstop Commitment Agreement, the Backstop Parties have
agreed to purchase all shares of New Common Stock that are not duly subscribed for pursuant to
the Rights Offering Procedures at a per share purchase price equal to approximately $50 million
divided by the total number of shares allocated to new money contributions (without giving effect
to the common stock issued or issuable under the Rights Offering or in respect of the
Commitment Premium or in respect of the Management Incentive Plan (as defined below)).
Except as otherwise provided in the Confirmation Order, the rights to purchase New Common
Stock in the Rights Offering, any shares issued upon exercise thereof, and all shares issued to
the Backstop Parties pursuant to the Backstop Commitment Agreement will be issued in reliance
upon the exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
“Securities Act”), provided by Section 4(a)(2) thereof and/or Regulation D thereunder. As a
condition to the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Backstop Commitment
Agreement, the Company will enter into a registration rights agreement with certain of the
Backstop Parties entitling such Backstop Parties to request that the Company register their
securities for sale under the Securities Act at various times.
The Backstop Parties’ commitments to backstop the Rights Offering, and the other transactions
contemplated by the Backstop Commitment Agreement, are conditioned upon the satisfaction of
all conditions precedent to the effectiveness of the Plan, and other applicable conditions
precedent set forth in the Backstop Commitment Agreement. The issuances of New Common
Stock pursuant to the Rights Offering and the Backstop Commitment Agreement are subject to
certain conditions, and will be effective upon our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases.
Shareholders Agreement. Pursuant to the Plan, upon the Effective Date, the Company expects
to enter into a shareholders agreement (the “Shareholders Agreement”) with the holders of the
New Common Stock providing for certain shareholders’ rights, including minority shareholder
protections (including amendment provisions relating to such minority shareholder protections).
Exit Facility. Upon the Effective Date, the Company expects to enter into a new four-year senior
secured revolving credit facility (the “Exit Facility”), which is intended to provide up to $200
million in borrowing commitments. The initial borrowing base under the Exit Facility is expected
to be $128 million. As contemplated in the Plan and depending upon the amount of cash the
Company has on hand at the date of emergence, the Company expects to draw approximately
$50 to $70 million on the Exit Facility to fund a portion of the payments contemplated by the Plan.
Treatment of Executory Contracts
The Plan provides that all of the Debtors’ Executory Contracts and Unexpired Leases, unless
otherwise specified in the Plan or Plan Supplement (as defined in the Plan), shall be deemed
assumed as of the Effective Date. The Plan also provides that any monetary defaults under an
Executory Contract or Unexpired Lease shall be satisfied in cash on the Effective Date, as set
forth in the applicable Cure Notice, and provides procedures for adjudicating objections to such
Cure Notices.
Management Incentive Plan
The Plan also provides for a management incentive plan (the “Management Incentive Plan”),
which will include, among other things, an allocation of equity-based awards representing up to
5% of the New Common Stock (on a fully diluted basis).
Second Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation and Second Amended and
Restated Bylaws
On the Effective Date, pursuant to the Plan, the reorganized Company will adopt the Second
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation and the Second Amended and Restated Bylaws
(collectively, the “New Organizational Documents”). Among other things, the Second Amended
and Restated Articles of Incorporation provide stockholders with certain drag-along and tag-
along rights prior to the listing of the New Common Stock on a national securities exchange in
the United States.
Composition of New Board of Directors after the Effective Date
On the Effective Date, the Company’s initial board of directors will include the following persons
and others to be determined in compliance with the Shareholders Agreement and the New
Organizational Documents, as applicable:
•  Mr. Darin G. Holderness, CPA, was the Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
and Treasurer of Concho Resources until May 2016. Mr. Holderness has over 20 years of
experience in the energy sector including nine years with KPMG LLP where his practice
was focused in the energy industry and over 17 years in industry in ever increasing roles
of responsibility including serving as Vice President and Controller of Pure Resources,
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Basic Energy Services, Vice President and
Chief Accounting Officer of Pioneer Natural Resources, and most recently as Senior Vice
President and Chief Financial Officer of Eagle Rock Energy Partners. Mr. Holderness is a
1986 graduate of Boise State University with a Bachelor of Business Administration in
Accounting and is a Certified Public Accountant.
•  Mr. Marc McCarthy has been a Senior Managing Director at Wexford Capital LP since
2008. Previously, Mr. McCarthy worked in the Global Equity Research Department of
Bear Stearns & Co., Inc. and was responsible for
coverage of the international oil and gas sector. Mr. McCarthy joined Bear Stearns & Co.
in 1997 and held various positions of increasing responsibility until his departure in June
2008, at which time he was a Senior Managing Director. Prior to 1997, he worked in
equity research at Prudential Securities, also following the oil and gas sector.
Mr. McCarthy previously served on the boards of Energy Partners as the Chairman,
Coronado Midstream, and is currently Chairman of the Board of Mammoth Energy Corp.
Mr. McCarthy is a Chartered Financial Analyst and received a B.A. in Economics from
Tufts University.
•  Mr. Harry Quarls currently serves as a Managing Director at Global Infrastructure
Partners, a $30 billion energy focused private equity fund. He also serves as a Director
for Woodbine Holdings LLC, Fairway Resources LLC, Opal Resources LLC, and Trident
Resources Corp. He is Chairman of the Board for both Woodbine Holdings and Trident
Resources. Previously, Mr. Quarls served as Managing Director and Practice Leader for
Global Energy at Booz & Co., a leading international management consulting firm, and
served as member of Booz’s Board of Directors. Mr. Quarls earned a M.B.A. degree from
Stanford University and also holds ScM. and B.S. degrees, both in chemical engineering,
from M.I.T. and Tulane University, respectively.
Restrictions on Trading of the Company’s Equity Securities to Protect the Use of Net
Operating Losses
The Bankruptcy Court has issued a final order pursuant to Sections 105(a), 362(a)(3) and 541 of
the Bankruptcy Code enabling the Debtors to avoid limitations on the use of tax net operating
loss carryforwards and certain other tax attributes by imposing certain notice procedures and
transfer restrictions on the trading of the Company’s existing equity securities. In general, the
order applies to any person that, directly or indirectly, beneficially owns (or would beneficially
own as a result of a proposed transfer) at least 4.50 percent of either the Company’s outstanding
common stock or preferred stock (a “Substantial Stockholder”), and requires that each
Substantial Stockholder file with the Bankruptcy Court and serve the Company with notice of
such status. Under the order, prior to any proposed acquisition or disposition of the Company’s
existing equity securities that would result in an increase or decrease in the amount of the
Company’s existing equity securities owned by a Substantial Stockholder, or that would result in
a person or entity becoming a Substantial Stockholder, such person or entity is required to file
with the Bankruptcy Court and notify the Company of such acquisition or disposition. The
Company has the right to seek an injunction from the Bankruptcy Court to prevent certain
acquisitions or sales of outstanding common stock or preferred stock if the acquisition or sale
would pose a material risk of adversely affecting the Company’s ability to utilize such tax
attributes. Such procedures will not apply to the New Common Stock.
Securities to be Issued under the Plan
On the Effective Date, the outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock and preferred
stock will be canceled. The authorized capital stock of the reorganized Company will be
50,000,000 shares, consisting of 45,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share
(“New Common Stock”) and 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share.
Pursuant to the Plan, the Backstop Commitment Agreement and the Rights Offering:
•  approximately 43.4 percent of the New Common Stock will be issued pro rata to certain
holders of claims arising under the Notes;
•  approximately 2.5 percent of the New Common Stock will be issued to certain holders of
General Unsecured Claims;
•  approximately 3.2 percent of the New Common Stock will be issued to the Backstop
Parties as the Commitment Premium; and
•  approximately 50.9 percent of the New Common Stock will be issued to participants who
exercised rights in the Rights Offering and to the Backstop Parties pursuant to the
Backstop Commitment Agreement.
As of the Effective Date, there are expected to be a total of approximately 14,992,018 shares of
New Common Stock issued and outstanding.
Releases
As of the Effective Date, pursuant to the Plan, all claims and interests against the Debtors or any
of their assets, property or estates will be satisfied, discharged and released in full and holders of
such claims and interests will be precluded from asserting them against the Debtors, the Debtors’
estates, the reorganized Debtors, their successors and assigns and their assets and properties
based upon any documents, instruments, or any act or omission, transaction, or other activity of
any kind or nature that occurred prior to the Effective Date. In addition, each Debtor will be
deemed to provide a full discharge and release to each other Debtor, the reorganized Debtors
and various other parties and each such entity’s current and former affiliates, and each such
entity’s and its current and former affiliates’ current and former directors, managers, officers,
principals, members, employees, predecessors, successors, assigns, subsidiaries, agents,
advisory board members, financial advisors, partners, attorneys, accountants, investment
bankers, consultants, representatives, and other professionals.
Certain Information Regarding Assets and Liabilities of the Company
Information regarding the assets and liabilities of the Company as the most recent practicable
date is hereby incorporated by reference to the Company’s quarterly reports on Form 10-Q for the
fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2016 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
“Commission”) on July 29, 2016.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained herein, and in the Exhibits hereto, that are not descriptions of
historical facts are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Because such statements include risks,
uncertainties and contingencies, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or
implied by such forward-looking statements. These risks, uncertainties and contingencies
include, but are not limited to, the following:
•  the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern, to meet financial obligations
during the chapter 11 process and to maintain contracts that are critical to the Company’s
operations;
•  the ability of the Company and certain of its creditors to consummate the Plan, including
with respect to claims of senior noteholders, trade creditors and equity holders, among
others, thereunder;
•  the Bankruptcy Court’s rulings in the Chapter 11 Cases and the outcome of the chapter
11 process in general;
•  the length of time that certain of the Company’s creditors will operate under the Chapter
11 Cases;
•  risks associated with third-party motions in the Chapter 11 Cases, which may interfere
with the Company’s creditors’ ability to develop and consummate the Plan;
•  the effect of the Chapter 11 Cases on the Company’s relationships with third parties,
regulatory authorities and employees;
•  the potential adverse effects of the chapter 11 process on the Company’s liquidity, results
of operations, or business prospects, the Company’s ability to execute its business and
the Plan;
•  increased administrative and legal costs related to the chapter 11 process and other
litigation and the inherent risks involved in a bankruptcy process;
•  the sufficiency of the liquidity purported to be made available by the Company’s third
party loans and receivables financing approved in connection with the chapter 11
process; and
•  other factors set forth in our periodic filings with the Commission, including the risks set
forth in Item 1A of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015 filed with the Commission on March 15, 2016.
Additional information concerning these and other factors can be found in our press releases and
public periodic filings with the Commission. Many of the factors that will determine our future
results are beyond the ability of management to control or predict. Readers should not place
undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s views only as of the
date hereof. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or
persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary
statements. The Company undertakes no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking
statements, or to make any other forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new
information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by applicable law.
The Company cautions that the trading in its securities during the pendency of chapter 11
proceedings is highly speculative and poses substantial risks. Upon the Effective Date, the
Company’s existing common stock will be extinguished, and existing equity holders will likely not
receive consideration in respect of their existing equity interests. Accordingly, the Company’s
future performance and financial results may differ materially and/or adversely from those
expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements made by the Company in this Current
Report.
Item 9.01Financial Statements and Exhibits.
(d) Exhibits
Exhibit No.  
2.1
2.2
Description
Second Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of Penn Virginia
Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates (Technical Modifications) filed pursuant to
Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code filed on August 10, 2016
with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Virginia,
Richmond Division.
Disclosure Statement for the First Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of
Reorganization of Penn Virginia Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates and
Amended Exhibits Thereto filed pursuant to Chapter 11 of the United States
Bankruptcy Code filed on June 28, 2016 with the United States Bankruptcy
Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Richmond Division.
SIGNATURE
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant
has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly
authorized.
Penn Virginia Corporation
             (Registrant)
By: /s/ Nancy M. Snyder
Name: Nancy M. Snyder
Title: Executive Vice President,
Chief Administrative Officer, General Counsel and
 
Corporate Secretary
Date: August 17, 2016
Exhibit No.  
2.1
2.2
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Second Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of Reorganization of Penn Virginia
Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates (Technical Modifications) filed pursuant to
Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code filed on August 10, 2016
with the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Virginia,
Richmond Division.
Disclosure Statement for the First Amended Joint Chapter 11 Plan of
Reorganization of Penn Virginia Corporation and Its Debtor Affiliates and
Amended Exhibits Thereto filed pursuant to Chapter 11 of the United States
Bankruptcy Code filed on June 28, 2016 with the United States Bankruptcy
Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Richmond Division.