
6-K 1 pbra20160811_6k.htm OIL AND NATURAL GAS PRODUCTION IN JULY
pbra20160811_6k.htm - Generated by SEC Publisher for SEC Filing
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 6-K
Report of Foreign Private Issuer
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
For the month of August, 2016
Commission File Number 1-15106
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. - PETROBRAS
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Brazilian Petroleum Corporation - PETROBRAS
(Translation of Registrant's name into English)
Avenida República do Chile, 65 
20031-912 - Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Federative Republic of Brazil
(Address of principal executive office)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover Form 20-F or Form 40-F.
Form 20-F ___X___ Form 40-F _______
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant by furnishing the information contained in this Form is also thereby
furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Yes _______ No___X____
Oil and natural gas production in July
Rio de Janeiro, August 11, 2016 – Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. – Petrobras announces that its total production of oil and
natural gas in July was of 2.89 million barrels of equivalent oil per day (boed), with the same level of the previous
month, which was of 2.90 million boed. Of this total, 2.70 million boed were produced in Brazil and 0.19 million boed
were produced abroad.
The average oil production in July was of 2.29 million barrels per day (bpd), in line with the previous month, which was
of 2.30 million bpd. Of this total, 2.20 million bpd were produced in Brazil and 0.09 million bpd were produced abroad.
Pre-salt production up 6% when compared to June and achieves new records
The production of oil and natural gas operated by Petrobras in the pre-salt layer in July had an increase of 6% over
the previous month and achieved a new monthly record, with the volume of 1.32 million boed.
This result is mainly due to the startup, on July 8, of the Lula Central production system's operation through the
Cidade de Saquarema FPSO, and due to the growth of the production of new wells connected to the Cidade Maricá
and Cidade de Itaguaí FPSOs, also installed in the Lula field.
The oil production operated by Petrobras (own and partners’ division) in the pre-salt layer in July was also a monthly
record, reaching an average of 1.06 million bpd, surpassing the monthly hallmark of 1 million bpd for the first time. In
addition, the daily record was reached on July 20 with the production of 1.11 million barrels.
Natural gas production in the country reaches new record
Natural gas production in the country, excluding the liquefied volume, was of 79.4 million m³/day, up 0.7% from the
previous month (78.8 million m³/day), reaching a new monthly record.
The average natural gas production abroad was of 16 million m³/day, down 7% from the 17.2 million m³/day achieved
in the previous month.
www.petrobras.com.br/ir
Contacts:
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A. – PETROBRAS | Investor Relations Department I e-mail:
petroinvest@petrobras.com.br
Av. República do Chile, 65 – 10th floor, 1002 – B – 20031-912 – Rio de Janeiro, RJ | Phone: 55 (21) 3224-1510 /
3224-9947
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This release includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of
1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that are subject to
risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements, which address the Company’s expected business
and financial performance, among other matters, contain words such as “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,”
“anticipate,” “optimistic,” “intend,” “plan,” “aim,” “will,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “likely,” and
similar expressions. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements,
which speak only as of the date on which they are made. There is no assurance that the expected events,
trends or results will actually occur. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-
looking statements, whether as a result of new information or future events or for any other reason.
The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those expressed or forecast in any forward-looking
statements as a result of a variety of assumptions and factors. These factors include, but are not limited to,
the following: (i) failure to comply with laws or regulations, including fraudulent activity, corruption, and
bribery; (ii) the outcome of ongoing corruption investigations and any new facts or information that may arise
in relation to the “Lava Jato Operation”; (iii) the effectiveness of the Company’s risk management policies and
procedures, including operational risk; and (iv) litigation, such as class actions or proceedings brought by
governmental and regulatory agencies.  A description of other factors can be found in the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 20-F for the year ended December 31, 2015, and the Company’s other filings with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
Date: August 11, 2016
PETRÓLEO BRASILEIRO S.A--PETROBRAS
/S/  Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Ivan de Souza Monteiro
Chief Financial Officer and Investor Relations Officer
By:
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This press release may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (Securities
Act), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (Exchange Act) that are not based on historical facts and are not
assurances of future results.  These forward-looking statements are based on management's current view and estimates of future economic
circumstances, industry conditions, company performance and financial results. The words "anticipates", "believes", "estimates", "expects", "plans"
and similar expressions, as they relate to the company, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Statements regarding the declaration or
payment of dividends, the implementation of principal operating and financing strategies and capital expenditure plans, the direction of future
operations and the factors or trends affecting financial condition, liquidity or results of operations are examples of forward-looking statements. Such
statements reflect the current views of management and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. There is no guarantee that the
expected events, trends or results will actually occur. The statements are based on many assumptions and factors, including general economic and
market conditions, industry conditions, and operating factors. Any changes in such assumptions or factors could cause actual results to differ
materially from current expectations.  
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement, and you should not place reliance on any
forward-looking statement contained in this press release. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information or future events or for any other reason.