
S-3/A 1 d169735ds3a.htm AMENDMENT NO. 2 TO FORM S-3 Amendment No. 2 to Form S-3
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 3, 2016
Registration No. 333-211189
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
Pre-Effective Amendment No. 2
to
FORM S-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Under
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
NUVERRA ENVIRONMENTAL SOLUTIONS, INC.
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
Delaware
(State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization)
26-0287117
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
14624 N. Scottsdale Rd., Suite 300
Scottsdale, Arizona 85254
(602) 903-7802
(Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, including Area Code, of Registrant’s Principal
Executive Offices
Joseph M. Crabb
Executive Vice President & Chief Legal Officer
Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc.
14624 N. Scottsdale Rd., Suite 300
Scottsdale, Arizona 85254
(602) 903-7802
(Name, Address, Including Zip Code, and Telephone Number, including Area Code, of Agent for Service)
Copy to:
Matthew M. Holman
Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP
1 E. Washington Street, Suite 2700
Phoenix, Arizona 85004
(602) 528-4000
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: From time to time after the effectiveness of the
registration statement.
If the only securities being registered on this form are being offered pursuant to dividend or interest reinvestment plans,
please check the following box.  ¨
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to
Rule  415  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended  (the  “Securities  Act”),  other  than  securities  offered  only  in
connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, check the following box.  x
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act,
please  check  the  following  box  and  list  the  Securities  Act  registration  statement  number  of  the  earlier  effective
registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following
box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same
offering.  ¨
If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective amendment thereto that
shall become effective upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the
following box.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to General Instruction I.D. filed to register additional securities
or additional classes of securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or
a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting
company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  ¨
Non-accelerated filer
¨
Accelerated filer
x
Smaller reporting company ¨
Non-accelerated filer
¨
Smaller reporting company
¨
Calculation of Registration Fee
Title of Each Class of
Amount
to be
Securities to be Registered
Registered (1)
Proposed
Maximum
Offering Price
Per Share (2)
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Amount of
Offering Price (2)
Registration Fee
20,575,741
$0.315
$156.90 (4)
$1,558,104.03
Common Stock, $0.001 par value per share,
underlying warrants (3)
 
 
(1) Pursuant  to  Rule  416  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended  (the  “Securities  Act”),  this  registration
statement also covers an indeterminate number of additional shares as may be issued as a result of adjustments
by reason of any stock split, stock dividend, or similar transaction. In accordance with Rule 416, this registration
statement also covers additional shares to be issued pursuant to anti-dilution adjustments under the applicable
warrant agreements following the consummation of a common stock rights offering by the registrant. On May 26,
2016,  the  Company  consummated  a  debt–for–equity  exchange  of  $31.4  million  principal  amount  of  notes  for
98,234,375  shares  of  common  stock,  which  triggered  anti-dilution  adjustments  under  the  applicable  warrant
agreements. After giving effect to the adjustments related to such debt-for-equity exchange, 20,575,741 shares of
common  stock  are  underlying  the  outstanding  warrants  issued  to  the  selling  stockholders,  which  shares  of
common  stock  are  being  registered  under  this  registration  statement.  Pursuant  to  Rule  416,  no  additional
registration fee is required following such adjustment.
(2) Calculated pursuant to Rule 457(c) under the Securities Act based on the average of high and low sale prices of
the common stock, as quoted on the OTCQB U.S. Market on May 2, 2016, which is a date within five business
days of the filing of this registration statement.
(3) Represents  shares  of  common  stock  underlying  outstanding  warrants  issued  to  the  selling  stockholders  on
August 1, 2016.
(4) Previously paid on May 6, 2016.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay
its  effective  date  until  the  Registrant  shall  file  a  further  amendment  which  specifically  states  that  this
Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act
or until this Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to
said Section 8(a), may determine.
PROSPECTUS
(Subject to Completion Dated August 3, 2016)
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. The selling stockholders may not
sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is
effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting any offer to buy these
securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc.
20,575,741 shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of outstanding warrants
This prospectus relates to (a) the issuance of up to a total of 20,575,741 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001
per  share,  that  may  be  issued  upon  the  exercise  of  outstanding  warrants  and  (b)  the  disposition  of  up  to  a  total  of
20,575,741 shares of our common stock that may be offered from time to time by the selling stockholders listed on
page 15 or their transferees. The shares being offered by this prospectus consist of up to 20,575,741 shares issuable
upon the exercise of outstanding warrants held by the selling stockholders.
This prospectus also covers any additional shares of common stock that may become issuable upon any anti-dilution
adjustment pursuant to the terms of the above-described warrants by reason of stock splits, stock dividends, or similar
events. The foregoing warrants were acquired by the selling stockholders in connection with restructuring transactions
completed on April 15, 2016.
Each warrant is exercisable at any time, from time to time, until April 15, 2026, the tenth anniversary of the date of
issuance. We will receive no proceeds from the disposition of shares of our common stock by the selling stockholders.
We will receive proceeds of $0.01 per share from the exercise of any of the warrants, except to the extent that any such
warrants are exercised on a cashless basis.
For a description of the plan of distribution of the shares, please see page 15 of this prospectus.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTCQB U.S. Market under the symbol “NESC.” The closing price of our common
stock on August 1, 2016 was $0.26 per share.
Investing  in  our  securities  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk.  You  should  carefully  review  the  risks  and
uncertainties described under the heading “Risk Factors” beginning on page 8 of this prospectus and in any
other document incorporated by reference herein or therein, before you make an investment in our securities.
Neither  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  nor  any  state  securities  commission  has  approved  or
disapproved  of  these  securities  or  passed  upon  the  adequacy  or  accuracy  of  this  prospectus.  Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of the prospectus is             , 2016.
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
THE OFFERING
RISK FACTORS
USE OF PROCEEDS
PRINCIPAL STOCKHOLDERS
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
1
   2
   5
   7
   8
   11
   11
   14
   15
   16
   18
   18
   18
   18
This  prospectus  is  part  of  a  registration  statement  that  we  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the
“SEC”). As permitted by the rules and regulations of the SEC, the registration statement filed by us includes additional
information not contained in this prospectus. You may read the registration statement and the other reports we file with
the SEC at the SEC’s website or its offices described under the heading “Where You Can Find More Information” in this
prospectus.
This prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference in this prospectus include important information about us
and the securities being offered. You should rely only on this prospectus and the information incorporated or deemed to
be incorporated by reference in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with information that is
in addition to or different from that contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. If anyone provides you with
different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. This prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make such offer or
solicitation in such jurisdiction. You should not assume that the information contained or incorporated by reference in
this prospectus is accurate as of any date other than as of the date of this prospectus, or in the case of the documents
incorporated  by  reference,  the  date  of  such  documents  regardless  of  the  time  of  delivery  of  this  prospectus  or  any
issuance of our shares of common stock. Our business, financial condition, liquidity, results of operations and prospects
may have changed since those dates.
We further note that the representations, warranties and covenants made by us in any agreement that is filed as an
exhibit to any document that is incorporated by reference in this prospectus were made solely for the benefit of the
parties  to  such  agreement,  including,  in  some  cases,  for  the  purpose  of  allocating  risk  among  the  parties  to  such
agreements,  and  should  not  be  deemed  to  be  a  representation,  warranty  or  covenant  to  you.  Moreover,  such
representations,  warranties  or  covenants  were  accurate  only  as  of  the  date  when  made.  Accordingly,  such
representations, warranties and covenants should not be relied on as accurately representing the current state of our
affairs.
Unless the context requires otherwise, (i) all references in this prospectus to “Nuverra,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” “us”
or “Nuverra Environmental Solutions” refer to Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc. and its subsidiaries, and (ii) all
references in this prospectus to “warrants” refer to the outstanding warrants issued on April 15, 2016, in connection with
the restructuring transactions described herein.
1
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This  prospectus,  including  any  information  incorporated  by  reference  herein,  contains  certain  “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities
Act”), and Section 21E of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), that
involve many risks and uncertainties. These statements relate to our expectations for future events and time periods. All
statements  other  than  statements  of  historical  fact  are  statements  that  could  be  deemed  to  be  forward-looking
statements, including, but not limited to, statements regarding:
•
•
•
•
future financial performance and growth targets or expectations;
market and industry trends and developments, including the current decline in oil and natural gas prices;
the potential benefits of our completed and any future merger, acquisition, disposition, restructuring, and
financing transactions;
the expected timing for completion of the restructuring transactions described herein and in our other
filings with the SEC;
•
the expected effect of the restructuring transactions; and
•
the expected timing for completing the refinancing of our asset-based revolving credit facility.
You  can  identify  these  and  other  forward-looking  statements  by  the  use  of  words  such  as  “anticipates,”  “expects,”
“intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “may,” “might,” “will,” “should,” “would,” “could,” “potential,”
“future,” “continue,” “ongoing,” “forecast,” “project,” “target” or similar expressions, and variations or negatives of these
words.
These forward-looking statements are based on information available to us as of the date of this prospectus and our
current expectations, forecasts and assumptions, and involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, forward-
looking statements should not be relied upon as representing our views as of any subsequent date. Future performance
cannot be ensured, and actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. Some factors
that could cause actual results to differ include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
failure  to  complete  all  aspects  of  our  restructuring  transactions,  including  the  rights  offering  and
implementation of the management incentive plan;
failure to refinance our indebtedness under our asset-based revolving credit facility;
financial results that may be volatile and may not reflect historical trends due to, among other things,
changes  in  commodity  prices  or  general  market  conditions,  acquisition  and  disposition  activities,
fluctuations  in  consumer  trends,  pricing  pressures,  changes  in  raw  material  or  labor  prices  or  rates
related to our business and changing regulations or political developments in the markets in which we
operate;
risks  associated  with  our  indebtedness,  including  our  ability  to  manage  our  liquidity  needs  and  to
comply with covenants under our credit facilities, including the indentures governing our notes;
risks  associated  with  our  capital  structure,  including  our  ability  to  refinance  or  restructure  our
indebtedness to access necessary funding under our existing or future credit facilities and to generate
sufficient operating cash flow to meet our debt service obligations;
changes  in  customer  drilling,  completion  and  production  activities  and  capital  expenditure  plans,
including impacts due to low oil and/or natural gas prices or the economic or regulatory environment;
difficulties in identifying and completing acquisitions and divestitures, and differences in the type and
availability of consideration or financing for such acquisitions and divestitures;
difficulties in completing any refinancing or restructuring transactions;
2
difficulties in successfully executing our growth initiatives, including difficulties in permitting, financing
and  constructing  pipelines  and  waste  treatment  assets  and  in  structuring  economically  viable
agreements with potential customers, joint venture partners, financing sources and other parties;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
our ability to attract, motivate and retain key executives and qualified employees in key areas of our
business;
fluctuations in prices, transportation costs and demand for commodities such as oil and natural gas;
risks associated with the operation, construction and development of saltwater disposal wells, solids
and liquids treatment assets, landfills and pipelines, including access to additional locations and rights-
of-way,  unscheduled  delays  or  inefficiencies  and  reductions  in  volume  due  to  micro-  and  macro-
economic factors or the availability of less expensive alternatives;
risks associated with our ability to collect outstanding receivables as a result of liquidity constraints on
our customers resulting from low oil and/or natural gas prices;
the availability of less favorable credit and payment terms due to the downturn in our industry and our
financial condition, including more stringent or costly payment terms from our vendors and additional
requirements  from  sureties  to  collateralize  our  performance  bonds  with  letters  of  credit,  which  may
further constrain our liquidity and reduce availability under our revolving credit facility;
risks associated with new technologies and the impact on our business;
the  effects  of  competition  in  the  markets  in  which  we  operate,  including  the  adverse  impact  of
competitive  product  announcements  or  new  entrants  into  our  markets  and  transfers  of  resources  by
competitors into our markets;
changes in economic conditions in the markets in which we operate or in the world generally, including
as a result of political uncertainty;
reduced  demand  for  our  services  due  to  regulatory  or  other  influences  related  to  extraction  methods
such as hydraulic fracturing, shifts in production among shale areas in which we operate or into shale
areas in which we do not currently have operations or the loss of key customers;
the impact of changes in laws and regulation on waste management and disposal activities, including
those  impacting  the  delivery,  storage,  collection,  transportation  treatment  and  disposal  of  waste
products, as well as the use or reuse of recycled or treated products or byproducts;
control of costs and expenses;
present and possible future claims, litigation or enforcement actions or investigations;
natural disasters, such as hurricanes, earthquakes and floods, or acts of terrorism, or extreme weather
•
natural disasters, such as hurricanes, earthquakes and floods, or acts of terrorism, or extreme weather
conditions, that may impact our corporate headquarters, assets, including wells or pipelines, distribution
channels, or which otherwise disrupt our or our customers’ operations or the markets we serve;
•
the threat or occurrence of international armed conflict;
3
•
•
the unknown future impact on our business from legislation and governmental rulemaking, including the
Affordable Care Act, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the rules to
be promulgated thereunder;
risks  involving  developments  in  environmental  or  other  governmental  laws  and  regulations  in  the
markets in which we operate and our ability to effectively respond to those developments including laws
and regulations relating to oil and natural gas extraction businesses, particularly relating to water usage,
and the disposal, transportation and treatment of liquid and solid wastes; and
•
other risks identified in this prospectus or referenced from time to time in our filings with the SEC.
You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of
this prospectus. Except as required by law, we do not undertake any obligation to update or release any revisions to
these forward-looking statements to reflect any events or circumstances, whether as a result of new information, future
events, changes in assumptions or otherwise, after the date hereof.
4
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this prospectus. This summary does not contain all of the
information you should consider before investing in our common stock. You should read the entire prospectus carefully,
including the section describing the risks of investing in our common stock under the caption “Risk Factors,” and the
documents incorporated by reference in the section entitled “Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference” before
making an investment decision. Some of the statements in  this  summary  constitute  forward-looking  statements.  For
more information, please see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Our Company
Nuverra  is  a  leading  provider  of  comprehensive,  full-cycle  environmental  solutions  to  customers  focused  on  the
exploration, development, and ongoing production of oil and natural gas from shale formations in the United States. We
provide  one-stop,  total  environmental  solutions,  including  delivery,  collection,  treatment,  recycling,  and  disposal  of
water, wastewater, waste fluids, hydrocarbons, and restricted solids that are part of the drilling, completion, and ongoing
production of shale oil and natural gas.
To  meet  our  customers’  environmental  needs,  we  utilize  a  broad  array  of  assets  to  provide  comprehensive
environmental solutions. Our logistics assets include trucks and trailers, temporary and permanent pipelines, temporary
and permanent storage facilities, ancillary rental equipment, treatment and processing facilities, and liquid and solid
waste  disposal  sites.  We  provide  a  suite  of  solutions  to  customers  who  demand  environmental  compliance  and
accountability from their service providers.
We  currently  operate  in  select  shale  areas  in  the  United  States,  including  the  predominantly  oil-rich  shale  areas
consisting of the Bakken, Eagle Ford, and Permian Shale areas and the predominantly gas-rich Haynesville, Marcellus,
and Utica areas. Our business serves customers seeking fresh water acquisition, temporary water transmission and
storage, transportation, treatment, recycling or disposal of liquid wastes, such as flowback and produced brine water,
and solid wastes such as drill cuttings, and management of other environmental products in connection with shale oil
and natural gas drilling completion and production operations. Additionally, we rent equipment to customers, including
providing for delivery and pickup.
Our business is divided into three operating divisions: (1) the Northeast division comprising the Marcellus and Utica
Shale areas, (2) the Southern division comprising the Haynesville, Eagle Ford, and Permian Basin Shale areas and
(3) the Rocky Mountain division comprising the Bakken Shale area.
General Company Information
Headquartered in Scottsdale, Arizona, Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware on May 29,
2007 as “Heckmann Corporation.” On May 16, 2013, we changed our name to Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc.
Our  address 
is
http://www.nuverra.com. The content of our website is not a part of this prospectus.
is  14624  N.  Scottsdale  Road,  Suite  300,  Scottsdale,  Arizona  85254,  and  our  website
Recent Developments – Restructuring Transactions
Due to the difficult macro environment and the corresponding impact of the prolonged depression in oil and natural gas
prices that has continued to negatively affect us and others in our industry, we have experienced a decline in demand
and  pricing  for  our  services.  These  factors,  coupled  with  our  large  outstanding  debt  service  obligations,  have
diminished our cash position and capital resources and raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going
concern. In order to address short- and long-term liquidity needs, we undertook a strategic review and assessment of
our business and operations. We divested our industrial solutions business when we sold Thermo Fluids Inc. in the first
half of 2015, in order to focus exclusively on our core shale environmental solutions business. Further, we sought to
maximize  liquidity  by  implementing  various  cost-management  initiatives,  which  included  limiting  our  capital
expenditures to only those deemed critical to our ongoing operations and those necessary to support our key growth
initiatives. In addition, we offset the cash impact of these expenditures by selling underutilized or non-core assets.
5
The worsening market environment and the continued decline in commodity prices have negatively affected our results
from operations, financial position and market prices for our securities, including our common stock. On January 19,
2016, the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) notified us that we were not in compliance with the continued listing
standard set forth in Section 802.01B of the NYSE Listed Company Manual due to our failure to maintain an average
global  market  capitalization  of  at  least  $15.0  million  over  a  consecutive  30-day  trading  period.  As  such,  the  NYSE
informed us that trading of our common stock would be suspended before the opening of trading on January 20, 2016,
and that it initiated delisting procedures with respect to our common stock. Our common stock began trading on the
OTCQB U.S. Market on January 20, 2016. On February 3, 2016, the NYSE filed a Form 25-NSE with the SEC, notifying
the SEC of our removal from listing and registration on the NYSE.
In the first quarter of 2016, the lenders under our asset-based revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) completed
their  periodic  redetermination  of  the  orderly  liquidation  values  of  our  eligible  machinery  and  equipment.  The
redetermination resulted in an approximately $21 million decline in our borrowing base and availability under the Credit
Facility, which resulted in further tightening of our liquidity. While we were, and remain, in compliance with our existing
debt arrangements, we recognized that absent an improvement in commodity prices or a reduction in our indebtedness
and cash interest expense, we may not be able to continue to make scheduled payments under our debt obligations,
and in such event may need to seek relief under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
In response to our financial results and concerns about short- and long-term liquidity, we reviewed various options to
restructure  our  balance  sheet  to  improve  our  overall  capital  structure.  As  a  result,  our  Board  of  Directors,  with
assistance from our advisors, developed the Restructuring (as defined herein), intended to improve liquidity, defer cash
interest expense, and preserve value for holders of our common stock.
On March 11, 2016, we entered into a Restructuring and Support Agreement (the “Restructuring Support Agreement”)
with holders of more than 80% (the “Supporting Holders”) of our 9.875% Senior Notes due 2018 (the “2018 Notes”) to
implement a proposed debt restructuring and recapitalization plan (the “Restructuring”).
In connection with the Restructuring, we consummated the following financing transactions on or before April 15, 2016:
•   Amendment of the Credit Facility to (i) reduce the commitment from $125 million to $100 million, (ii) amend certain
rates  and  covenants,  and  (iii)  permit  the  transactions  contemplated  by  the  Restructuring,  among  other
amendments.
•   Pursuant to an exchange offer and consent solicitation (the “Exchange Offer”), the issuance to tendering holders of
the 2018 Notes of (i) $327,221,000 aggregate principal amount of new Second-Lien Notes due 2021 (the “2021
Notes”) under a new indenture to those holders electing to exchange their 2018 Notes for 2021 Notes, (ii) $908,000
in shares of common stock at a conversion price per shares of $0.32 (the “Conversion Price”), which resulted in the
issuance  of  2,837,500  shares  of  common  stock  (the  “Exchange  Offer  Shares”)  to  those  holders  electing  to
exchange their 2018 Notes for our common stock, and (iii) 10-year penny warrants (the “Exchange Warrants”) to
purchase 10% of the outstanding shares of common stock, on a fully diluted basis after taking into account the
common stock to be issued in connection with the Johnsrud Equity Conversion (as defined herein) and the Rights
Offering (as defined herein), and the issuance of the Exchange Offer Shares, subject only to dilution by the shares
issued or to be issued in connection with a new management incentive plan we expect to implement.
•   Entered into a new last out first lien term loan in the aggregate amount of $24.0 million (the “Term Loan”) and in
connection  therewith  we  issued  10-year  penny  warrants  to  the  lenders  under  the  Term  Loan  (the  “Term  Loan
Warrants” and, together with the Exchange Warrants, the “warrants”) to purchase 5% of the outstanding shares of
common stock, on a fully diluted basis after taking into account the common stock to be issued in connection with
the Johnsrud Equity Conversion (as defined herein) and the Rights Offering (as defined herein), and the issuance
of the Exchange Offer Shares, subject only to dilution by the shares issued or to be issued in connection with a
new management incentive plan we expect to implement.
In connection with the Restructuring, we consummated the following financing transaction on May 26, 2016:
•   Mark D. Johnsrud was issued 98,234,375 shares of common stock at the Conversion Price in exchange for the
approximately $31.4 million principal amount of 2018 Notes owned by an entity controlled by Mr. Johnsrud, which
were irrevocably tendered to the Company on April 15, 2016 (the “Johnsrud Equity Conversion”).
6
In connection with the Restructuring, we also intend to consummate the following financing transaction in the second
half of 2016:
•   An equity rights offering (the “Rights Offering”) in which each holder of common stock will be granted subscription
rights to purchase for cash its pro rata shares of $5.0 million of additional common stock at a 20% discount to the
Conversion Price (the “Offering Price”). The Rights Offering will be fully backstopped by Mark D. Johnsrud, our
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, pursuant to which Mr. Johnsrud will receive a backstop fee of 5% payable in
the form of additional common stock issued at the Conversion Price. In order to secure his backstop obligations,
Mr. Johnsrud deposited $5.0 million (the “Escrowed Funds”) into a third party escrow account on April 15, 2016.
The  proceeds  from  the  Rights  Offering  will  be  applied  to  amounts  outstanding  under  the  Credit  Facility,  which
amounts may be redrawn subject to the terms and conditions of the Credit Facility.
•   On  July  29,  2016,  Nuverra  Environmental  Solutions,  Inc.  (the  “Company”)  entered  into  a  First  Amendment  to
Escrow Agreement (the “Escrow Agreement Amendment”) by and among Mr. Johnsrud, the Company, and U.S.
Bank  National  Association,  a  national  banking  association,  pursuant  to  which  the  Company  and  Mr.  Johnsrud
agreed to an irrevocable early release of the Escrowed Funds, which was used to pay down the Company’s Credit
Facility. In exchange for the release of the Escrowed Funds, the Company deposited into escrow an aggregate of
20,312,500  shares  of  common  stock  (the  “Escrow  Shares”),  which  represents  the  shares  underlying  the
subscription rights and the backstop fee. Upon consummation of the Rights Offering, the number of Escrow Shares
disbursed to Mr. Johnsrud from the escrow account will be reduced by the aggregate number of shares of common
stock subscribed for in the Rights Offering and the corresponding number of shares of common stock underlying
the backstop fee payable to Mr. Johnsrud. Any Escrow Shares not disbursed to Mr. Johnsrud will be returned to the
Company. Upon consummation of the Rights Offering, the Company will refund to Mr. Johnsrud an amount equal
to the aggregate amount of gross proceeds raised from subscribing stockholders in the Rights Offering.
The Offering
20,575,741
20,575,741
151,150,101
Issuance  of  shares  of  common  stock  upon  the  exercise  of
the Exchange Warrants and the Term Loan Warrants
 
Resale of shares of common stock that will be issued upon
the exercise of the Exchange Warrants and the Term Loan
Warrants
 
Total shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of
August 1, 2016
 
Total  proceeds  raised  by  us  from  the  disposition  of  the
their
common  stock  by 
 
transferees
OTCQB U.S. Market symbol
  NESC
this
See  “Risk  Factors”  beginning  on  page  8  of 
Risk factors
prospectus  and 
for  a
discussion of factors you should carefully consider before
deciding to invest in our common stock.
We will receive no proceeds from the sale of the common
stock issuable upon exercise of any warrants.
the  selling  stockholders  or
incorporated  by
reference
7
RISK FACTORS
This section describes material risks to our businesses that currently are known to us. You should carefully consider all
of  the  information  in  this  prospectus  and  each  of  the  risks  described  below,  together  with  the  other  information
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, including the risk factors included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2015, as amended, Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31,
2016,  and  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  SEC  on  July  13,  2016.  Any  of  the  following  risks  and  those
incorporated  by  reference  could  materially  and  adversely  affect  our  business,  financial  condition  and  results  of
operations  and  the  actual  outcome  of  matters  as  to  which  forward-looking  statements  are  made  in  this  prospectus.
While we believe we have identified and discussed the material risks affecting our business, there may be additional
risks  and  uncertainties  that  we  do  not  currently  know  or  that  we  do  not  currently  believe  to  be  material  that  may
adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations in the future.
Risks Related To Our Common Stock
We were delisted from the New York Stock Exchange, and there is a limited trading volume for our common
stock on the OTCQB.
In January 2016, our common stock was delisted from the NYSE. Our common stock currently trades on the OTCQB
U.S. Market (the “OTCQB”) under the symbol NESC, and there is a limited trading volume for our common stock. As a
result, relatively small trades of our common stock may have a significant impact on the price of our common stock and,
therefore, may contribute to the price volatility of our common stock. Because of limited trading volume in our common
stock and the price volatility of our common stock, you may be unable to sell your shares of common stock when you
desire or at the price you desire. The inability to sell your shares in a declining market because of such illiquidity or at a
price you desire may substantially increase your risk of loss.
The delisting of our common stock from the NYSE could adversely affect institutional investor interest in holding or
acquiring our common stock and otherwise reduce the number of investors willing to hold or acquire our common stock.
This  could  negatively  affect  our  ability  to  raise  capital  necessary  to  maintain  operations  and  service  our  debt.  In
addition, the delisting of our common stock from the NYSE may cause a loss of confidence among our employees and
customers and otherwise negatively affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
We do not now, and are not expected to in the foreseeable future, meet the listing standards of the NYSE or any other
national securities exchange. We presently anticipate that our common stock will continue to be quoted on the OTCQB.
As a result of the limited trading volume for our common stock, investors may be unable to sell shares of common stock
at  the  times  or  in  the  quantities  desired  and,  therefore,  may  be  required  to  hold  some  or  all  of  their  shares  for  an
indefinite period of time.
Our stock price may be volatile, which could result in substantial losses for investors in our securities.
The stock markets have experienced extreme volatility that has often been unrelated to the operating performance of
particular companies. These broad market fluctuations may adversely affect the trading price of our common stock. The
market price of our common stock may also fluctuate significantly in response to the following factors, some of which
are beyond our control:
•   variations in our quarterly operating results and changes in our liquidity position;
•   changes in securities analysts’ estimates of our financial performance;
•   inaccurate or negative comments about us on social networking websites or other media channels;
•   changes in market valuations of similar companies;
•   announcements  by  us  or  our  competitors  of  significant  contracts,  acquisitions,  strategic  partnerships,  joint
ventures, capital commitments, new products or product enhancements, as well as our or our competitors’
success or failure in successfully executing such matters;
•   changes in the price of oil and natural gas;
•   loss of a major customer or failure to complete significant transactions; and
•   additions or departures of key personnel.
8
From the date of our initial public offering until our common stock was delisted in January 2016, our common stock
traded on the NYSE. The trading price of our common stock has ranged from a high of $104.40 on September 3, 2008,
to  a  low  of  $0.13  on  January  29,  2016.  The  last  reported  price  of  our  common  stock  on  the  OTCQB  on  August  1,
2016, was $0.26 per share.
We may issue a substantial number of shares of our common stock in the future and stockholders may be
adversely affected by the issuance of those shares.
We may raise additional capital or refinance or restructure our existing debt by issuing shares of common stock, or other
securities convertible into common stock, which will increase the number of shares of common stock outstanding and
may result in substantial dilution in the equity interest of our current stockholders and may adversely affect the market
price of our common stock. We have previously issued 1.8 million shares of common stock at a total price of $80.1
million under a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC and we could seek to issue new debt, equity and
hybrid securities in the future. In addition, we have issued shares of our common stock pursuant to private placement
exemptions from Securities Act registration requirements, and may do so in connection with financings, acquisitions,
the settlement of litigation and other strategic transactions in the future. The issuance, and the resale or potential resale,
of shares of our common stock could adversely affect the market price of our common stock and could be dilutive to our
stockholders.
We currently do not intend to pay any dividends on our common stock.
We  currently  do  not  intend  to  pay  any  dividends  on  our  common  stock,  and  restrictions  and  covenants  in  our  debt
agreements may prohibit us from paying dividends now or in the future. While we may declare dividends at some point
in  the  future,  subject  to  compliance  with  such  restrictions  and  covenants,  we  cannot  assure  you  that  you  will  ever
receive cash dividends as a result of ownership of our common stock and any gains from investment in our common
stock may only come from increases in the market price of our common stock, if any.
There is no assurance that an active public trading market in our common stock will be available.
There can be no assurance that an active public trading market for our common stock will be available or sustained. If
for any reason an active public trading market does not continue, purchasers of the shares of our common stock may
have difficulty in selling their securities should they desire to do so and the price of our common stock may decline.
The exercise of the warrants may result in substantial dilution and may depress the market price of our
common stock.
As of August 1, 2016, we had issued and outstanding 151,150,101 shares of common stock and also (i) 886,095 shares
of our common stock issuable under employee benefit plans, (ii) the Exchange Warrants exercisable for 15,187,261
shares of our common stock at an exercise price equal to $0.01 per share, and (iii) the Term Loan Warrants exercisable
for  7,605,084  shares  of  our  common  stock  at  an  exercise  price  of  $0.01  per  share.  If  the  shares  issuable  under
employee benefit plans are issued or if the shares issuable upon exercise of the warrants are issued, our common
stockholders may experience substantial dilution and the market price of our shares of common stock could decline.
Further, the perception that such securities might be exercised could adversely affect the market price of our shares of
common stock. In addition, holders of the warrants are likely to exercise them when, in all likelihood, we could obtain
additional capital on terms more favorable to us than those provided by the warrants. Further, during the time that the
foregoing securities are outstanding, they may adversely affect the terms on which we could obtain additional capital.
Future sales by us or our existing stockholders could depress the market price of our common stock.
If we or our existing stockholders sell a large number of shares of our common stock, the market price of our common
stock could decline significantly. Further, even the perception in the public market that we or our existing stockholders
might sell shares of common stock could depress the market price of the common stock.
9
We are subject to anti-takeover effects of certain charter and bylaw provisions and Delaware law, as well as of
our substantial insider ownership.
Provisions  of  our  certificate  of  incorporation  and  bylaws,  each  as  amended  and  restated,  and  Delaware  law  may
discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition that stockholders may consider favorable, including transactions in
which you might otherwise receive a premium for your shares. In addition, these provisions may frustrate or prevent any
attempts by our stockholders to replace or remove our management and board of directors. These provisions include:
•   authorizing the issuance of “blank check” preferred stock without any need for action by stockholders;
•   establishing a classified board of directors, so that only approximately one-third of our directors are elected
each year;
•   providing our board of directors with the ability to set the number of directors and to fill vacancies on the board
of directors occurring between stockholder meetings;
•   providing that directors may only be removed for “cause” and only by the affirmative vote of the holders of at
least a majority in voting power of our issued and outstanding capital stock; and
•   limiting the ability of our stockholders to call special meetings.
We are also subject to provisions of the Delaware corporation law that, in general, prohibit any business combination
with a beneficial owner of 15% or more of our common stock for three years following the date the beneficial owner
acquired at least 15% of our stock, unless various conditions are met, such as approval of the transaction by our board
of directors. Together, these charter and statutory provisions could make the removal of management more difficult and
may discourage transactions that otherwise could involve payment of a premium over prevailing market prices for our
common stock.
The existence of the foregoing provisions and anti-takeover measures, as well as the significant amount of common
stock beneficially owned by our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman, Mr. Johnsrud, could limit the price that investors
might be willing to pay in the future for shares of our common stock. They could also deter potential acquirers of our
company, thereby reducing the likelihood that you could receive a premium for your common stock in an acquisition.
Risks Related to Our Company and Our Indebtedness
Our asset-based revolving credit facility (“Credit Facility”) contains a covenant requiring us to refinance the
Credit Facility in full on or before September 30, 2016 and has a maturity date of December 31, 2016. There can
be no assurances that we will be able to timely refinance the Credit Facility, that any such refinancing would be
available to us on attractive or acceptable terms, or that we will be able to otherwise obtain funds by selling
assets or raising equity to repay the Credit Facility when due. Failure to timely refinance the Credit Facility, or
obtain  a  waiver  thereof,  or  repay  the  Credit  Facility  when  due,  may  cause  us  to  seek  to  restructure  under
Chapter  11  of  the  United  States  Bankruptcy  Code  (the  “Bankruptcy  Code”),  which  will  adversely  affect  our
financial condition and impair potential recoveries by creditors, including the lenders under our Credit Facility
and the Term Loan and holders of our 2018 Notes and 2021 Notes, and by holders of our common stock.
Our Credit Facility contains a covenant requiring us to refinance the Credit Facility in full on or before September 30,
2016 and has a maturity date of December 31, 2016. There can be no assurances that we will be able to refinance the
Credit Facility by September 30, 2016 or that any such refinancing would be available to us on attractive or acceptable
terms. Any refinancing of the Credit Facility could be at higher interest rates and may require us to comply with more
onerous  covenants,  which  could  further  restrict  our  business  operations.  If  we  fail  to  comply  with  our  refinancing
covenant,  we  would  request  a  waiver  from  the  lenders  or  may  be  required  to  repay  the  outstanding  balance  of  the
Credit Facility. Failure to obtain a waiver or cure the default through repayment of the facility would create an event of
cross default under our other credit facilities and indentures, including the Term Loan and the Indentures governing the
2018 Notes and 2021 Notes. There can be no assurance that the lenders under the Credit Facility will grant a waiver of
the covenant default or that the lenders under the Term Loan will grant a waiver of, or that the holders of our 2018 Notes
and 2021 Notes will consent to, any cross default, and we currently do not have sufficient liquidity, including cash on
hand, to repay the outstanding balance of the Credit Facility or our other indebtedness.
Even if a waiver of the refinancing covenant can be obtained, we do not have sufficient liquidity, including cash on
hand, to repay the outstanding balance of the Credit Facility as required on September 30, 2016 or upon maturity on
December 31, 2016. If we are unable to refinance our Credit Facility, we may need to dispose of assets or operations or
issue  equity  to  obtain  necessary  funds  to  repay  the  outstanding  balance  of  the  Credit  Facility.  In  the  event  we  are
required to dispose of material assets or operations in order to repay our Credit Facility, we cannot provide assurance
that we could effect these actions on a timely basis, on commercially reasonable terms or at all, or that these actions
would be sufficient to meet our obligations. Any issuance of equity in connection with repayment of our Credit Facility
could be materially dilutive to existing stockholders. We do  not  know  whether  we  will  be  able  to  take  any  of  these
actions, if necessary, on a timely basis or on terms satisfactory to us or at all.
In the event that we are unable to timely refinance the Credit Facility, or obtain a waiver thereof, or repay the Credit
Facility when due, we may need to restructure under the Bankruptcy Code, which will adversely affect our financial
condition  and  impair  potential  recoveries  by  creditors,  including  the  lenders  under  our  Credit  Facility  and  the  Term
Loan, holders of our 2018 Notes and 2021 Notes, and by holders of our common stock.
10
Our liquidity continues to decline due to deteriorating operating results and constraints imposed by our Credit
Facility. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient liquidity
to meet our obligations and operating needs.
The  substantial  and  extended  decline  in  oil  and  natural  gas  prices  has  resulted  in  significant  reductions  in  our
customers’ operating and capital expenditures. This extended downturn has resulted in a reduction in demand for our
services as well as lower prices and operating margins, and has adversely affected our financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows, resulting in a decline in liquidity to cover our operations.
In addition, recent amendments to our Credit Facility have further constrained our liquidity by reducing the maximum
revolver commitments and availability thereunder through the implementation of additional reserves and an availability
block and a reduction in availability attributable to eligible equipment. This has resulted in a material reduction in the
amount we can borrow under the Credit Facility. In addition, the administrative agent for our Credit Facility has the
periodic right to commission appraisals of the assets comprising our borrowing base. Recent appraisals have resulted
in a reduction of the borrowing base and have required us to repay a portion of the amount outstanding under the Credit
Facility in order to remain in compliance with applicable borrowing limitations. The administrative agent has the right to
undertake future periodic appraisals and there can be no assurance that we will have sufficient cash on hand or other
sources of liquidity to make any future repayments required as a result of such appraisals. These limitations under our
Credit Facility could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and financial condition as our ability to continue as
a  going  concern  is  dependent  upon  our  ability  to  generate  sufficient  liquidity  to  meet  our  obligations  and  operating
needs.
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any proceeds from the disposition of the shares of common stock by the selling stockholders or their
transferees.
PRINCIPAL STOCKHOLDERS
The  following  table  sets  forth  certain  information  known  to  the  Company  regarding  the  beneficial  ownership  of  its
common stock as of August 1, 2016 by (i) each director, (ii) each of our named executive officers, and (iii) all executive
officers and directors of the Company serving as of August 1, 2016, as a group.
11
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
Mark D. Johnsrud (1)
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer
Joseph M. Crabb (2)
Shares Beneficially Owned
Amount and
Nature of
Beneficial
Ownership
Percent of
Class
128,837,914
86.10%
Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer and Corporate
Secretary
Gregory J. Heinlein (3)
76,478
*
Former Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
W. Christopher Chisholm (4)
20,969
*
Former Executive Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer and
Interim Chief Financial Officer
William M. Austin (5)
Director
Edward A. Barkett (6)
Director
Tod C. Holmes (7)
Director
R. Dan Nelson (8)
Director
Alfred E. Osborne, Jr. (9)
Director
J. Danforth Quayle (10)
Director
Robert B. Simonds, Jr. (11)
Director
Shares owned by executive officers and directors as a group
21,126
61,579
89,504
70,946
76,729
103,175
93,125
139,664    
 
  
    
  129,591,209
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
86.60%
*
(1)
Less than 1% of shares outstanding
Includes  655,000  shares  held  by  JPJ  LP,  a  Delaware  limited  partnership  of  which  Badlands  Capital,  LLC,  a
Delaware limited liability company is the general partner; Mr. Johnsrud is the sole member of Badlands Capital,
LLC. Also includes 1,305 shares in Mr.  Johnsrud’s  401(k).  Also  includes  98,234,375  shares  held  by  Badlands
Development II, LLC, a North Dakota limited liability company, of which Mr. Johnsrud owns 100% of the units and
acts as its sole managing member. Also includes an aggregate of 20,312,500 shares of the Company’s common
stock deposited into escrow in exchange for an early release from escrow of Mr. Johnsrud’s $5.0 million backstop
obligation. See “Recent Developments — Restructuring Transactions” on page 7 for more information.
Includes 51,398 fully vested options and 1,565 shares in Mr. Crabb’s 401(k).
(2)
(3) All fully vested options were cancelled 90 days after Mr. Heinlein’s final day of employment pursuant to the terms
of the Company’s stock option plan.
(4) All fully vested options were cancelled 90 days after Mr. Chisholm’s final day of employment pursuant to the terms
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
of the Company’s stock option plan.
Includes  60,789  shares  of  restricted  stock  which  are  forfeitable  until  vested  (789  shares  scheduled  to  vest  on
11/13/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest on 11/10/16 and 11/10/2017).
Includes  64,735  shares  of  restricted  stock  which  are  forfeitable  until  vested  (4,735  shares  scheduled  to  vest
11/13/16,  30,000  shares  scheduled  to  vest  11/10/16  and  11/10/17)  and  10,000  shares  by  Mr.  Barkett  in  an
Individual Retirement Account.
Includes 61,973 shares of restricted stock which are forfeitable until vested (1,973 shares scheduled to vest on
11/13/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest on 11/10/16 and 11/10/17).
12
Includes 64,735 shares of restricted stock which are forfeitable until vested (4,735 shares scheduled to vest on
11/13/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest 11/10/16 and 11/10/17). Also includes 9,679 shares that are held of
record by the Nelson Family Revocable Trust.
Includes 64,735 shares of restricted stock which are forfeitable until vested (4,735 shares scheduled to vest on
11/13/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest on 11/10/16 and 11/10/17). Also includes 22,440 shares that are held of
record  by  the  Rahnasto  Osborne  Revocable  Trust  and  9,000  shares  that  are  held  of  record  by  Mr.  Osborne’s
Keogh Account.
(10) Includes 64,735 shares of restricted stock which are forfeitable until vested (4,735 shares scheduled to vest on
11/13/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest on 11/10/16 and 11/10/17). Also includes 21,615 shares that are held of
record by the James D. Quayle 2000 Irrevocable Trust and 2,500 shares that are held of record by the BTC Inc.
Retirement Trust.
(11) Includes 64,735 shares of restricted stock which are forfeitable until vested (4,735 shares scheduled to vest on
11/10/16, 30,000 shares scheduled to vest on 11/10/16 and 11/10/17). Also includes 10,554 shares that are held of
record by the Simonds Family Trust and 50,000 fully vested options.
The following table sets forth beneficial ownership information about persons or groups that own or have the right to
acquire more than 5% of our common stock, as of August 1, 2016, other than our directors and executive officers who
are listed in the table above, based on information contained in a Schedule 13G filed with the SEC with respect to
Ascribe Capital LLC, and information otherwise known to the Company with respect to Gates Capital Management, L.P.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
Ascribe Capital LLC (1)
Ascribe III Investments LLC
American Securities LLC
Common Stock
Amount and
Nature of
Beneficial
Ownership
Percent of
Class
299 Park Avenue, 34th Floor, New York, NY 10171
Gates Capital Management, L.P. (4)
10,640,522(2)(3)
6.58%
Gates Capital Management GP, LLC
Gates Capital Management, Inc.
Jeffrey L. Gates
1177 Ave. of Americas, 46th Floor New York, NY 10036
9,935,219(2)(3)
6.17%
(1) Ascribe  Capital  LLC  is  deemed  to  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  of  10,640,522  shares,  Ascribe  III
Investments  LLC  is  deemed  to  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  of  9,775,654  shares,  and  American
Securities  LLC  is  deemed  to  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  of  10,640,522  shares.  Additionally,
Michael G. Fisch, in his capacity as trustee of The Michael G. Fisch 2006 Revocable Trust, in its capacity as the
managing member of American Securities LLC, as the sole owner of Ascribe Capital LLC, may be deemed to have
shared  voting  and  investment  power  over  the  shares  held  by  Ascribe  II  Investments  LLC  and  Ascribe  III
Investments  LLC.  Michael  G.  Fisch  disclaims  beneficial  ownership  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  held  by
Ascribe II Investments LLC and Ascribe III Investments LLC, except to the extent of his pecuniary interest therein.
(2) Reflects shares of common stock the beneficial owner has the right to acquire upon exercise of warrants of which it
is the record owner.
(3) Following  consummation  of  the  Rights  Offering,  the  beneficial  owners  will  receive  an  additional  number  of
warrants to maintain their equity position prior to the issuance of the shares in the Rights Offering, pursuant to
certain anti-dilution adjustments under the applicable warrant agreements. Following consummation of the Rights
Offering,  Ascribe  Capital  LLC  and  Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.  will  be  issued  an  additional  number  of
warrants  such  that  the  shares  underlying  the  warrants  will  represent  7.52%  and  7.06%,  respectively,  of  the
Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock.
(4)
Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and
13
Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and
Jeffrey L. Gates are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of 9,935,219 shares.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
The  following  summary  describes  the  material  terms  of  our  common  stock.  This  discussion  does  not  purport  to  be
complete  and  is  qualified  in  its  entirety  by  reference  to  our  amended  and  restated  certificate  of  incorporation,  as
amended  (“Certificate  of  Incorporation”)  and  our  amended  and  restated  bylaws  (the  “Bylaws”)  and  the  applicable
provisions of the Delaware General Corporation Law.
Authorized and Outstanding Capital Stock
On May 20, 2016, we held a special meeting of stockholders to seek stockholder approval of an amendment to our
Certificate of Incorporation to provide for the authorization of three hundred million (300,000,000) additional shares of
common stock to consummate the Johnsrud Equity Conversion and the Rights Offering, in addition to potential future
issuances. Following the special meeting of stockholders, at which the stockholders approved the amendment to the
Certificate of Incorporation, the Company now has the authority to issue three hundred fifty-one million (351,000,000)
shares of capital stock, consisting of (i) three hundred fifty million (350,000,000) shares of common stock, par value
$0.001 per share (the “common stock”), and (ii) one million (1,000,000) shares of preferred stock, par value $0.001 per
share, of which 130,820,802 shares of common stock and no shares of preferred stock were issued and outstanding as
of August 1, 2016.
As of August 1, 2016, we had outstanding awards under our 2009 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended, consisting of
options to acquire 392,790 shares of common stock and 493,305 shares of restricted stock and restricted stock units.
Common Stock
Holders of common stock are entitled to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders. Our
holders of common stock do not have cumulative voting rights. Holders of common stock will be entitled to receive
ratably such dividends as may be declared by the board out of funds legally available therefor, which may be paid in
cash, property, or in shares of the Company’s capital stock. Upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company,
either voluntarily or involuntarily, the holders of common stock will be entitled to receive their ratable share of the net
assets of the Company legally available for distribution after payment of all debts and other liabilities. There are no
conversion, preemptive or other subscription rights and there are no sinking fund or redemption provisions applicable to
the common stock.
Dividends
We have no current plans to pay dividends on common stock in the future. Furthermore, the terms of the Notes, the
Term  Loan  and  the  Credit  Facility  may  restrict  our  ability  to  do  so,  and  we  expect  that,  if  any  of  our  existing  credit
facilities are refinanced, the amended credit agreements will have similar restrictions. Our other future indebtedness, if
any, may also restrict payment of dividends on common stock.
Limitation on Liability and Indemnification of Directors and Officers
Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws limit our directors’ and officers’ liability to the fullest extent permitted under
Delaware General Corporation Law. Specifically, our directors and officers will not be liable for monetary damages for
any breach of fiduciary duty by a director or officer, except for liability:
•   for any breach of the director’s or officer’s duty of loyalty to us or our stockholders;
•   for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law;
•   under Section 174 of the Delaware General Corporation Law;
14
•   for any transaction from which a director or officer derives an improper personal benefit; or
•   in connection with a proceeding that was not authorized or consented to by our board of directors.
If the Delaware General Corporation Law is amended to authorize corporate action further eliminating or limiting the
personal liability of directors or officers, then the liability of any of our directors or officers shall be eliminated or limited
to the fullest extent permitted by the Delaware General Corporation Law, as so amended.
Advance Notice Requirements for Stockholder Proposals and Director Nominations
Our Bylaws contain advance notice provisions that a stockholder must follow if it intends to bring business proposals or
director nominations, as applicable, before a meeting of stockholders. These provisions may preclude our stockholders
from bringing matters before its annual meeting of stockholders or from making nominations at its annual meeting of
stockholders.
Listing
Our common stock is currently quoted on the OTCQB under the ticker symbol “NESC.”
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
Shares of Common Stock Offered Hereby
The shares of common stock being offered by the selling stockholders are shares of common stock issuable upon the
exercise of outstanding warrants, which warrants and shares were issued by us in connection with the Restructuring.
For additional information regarding the warrants and shares of common stock, see the information set forth under the
caption “Prospectus Summary – Restructuring Transactions.”
This prospectus relates to the sale of up to 20,575,741 shares of the common stock for the selling stockholders named
in the table below. A total of 20,575,741 shares of the common stock are issuable to the selling stockholders upon the
exercise of warrants. We are registering the shares of common stock in order to permit the selling stockholders to offer
the shares for resale from time to time.
The table below lists the selling stockholders and other information regarding their beneficial ownership of our shares
of common stock. The information provided below with respect to the selling stockholders has been obtained from the
selling stockholders and is current as of August 1, 2016.
Because the selling stockholders may sell none, all or some portion of the shares of common stock owned by them, we
cannot estimate the number of shares of common stock that will be beneficially owned by the selling stockholders after
this offering. In addition, the selling stockholders may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of, at any time or from time to
time since the date on which the selling stockholders provided the information regarding the shares of common stock
owned  by  them,  all  or  a  portion  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  owned  by  them  in  transactions  exempt  from  the
registration requirements of the Securities Act.
Name of Selling Stockholder
Common Stock
Owned Before
the Offering (1)    
 
2,344,809    
  
ECF Value Fund, L.P. (3)
5,324,351    
ECF Value Fund II, L.P. (4)
  
ECF Value Fund International Master L.P. (5)  
2,266,059    
864,868    
  
Ascribe II Investments LLC (6)
Ascribe III Investments LLC (7)
  
9,775,654
Common Stock
Offered
2,344,809    
5,324,351    
2,266,059    
864,868    
9,775,654
15
Shares of
Shares of
Common Stock
Shares of
Percentage of
Common Stock
Owned After
the Offering (2)    
0    
0    
0    
0    
0
Owned After
the Offering
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0%
(1) Reflects  shares  of  common  stock  the  selling  stockholder  has  the  right  to  acquire  upon  exercise  of  warrants  of
Reflects  shares  of  common  stock  the  selling  stockholder  has  the  right  to  acquire  upon  exercise  of  warrants  of
which it is the record owner.
(2) Assumes selling stockholder fully exercises the warrants of which it is the record owner and sells all shares issued
upon exercise of the warrants.
(3) Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and
Jeffrey L. Gates are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of 2,344,809 shares held by ECF Value
Fund, L.P. Following the Rights Offering, ECF Value Fund, L.P. will be issued additional shares pursuant to anti-
dilution  adjustments,  of  which  Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates
Capital Management, Inc. and Jeffrey L. Gates will be deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power.
(4) Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and
Jeffrey L. Gates are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of 5,324,351 shares held by ECF Value
Fund II, L.P. Following the Rights Offering, ECF Value Fund II, L.P. will be issued additional shares pursuant to
anti-dilution adjustments, of which Gates Capital Management, L.P., Gates Capital Management GP, LLC, Gates
Capital Management, Inc. and Jeffrey L. Gates will be deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power.
(5) Gates  Capital  Management,  L.P.,  Gates  Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and
Jeffrey L. Gates are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of 2,266,059 shares held by ECF Value
Fund International Master, L.P. Following the Rights Offering, ECF Value Fund International Master, L.P. will be
issued additional shares pursuant to anti-dilution adjustments, of which Gates Capital Management, L.P., Gates
Capital  Management  GP,  LLC,  Gates  Capital  Management,  Inc.  and  Jeffrey  L.  Gates  will  be  deemed  to  have
shared voting and dispositive power.
(6) Ascribe Capital LLC and American Securities LLC are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of
864,868 shares held by Ascribe II Investments LLC. Additionally, Michael G. Fisch, in his capacity as trustee of
The Michael G. Fisch 2006 Revocable Trust, in its capacity as the managing member of American Securities LLC,
as  the  sole  owner  of  Ascribe  Capital  LLC,  may  be  deemed  to  have  shared  voting  and  investment
power over the shares held by Ascribe II Investments LLC. Following the Rights Offering, Ascribe II Investments
LLC will be issued additional shares pursuant to anti-dilution adjustments, of which Ascribe Capital LLC, American
Securities LLC and Michael G. Fisch will be deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power. Michael G.
Fisch disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares of common stock held by Ascribe II Investments LLC, except to
the extent of his pecuniary interest therein.
(7) Ascribe Capital LLC and American Securities LLC are deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power of
9,775,654 shares held by Ascribe III Investments LLC. Additionally, Michael G. Fisch, in his capacity as trustee of
The Michael G. Fisch 2006 Revocable Trust, in its capacity as the managing member of American Securities LLC,
as  the  sole  owner  of  Ascribe  Capital  LLC,  may  be  deemed  to  have  shared  voting  and  investment
power over the shares held by Ascribe III Investments LLC. Following the Rights Offering, Ascribe III Investments
LLC will be issued additional shares pursuant to anti-dilution adjustments, of which Ascribe Capital LLC, American
Securities LLC and Michael G. Fisch will be deemed to have shared voting and dispositive power. Michael G.
Fisch disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares of common stock held by Ascribe III Investments LLC, except to
the extent of his pecuniary interest therein.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each selling stockholder of our common stock and any of their pledges, assignees, and successors-in-interest may,
from time to time, sell any or all of their shares of common stock on the OTCQB or any other stock exchange, market, or
trading facility on which the shares are traded or in private transactions. These sales may be at fixed or negotiated
prices. A selling stockholder may use any one or more of the following methods when selling shares:
•
•
•
•
ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position and
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
privately negotiated transactions;
settlement of short sales entered into after the effective date of the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part;
broker-dealers may agree with the selling stockholders to sell a specified number of such shares at a
stipulated price per share;
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an options
exchange or otherwise;
a combination of any such methods of sale; or
any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
•
•
•
•
•
•
The selling stockholders may, from time to time, pledge or grant a security interest in some or all of the shares of our
common  stock  owned  by  them  and,  if  any  of  the  selling  stockholders  default  in  the  performance  of  their  secured
obligations, the pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell the shares of common stock, from time to time, under this
prospectus,  or  under  an  amendment  to  this  prospectus  under  Rule  424(b)(3)  or  other  applicable  provision  of  the
Securities Act amending the list of selling stockholders to include the pledgee, transferee or other successors in interest
as a selling stockholders under this prospectus. The selling stockholders also may transfer the shares of common stock
in  other  circumstances,  in  which  case  the  transferees,  pledgees  or  other  successors  in  interest  will  be  the  selling
beneficial owners for purposes of this prospectus.
16
The selling stockholders may also sell shares under Rule 144 under the Securities Act, if available, rather than under
this prospectus.
Broker-dealers engaged by the selling stockholders may arrange for other broker dealers to participate in sales. Broker-
dealers may receive commissions or discounts from the selling stockholders (or, if any broker-dealer acts as agent for
the purchaser of shares, from the purchaser) in amounts to be negotiated, but, except as set forth in a supplement to this
prospectus, in the case of an agency transaction not in excess of a customary brokerage commission in compliance
with  FINRA  Rule  2121;  and  in  the  case  of  a  principal  transaction  a  markup  or  markdown  in  compliance  with  the
Supplementary Material to FINRA Rule 2121.
In connection with the sale of the common stock or interests therein, the selling stockholders may enter into hedging
transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions, which may in turn engage in short sales of the common
stock in the course of hedging the positions they assume. The selling stockholders may also sell shares of the common
stock short and deliver these securities to close out their short positions, or loan or pledge the common stock to broker-
dealers that in turn may sell these securities. The selling stockholders may also enter into option or other transactions
with broker-dealers or other financial institutions or the creation of one or more derivative securities which require the
delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institutions of shares offered by this prospectus, which shares such
broker-dealer  or  other  financial  institution  may  resell  pursuant  to  this  prospectus  (as  supplemented  or  amended  to
reflect such transaction).
The selling stockholders and any underwriters, broker-dealers or agents that participate in the sale of the common stock
or interests therein may be “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(11) of the Securities Act. Any discounts,
commissions,  concessions  or  profit  they  earn  on  any  resale  of  the  shares  may  be  underwriting  discounts  and
commissions under the Securities Act. Selling stockholders who are “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(a)
(11) of the Securities Act will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act.
We are required to pay all fees and expenses incident to the preparation and filing of this prospectus by the Company,
including  (i)  all  registration  and  filing  fees  and  expenses,  including  those  related  to  filings  with  the  SEC  and  in
connection  with  applicable  state  securities  or  blue  sky  laws;  (ii)  printing  expenses;  (iii)  messenger,  telephone,  and
delivery  expenses;  (iv)  expenses  of  audits  incident  to  or  required  by  any  such  registration;  and  (v)  reasonable  and
documented  legal  fees  and  expenses  of  the  warrant  holders’  counsel  (or  reimburse  the  warrant  holders  for  such
reasonable fees and out-of-pocket expenses of their counsel). We have agreed to indemnify the selling stockholders
against certain losses, claims, damages and liabilities.
We agreed to keep this prospectus continuously effective until such time as all registerable securities hereunder are
sold. To the extent required, this prospectus may be amended or supplemented from time to time to describe a specific
plan of distribution. The place and time of delivery for the securities in respect of which this prospectus is delivered will
be set forth in the accompanying prospectus supplement.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in the distribution of the resale
shares may not simultaneously engage in market making activities with respect to the common stock for the applicable
restricted  period,  as  defined  in  Regulation  M,  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  distribution.  In  addition,  the  selling
stockholders will be subject to applicable provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder,
including Regulation M, which may limit the timing of purchases and sales of shares of the common stock by the selling
stockholders or any other person. We will make copies of this prospectus available to the selling stockholders and have
informed them of the need to deliver a copy of this prospectus to each purchaser at or prior to the time of the sale
(including by compliance with Rule 172 under the Securities Act).
17
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the shares of common stock offered hereby will be passed upon for us by Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP.
EXPERTS
The financial statements of Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015, and for
each of the years ended in the three-year period ended December 31, 2015, and management’s assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, have been incorporated by reference
in  this  prospectus  in  reliance  upon  the  reports  of  KPMG  LLP,  an  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  as
stated in their reports, which are incorporated herein by reference, and upon the authority of such firm as experts in
accounting and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed a registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC under the Securities Act with respect to the shares of
common stock offered by this prospectus. This prospectus, which constitutes a part of the registration statement, does
not contain all of the information included in the registration statement or the schedules, exhibits and amendments to
the  registration  statement.  You  should  refer  to  the  registration  statement  and  its  exhibits  and  schedules  for  further
information. Statements made in this prospectus as to any of our contracts, agreements or other documents referred to
are not necessarily complete. In each instance, if we have filed a copy of such contract, agreement or other document
as an exhibit to the registration statement, you should read the exhibit for a more complete understanding of the matter
involved. Each statement regarding a contract, agreement or other document is qualified in all respects by reference to
the  actual  document.  Certain  information  is  also  incorporated  by  reference  into  this  prospectus  as  described  under
“Incorporation of Certain Documents by Reference.”
You  may  read  and  copy  information  omitted  from  this  prospectus  but  contained  in  the  registration  statement  at  the
Public Reference Section of the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549 at prescribed rates.
Please  call  the  SEC  at  1-800-SEC-0330  for  further  information  on  the  operation  of  the  public  reference  rooms.  In
addition, materials filed electronically with the SEC are available at the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
We  are  subject  to  the  information  and  periodic  reporting  requirements  of  the  Exchange  Act,  and,  in  accordance
therewith,  file  periodic  reports,  proxy  statements  and  other  information  with  the  SEC.  Such  periodic  reports,  proxy
statements and other information are available for inspection and copying at the Public Reference Room and website of
the SEC referred to above. We also furnish our stockholders with annual reports containing our financial statements
audited by an independent registered public accounting firm and quarterly reports containing our unaudited financial
information. We maintain a website at www.nuverra.com. You may access our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports, filed or furnished pursuant to
section  13(a)  or  15(d)  of  the  Exchange  Act  with  the  SEC  free  of  charge  at  our  website  as  soon  as  reasonably
practicable after this material is electronically filed with, or furnished to, the SEC. The reference to our website or web
address does not constitute incorporation by reference of the information contained at that site.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
The  SEC  allows  us  to  incorporate  by  reference  the  information  we  file  with  it.  This  means  that  we  can  disclose
information to you by referring you to those documents. The documents that have been incorporated by reference are
an important part of the prospectus, and you should review that information in order to understand the nature of any
investment by you in our common stock. We are incorporating by reference the documents listed below:
•
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 filed on March 14, 2016,
as amended by Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A filed on April 29, 2016;
•
Our Quarterly Report Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2016 filed on May 9, 2016;
•
•
•
•
•
The description of our shares of common stock contained in our Form 8-A dated May 22, 2008;
18
Our Definitive Proxy Statement for our special meeting of stockholders held on May 20, 2016 filed on
May 9, 2016;
Our  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K  filed  on  January  20,  2016,  January  25,  2016,  February  11,  2016,
March 14, 2016, March 17, 2016, March 29, 2016, March 30, 2016, April 1, 2016, April 13, 2016, April
14, 2016, April 18, 2016 (as amended by Form 8-K/A filed on April 19, 2016), April 21, 2016, May 26,
2016, July 6, 2016, July 13, 2016 and August 2, 2016;
All documents subsequently filed by us pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange
Act, after the date of the initial registration statement and prior to the effectiveness of the registration
statement, shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference into this prospectus; and
All documents subsequently filed by us pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14, or 15(d) of the Exchange
Act, prior to the termination of the offering, shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference into this
prospectus.
Upon request, we will provide to each person, including any beneficial owner, to whom this prospectus is delivered, a
copy of any or all of the reports or documents that have been incorporated by reference into this prospectus. If you
would like a copy of any of these documents, at no cost, please write or call us at:
Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc.
14624 N. Scottsdale Rd., Suite 300
Scottsdale, Arizona 85254
(602) 903-7802
Attn: Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer
Any statement contained in a document which is incorporated by reference in this prospectus is automatically updated
and superseded if information contained in the prospectus modifies or replaces this information.
19
PART II
Item 14. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
The following table shows the costs and expenses, other than underwriting discounts and commissions, payable in
connection with the sale and distribution of the shares of common stock being registered. All of these expenses will be
paid by us. All amounts except for the SEC registration fee are estimated.
SEC registration fee
Accounting fees and expenses
Legal fees and expenses
Printing Costs
Filing costs and other miscellaneous fees and expenses
Total
156.90  
$
7,500  
$
25,000  
$
8,500  
$
$
1,000  
$42,156.90
Item 15. Indemnification of Officers and Directors.
The  Company’s  amended  and  restated  certificate  of  incorporation,  as  amended  (“Certificate  of  Incorporation”),  and
amended  and  restated  bylaws,  as  amended,  provide  for  indemnification  of  agents  including  directors,  officers  and
employees  to  the  maximum  extent  allowed  by  Delaware  law.  The  Company’s  Certificate  of  Incorporation  requires
indemnification of any person who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that he
or she is or was a director, officer, employee or agent if the board of directors (or other committee or entity empowered
to make such a determination) formally determines that he acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably deemed
consistent with, or not opposed to, its best interests. With respect to any criminal action or proceeding, the board of
directors (or other committee or entity empowered to make such a determination) must formally determine that he or she
had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. In the case of any action, suit or proceeding by or in the
right  of  the  Company,  no  indemnification  shall  be  made  if  such  person  is  determined  to  be  liable  to  the  Company,
unless and only to the extent that the court in which such proceeding was brought determines upon application that
such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity. To the extent that a director, officer, employee or agent has
prevailed in defense of any such action, suit or proceeding, he or she shall be indemnified against expenses (including
attorneys’ fees and witness expenses) actually and reasonably incurred by him or her. The indemnification provided by
the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation is not exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking indemnification
may be entitled under any statute, bylaw, agreement, vote of uninvolved stockholders, directors or otherwise.
The Company has purchased and maintains insurance covering its directors, officers, employees and agents against
any liability asserted against any of them and incurred by any of them, whether or not the Company would have the
power to indemnify them against such liability under the provisions of the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation and
applicable Delaware law.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to the Company’s directors,
officers  or  controlling  persons  pursuant  to  the  provisions  described  above,  or  otherwise,  the  Company  has  been
advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “Commission”) such indemnification is
against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
Item 16. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
See the Exhibit Index on the page immediately preceding the Signature Page for a list of exhibits filed as part of this
registration statement on Form S-3, which Exhibit Index is incorporated herein by reference.
II-1
Item 17. Undertakings.
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
1. To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration
statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the
most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change
in the information set forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in the
volume  of  securities  offered  (if  the  total  dollar  value  of  the  securities  offered  would  not  exceed  that  which  was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the
form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and
price represent no more than a 20 percent change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation
of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement.
(iii)  To  include  any  material  information  with  respect  to  any  plan  of  distribution  not  previously  disclosed  in  the
registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement;
Provided, however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii) and (a)(1)(iii) above do not apply if the information required to be
included  in  a  post-effective  amendment  by  those  paragraphs  is  contained  in  reports  filed  with  or  furnished  to  the
Commission by the registrant pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that are
incorporated by reference in the registration statement, or is contained in a form of prospectus filed pursuant to Rule
424(b) that is part of the registration statement.
2.  That,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  each  such  post-effective
amendment  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  new  registration  statement  relating  to  the  securities  offered  therein,  and  the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
3. To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
4. That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, each prospectus filed
pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements
relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and
included  in  the  registration  statement  as  of  the  date  it  is  first  used  after  effectiveness.  Provided,  however,  that  no
statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document
incorporated  or  deemed  incorporated  by  reference  into  the  registration  statement  or  prospectus  that  is  part  of  the
registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify
any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration statement or
made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
5. The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act
of 1933, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a
new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall
be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
6. Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers
and  controlling  persons  of  the  registrant  pursuant  to  the  foregoing  provisions,  or  otherwise,  the  registrant  has  been
advised that in the opinion of the Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Act and
is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment
by  the  registrant  of  expenses  incurred  or  paid  by  a  director,  officer  or  controlling  person  of  the  registrant  in  the
successful  defense  of  any  action,  suit  or  proceeding)  is  asserted  by  such  director,  officer  or  controlling  person  in
connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has
been  settled  by  controlling  precedent,  submit  to  a  court  of  appropriate  jurisdiction  the  question  whether  such
indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of
such issue.
II-2
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has reasonable grounds to
believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has duly caused this registration statement to be
signed  on  its  behalf  by  the  undersigned,  thereunto  duly  authorized,  in  the  City  of  Scottsdale,  State  of  Arizona,  on
August 3, 2016.
Nuverra Environmental Solutions, Inc.
By:
 /s/ Mark D. Johnsrud
Name: Mark D. Johnsrud
Title:
Chief Executive Officer,
 President and Chairman
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
SIGNATURE
TITLE
/s/ Mark D. Johnsrud
Mark D. Johnsrud
Chief Executive Officer,
Chairman and Director
(Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial
  
Officer)
*
Vice President and Corporate Controller
Stacy W. Hilgendorf
(Principal Accounting Officer)
*
William M. Austin
*
Edward A. Barkett
*
Tod C. Holmes
Director
Director
Director
II-3
DATE
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
SIGNATURE
TITLE
Director
Director
Director
Director
*
R. Dan Nelson
*
Alfred E. Osborne, Jr.
*
J. Danforth Quayle
*
Robert B. Simonds, Jr.
*By: /s/ Mark D. Johnsrud
Mark D. Johnsrud
 Attorney-in-fact
DATE
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
August 3, 2016
Exhibit
Number  
  3.1
3.1A
3.1B
3.1C
3.1D
3.1E
3.2
3.2A
3.2B
4.1
II-4
Description
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to
Amendment No. 2 to Heckmann Corporation’s Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on
September 4, 2007)
Certificate of Amendment to Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Heckmann Corporation’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on
November 5, 2008)
Second Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1B to Heckmann Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2010, filed with the SEC on March 14, 2011)
Third  Certificate  of  Amendment  of  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  (incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1C to the Company’s Registration Statement on Form S-4 filed with the
SEC on May 23, 2013)
Fourth  Certificate  of  Amendment  of  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  (incorporated
herein  by  reference  to  Exhibit  3.1  to  Company’s  Current  Report  on  Form  8-K  filed  with  the  SEC  on
December 3, 2013)
Fifth Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on May 26,
2016
Amended and Restated Bylaws (incorporated herein by reference to Amendment No. 4 to Heckmann
Corporation’s Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on October 26, 2007)
First Amended and Restated Bylaws (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2A to the Company’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q filed with the SEC on November 9, 2010)
Second  Amended  and  Restated  Bylaws  (incorporated  herein  by  reference  to  Exhibit  3.1  to  the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 7, 2011)
Specimen Certificate for shares of common stock, $.001 par value per share, of Nuverra Environmental
Solutions, Inc. (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Annual Report on Form
10-K filed with the SEC on March 10, 2014)
Warrant Agreement (Exchange), dated as of April 15, 2016, among Nuverra Environmental Solutions,
Inc.,  Mark  D.  Johnsrud,  and  American  Stock  Transfer  &  Trust  Company,  LLC,  as  warrant  agent
(incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with
the SEC on April 21, 2016)
Warrant Agreement (Term Loan), dated as of April 15, 2016, among Nuverra Environmental Solutions,
Inc.,  Mark  D.  Johnsrud,  and  American  Stock  Transfer  &  Trust  Company,  LLC  (incorporated  herein  by
reference to Exhibit 4.5 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on April 21,
2016)
Legal Opinion of Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP
Consent of KPMG LLP
Consent of Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1)
Power of Attorney of Officers and Directors of the Company
4.2
4.3
5.1**
23.1**
23.2**
24.1**
** Previously filed
II-5