
EX-99.1 2 ex99-1.htm
Exhibit 99.1
Quantum Materials Corp. Continues Work for Joint Development Partner, Increases Strategic
Personnel and Lab Space
San Marcos, TX – August 16, 2016 – Leading North American quantum dot
manufacturer Quantum Materials Corp. (OTCQB:QTMM) today announced that the Company is
continuing work with a leading optical film manufacturer, building upon a relationship which
originated under an initial joint development agreement.
Over past year as this development work has ramped up and other projects have come on line,
Quantum Materials Corp has tripled its full-time science and engineering staff with the addition of
several patent-holding scientists, and engineering, and manufacturing operations specialists. In
addition, effective September 1, 2016 the Company will double its lab space at Quantum
Materials’ San Marcos, Texas headquarters.
“Our collaboration continues to evolve as we work closely together to create optimal quantum
dots characterizations for display optical films,” said Sri Peruvemba, CEO of Quantum Materials
Corp. “As we grow our people are the key to our success. We are fortunate in attracting the best
material sciences talent with which to drive the commercialization of quantum dot technologies
for the display, lighting and energy industries.”
About Quantum Materials Corp
Quantum Materials Corp (QMC) develops and manufactures quantum dots and nanomaterials for
use in medical, display, solar energy and lighting applications through its patented volume
production process. QMC’s volume manufacturing methods enable consistent quality and
scalable cost reductions to drive innovative discovery to commercial success. The company’s
technology continues to move the future of quantum dots to the present. QMC’s products are the
foundation for technologically superior, energy efficient and environmentally sound LCD UHD
displays, the next generation of solid-state lighting, solar photovoltaic power applications,
advanced battery and energy storage solutions, biotech imaging, and biomedical theranostics.
Wholly-owned subsidiary Solterra Renewable Technologies develops sustainable quantum dot
solar technology.
For more information follow Quantum Materials Corp at www.QMCDOTS.com and on LinkedIn
and Twitter.
Safe Harbor statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties
concerning business, products, and financial results. Actual results may differ materially from the
results predicted. More information about potential risk factors that could affect our business,
products, and financial results are included in our annual report and in reports subsequently filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). All documents are available through the
SEC’s EDGAR System at http://www.sec.gov/ or www.QMCdots.com. We hereby disclaim any
obligation to publicly update the information provided above, including forward-looking
statements, to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.
CONTACTS:
Toshi Ando
Senior Director of Business Development
510.300.4021
toshi@qmcdots.com
Media:
Rich Schineller
941.780.8100
rich@prmgt.com
Investor Relations:
Clay Chase /SD Torrey Hills Capital
858.456.7300
cc@sdthc.com
