
Gran Tierra Energy Inc. Announces Closing of PetroLatina Energy Ltd. Acquisition
All dollar amounts are in United States ("U.S.") dollars unless otherwise indicated.
CALGARY, ALBERTA--(Marketwired – August 23, 2016) - Gran Tierra Energy Inc. ("Gran Tierra" or the 
"Company") (NYSE MKT: GTE, TSX: GTE) is pleased to announce today that the Company has completed the 
previously announced acquisition of PetroLatina Energy Ltd. ("PetroLatina") for a purchase price of approximately 
$525  million  (the  "Acquisition"),  consisting  of  an  initial  payment  of  $500  million  at  closing,  subject  to  closing 
adjustments, and  a  deferred  payment  of  $25  million  no  later  than  December  31,  2016.  PetroLatina  is  a  private, 
independent exploration and production company with assets primarily in the Middle Magdalena basin of Colombia.
Gary  Guidry,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Gran  Tierra,  commented:  "We  are  pleased  that  the 
Acquisition has closed quickly and we now look forward to developing the upside potential in our new core area in 
the  prolific  Middle  Magdalena  Basin.  We  have  acquired  significant  proved,  probable  and  possible  reserves  which 
we  expect  to  enhance  our  long-term  growth  strategy  and  to  be  an  excellent  fit  with  Gran  Tierra's  current  reserves 
and resources base in the Putumayo Basin."
The Acquisition was funded through a combination of cash on hand, borrowings under Gran Tierra’s existing credit 
facilities,  a  new  term  loan,  and  the  proceeds  of  a  private  placement  of  subscription  receipts  of  the  Company 
(“Subscription Receipts”).
In  connection  with  the  Acquisition,  Gran  Tierra  issued  57,835,134  Subscription  Receipts  priced  at  $3.00  per 
Subscription Receipt to certain institutional investors and certain directors and executive officers of Gran Tierra for 
aggregate  gross  proceeds  of  approximately  $173.5  million.  In  accordance  with  their  terms,  each  Subscription 
Receipt was exchanged for one share of common stock in the capital of the Company (the “Common Shares”) and 
the proceeds of the Subscription Receipt financing were released from escrow on August 23, 2016. Holders of the 
Subscription  Receipts  are  not  required  to  take  any  action  in  order  to  receive  the  Common  Shares.  The  Common 
Shares were issued in book-entry form using the direct registration system of Computershare Trust Company, N.A., 
Gran Tierra’s transfer agent.
The  Subscription  Receipts  were  exchanged  for  Common  Shares  in  reliance  on  the  exemption  from  registration 
provided by Section 3(a)(9) of the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended. This press release does not constitute an 
offer  to  sell  or  the  solicitation  of  an  offer  to  buy  the  securities  herein  described,  and  shall  not  constitute  an  offer, 
solicitation or sale in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration 
or qualification under the securities laws of that jurisdiction.
In connection with the Acquisition, Gran Tierra amended its existing credit facility to add a $130 million term loan 
with Scotiabank, as administrative agent, and each of the lenders in Gran Tierra’s existing secured revolving credit 
facility, including Scotiabank, Natixis (New York Branch), Société Générale, HSBC Bank Canada, Royal Bank of 
Canada and Export Development Canada. This new term loan was used to fund a portion of the purchase price of the 
Acquisition.
Contact Information
For investor and media inquiries please contact:
Gran Tierra Energy Inc. 
Gary Guidry
President and Chief Executive Officer 
403-767-6500 
 
Gran Tierra Energy Inc. 
Ryan Ellson 
Chief Financial Officer 
403-767-6501 
 
Gran Tierra Energy Inc. 
Rodger Trimble 
Vice President of Investor Relations 
403-698-7941 
info@grantierra.com
About Gran Tierra Energy Inc.
Gran  Tierra  Energy  Inc.  is  an  international  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production  company,  headquartered  in 
Calgary,  Canada,  incorporated  in  the  United  States,  trading  on  the  NYSE  MKT  (GTE)  and  the  Toronto  Stock 
Exchange  (GTE),  and  operating  in  South  America.  Gran  Tierra  holds  interests  in  producing  and  prospective 
properties  in  Colombia,  Peru,  and  Brazil.  Gran  Tierra  has  a  strategy  that  focuses  on  establishing  a  portfolio  of 
producing  properties,  plus  production  enhancement  and  exploration  opportunities  to  provide  a  base  for  future 
growth. Additional information concerning Gran Tierra is available at www.grantierra.com. Investor inquiries may 
be directed to info@grantierra.com or (403) 265-3221.
Gran Tierra's Securities and Exchange Commission filings are available on a web site maintained by the Securities 
and Exchange Commission at http://www.sec.gov and on SEDAR at http://www.sedar.com.
Disclaimer
General Advisory
The  information  contained  in  this  press  release  does  not  purport  to  be  all-inclusive  or  contain  all  information  that 
readers  may  require.  You  are  encouraged  to  conduct  your  own  analysis  and  review  of  Gran  Tierra  and  of  the 
information  contained  in  this  press  release.  Without  limitation,  you  should  read  the  entire  record  of  publicly  filed 
documents  relating  to  the  Company,  consider  the  advice  of  your  financial,  legal,  accounting,  tax  and  other 
professional  advisors  and  such  other  factors  you  consider  appropriate  in  investigating  and  analyzing  Gran  Tierra. 
You  should  rely  only  on  the  information  provided  by  Gran  Tierra  and  are  not  entitled  to  rely  on  parts  of  that 
information  to  the  exclusion  of  others.  Gran  Tierra  has  not  authorized  anyone  to  provide  you  with  additional  or 
different  information,  and  any  such  information,  including  statements  in  media  articles  about  Gran  Tierra,  should 
not be relied upon.
An  investment  in  the  securities  of  Gran  Tierra  is  speculative  and  involves  a  high  degree  of  risk.  Gran  Tierra's 
business  is  subject  to  the  risks  normally  encountered  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  and  certain  other  risks  that  are 
associated  with  Gran  Tierra's  current  stage  of  development.  An  investment  in  the  Company's  securities  is  suitable 
only for those purchasers who are willing to risk a loss of some or all of their investment and who can afford to lose 
some or all of their investment. You should carefully consider the risks described under the heading "Risk Factors" 
in  the  Company's  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015  and  in  the  Company's 
subsequent SEC filings.
Forward-Looking Information Advisory
This  press  release  contains  forward-looking  statements  within  the  meaning  of  the  United  States  Private  Securities 
Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995,  Section  27A  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Section  21E  of  the 
Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  and  financial  outlook  and  forward  looking  information  within  the
meaning of applicable Canadian securities laws (collectively, "forward-looking statements"). Such forward-looking 
statements include, but are  not limited to, our ability to integrate the acquired assets  with our own and realize  the 
anticipated  benefits,  the  scale,  growth,  planned  synergies,  the  combined  work  program  and  operations  going 
forward.
The  forward-looking  statements  contained  in  this  press  release  are  based  on  certain  assumptions  made  by  Gran 
Tierra based on management's experience and perception of historical trends, current conditions, anticipated future 
development and other factors believed to be appropriate. Such statements are subject to a number of assumptions, 
risks  and  uncertainties,  many  of  which  are  beyond  Gran  Tierra's  control,  which  may  cause  actual  results  to  differ 
materially from those implied or expressed by the forward-looking statements. These include the factors discussed 
or referenced under the heading "Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors" in Gran Tierra's 2015 Annual Report on Form 10-K, 
under the heading "Part II. Item 1A. Risk Factors" in Gran Tierra's Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and in the other 
reports and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
All  forward-looking  statements  speak  only  as  of  the  date  on  which  such  statements  are  made,  and  Gran  Tierra 
undertakes  no  obligation  to  correct  or  update  any  forward-looking  statements,  whether  as  a  result  of  new 
information,  future  events  or  otherwise,  except  as  required  by  applicable  law.  Gran  Tierra's  forward-looking 
statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement.
Investors are urged to consider closely the disclosures and risk factors in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-
K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and in the other reports and filings with the SEC, available from the Company's 
offices or website. These forms can also be obtained from the SEC via the internet at www.sec.gov or by calling 1-
800-SEC-0330.