
EX-31 4 f10k033116_ex31.htm EXHIBIT 31 SECTION 302 CERTIFICATION Exhibit 31 Section
302 Certification
EXHIBIT 31
NEXGEN APPLIED SOLUTIONS INC.
Certification of the Chief Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to
Securities Exchange Act Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14
I, Robert Coleridge, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Nexgen Applied Solutions Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances
under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in
this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. As the registrant’s Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer, I am responsible
for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules  13a-15(e)  and  15d-15(e))  and  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  (as  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and I have:
a.
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and
procedures to be designed under my supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the  registrant,  including  its  consolidated  subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  me  by  others  within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  to  be
designed  under  my  supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of
financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented
in this report my conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures,
as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that
occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in
the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  my  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal  control  over  financial
reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors
(or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control
over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to
record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
August 24, 2016
/s/ Robert Coleridge
Principal Executive Officer and
Principal Financial Officer
