
EX-31.2 5 iep-ex312_63016.htm EXHIBIT 31.2 Exhibit
EXHIBIT 31.2
  
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
Pursuant to Section 302(a) of the Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 and
Rule 13a-14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
I, SungHwan Cho, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this joint quarterly report on Form 10-Q of Icahn Enterprises L.P. and Icahn
Enterprises Holdings L.P. for the period ended June 30, 2016;
 
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances
under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by
this report;
 
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in
this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows of the registrants as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
 
4. The registrants' other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e))
and internal control over financial reporting as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-
15(f) for the registrants and we have:
 
a) designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to
the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b) designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c) evaluated the effectiveness of the registrants' disclosure controls and procedures and
presented in the report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d) disclosed in this report any change in the registrants' internal control over financial reporting
that occurred during the registrants' most recent fiscal quarter (the registrants' fourth fiscal quarter
in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrants' internal control over financial reporting.
5. The registrants' other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrants' auditors and the audit
committee of the registrants' board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
 
a) all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal
control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrants'
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b) any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the registrants' internal control over financial reporting.
  
/s/SungHwan Cho
SungHwan Cho
Chief Financial Officer of Icahn Enterprises G.P. Inc., the general partner of Icahn Enterprises
L.P. and Icahn Enterprises Holdings L.P.
Date: August 4, 2016