
10KSB/A 1 form10ksbamend2current.htm FORM 10KSB AMENDMENT NO. 2
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
-------------------------
FORM 10-KSB
AMENDMENT NO. 2
[X]  ANNUAL REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE  SECURITIES  EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended: December 31, 2004
[ ]  TRANSITION  REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE  SECURITIES  EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ______________ to ______________
Commission file number: 0-28345
Big Sky Energy Corporation,
(Exact name of small business issuer in its charter)
NEVADA
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
Suite 750, 440 – 2nd Avenue SW
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
(Address of principal executive offices)
Issuer's telephone number:1(403) 234-8282
Securities Registered Under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:
Securities Registered Under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act:
72-1381282
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
T2P 5E9
(Zip Code)
None
Common Stock, $0.001 par value
(Title of class)
Check whether the issuer (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the
past 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Corporation was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject
to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes |X|   No |_|
Check if there is no disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-B is not contained in this form,
and no disclosure will be contained, to the best of Corporation's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements
incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-KSB or any amendment to this Form 10-KSB. |_|
Revenue for the most recent fiscal year: $nil
Aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates of the Corporation using the average
of the bid and asked price of the common stock, as of March 31, 2005: $1.12
Number of shares outstanding of each of the Corporation's classes of common stock, as of December 31, 2004:
68,119,460 shares of common stock, par value US$0.001 per share.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE: None
PART I
Big Sky Energy Corporation (“Big Sky” or the “Company”) is filing this Amendment No. 2 to its Annual Report on Form 10-
KSB/A for the year ended December 31, 2004 (this “Amendment”) to reflect the amendment and restatement of its
Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2004 to reflect adjustments determined to be
necessary as a result of an internal investigation of the treatment of certain portions of an farm-out agreement entered into
by one of its subsidiaries.
The Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for the year ended December 31, 2004 was initially filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission on April 15, 2005 and Amendment No. 1 thereto was filed on August 19, 2005. This Amendment
No. 2 on Form 10-KSB/A is being filed to reflect restatements of the following financial statements:
•
Consolidated balance sheet as at December 31, 2004;
•
Consolidated statements of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2004;
•
and to make certain conforming changes.
Big Sky Energy Corporation is filing this Amendment No. 2 to its Form 10-KSB for the following reason:
Subsequent to the issuance of the Company’s 2004 financial statements, the Company’s management determined that its
belief that no obligation would exist to repay ABT Ltd. for costs they incurred or advanced to KoZhaN LLP in relation to the
Morskoe oil field under the farm-out agreement signed October 12, 2004 (see Note 10 of the Notes to the Amended and
Restated Consolidated Financial Statements), should Ministry approval not be received on the transfer of 45% of the
subsurface rights of the Morskoe licence to ABT Ltd., was incorrect, and that in fact an obligation would exist to repay ABT
Ltd. for all costs incurred or advanced by them relating to the Morskoe oil field should Ministry approval not be received.
As a result, the “Short-Term Interest Free Loan from ABT LTD” liability account, the “Oil and Gas Properties” asset account
and the “Other Current Asset” account were understated in the amounts of $1,174,423, $1,088,263, and $86,160
respectively as previously reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets included in the December 31, 2004 Form 10-
KSB. The error described above also resulted in an understatement in cash flow from financing activities in the amount of
$334,000 and an overstatement in cash flow from investing activities in the amount of $334,000 on the Consolidated
Statements of Cash Flows. The Consolidated Balance Sheets and the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as at
December 31, 2004 have been restated to correct these previous misstatements.  This restatement has no impact on
earnings or equity.
ITEM 1.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS.
We are a development stage enterprise, which means we are in the process of developing our business. We commenced
operations in 2000 as an Internet service provider in China. In fall of 2003, we changed our focus to oil and gas exploration
and production, seeking to partner with China’s national petroleum companies, at which time we changed our name to
China Energy Ventures Corp. Through acquisition of other companies, in 2003 and 2004, we acquired five onshore
licenses in the prolific pre-Caspian basin in the Republic of Kazakhstan. We determined to develop these blocks
independently, by investing our capital or joint venturing with other companies.
At the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders held in Calgary, Alberta, December 3, 2004, shareholders approved
changing the corporate name to Big Sky Energy Corporation, to reflect the changed nature of the business of the
Corporation. Shareholders also elected three new directors, each of which have extensive business and finance
experience in the Republic of Kazakhstan. Three directors, whose extensive business experience is primarily focused in
China, did not stand for re-election to the Board of Directors. Throughout this document we use the “Corporation” to denote
the single legal entity unless the context requires otherwise.
In December 2004, we sold our 100% shareholding in Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., which held our remaining assets in
China, Big Sky Chengdu Technology Services Ltd, 100% owned, and our interest in the Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network
Ltd. joint venture, 50% owned. With this sale, we exited the Internet business in China. The sale of Big Sky Network
Canada Ltd. is presented as a discontinued operation in our financial statements.
In January 2005, we commenced negotiations with Mr. S.A. (Al) Sehsuvaroglu to secure his services as our president. A
contract was signed with Mr. Sehsuvaroglu and he assumed his new position on March 1, 2005. We also signed a contract
with Mr. Ruslan Tsarni, who joined the Corporation as Vice-President, Business Development on March 15, 2005.
2
We have incurred losses since inception and we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses in the foreseeable future.
Energy exploration and development entails significant risk  (see” Risk Factors”) that impact the sustainability of early
stage development companies.
We have successfully raised new equity capital for new business ventures but may not be able to do so in the future. We
are seeking to acquire producing oil and gas assets and to develop our own exploration potential. We will be unable to
continue as a going concern if we are unable to earn sufficient revenues from our operations or raise additional capital
through debt or equity financings to meet our working capital and joint venture capital contribution obligations.  Recent
private placements have raised sufficient additional capital to meet our obligations until December 31, 2006. Furthermore,
we expect to acquire at least one oil-producing asset in 2005, using equity and debt to ensure sustainable operations in
the future.
OVERVIEW OF CORPORATE STRUCTURE
We were incorporated in February 1993 as Institute for Counseling, Inc. under the laws of the State of Nevada.  On April
14, 2000, we acquired China Broadband (BVI) Corp., a British Virgin Islands company incorporated in February 2000, by
issuing 13,500,000 shares of our common stock in exchange for all of the issued and outstanding common stock of China
Broadband (BVI) Corp.  The former shareholders of China Broadband (BVI) Corp. became our controlling shareholders.
 On April 14, 2000, subsequent to the above acquisition, we changed our name to "China Broadband Corp." and merged
China Broadband (BVI) Corp. into China Broadband Corp. Our principal executive office is located at Suite 750, 440 – 2nd
Avenue SW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 5E9, and our phone number there is 1-403-234-8282. Our principal business
office, in Kazakhstan, is located in a recently constructed office tower in central Almaty at Suite 3, 132 Dostyk Avenue,
Almaty, Kazakhstan 650051, and our phone number there is 7 3272 628 394.
We maintain a representative office in China at 1003 W2 Oriental Plaza, #1 East Chang An Avenue, Beijing, Peoples
Republic of China 100738 and our phone number there is 86 10 8518 2686.
We maintain a World Wide Web site address at www.bigskycanada.com. Information on our web site is not part of this
document.
On July 8, 2000, Big Sky Network Ltd. and Chengdu Huayu Information Co. Ltd. entered into a cooperative joint venture
contract to form a joint venture company, Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network Ltd., referred to as our Chengdu joint venture,
under the laws of the People's Republic of China on Cooperative Joint Ventures using Chinese Foreign Investment.  We
had agreed to provide up to $5,500,000 in financing for the joint venture, in the form of cash and equipment.  The Chengdu
joint venture was granted the exclusive right to provide equipment and technical services to our Chinese joint venture
partner’s subscribers to enable these subscribers to access the Internet. Our Chinese joint venture partner failed to meet its
obligations under the joint venture agreement. As we were unable to achieve a successful working partnership, the
business of the joint venture was discontinued. After discussions and negotiations with the joint venture partner failed to
achieve a satisfactory alternative, we commenced arbitration to seek damages. To date, such arbitration has not been
successful. Although we sold this business in December 2004, we retain a 25% interest in any favorable settlement of this
action. As the outcome of this arbitration is uncertain, we attribute no value to this residual interest.
We, through Big Sky Network Canada Ltd, (“Big Sky Canada”) held a 100% interest in Chengdu Big Sky Network
Technology Services Ltd., referred to as Chengdu Technology Services, which resells high-speed broadband Internet
service to companies and residents in the section of Chengdu designated as a high technology park. As noted above, we
sold our shareholding in Big Sky Canada on December 9, 2004 for $175,793.
Late in October 2003, we began investing in oil and gas assets, an area in which our management has knowledge and
experience and it was our belief that it was the right time to diversify into the oil and natural gas industry.  We considered
that this diversification would provide us with a revenue stream and financial stability which would sustain our operations
so that we could concentrate on growing our business in the oil and gas sector.
On October 27, 2003, the Corporation entered into a Share Exchange Agreement with Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd.
(“BSEK”), a private company incorporated in Alberta, Canada, and all its shareholders of record.  Under the terms of the
Share Exchange Agreement, we were required to issue up to a maximum of 8,000,000 common shares in a share
exchange offer with the shareholders of record of BSEK as of October 27, 2003.  Management determined the net asset
value per share and the
3
number of shares to be issued based upon various criteria including a third party valuation.   On January 12, 2004, we
issued 8,000,000 of our common shares to the shareholders of BSEK in exchange for their shares in BSEK.
BSEK has a 90% interest in KoZhaN LLP, (“KoZhaN”), a Republic of Kazakhstan limited liability partnership, which has
three petroleum licenses in the Atyrau region of Kazakhstan.
On December 29, 2003, we changed out name from China Broadband Corp. to China Energy Ventures Corp. On
December 3, 2004 shareholders approved a further name change to Big Sky Energy Corporation.
On May 10, 2004, Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd., at that time a 75% owned subsidiary of Big Sky, (“BSEA”), purchased 100%
of Vector Energy West LLP, a Kazakhstan limited liability partnership, (“Vector”), for $4,430,000.  This purchase price was
determined by a valuation of Vector’s Atyrau and Liman-2 licenses which was performed by PetroGlobe (Canada) Ltd., an
independent third party. On the same date, pursuant to the terms of an Agreement for Assignment of the Creditor’s Rights,
BSEA paid $570,000 to Lorgate Management Inc.
On July 6, 2004, we closed a private placement of $8,050,000 and issued 16,100,000 shares.
We currently have enough cash on hand to cover the expected level of general and administrative and other overhead
costs throughout 2006. We had originally assumed work commitments on our licenses in Kazakhstan, which would require
expenditures estimated at up to $35 million, which may be decreased upon prior approval of the Kazakhstan competent
authority to the commitments defined in the respective five hydrocarbon contracts to a total amount of approximately $16
million. Our commitments are measured in actual work completed, not in money expended. We can successfully meet our
work commitments for a lesser expenditure of money if we can perform the work more efficiently. Work commitments
consist of well drilling, seismic shoots, data processing, workover and re-entry of existing wells and general business
activity that serves to further develop, explore, produce and sell hydrocarbons in Kazakhstan.
Work program commitments for 2004 have been completed only in part. To satisfy the Kazakh regulatory authorities the
work commitments not completed in 2004 have to be completed in 2005.
The following figure sets forth our corporate structure as at December 31, 2004.
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
(the “Big Sky”)
a Nevada corporation
100%
Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd.
(“BSEA”)
an Alberta Corporation
100%
Vector
Energy
West LLP
(“Vector”)
a
Kazakhstan
limited
liability
partnership
100%
Big Sky Energy
Kazakhstan Ltd.
(“BSEK”)
An Alberta corporation
90%
KoZhaN LLP
(“KoZhaN”)
A Kazakhstan limited liability
partnership
Neither Big Sky nor any of our subsidiaries have been subject to any bankruptcy, receivership or similar proceedings.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS STRATEGY
Oil and Gas Business
During the last half of 2003, we commenced the diversification of our efforts towards the exploration and exploitation of oil
and gas in selected countries.  Our objective is to find fields with proven reserves that justify exploration and that require
some enhanced recovery, workover, additional drilling or stimulation, and that have an exploration upside, located near
infrastructure and markets, in countries with favorable fiscal and tax regimes and well developed commercial laws,
including adequate
4
environmental regulations. We determined that Kazakhstan was one country that meets these criteria and commenced
efforts to locate acquisition opportunities there.
Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd.
Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. was incorporated on July 29, 2003 in Alberta, Canada and holds a 90% interest in
KoZhaN, which has three petroleum licenses in the Atyrau region of Kazakhstan.
In late 2003 and early 2004, BSEK entered into various share purchase agreements with Shengli Oilfield Junwei
Petroleum-Tech Development Co. Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of Sinopec Corp. for an investment into BSEK of
$10,000,000.  We decided to pursue this project ourselves and on July 1, 2004, a Severance Agreement was completed
by BSEK and Shengli that terminated all of the various share purchase agreements and BSEK repaid funds that had been
received from Shengli. Management will consider other farm out options to third parties as opportunities arise.
On October 27, 2003, the Corporation entered into a Share Exchange Agreement with BSEK and all its shareholders of
record.  Under the terms of the Agreement, we forwarded $500,000 to BSEK as a short-term loan, which was to be repaid
within 60 days.  As well, we were required to issue up to a maximum of 8,000,000 common shares in a share exchange
offer with the shareholders of record of BSEK as of October 27, 2003.  Management determined the net asset value per
share and the number of shares to be issued based upon various criteria including a valuation performed by PetroGlobe
(Canada) Ltd., a third party independent petroleum engineering firm. In December 2003, we forwarded an additional
$625,000 to BSEK as a short-term loan, which was to be repaid within 60 days. On January 12, 2004, we issued
8,000,000 of our common shares to the shareholders of BSEK in exchange for their shares in BSEK thereby giving us
100% ownership of BSEK.  On January 14, 2004, BSEK made a payment of $250,000 on the initial loan made in October
2003. On January 20, 2004, we extended the repayment terms on both loans to BSEK to June 1, 2004 and set the interest
rate at 5% per annum.  As of December 31, 2004, these loans had not been repaid.  BSEK will repay them once it has
started production.
Mr. Matthew Heysel, who is a shareholder, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation; was Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer of BSEK and also the Vice-Chairman of KoZhaN at the time of the Share Exchange Agreement
with BSEK.  Mr. Heysel, as a board member of the Corporation and BSEK, voluntarily abstained from voting on the
transaction with BSEK.  Mr. Heysel continues to hold his directorships with these entities, but has relinquished his Chief
Executive Officer designation to Mr. Sehsuvaroglu.
Mr. Daming Yang, who is a shareholder and director of the Corporation, was the President and a director of BSEK and
also the Chairman of KoZhaN at the time of the Share Exchange Agreement with BSEK.  Mr. Yang, as a board member of
the Corporation and BSEK, voluntarily abstained from voting on the transaction with BSEK. Mr. Yang continues to hold his
directorships and offices with these entities.
Mr. Kai Yang, at the time of the Share Exchange Agreement with BSEK, was a major shareholder of the Corporation, the
sole shareholder of Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd., which held 80% of the stock of BSEK and Mr. Daming Yang’s brother.
On February 27, 2004, the Corporation entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with IbrizOil Inc., an Alberta
corporation, hereinafter referred to as Ibriz.  Under the terms of the agreement, Ibriz assigned its 5% over-riding royalty in
BSEK’s interest in KoZhaN in exchange for common stock of the Corporation.  The value of the royalty held in Ibriz was
determined using the results of the valuation report performed by PetroGlobe (Canada) Ltd., an independent third party, in
connection with the Share Purchase Agreement entered into by the Corporation and BSEK on October 27, 2003.  The
amount of common stock issued was determined using the average closing price of our common stock for the five days
prior to February 27, 2004.  On March 4, 2004, we issued 681,475 common shares to Ibriz in connection with the
agreement. At the time of this transaction, Mr. Van Doorne was our Executive Vice President, the Managing Director of
BSEK and a shareholder of the Corporation, as well as, the Chief Executive Officer, a director and a shareholder of Ibriz.
On March 18, 2005, Mr. Van Doorne resigned as Chief Executive Officer and a director of Ibriz.
KoZhaN
KoZhaN was incorporated as a limited liability partnership on April 28, 2001 in the Republic of Kazakhstan by five
Kazakhstani nationals unrelated to us.
On February 17, 2003, KoZhaN entered into agreements with the Government of Kazakhstan for the exploration and
development of three petroleum licenses in the Atyrau region of western Kazakhstan.
5
-
-
-
The Morskoe license covers an area of 18,434 acres.  The Morskoe field was
discovered in 1965 .  In 1965, five wells were drilled in the field, resulting in four oil
wells.  One well tested a combined oil flow of 1300 barrels of oil per day (“bopd”).  The
wells were shut-in and have never produced oil.
The Karatal license, which covers an area of 103,982 acres.  Several wells drilled in the
late 1960s on the property tested small oil flows.
The Dauletaly license covers an area of 33,359 acres.  No reserves have been
established on the license, which is adjacent to the Krykmyltyk field, which is currently
producing approximately 2,000 bopd.
In August 2003, in an arms-length transaction, the five shareholders of KoZhaN, each holding a 20% interest in KoZhaN,
entered into a Sale and Purchase Agreement with BSEK whereby BSEK purchased a 90% interest in KoZhaN for future
consideration based upon the achievement of KoZhaN production milestones.  BSEK entered into this agreement in order
to obtain the contractual rights for exploration and development for the Morskoe, Karatal and Dauletaly fields owned by
KoZhaN. BSEK currently owns a 90% interest in KoZhaN and the remaining five shareholders each own a 2% interest.
 BSEK is required to make the following payments to the five shareholders, as a group, upon KoZhaN achieving the
following milestones:
-
-
-
-
$100,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for two sales of a commercial
quantity of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by KoZhaN.  Each sale shall not be
of less than 4,000 tonnes of oil and shall be calculated after deducting the government’s
share of production, if any.
$300,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative production of
40,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by
KoZhaN.  The 40,000 tonnes shall be calculated after deducting the government’s
share of production, if any.
$400,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative production of
150,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by
KoZhaN.  The 150,000 tonnes shall be calculated after deducting the government’s
share of production, if any.
$500,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative production of
250,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by
KoZhaN.  The 250,000 tonnes shall be calculated after deducting the government’s
share of production, if any.
- A quarterly payment per barrel of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by KoZhaN
- A quarterly payment per barrel of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by KoZhaN
(“Production Payment”).  Such production is to be calculated after deducting the
government’s share of production, if any. The Production Payment shall equal $0.35 per
barrel if the price of oil is equal to or less than $14.00, $0.75 per barrel if the price of oil
is greater than $14.00 and less than or equal to $18.00, $1.00 per barrel if the price of
oil is greater than $18.00 and less than or equal to $22.00, or $1.50 per barrel if the
price of oil is greater than $22.00.  The price of oil shall be determined as a quarterly
average based on a calendar year and calculated based on the actual value of oil
realized by sale of the oil, net of transportation and tariff costs.
- Upon awarding of a new tender for subsurface use rights outside the Contract
Territories, KoZhaN shall pay a bonus of $0.05 multiplied by the number of barrels of oil
attributed to the oilfield reserves associated with that award as defined in State Balance
of Reserves (Oil) of Kazakhstan as of January 1, 2000.  Payment of the bonus shall be
made within 30 days of the tender being awarded.
- Under the terms of the Sale and Purchase Agreement, 1 tonne equal 7 barrels.
Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd.
Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd. was incorporated on April 8, 2004 in Alberta, Canada.  Initially, we owned 75% of this
subsidiary and Fullup Limited, a Cypriot registered corporation, owned 25%.   We entered into this corporate arrangement
with Fullup Limited based upon representations from it that it would be able to present us with oil and gas opportunities in
the Atyrau area of western Kazakhstan.
As consideration for facilitation of the successful acquisition of Vector, BSEA granted a royalty to Fullup Limited of $1.00
per barrel on oil sold by Vector from the Atyrau and Liman-2 licenses. On November 10, 2004, BSEA and Fullup Limited
entered
6
into a Share Exchange Agreement whereby Fullup Limited agreed to exchange its 25% interest in BSEA for 3,500,000
common shares of the Corporation.
Vector Energy West
Vector Energy West was incorporated as a limited liability partnership in the Republic of Kazakhstan on July 4, 2001.
On December 28, 2002, Vector Energy entered into agreements with the Government of Kazakhstan for the exploration
and development of two petroleum licenses in western Kazakhstan.
-
-
The Atyrau license covers an area of 2,599,044 acres.  The Atyrau field is located on
the north shore of the Caspian Sea, near the city of Atyrau.  This block has some 33
salt domes identified by seismic. Of these, 8 post salt prospects have been identified
and drilled.  
The Liman-2 license covers an area of 1,015,599 acres.  The Liman-2 field is located
immediately west of the Atyrau license on the north shore of the Caspian Sea.  This
block has some 10 un-drilled salt domes.
On June 1, 2004, Vector granted a royalty of $1.00 per barrel of oil sold by Vector from the Atyrau and Liman-2 licenses to
the former President of Vector. This royalty expires June 1, 2005.
Big Sky Energy Ltd.
Big Sky Energy Ltd. was incorporated on May 31, 2004 in Alberta, Canada in order to have a representative oil and natural
gas office in China.  We own 100% of this subsidiary, which is currently inactive.
Oil and Gas Business
In Kazakhstan, producers have the right to negotiate sales contracts directly with purchasers, allowing the market to
determine the price of oil.  Under the terms of the three Contracts for Exploration and Production of Hydrocarbons
(“Hydrocarbon Contracts”) entered into by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
and KoZhaN on the Morskoe, Karatal and Dauletaly Fields, referred to as the Hydrocarbon Contracts, all production has to
be sold into the domestic market during the Exploration Phase of the Hydrocarbon Contracts. The Exploration Phase has a
maximum term of 6 years.  We have the right to accelerate the exploration activities and thus shorten the exploration
phase.  During the Exploitation Phase we can sell up to 80% of our production on the international markets.  Currently
domestic prices are approximately US$145 per tonne. If the domestic market cannot absorb the produced hydrocarbons
we can sell our product on the international market.
Competition
Several domestic and international companies operate in Kazakhstan.  The Government of Kazakhstan issues licenses on
a regular basis through bidding rounds.  Shares in existing licenses can be freely sold and purchased, subject to the terms
of the individual Charter and Foundation Agreements in place.  Late in 2004, the Government of Kazakhstan passed
legislation providing certain pre-emptive rights whereby the government has the right to acquire interests in fields if there is
an intention of the license holder to sell or farm out to a third party. However, there is little competition from foreign
companies for the assets targeted in Kazakhstan by us.  Major international companies target the large high-risk offshore
blocks in the Caspian Sea.
Local refineries are generally amply supplied by existing producers.  Although we are required to sell our crude into the
local markets, we can sell our produced hydrocarbons into the international markets if the refineries are not capable of
accepting our production.  There are no restrictions to access the pipelines exporting crude from Kazakhstan, except that a
transportation agreement has to be signed with KazTransOil and export quotes have to be obtained from the Ministry of
Energy.
Employees and Consultants
As the focus of business of the Corporation centers in Kazakhstan, more of the officers and management will be located in
the Almaty office. Beginning with our President, we expect to operate our business from Almaty. Field operations
personnel will work from an office in Atyrau or will be located at various field work sites.
7
Vector and KoZhaN engage local staff as required to manage their business.  We anticipate that Big Sky and our
subsidiaries, on an as-needed basis, will hire additional employees over the next fiscal year. We are consolidating our two
offices in Almaty. Set forth below is an indication of current operations and the numbers of employees and consultants
required by our subsidiaries and us to maintain current operations, as at March 31, 2005:
Kazakhstan
China
Canada
Other
Number of Employees/Consultants
Management Sales
Technical Administrative
4
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
7
1
2
0
Should  our  development  necessitate,  we  will  hire  additional  employees  and  consultants  in  sales,  marketing,  and
administration over the current fiscal year and will hire additional management and employees on an as-needed basis.  If
the need arises for additional technical employees and we are unable to hire qualified employees in a timely manner, we
may outsource projects to third parties.
ADDITIONAL FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS
An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should read the following risk factors carefully
before purchasing our common stock. We believe that these represent all the current material risk factors that may affect
our business.  If any of the risks discussed below actually occur, our business, financial condition, operating results or
cash flows could be materially adversely affected. This could cause the trading price of our common stock to decline.
Risks Relating To Our Business
We have a limited operating history and have changed the focus of our operations by entering into the oil and gas industry.
 The failure of our plans could ultimately force us to reduce or suspend operations and even liquidate our assets and wind-
up and dissolve our company.
We have a limited operating history, a history of minimal revenues and a history of losses.  We began our business
activities in April 2000 in China.  Our operations in the Chinese Internet market produced only minimal revenues and we
have divested this business, effective December 9, 2004. We have diversified our operations to oil and natural gas
exploration and production, an area in which our management has been successful in past endeavors, although we do not
know if Big Sky will be successful in any of these plans due to our early stage of operations in the oil and gas industry.
We have incurred net losses since inception and anticipate that losses will continue. Should losses continue indefinitely, it
would eventually result in us ceasing operations.
We have incurred losses since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $30,185,135 at December 31, 2004. We
anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses due to an increased level of planned operating and capital expenditures,
increased sales and marketing costs, high costs associated with oil and gas exploration and development, additional
personnel requirements and our general growth objectives.  We anticipate that our net losses will increase in the near
future as we implement our business strategy and commence oil and gas exploration.  Our ability to earn a profit will
depend on the success of our oil and gas exploration and development programs, which has not yet been achieved.  We
may never achieve profitability.
Our ability to continue as a going concern requires us to raise additional funds and produce working capital from oil and
gas operations.
In light of our lack of profitability and the risks described in this section, our management and our independent registered
chartered accountants have expressed substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.   At December
31, 2004, we had net working capital deficiency of $2,793,503.  We will need additional capital or a farmout of our interests
to third parties to fund any new ventures, which is uncertain and will likely result in the dilution to existing shareholders’
interests.
8
Our inability to retain our key managerial personnel could affect our ability to continue conducting our business.
Our success depends to a significant extent on the continued efforts of our executive officers, principally Messrs. Heysel,
Sehsuvaroglu and Tsarni, who are responsible for the continuing development of our oil and gas assets. The loss of any
one of these individuals could have a material adverse effect on our ability to continue to locate, negotiate and acquire oil
and gas assets and financing to develop these assets. We would have to replace any such individuals with someone that
has commensurate experience abilities if they were to leave us. We have entered into employment and non-competition
agreements with all of these individuals.
Our business may be adversely affected by relationships between the United States and the countries in which we do
business, which may impede our ability to operate in the countries in which we are located.
We are a Nevada corporation and subject to the laws of the United States.  Our principal businesses are conducted
through wholly-owned subsidiaries that operate in Kazakhstan.  Our business is directly affected by political and economic
conditions in Kazakhstan.  Our business may be adversely affected by the diplomatic and political relationships between
the U.S., China, Russia and Kazakhstan.  These relationships may adversely influence the Kazakhstan government and
public opinion of U.S. corporations conducting business in Kazakhstan and may affect our ability to obtain regulatory
approval to operate effectively.  In addition, boycotts, protests, governmental sanctions and other actions could adversely
affect our ability to operate profitably.
Risks Related to Our Oil and Gas Operations
If our exploration and development programs prove unsuccessful, we may not be able to continue operations.
An investment in our company should be considered highly speculative due to the nature of our involvement in the
exploration, development and production of oil and natural gas.  Oil and gas exploration involves a high degree of risk,
which even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome.  Exploratory
drilling is subject to numerous risks, including the risk that no commercially productive oil and natural gas reservoirs will be
encountered.  The cost to drill, complete and operate wells is often uncertain, and drilling operations may be curtailed,
delayed or cancelled as a result of a variety of factors including unexpected drilling conditions, abnormal pressures,
equipment failures, premature declines of reservoirs, blow-outs, sour gas releases, fires, spills or other accidents, as well
as weather conditions, compliance with governmental requirements, delays in receiving governmental approvals or
permits, unexpected environmental issues and shortages or delays in the delivery of equipment.  Our inability to drill wells
that produce commercial quantities of oil and natural gas would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
Future oil and gas exploration may involve unprofitable efforts, not only from dry wells, but from wells that are productive
but do not produce sufficient net revenues to return a profit after exploration, drilling, operating and other costs.
 Completion of wells does not ensure a profit on the investment or recovery of exploration, drilling, completion and
operating costs.  Drilling hazards or environmental damage could greatly increase the cost of operations, and various field
operating conditions may adversely affect production.  Adverse conditions include delays in obtaining governmental
approvals or consents, shut-ins of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, insufficient storage or
transportation capacity or other geological and mechanical conditions.
Fluctuations in commodity prices could have a material impact on our revenues, which would affect our profitability.
Commodity price risk related to conventional crude oil prices could become our most significant market risk exposure if we
achieve oil and natural gas production.  Crude oil prices are influenced by such worldwide factors as the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries actions, political events and supply and demand fundamentals.  At this time, we cannot
accurately predict these fluctuations because we do not know when we will commence generating revenues from our oil
and gas operations.  Furthermore, we cannot estimate, at this time, the impact of commodity price fluctuations until we can
predict the level of revenues.
Application, interpretation and enforcement of government taxes is inconsistent making it difficult for us to ensure that we
are compliant which could lead to penalties.
The tax environment in Kazakhstan is subject to change, inconsistent application, interpretation and enforcement.  Non-
compliance with Kazakhstan laws and regulations can lead to the imposition of penalties and interest.  We intend to make
every effort to conform to these laws and regulations. However, our interpretations and those of our advisors may not be
the same as those of government officials, which could lead to penalties and interest.
9
Vector and KoZhaN face competition which could adversely affect their ability to penetrate the oil and gas market in
Kazakhstan which may make it difficult to attain profitability.
The oil and gas market is competitive and some of the competitors of Vector and KoZhaN are major international energy
industry operators.
These competitors have various advantages over Vector and KoZhaN, including:
-
-
-
substantially greater financial resources, which gives them greater flexibility
when developing their exploration and drilling programs;
greater recognition in the industry, which influences a potential partners’ decision
to participate in programs;
larger operations, which provides economies of scale and operating efficiencies
not available to Vector or KoZhaN;
longer operating histories; and
-
- more established relationships with government officials and other strategic
partners.
Vector and KoZhaN may be unable to successfully compete with these established competitors, which may adversely
affect their ability to acquire Hydrocarbon Contracts, licenses and drilling permits, which could impact their ability to
generate revenue.
Compliance, interpretation and enforcement with evolving environmental laws and regulations may impact our expenses
in a negative manner, which would directly impact our profit margins.
Extensive national, regional and local environmental laws and regulations in Kazakhstan affect the operations of Vector
and KoZhaN.  These laws and regulations set various standards regulating certain aspects of health and environmental
quality which provide for user fees, penalties and other liabilities for the violation of these standards and establish, in some
circumstances, obligations to remediate current and former facilities and off-site locations. We believe we are currently in
compliance with all existing Kazakhstan environmental laws and regulations.  However, as new environmental laws and
legislation are enacted and the old laws are repealed, interpretation, application and enforcement of the laws may become
inconsistent.  Compliance in the future could require significant expenditures, which would directly impact our profit
margins.
If Vector and KoZhaN repeatedly do not honor their capital expenditure commitments with the Republic of Kazakhstan,
they may lose their exploration licenses.
Pursuant to the three Hydrocarbon Contracts, a commitment was made by KoZhaN to invest, in Kazakhstan, an aggregate
of $16.43 million in capital expenditures, investments or other items that may be treated as capital assets of KoZhaN on or
before December 31, 2009. KoZhaN has commenced this investment using loans from BSEK and intends to fund this
investment using further loans from BSEK and, in the long term, from future production revenues.  These expenditures will
be used to further exploit and develop existing fields and to explore for additional reserves to enhance future production
and revenues.  If the required investment is not made within the agreed time period, KoZhaN may lose its exploration
licenses.  If the exploration effort is unsuccessful or future exploration is determined to be not profitable, KoZhaN can elect
not to invest the balance of the required exploration investment.
Pursuant to the Liman-2 and Atyrau Hydrocarbon Contracts, Vector has committed to invest for its two exploration assets
an aggregate of $53.9 million in capital expenditures, investments or other items that may be treated as capital assets of
Vector on or before December 31, 2007. Vector has funded its operations using loans from its parent company and will
further finance its subsoil use activities using funds of its parent company and further production revenues. If the required
capital investment commitments are not met within the agreed exploration period, Vector may lose its exploration licenses.
If the exploration effort is unsuccessful or future exploration is determined to be not profitable, Vector may withdraw from
the Hydrocarbon Contracts without investing the balance of the required exploration investment.
10
We may suffer currency exchange losses if the Tenge depreciates relative to the U.S. dollar.
We report in U.S. Dollars.  Anticipated early oil production will likely be sold on the domestic market where selling prices
are determined in the Tenge, the currency of Kazakhstan.  The majority of our Kazakhstan operating costs will be
denominated in Tenge.
Should we become profitable, we will be subject to Kazakhstan’s Excess Profits Tax, which would reduce our profit
margin.
Through our Kazakhstan subsidiaries, we may become subject to Excess Profits Tax under the terms of the Hydrocarbon
Contracts they have for oil and natural gas exploration and production.   Excess Profits Tax is in addition to statutory
income taxes and takes effect after the field has achieved a cumulative internal rate of return higher than 20%.  The Excess
Profits Tax ranges from 0% to 60% of taxable income.
Other Risks
Our shareholders may not be able to enforce U.S. civil liabilities claims thereby limiting their ability to collect on claims
against us.
Our assets are located outside the United States and are held through wholly owned subsidiaries incorporated under the
laws of  Canada and Kazakhstan.  Our current operations are conducted in Kazakhstan.  In addition, our directors and
officers are nationals and/or residents of countries other than the United States.  All or a substantial portion of the assets of
these persons are located outside the United States.  As a result, it may be difficult for you to effect service of process
within the United States upon these persons.  In addition, there is uncertainty as to whether the courts of  Canada or
Kazakhstan would recognize or enforce judgments of United States courts obtained against us or such persons predicated
upon the civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United States or any state thereof, or be competent to hear
original actions brought in these countries against us or such persons predicated upon the securities laws of the United
States or any state thereof.
Broker-dealers may be discouraged from effecting transactions in our shares because they are considered penny stocks
and are subject to the penny stock rules thereby potentially limiting the liquidity of our shares.
Rules 15g-1 through 15g-9 promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, impose sales practice
and disclosure requirements on NASD broker-dealers who make a market in "penny stocks". A penny stock generally
includes any non-NASDAQ equity security that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share.  Our shares are quoted on
the OTC/BB, and the price of our shares ranged from $0.01 (low) to $10.00 (high) during the period from September 25,
2000 to March 31, 2005.  The closing price of our shares on March 31, 2005 was $1.12.  NASD broker-dealers who act as
market makers for our shares generally facilitate purchases and sales of our shares.  The additional sales practice and
disclosure requirements imposed upon broker-dealers may discourage broker-dealers from effecting transactions in our
shares, which could severely limit the market liquidity of the shares and impede the sale of our shares in the secondary
market.
Under the penny stock regulations, a broker-dealer selling penny stock to anyone other than an established customer or
"accredited investor" (generally, an individual with net worth in excess of $1,000,000 or an annual income exceeding
$200,000, or $300,000 together with his or her spouse) must make a special suitability determination for the purchaser and
must receive the purchaser's written consent to the transaction prior to sale, unless the broker-dealer or the transaction is
otherwise exempt.
In addition, the penny stock regulations require the broker-dealer to deliver, prior to any transaction involving a penny
stock, a disclosure schedule prepared by the SEC relating to the penny stock market, unless the broker-dealer or the
transaction is otherwise exempt.  A broker-dealer is also required to disclose commissions payable to the broker-dealer
and the registered representative and current quotations for the securities.  Finally, a broker-dealer is required to send
monthly statements disclosing recent price information with respect to the penny stock held in a customer's account and
information with respect to the limited market in penny stocks.
11
ITEM 2.
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY.
Our principal Kazakhstan business office is located at Suite 3, 132 Dostyk Avenue, Almaty, Kazakhstan 650051. The
office consists of approximately 4,000 square feet of office space held under a lease that expires November 30, 2005. We
intend to renew this lease for the foreseeable future. Monthly rental cost for this space is approximately 1 million Tenge,
approximately US$7,700. This is also the registered office for Vector.
Our principal executive office and our offices of BSEK and BSEA are located at Suite 750, 440 – 2nd Avenue SW.,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2P 5E9 and consists of approximately 4,000 square feet of office space held under a lease
that expires on May 30, 2007 subject to certain early termination provisions after one year.  The monthly rental cost of this
space is Cdn.$10,308, plus variable operating costs.
KoZhaN has an office located at 1/1 Dzhandosov Street, Almaty, 480008, Kazakhstan and consists of approximately 590
square feet of office space held under a lease that expires on June 30, 2005 at a monthly rental cost of $3,000. The lease
is renewable for consecutive three-month periods.  We plan to discontinue this lease in the near future.
Our Beijing representative office is located at 1003 W2 Oriental Plaza, #1 East Chang An Avenue, Beijing, Peoples
Republic of China 100738. The office consists of 197 square metres, approximately 1200 square feet, held under a lease
that expires February 28, 2006 at a monthly rent of $4,925 plus management fees.
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
Morskoe License
The Morskoe License is located near Tengiz in western Kazakhstan, about 90 kilometers southwest of Kulsary railway
station.  Neighboring producing oilfields include Tengiz 10 miles to the northeast and Prorva, 10 miles to the south.  The
field was identified by seismic investigation in 1963 and proven through drilling in 1965.  It shows the anticlinal structures
draped over the top of the salt dome and delineated to the northwest by a fault.  The oil-bearing horizons belong to the
Lower Cretaceous Series at a depth of 4,000 feet.
The oil has been trapped in sandstones with a porosity exceeding 20%.  Net pays of over 20 feet have been established.
 Three wells are prime candidates for re-completion, having tested oil at combined rates of over 1,000 bopd.  The quality of
the crude ranges from 35° to 25° American Petroleum Institute (“API”).  The License has an area of 18,434 acres.  We
have the rights from surface to the Lower Permian.
Karatal License
The Karatal License is located near Makat in western Kazakhstan, about 50 miles north of Atyrau, western Kazakhstan’s
major city.  All large North American and European service companies are operating out of Atyrau.  Neighboring producing
oilfields include Daraimola 10 miles to the northwest and Tanatar, 5 miles to the east.  The field was identified by seismic
investigation in 1958 and proven through drilling in 1959.  It shows several anticlinal structures draped over the top of salt
domes and delineated by faults.  The oil-bearing horizons belong to the Lower Cretaceous Series at depths between 300
and 3,000 feet.  The oil has been trapped in sandstones with a porosity exceeding 20%.  Two wells are prime candidates
for re-completion, having tested small amounts of oil.  Although some oil production has been established, the license is
considered an exploration block.
The License has an area of 103,982 acres.  We have the rights from surface to the basement.
Dauletaly License
The Dauletaly License is located near Emba in western Kazakhstan, about 60 miles northeast of Kulsary.  Neighboring
producing oilfields include Krykmyltyk 1 mile to the north and Zhubantam, 10 miles to the east.    It shows several typical
anticlinal structures draped over the top of salt domes and delineated by faults.  The license is considered an exploration
block, with substantial deep potential, based on regional maps.
The License has an area of 33,359 acres.  We have the rights from surface to the basement.
12
Atyrau and Liman-2 Licenses
On December 28, 2002, Vector entered into a Hydrocarbon Contractor contract with the Government of the Republic of
Kazakhstan to explore for and produce hydrocarbons in the Atyrau and Liman-2 oilfields in the Atyrau region. From that
date to December 31, 2003, no major exploration activities have been carried out. In accordance with the Hydrocarbon
Contract  #1077, dated December 28, 2002. Vector received the right to perform exploration activities on the Atyrau oilfield
during 6 years from 2003 to 2008. In accordance with the Hydrocarbon Contract dated December 28, 2002, Vector
received the right to perform exploration activities on the Liman-2 oilfield during 5 years from, 2003 to 2007 inclusive and to
perform production activities during the subsequent 20 years.
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
To our knowledge, neither Big Sky nor any of our officers or directors is a party to any material legal proceeding or
litigation and such persons know of no material legal proceeding or contemplated or threatened litigation and none of our
officers or directors have been found by any court of competent jurisdiction to have violated any federal or state securities
or commodities law. There are no judgments, orders, or decrees against us or our officers or directors that limit in any
manner our involvement or that of our officers or directors in any type of business, securities or banking activities. None of
our officers or directors has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor relating to securities or performance in corporate
office.  None of our officers or directors has been involved in any capacity in any bankruptcy petition.
We are subject to potential litigation in the normal course of operations.  There are no claims currently pending that we
consider would materially affect our operations.
ITEM 4.
SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS.
On March 9, 2004, we solicited votes from selected shareholders of record to approve an increase in our authorized share
capital from 50,000,000 to 150,000,000, par value $0.001 per share.  We received an affirmative vote of 20,354,379 or 51%
of our issued and outstanding shares (39,944,744 shares).
On December 3, 2004 at our Annual General Meeting of Shareholders, shareholders voted in favor of increasing the
number of options authorized for issuance under the Corporation’s 2000 Stock Award Plan from 8,000,000 to 15,000,000.
The Shareholders also approved a name change from China Energy Ventures Corp. to Big Sky Energy Corporation. The
Shareholders also voted in favor of amending the By-laws of the Corporation to require a minimum number of board
members to be three and a maximum number to be eleven.
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET PRICE FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
Our common stock, par value $0.001 per share is traded in the over-the-counter market and is quoted on the National
Association of Securities Dealers Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board (“NASD-OTC-BB”), under the symbol "BSKO".  The
following information was obtained from http://finance.yahoo.com:
Period
2003:
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
2004:
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
2005:
January 1 – March 31
High
Low
$0.08
$0.39
$0.45
$1.06
$0.04
$0.01
$0.14
$0.16
13
$0.91
$0.65
$0.64
$0.79
$0.58
$0.53
$0.45
$0.49
$1.16
$0.47
Quotations commenced on the NASD-OTC-BB on September 25, 2000.  These over-the-counter market quotations reflect
inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission and may not necessarily represent actual
transactions.
We have never paid dividends on our common shares.  There are no restrictions that may limit our ability to pay dividends
currently or in the future.  We do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
As of April 7, 2005 we had approximately 260 shareholders of record and 97,438, 660 common shares issued and
outstanding.
EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN INFORMATION
As of December 31, 2004:
Plan Category
Big Sky Energy Corporation 2000 Stock
Option Plan (2)
Alternative Compensation Plan (3)
Number of
Weighted
securities to be
average exercise
issued upon
exercise of
outstanding
price of
outstanding
options,
options, warrants
warrants and
and rights
6,175,000
1,317,198
rights
$0.08
$0.08
Number of securities
remaining available
for future issuance
under equity
compensation plans
(1)(4)
8,723,334
0
(1)Excluding securities reflected under “Number of securities to be issued upon exercise of outstanding
options, warrants and rights”.
(2)Approved by our shareholders on June 29, 2001.
(3)Adopted by the board of directors on March 22, 2002 and approved by our shareholders on June 14,
2002.
(4)Approved by our shareholders on December 3, 2004 to a maximum of 15,000,000 options.
RECENT SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES
During 2004, we granted 100,000 options exercisable to acquire common shares to a consultant.  These options were
priced above the fair market value on the date of grant with an exercise price of $0.56 per share. The options were subject
to vesting conditions based upon continued performance of services, pursuant to which one-third of the granted options
vested on the date of grant, and one-third of the granted options would prospectively vest on each of the first and second
anniversaries of the date of grant, respectively.
On January 26, 2004, we issued 100,000 shares to an accredited investor at $0.25 per share for gross proceeds of
$25,000.  These securities were issued to a non-U.S. person outside the United States.
On February 11, 2004, we issued 66,666 shares upon a Stock Option Award being exercised at a price of $0.05 per share
for gross proceeds of $3,333.30.  These securities were issued to a non-U.S. person outside the United States.
On March 4, 2004, the Corporation issued 681,475 common shares to Ibriz in connection with an Asset Purchase
Agreement that we entered into with Ibriz.  The amount of common stock issued was determined using the average closing
price of our common stock for the five days prior to February 27, 2004, which resulted in a share price of $0.61 per share.
 These securities were issued to a non-U.S. entity outside the United States.
14
On January 12, 2004, the Corporation completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued and outstanding share capital of
BSEK.  The Corporation issued 8,000,000 common shares at a deemed price of $0.286 per share, being the trading price
of the Corporation’s shares at the date of announcing the transaction, for total consideration including transaction costs of
$2,288,000 as described in Note 5.
On April 12, 2004, the Corporation issued 299,716 common shares to Canaccord Capital (Europe) Limited for total
proceeds of $74,929 in connection with the exercise of a warrant issued on April 3, 2002.  The warrant was for a total of
299,716 common shares with an exercise price of $0.25.
On May 7, 2004, the Corporation closed on the first tranche of a private placement and issued 13,483,750 shares for gross
proceeds of $6,741,875. The costs associated with the private placement includes a finders fee equal to 6% of the gross
proceeds received by the Corporation and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued under
the private placement. The total share issuance costs for this tranche were $373,537.
On July 6, 2004, an additional 2,616,250 shares of the Corporation’s common stock was issued at $0.50 per share, totaling
$1,308,125.  The private placements were expressly subject to BSEA closing on the acquisition of Vector.  Costs
associated with this private placement included a finders fee equal to 6% of the gross proceeds received by the
Corporation and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued under the private placement. The
total share issuance costs were $97,193.
On September 20, 2004 the Corporation closed on the third tranche of a private placement and issued 2,440,000 shares
for gross proceeds of $1,220,000.  The costs associated with this private placement included a finders fee equal to 6% of
the gross proceeds received by the Corporation and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued
under the private placement. The total share issuance costs for this tranche were $208,070.
On November 15, 2004 the Corporation issued 35,000 shares on the exercise of stock options for total proceeds of $1,750.
On November 17, 2004 the Corporation closed on the fourth tranche of a private placement and issued 5,800,000 shares
for gross proceeds of $2,900,000. The costs associated with this private placement include a finders fee equal to 6% of the
gross proceeds received by the Corporation and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued
under the private placement. The total share issuance costs for this tranche were $437,241.
On November 10, 2004 the Corporation entered into an agreement to issue 3,500,000 common shares in exchange for the
25% minority interests in BSEA at a deemed price of $0.73 per share, which represents the closing market price for the
Corporation’s Common Shares on November 10, 2004 for total proceeds of $2,555,000.
The Corporation applies the fair value method in accounting for warrants issued as a finder fee. The fair value is measured
using a Black-Scholes valuation model. And is netted as a cost of share issuance.
In March 2005, the Corporation issued 1,750,000 shares to four option holders who exercised options previously granted,
at an exercise price of $0.05 per commons share for proceeds of $87,500.
Each of the foregoing issuances of securities was exempt from registration due to the exemption found in Regulation S
promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933. These sales were offshore
transactions since all of the offerees were not in the United States and the purchasers were outside the United States at
the time of the purchase. Moreover, there were no directed selling efforts of any kind made in the Untied States neither by
us nor by any affiliate or any person acting on our behalf in connection with any of these offerings. All offering materials
and documents used in connection with the offers and sales of the securities included statements to the effect that the
securities have not been registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and may not be offered or sold in the United States or
to  U.S.  persons  unless  the  securities  are  registered  under  the  Act  or  an  exemption  therefrom  is  available  and  that  no
hedging transactions involving those securities may not be conducted unless in compliance with the Act. Each purchaser
under Regulation S certified that it is not a U.S. person and is not acquiring the securities for the account or benefit of any
U.S.  person  and  agreed  to  resell  such  securities  only  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Regulation  S,  pursuant  to
registration under the Act or pursuant to an available exemption from registration. The shares sold are restricted securities
and the certificates representing these shares have been affixed with a standard restrictive legend, which states that the
securities cannot be sold without registration under the Securities Act of 1933 or an exemption there from and we are
required to refuse to register any transfer that does not comply with such requirements.
15
REPURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURTIES
We have no plans, programs or arrangements in regards to repurchases of our common stock.
ITEM 6.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OR PLAN OF OPERATION.
The following summary financial data should be read in conjunction with the remainder of "Management's Discussion and
Analysis or Plan of Operation" and the consolidated amended and restated financial statements and notes to such
consolidated amended and restated financial statements included in this report.  The selected historical financial as at
December 31, 2004 and 2003 and for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, 2002 and from inception date (February
1, 2000) to December 31, 2004 has been derived from our audited consolidated amended and restated financial
statements.
The Balance Sheet Data for 2004 summarized below has been restated due to a correction of an error. Please refer to
Note 27 of the Notes to the Amended and Restated Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the
restatement.
SUMMARY FINANCIAL DATA
Statement of Operations Data:
YEAR
ENDED
YEAR ENDED
DECEMBER
YEAR ENDED
DECEMBER
DECEMBER
31, 2003
31, 2002
31, 2004
PERIOD
FROM
FEBRUARY 1,
2000 TO
DECEMBER
31, 2004
$6,816,252
$3,194,368
$2,215,324
$20,071,119
$24,204
$64,606
($376,156)
($10,114,016)
$6,792,048
($0.13)
$3,129,762
($0.13)
$2,591,480
($0.12)
$30,185,135
-
51,585,004
23,536,537
21,774,775
Loss from continuing
operations
Income (Loss) from
discontinued
operations
Net loss
Basic loss per share
Basic weighted
average
Common Shares
Outstanding
Balance Sheet Data:
Cash and cash equivalents
Working capital (deficiency)
Total assets
Total stockholders’ equity
December 31,
2004
(As Restated)
$983,734
($2,793,503)
$25,757,879
$13,397,829
December 31,
2003
$1,068,451
$2,241,254
$2,790,706
$2,528,393
NATURE OF OPERATIONS
Late in 2003, the Corporation began investing in oil and gas assets in addition to its Internet service business in China, a
transition which concluded December 9, 2004 from selling Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., to become an oil and gas
exploration and production company. We acquired KoZhaN and Vector Energy West.  By acquiring these companies the
Corporation gained a significant acreage position in the prolific pre-Caspian basin of western Kazakhstan, located close to
infrastructure and transportation.
In the fourth quarter, the Corporation spudded its first well, Morskoe # 10. Our near term objectives include the drilling
completion and testing of Morskoe #10, followed by the drilling or working over of additional wells offsetting Morskoe #10,
should we have positive test results.
We are also intent on farming out selected high risk exploration targets.  Initially, the Corporation focused its partnership
initiatives on China’s major national oil and gas production and service companies and since has expanded its farm out
discussions to include established multinational energy companies.
16
We believe that these activities will lead to a sustainable platform on which to build the Corporation in Kazakhstan. In
addition to building a base in Kazakhstan, the Corporation is trying to secure additional licenses in other countries, using
the diverse expertise of its officers and consultants.
The Corporation raised over US$12 million of new common equity in 2004. While access to the capital markets is always
subjective, the current levels of energy prices support investor interest in financing new projects. The Corporation is basing
its growth strategies on attaining a sustainable level of cash flow from low risk energy development of existing licenses
while securing additional licenses subject to available financing on economic terms.  The Corporation raised an additional
$13.7 million in equity capital in February 2005.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
For 2004 and 2003, the Corporation did not earn revenues. We have added oil and gas properties through the acquisition
of KoZhaN and Vector; however these properties are currently undeveloped and consequently did not provide revenue
during the period.
Expenses
During 2004 and 2003, we incurred operating expenses of $6,591,615 and $3,208,603 respectively. The following table
provides a breakdown of operating expenses by category.
General Operating Expenses
Office Costs
Professional Services
Investor Relations
Extinguishment of debt
Miscellaneous
TOTAL
YEAR ENDED
DECEMBER 31,
YEAR ENDED
DECEMBER 31,
2004
$
2003
$
PERIOD FROM
FEBRUARY 1,
2000 TO
DECEMBER 31,
2004
$
17,330,204
2,724,450
1,415,251
(1,422,225)
-
212,114
5,586,469
759,984
245,162
-
-
3,073,825
122,672
12,106
-
6,591,615
3,208,603
20,259,794
Office costs include the costs of executive management, administrative consultants, rent, insurance, travel and general
offices costs associated with maintaining our business offices and operation in Canada and Kazakhstan. The increase in
office costs from 2003 is due to acquisition of additional subsidiaries during the year and their related costs.
There is $385,690 (2003 – $455,000) of office costs related to maintaining an office in Beijing. These costs decreased as a
result of the Corporations change in focus to oil and gas operations
Professional services include accounting, audit and legal advisory costs.  Professional costs have increased in 2004
compared to 2003.  The overall increase in professional services was due to increased legal, audit and accounting fees
due to the increased activity of the oil and gas operations in the subsidiaries.
The financial statements of the Corporation’s two subsidiaries have been translated into US Dollars from Kazakhstan
Tenge.  The subsidiaries maintain their accounting records in Tenge.  A majority of KoZhaN’s and Vector’s capitalized
costs, expenses, liabilities, loans and cash flows are denominated in US Dollars.  Accordingly, KoZhaN and Vector have
determined that the US Dollars is its functional currency.  KoZhaN’s and Vector’s long-lived assets and equity are
translated using historic exchange rates.  Gains and losses arising from these translations are reported in the consolidated
statement of operations.  The foreign currency loss related to this translation was $193,130.  The Corporation maintains
offices in Canada and China and may incur foreign exchange losses in meeting its operating expenses in local currencies
relative to the US dollar. In 2004, foreign exchange
17
losses for operations in China and Canada were $33,808.  The Kazakhstan Tenge is not a fully convertible currency
outside of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The translation of Tenge denominated assets and liabilities into US Dollars for the
purpose of these financial statements does not indicate that the Corporation could realize or settle in US Dollars the
reported values of the assets and liabilities.
We record the fluctuations in the fair value of certain unexercised stock options as a deferred compensation asset
(reported as a reduction of stockholders’ equity on the balance sheet). This asset is amortized over the life of the stock
options as non-cash compensation expense. The non-cash compensation expense in 2004 was $758,264 (2003 –
$1,541,174)
Summary of Non-cash Compensation Expense since inception:
Options
     Options granted June 29, 2001
     Options granted November 13, 2001
     Options granted October 21, 2002
     Options granted October 21, 2002
     Options granted April 26, 2003
     Options granted June 24, 2004
Total
Unamortized
Deferred
Compensation
Expense
3,841
-
-
707,006
14,749
32,668
$758,264
-
-
-
-
4,594
23,332
$27,926
Losses
Since we are in the development stage, all losses accumulated since inception is considered as part of our development
stage activities.
Discontinued Operations
In December 2004, we sold our 100% shareholding in Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., which held our remaining assets in
China, Big Sky Chengdu Technology Services Ltd, 100% owned, and our interest in the Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network
Ltd. joint venture, 50% owned. With this sale, we exited the Internet business in China. The sale of Big Sky Network
Canada is presented as a discontinued operation in our amended and restated financial statements.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES AND INVESTMENTS
The Corporation began investing in oil and gas assets in addition to its Internet service business in China, to become an
international oil and gas exploration and production company. This began with the acquisition of KoZhaN and continued
with the acquisition of Vector.  By acquiring these companies the Corporation gained a significant acreage position in the
prolific pre-Caspian basin of western Kazakhstan located close to infrastructure and transportation. The Corporation sold
all of its Internet assets in China on December 9, 2004.
In the fourth quarter of 2004, the Corporation spudded its first well, Morskoe # 10. Our near term objectives include the
drilling, completion and testing of Morskoe #10, followed by the drilling or working over of additional wells offsetting
Morskoe #10, should we have positive test results.  The Company entered into an agreement to farm out 45% of its interest
in the Morskoe license in exchange for a turnkey completion of the Morskoe # 10 well with cost of completing the well to be
paid by the farmee. This agreement is subject to Ministry approval (refer to Note 10 of the Notes to the Amended and
Restated Consolidated Financial Statements).
We are also intent on farming out selected high risk and high cost exploration targets.  Initially, the Corporation focused its
partnership initiatives on China’s major national oil and gas production and service companies and since has expanded
its farm out discussions to include established energy companies.
We believe that these activities will lead to a sustainable platform on which to build the Corporation. In addition to building
a base in Kazakhstan, the Corporation is trying to secure additional licenses in other countries, using the diverse expertise
of its officers and consultants.
18
The Corporation raised over US$12 million of new common equity in 2004. While access to the capital markets is always
subjective, the current levels of energy prices support investor interest in financing new projects. The Corporation is basing
its growth strategies on attaining a sustainable level of cash flow from low risk energy development of existing licenses
while securing additional licenses, subject to available financing on economic terms.
During the first quarter of 2004, we successfully completed the acquisition of BSEK and its subsidiary, KoZhaN, and in the
second quarter of 2004, we successfully completed the acquisition of Vector. These were important initial steps in our
efforts to redirect our operations toward exploration and exploitation of oil and gas.  See Note 5 in our amended and
restated financial statements.
We expect this new direction to bring increased value as the management team has extensive expertise and experience in
the oil and gas business.
Material Commitments for Capital Expenditures
As a result of the acquisition of KoZhaN and Vector, we have acquired significant commitments for future capital
expenditure. The majority or these commitments are not required to be settled until we are in the production phase, at
which time we expect to have sufficient cash-flows from production to meet these commitments and will rely primarily on
production cash-flows to meet future capital expenditures. If the future cash flows from production are insufficient to meet
these commitments, we will likely have to rely on additional equity financing.
Certain commitments relating to KoZhaN require capital expenditure prior to the production phase. These include
investment commitments of $16.43 million.  We anticipate we will be able to meet these capital costs through a number of
financing alternatives. The investment commitment of $16.43 million is required to be spent in exploration phase in the
Republic of Kazakhstan during the exploration phase, which is expected to last until approximately 2009.  We plan to
finance this commitment through a combination of the sale of exploration related production and future equity financing.
  The governments’ objective in setting minimum work commitments is to ensure certain types of exploratory work is
carried out by the license holder, including drilling new wells and seismic activity. The government will measure the
degree to which the Corporation has met its commitments in terms of work completed. The government estimates the work
commitment in terms of expected spending amounts. The government measures the performance of the Corporation
towards meeting its work commitment by evaluating the actual work performed in comparison with the agreed
requirements. Actual spending is not a performance measure.
Commercial discovery bonuses will be equal to 0.1% of the value of proved reserves if found.  We anticipate that any
commercial discovery bonus will be small enough to be financed out of our working capital.
For 2004, we have met the work commitments expected of Vector and KoZhaN. For 2005, we defined work commitments
as follows:
•
KoZhaN – Expected Capital Expenditures are $5.2 million of which $1.6 million is allocated for 3 work over wells in
Karatal; $0.5 million is allocated to new drilling in Dauletaly. We expect to spend an additional $1.4 million developing the
Morskoe area, subject to results of drilling Morskoe #10. The balance of spending will be made up from administration,
training and related business activities.
•
Vector – Expected Capital Expenditures $29.4 million of which $9.0 million is allocated for seismic work and $17.0 million
allocated for drilling 10 wells. The balance will be made up of administration, training and related business activities.
The Vector and KoZhaN work commitments are measure by actual work undertaken and completed. The cost to complete
the work can be lower, or higher, than the estimated cost. Actual cost is not the determining factor in meeting work
commitment obligations. As the undertaken work commitments in 2005 are higher than those defined in the Hydrocarbon
Contracts, Vector and KoZhaN expects to apply to the government to amend the commitment to the lesser amounts
defined in the Hydrocarbon Contracts.
19
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
During  2004,  the  Corporation  utilized  cash  for  management  and  corporate  administrative  activities  of  approximately
$200,000  per  month.  Management  anticipates  that  the  Corporation  currently  has  sufficient  working  capital  to  fund  this
minimum  level  of  operations  through  December  2006.  However,  the  Corporation  may  require  additional  financing  to
continue as a going concern beyond December. Current cash resources are not anticipated to be sufficient to fund the
work  commitment  for  existing  licenses,  acquire  producing  properties  or  additional  licenses.  It  will  consider  seeking
additional private equity or debt financing. There can be no assurances that any such funds will be available, and if funds
are  raised,  that  they  will  be  sufficient  to  achieve  the  Corporation’s  objective,  or  result  in  commercial  success.  The
Corporation  cannot  assure  you  that  it  will  be  able  to  obtain  sufficient  capital  to  satisfy  all  of  its  obligations  or  that  its
operating subsidiaries will be commercially successful. In February 2005, we raised an additional $13.7 million of common
equity from institutional investors and accredited private investors in Europe, Russia, USA and Canada
The ability of the Corporation to continue operations will depend on its ability to finance, acquire, explore for and produce
oil and natural gas on a profitable basis.
As of December 31, 2004, we had cash and cash equivalents of $983,734 that were included in the working capital deficit
of $2,793,503.  This compared to a working capital surplus of $2,241,254 at December 31, 2003.  The decrease largely
reflects the working capital deficit acquired on the acquisition of BSEK and Vector that occurred during the year. We
closed on the first tranche of a private placement and issued 13,483,750 shares for proceeds of $6,741,875.  A second
tranche was closed July 6, 2004, raising an additional $1,308,125 by issuing an additional 2,616,250 shares.   The third
tranche was closed September 20, 2004, raising an additional $1,220,000 by issuing an additional 2,440,000 shares. The
fourth tranche was closed November 17, 2004 raising $2,900,000 by issuing an additional 5,800,000 shares.  Costs
associated with all tranches of the private placement include a finder’s fee equal to 6% of the gross proceeds received by
us and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued under the private placement totaling to
$1,116,041 of share issuance costs.  As well, Canaccord Capital (Europe) Limited exercised a warrant for 299,716 shares
for proceeds of $74,929.  $4,430,000 of these funds was directed towards the purchase of Vector Energy and $570,000
was directed towards the acquisition of creditor’s rights from Lorgate Management Inc.
On February 11, 2004 we issued 66,666 shares for proceeds of $3,333 on the exercise of non-employee options. As part
of the exercise agreement, the remaining 33,334 unvested options outstanding to the option holder were cancelled and
returned to the stock option plan.  On June 24, 2004, the Nominating and Compensation Committee granted 100,000
options to a consultant.
On November 10, 2004 we issued 3,500,000 shares in exchange for the 25% minority interest in BSEA at a deemed price
of $0.73 per share, being the closing market price for the Corporations Common Shares on November 10, 2004 for total
proceeds of $2,555,000.
On November 15, 2004 we issued 35,000 shares for proceeds of $1,750 on the exercise of non-employee options.
On a consolidated basis, our minimum cash requirement for maintenance of operations, without conducting a drilling
program or acquisitions of other potential fields, is estimated at approximately $400,000 per month in 2005.  With the
acquisition of BSEK, Vector and our diversification into oil and natural gas exploration and production, we anticipate that
we will be required to raise additional capital to fund future exploration and development programs or farm out some of our
interest in various higher risk/cost projects to third parties.  Such farm-outs would be intended to cover up to 100% of
project costs in return for a percentage interest in the project.
On October 12, 2004, KoZhaN entered into two (2) agreements with ABT Ltd. LLP – an Agreement on Partial Transfer of
the Subsoil Use Right (the “Transfer Agreement”) and Agreement No. 1. (“Agreement No. 1”). These two (2) agreements
set the terms and conditions of the transfer by KoZhaN of forty-five percent (45%) of its interest in the subsoil use right in
the Morskoe oil field (the “Interest”).
Pursuant to Agreement No. 1, ABT is providing consideration for the Interest that consists of performance of certain
construction works and up to 50% of the costs incurred in connection with Well No. 10 in the Morskoe oil field that are not
deemed to be associated with the “drilling works” of such well.
Also pursuant to Agreement No. 1, ABT agreed to provide a loan of up to $550,000 for the drilling works associated with
Well No. 10. “Drilling works” was defined as all costs associated with the drilling, completing, equipping, coring, logging,
perforating and test of Well No. 10. This loan is required to be repaid only in the case of discovery of oil and production
from the Morskoe oil field.
20
The transfer of the Interest is subject to approval by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan (the
“MEMR”), which has not yet been received.
The Company has recorded the amount of $840,423 paid by ABT in performance of the construction works as an amount
loaned to the Company by ABT. In the event that the transfer of the Interest is approved by the MEMR, this amount will be
converted into an amount received as consideration for the Interest transferred to ABT.
The amounts received from ABT towards the drilling works, which as of December 31, 2004, equaled $500,000, have
been recorded by the Company as a loan, to be repaid from production. In the event that no oil is discovered or produced
by the Company from the Morskoe oil field, this loan will be removed from the Company’s records as a forgiven loan
pursuant to the terms of Agreement No. 1. The Company has the obligation to repay the amount of $500,000 to ABT Ltd.
should the farm out agreement not be approved by the Ministry.
Cash Requirements
The following aggregated information about our contractual obligations and other commitments aim to provide insight into
our short and long-term liquidity and capital resource need and demands as at December 31, 2004.
Exploration phase
Production phase
Within 1
Total
Time period
Estimated
dates
Production levels (tonnes of oil)
year
1 - 3 years  3 - 5 years
Over 5 years
2005
2006 – 08 2009 - 10
2011
2012
2013
2014
–2014-2030
$Nil
4,000t
40,000t
150,000t
250,000t
250,000t
Over
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
$Nil
182,012
182,012
700,948
10,359,306
151,500       151,500       151,500    2,575,500
69,450       69,450       69,450
1,180,650
5,445,000 5,445,000 5,445,000  92,565,000
$348,800      $174,900     $173,900
1,340,423
1,340,423
3,030,000
11,424,278
(One tonne of oil equals approximately 7.4 barrels) 
 
Operating
leases
Historical
costs (Owed
to
Kazakhstan
Government)
Short-term
interest free
loan from
ABT Ltd.
Social
sphere
development
liability
(Astana and
Atyrau)
Social
development
commitment
(Astana and
Atyrau)
Investment
commitment
(Including
investment
in local
personnel)
Liquidation
fund
(Obligations
incurred to
date)
Commercial
production
milestone
payments
1,389,000
1,300,000
40,000
121,900,000  1,500,000*  3,000,000* 8,500,000*
40,000
100,000     300,000     400,000     500,000
-
Total
$140,772,501 $3,015,323 $3,173,900
$
8,500,000
$
100,000 $6,147,962 $6,247,962 $6,866,898 $106,720,456
21
* As disclosed in Note 25 (g) to the consolidated amended and restated financial statements, we are obliged to spend
$14,000,000 during the exploration phase, which is expected to end in 2009. As we are entitled to make these payments at
any point over the exploration period, the timing of payments presented in the table reflects management’s estimate as to
when these expenditures will be incurred by us.
The following commitments have been excluded based on the inability to estimate the timing
* As disclosed in Note 25 to the consolidated amended and restated financial statements, we are obliged to spend $16.43
million during the exploration phase, which is expected to end in 2009. As we are entitled to make these payments at any
point over the exploration period, the timing of payments presented in the table reflects management’s estimate as to when
these expenditures will be incurred by us.
The following commitments have been excluded based on the inability to estimate the timing of payment and or the dollar
amount of the future payments:
1.
Quarterly payments to the non-controlling partners in KoZhaN – these payments will be charged based net sales of oil, in
accordance with the following schedule:
-$0.35 per barrel if the price of oil is equal to or less than $14.00;
-$0.75 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $14.00 and less than or
equal to $18.00;
-$1.00 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $18.00 and less than or
equal to $22.00; or
-$1.50 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $22.00
2.
Commercial discovery bonus – these payments to the government are required within 30 days of the approval by the State
Committee of Kazakhstan of proved commercial hydrocarbon reserves. Payments amounts are currently set at 0.1% of the
value assigned to the proved commercial reserves.
3.
A royalty of $1 per barrel for oil produced and sold form the Atyrau and Liman 2 licences.
PLAN OF OPERATION
As of December 31, 2004, our management anticipates that we currently have sufficient working capital to fund our
operations, without conducting a drilling program or acquisitions of other potential fields, through December 2006.   As at
March 31, 2005, after raising an additional $13.7 million in new common equity, we had sufficient working capital to fund
our operations and carry out a significant portion of our annual work commitments.
With the acquisition of BSEK, Vector and our diversification into oil and natural gas exploration and production, we
anticipate that we will be required to raise additional capital to fund future exploration and development programs or farm-
out some of our interest in higher risk exploration projects to third parties.  Such farm-outs would be intended to cover up to
100% of project costs in return for a percentage interest in the project.
Meeting our future financing requirements will be dependent on our ability to develop oil and gas farm outs or joint venture
partnerships on favourable terms, our ability to access equity capital markets and, after achieving or acquiring sustainable
production, our ability to maintain credit facilities from institutional lenders. We may not be able to raise additional equity
when required, or we may raise the equity on terms that are dilutive to existing shareholders.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2004.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCMENTS
In December 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) revised FIN No. 46, “Consolidation of Variable
Interest Entities”, which clarifies the application of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51 “Consolidated Financial
Statements” to those entities (defined as VIEs) in which either the equity at risk is not sufficient to permit that entity to
finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or equity investors lack voting
control, an obligation to absorb expected losses or the right to receive expected residual returns. FIN No. 46(R) requires
consolidation by a business of VIEs in which it is the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary is defined as the party
that has exposure to the majority of the expected losses and/or expected residual returns of the VIE. The Corporation does
not have an interest in any VIE, and therefore there is no impact on the Company's financial position, results of operations
or cash flows from adoption.
22
In June 2004, the FASB issued an exposure draft of a proposed statement, “Fair Value Measurements” to provide
guidance on how to measure the fair value of financial and non-financial assets and liabilities when required by other
authoritative accounting pronouncements. The proposed statement attempts to address concerns about the ability to
develop reliable estimates of fair value and inconsistencies in fair value guidance provided by current U.S. GAAP, by
creating a framework that clarifies the fair value objective and its application in GAAP. In addition, the proposal expands
disclosures required about the use of fair value to re-measure assets and liabilities. The standard would be effective for
financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. The Corporation is reviewing The Exposure
Draft to determine the potential impact, if any, on its consolidated amended and restated financial statements.
In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151, “Inventory Costs”, to clarify that abnormal amounts of idle facility
expense, freight, handling costs and wasted materials (spoilage) should be recognized as current-period charges, and to
require the allocation of fixed production overheads to inventory based on the normal capacity of the production facilities.
The guidance is effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. Earlier application
is permitted. The Corporation does not believe there will be a material impact on it’s financial position, results of operations
or cash flow from operations.
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement 153, Exchanges of Non-monetary Assets, an amendment of APB Opinion
29, Accounting for Non-monetary Transactions. This amendment eliminates the exception for non-monetary exchanges of
similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for exchanges of non-monetary assets that do not have
commercial substance. Under Statement 153, if a non-monetary exchange of similar productive assets meets a
commercial-substance criterion and fair value is determinable, the transaction must be accounted for at fair value resulting
in recognition of any gain or loss. This statement is effective for non-monetary transactions in fiscal periods that begin after
June 15, 2005. The Corporation is reviewing the guidance to determine the potential impact, if any, on its consolidated
amended and restated financial statements.
In November 2004, the EITF ratified Issue No. 03-13, “Applying the Conditions in Paragraph 42 of FASB Statement
No.144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, in Determining Whether to Report Discontinued
Operations”. The EITF reached a consensus that classification of a disposed of or held-for-sale component as a
discontinued operation is only appropriate if the ongoing entity (i) expects to have no continuing “direct” cash flows, and (ii)
does not retain or expect to retain an interest, contract or other arrangement sufficient to enable it to exert significant
influence over the disposed component’s operating and financial policies after the disposal transaction. Application of this
consensus did not have a material impact on the Corporation’s consolidated amended and restated financial statements.
In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), “Share-Based Payment”, that will require
compensation costs related to share-based payment transactions to be recognized in financial statements. With limited
exceptions, the amount of compensation cost will be measured based on the grant-date fair value of the equity or liability
instruments issued. In addition, liability awards will be re-measured each reporting period. Compensation cost will be
recognized over the period that an employee provides service in exchange for the award. The standard replaces SFAS
No. 123, “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation”, and supersedes APB Opinion No. 25, “Accounting for Stock Issued
to Employees”. It is effective for small business issuers for the first interim or annual reporting period beginning after
December 15, 2005, meaning that the Corporation will apply the guidance to all employee awards of share-based
payment granted, modified or settled in the first quarter of 2006. The Corporation is reviewing the standard to determine the
potential impact, if any, on its consolidated amended and restated financial statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Oil and Gas Properties
The Corporation follows the successful efforts method of accounting for its oil and gas operations.  Property acquisition
costs are initially capitalized to property, plant and equipment as unproved property costs.  Once proved reserves are
discovered, the acquisition costs are reclassified to proved property acquisition costs.  Exploration drilling costs are
capitalized pending evaluation as to whether sufficient quantities of reserves have been found to justify commercial
production.  If commercial quantities of reserves are not found, exploration drilling costs are expensed.  All exploratory
wells that discover potentially commercial quantities of reserves in areas requiring major capital expenditures before the
commencement of production and where commercial viability requires the drilling of additional exploratory wells, remain
capitalized as long as the drilling of
23
additional exploratory wells is under way or firmly planned.  All other exploration costs, including geological and
geophysical and annual lease rentals are expensed to earnings as incurred.  All development costs are capitalized as
proved property costs.  The costs of unsuccessful exploratory wells are charged to expense at the time the wells or other
exploration activities are determined to be non-productive. Production costs, overheads and all exploration costs other
than exploratory drilling are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Oil and Gas Properties
The Corporation evaluates its long-lived assets, including oil and gas properties, for possible impairment by comparing the
carrying values with the undiscounted future net before-tax cash flows. Among other things, this might be caused by falling
oil and gas prices, a significant revision to reserve estimates, adverse changes in operating costs, tax or political
environment. Asset impairment may occur if a field discovers lower than anticipated reserves, write downs of proved
reserves based on field performance, significant changes in commodity prices, significant decreases in the market value of
an asset, and significant change in the extent or manner of use or physical change in an asset. Impaired assets will be
written down to their estimated fair values, generally their discounted future net before-tax cash flows. For proved oil and
gas properties, the Corporation performs the impairment test on an individual field basis. Unproved properties are
reviewed periodically to determine if there has been impairment of the carrying value with any such impairment charged to
expense in the current period. We assessed our oil and gas properties for impairment at the end of 2004 and found no
impairments were required based on our assumptions.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for stock-based awards to employees using the intrinsic method in accordance with Accounting Principles
Board Opinion (“APB”) No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees”.  Under APB 25, compensation expense is
accounted for in accordance with the intrinsic method where the expense is recognized upon exercise of the option as
being the difference between the quoted market price and the exercise price, or if resulting from awards under variable
plans, the expense is measured at each reporting period as the difference between the quoted market price and the
exercise price.  We account for stock-based awards to non-employees in accordance with the Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) No. 123, “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation”.  SFAS No. 123 requires that stock
options awarded to non-employees be valued at fair value on the date of the award.  Management estimates the fair value
of the stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and makes assumptions for the applicable interest rates,
volatility and dividend yield.  In all cases, the calculated compensation is recognized as an expense over the period that
the employee performs the related services.  For the year ended December 31, 2004, an amount of $758,264 was
recorded as non-cash stock compensation expense in respect of employee and non-employee-stock based compensation
(2003 - $489,654)
OUTLOOK
We have focused our operations on oil and natural gas exploration and production, an area in which our management has
extensive experience. Our primary business operations are in Kazakhstan, although we continue to seek opportunities in
other countries. To complete our transition to oil and gas business, we have engaged a new President and Vice President,
Business Development.
The oil and natural gas industry is cyclical in nature. During peaks in this cycle, oil prices are higher, exploration activities
are more prolific and the costs associated with investing are generally lower that during the downward phase of the cycle.
 Commodity prices have been relatively high for at least three years and the industry is very active.  Many companies have
instigated exploration programs or are interested in investing in exploration.
Our objective is to find shallow (less than approximately 3000 feet) oil and gas fields with proven reserves that require
some enhanced recovery, work over, additional drilling or stimulation, and that have an exploration upside and are located
near infrastructure and markets.   The strategy for our entry into the oil business is to act as the principal in researching,
negotiating and acquiring licensees to explore and produce hydrocarbons and then to partner with the other oil companies
and have these companies provide the initial funding that is required to establish production at the selected oil and gas
fields.
Our current capital resources are limited.  There can be no assurances that we will have sufficient financial, technical and
human resources to undertake new opportunities or maintain our current operations. We have consistently been able to
raise new capital, attract experienced management and operating people and locate new opportunities. In the current
environment of energy prices at higher levels than in the past, we expect to continue to be able to develop our business.
24
Our focus is on finding or acquiring oil production to ensure sustainable cash flows and ongoing operations.
ITEM 7.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
The information required by this item is included in pages F-1 through F-32 attached hereto. The index to the consolidated
amended and restated financial statements can be found on page F-1.
ITEM 8.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURES.
Not Applicable.
ITEM 8A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES.
We maintain disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in
our Exchange Act reports is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC's
rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Subsequent to the discovery of the accounting error which was the causation of our current restatement, we carried out an
evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of our management and Audit Committee, including our Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls
and procedures pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 13a-14.  Based upon the foregoing, our Chief Executive Officer and our
Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures while designed to provide reasonable
assurance that information required to be disclosed in the reports the Corporation files and submits under the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported as and when required, were lacking in rigor and
application and disclosure controls were not functioning.
The areas that require to be remediated include:
-
lack of sufficient personnel with appropriate knowledge, experience and training in US GAAP;
-
lack of clear accountability structure within the accounting function;
-
lack of clear organization and accountability structure within the accounting function, including insufficient review and
supervision, combined with financial reporting systems that are not integrated between our offices in Kazakhstan and
North America and our offices and those of our accountants and require substantial manual intervention;
-
lack of review process for translated material prior to insertion into the accounting records of the company;
The accounting error was not related to the process by which information is processed and disclosed but was related to
the complexities of the contracts that were the subject of the accounting error. The subject-contracts were originally drafted
in Russian. Upon translation into English, certain provisions of the contracts were worded in way that lead to multiple
possible interpretations. This lack of clarity was the root of the cause of the accounting error.
The Corporation intends to adopt a policy that all contracts drafted in a foreign language must be translated into English
and then reviewed and approved by the Corporation’s legal counsel prior to execution.  Management believes that this will
ensure that specificity and clarity will be included in every contract executed by the Corporation and its subsidiaries and
prevent the misinterpretation that occurred in the contracts referenced above.
25
As an initial step to addressing this lack of rigor and good practice, the Audit Committee conducted a recruitment exercise
which culminated in the employment of Kevin Kim as Chief Accounting Officer as of August 15, 2005.
In addition, our Chief Financial Officer has engaged with our Corporate Governance and Compliance Consultant to devise
and implement a sub-certification program throughout the accounting function with the long-term goal of extending this
program to all business processes.
In conjunction with external service providers, we will continue to identify, develop and implement remedial measures to
address these inadequacies and implement best practice in our internal controls over financial reporting.
Changes in Internal Controls
The Company’s internal controls over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation above changed as
disclosed above.
26
PART III
ITEM 9.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS; COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION
16(a) OF THE EXCHANGE ACT.
We employ our executive officers as consultants under the terms of individual consulting agreements.  See “Employment
and Consulting Agreements”.  The following table sets forth information, as of March 31, 2005, regarding our directors,
executive officers and key employees:
Name
Nurlan Utebovich
Balgimbayev
Bruce Gaston
Matthew Heysel
Thomas Milne
Philip Pardo
S.A. (Al)
Sehsuvaroglu
Barry Swersky
Ruslan Tsarni
Age
57
Director
Position
40
49
58
49
50
66
34
Director
Chairman of the Board, Chief
Executive Officer & Director
Director and Chief Financial
Officer
Director
President & Director
Co-Chairman, Director & Vice
President, New Developments
Vice President, Business
Development  & Corporate
Since
March 31, 2005
December 3, 2004
April 14, 2000
April 14, 2000
December 3, 2004
March 9, 2005
December 3, 2004
March 29, 2005
Glenn Van Doorne
Daming Yang
51
47
Secretary
Executive Vice President
Director
February 26, 2004
April 14, 2000
Nurlan Utebovich Balgimbayev
Mr. Nurlan Balgimbayev is a former Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan, (October 1997-October 1999), a former
Minister of Oil and Gas (1994-1997), and a former President of the government owned national oil company, Kazmunaigas
(October  1999-February  2002).  He  graduated  in  1973  from  the  Kazakh  Polytechnic  Institute  with  a  degree  of  Mining
Geologist. Mr. Balgimbayev began his career as an engineer in 1973, initially with Mangyshlak Oil and Gas and continuing
as Chief Engineer with Zhaik Oil. From 1981 to 1986, he was Chief Engineer of Aktubinsk oil and Gas followed by five
years  of  senior  management  responsibilities  in  the  Ministry  of  Oil  and  Gas  Industry  of  the  USSR,  in  Moscow.  Mr.
Balgimbayev  attended  the  University  of  Massachusetts,  Executive  Program  until  1993  when  he  joined  Chevron
Corporation as a Senior Consultant until he became Minister of Oil and Gas in 1994.
Mr. Balgimbayev served as a director of Nelson Resources Limited (2002-2004) and is a director of Herson Oil Refinery
System  (Ukraine).  He  is  also  a  Member  of  the  Kazakhstan  Board  for  the  Stable  Development  of  the  Republic  of
Kazakhstan. He was honored with the Kazakhstan National Medal “Barys” for his service to the republic of Kazakhstan.
Bruce Hill Gaston – Director
Mr. Gaston is a financial control, risk management, capital markets, and corporate finance specialist with a significant
background in the Eurasian oil and gas marketplace.  Mr. Gaston was previously a Senior Associate Director of Deutsche
Morgan Grenfell based initially in London and then in Tokyo.  While in London with Deutsche Morgan Grenfell, Mr. Gaston
was involved in risk management and advisory for the Russian and Eastern European sovereign debt trading and financial
structuring.  Mr. Gaston has been a consultant with a boutique Eurasian corporate finance and risk management
consultancy since late 1999 supporting clients including the Royal Bank of Scotland Asia and Barclays Capital.  Mr.
Gaston has also served as a Director of Deloitte & Touche Central Asia through 2002 and was previously head of Russian
Equities for Commerzbank AG in 1998 and 1999.  Mr. Gaston has also served with Credit Suisse Financial Products as an
accountant and Bankers Trust as an Assistant Treasurer and started his financial career as a graduate on the trading floor
of Chase Manhattan NA in 1987.  Mr. Gaston has been an advisor to Eastern European governments on privatization, Oil
and Gas clients on Financial Control Process Engineering, and has considerable experience in Risk Management in
global markets and within the Eastern European Emerging Markets sector.  Mr. Gaston’s educational achievements
include a BA in July 1987 from the University of New Brunswick, followed by an MSc in Economics from the University of
London in December 1990
27
Matthew Heysel –Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer, Director
Mr. Heysel has served as Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation from April 14,
2000 to the present.  Mr. Heysel has been the Chairman of Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. since July 2003 and Vice-
Chairman of KoZhaN LLP since August 2003.  Previously, he served as an Investment Banker at Yorkton Securities, a
Canadian independent securities firm, where he was responsible for corporate finance in the oil and gas sector from April
1997 through April 1999.  From April 1999 to November 2001, he was the President of New Energy West Corporation.
 From 1987 to 1997, Mr. Heysel was with Sproule Associates Limited, an independent economic evaluator of oil and
natural gas reserves.  During his tenure with Sproule, Mr. Heysel held the positions of Petroleum Engineer and Associate,
Engineering Manager and Senior Associate and Manager – International Projects and Senior Associate.  Mr. Heysel also
serves as a director of Gastar Exploration Ltd.  Mr. Heysel obtained an Honors Bachelor Degree in Science from the
University of Western Ontario in 1979 and a Bachelor of Science-Chemical Engineering Degree from the University of
Toronto in 1982.
Thomas Milne - Director and Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Milne has served on our Board of Directors and as Vice President of Finance and Chief Financial Officer since April
14, 2000.  He has also served as the Chief Financial Officer of Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., our subsidiary, since May of
1999.  From September 2002 to February 2004, Mr. Milne was the Regional Advisory Services Partner for Meyers Norris
Penny LLP, a chartered accountancy and business advisory firm located in Calgary, Alberta.  From 2000 to 2002, Mr.
Milne was employed by the Corporation.  From 1985 through 1997, Mr. Milne was Vice President and Treasurer of NOVA
Corporation, and director of NOVA Finance International.  He was the Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer
of Arakis Energy, from September 1997 to October 1998, an oil and gas company traded on NASDAQ.  Since March 1998,
Mr. Milne has served as Chief Executive Officer of Precise Details, Inc., a consulting, investment management, real estate
and automotive services company.  Mr. Milne also currently serves as a director of The Alberta Performing Arts
Stabilization Fund and the Investment Committee of the University of Calgary Pension and Endowment Funds.
Philip Dean Pardo – Director
Mr. Pardo has been working in Central Asia for nine years and is Vice Rector on Academic Affairs and Director of
Business School of Kazakh British Technical University. Previously he held the post Associate Dean of the College of
Continuing Education for the Kazakhstan Institute of Management, Economics and Strategic Research (KIMEP) were he
taught courses in Small Business, Franchising, Public Administration and Finance. He has participated in numerous
private consulting assignments in the areas of Strategic and Business Planning, Bank Financing, Valuation and is very
active as a negotiator in the medium sized M&A field. As Director, Business Valuation for the Rice Group, Central Asia
LLP, Mr. Pardo supervised assignments, which assess the value interest in ownership of a commercial, industrial or
service organization involved in economic activity.  The valuations he performed were used for buying or selling
businesses, buying insurance, resolving litigation issues, tax planning, allocating purchase prices among tangible and
intangible assets.  Mr. Pardo has an MBA in finance and has worked for Deloitte & Touche as Tax Director as well as
LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae.  Before coming to Central Asia he worked for the U.S. Department of Defense. He has
had assignments in Canada, Belgium, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and the United States and is currently serving
as Past President of The Rotary Club of Almaty. Mr. Pardo serves as an independent director and is Chairman of the Audit
Committee and Chairman of the Nominating & Compensation Committee.
S.A .(Al) Sehsuvaroglu – President & Director
Mr. Sehsuvaroglu, a US citizen, received a Bachelor of Science – Nuclear Engineering in 1978 from Kansas State
University and is a Registered Professional Engineer in Texas since 1990. Commencing his 20-year with Halliburton
Energy Services in 1978, he had increasing levels of responsibility in engineering in Algeria, France, Netherlands, United
States, United Kingdom and Kazakhstan. In 2000, he joined Brown & Root Energy Services in Kazakhstan as Country
Director. In 2001, Mr. Sehsuvaroglu became Senior Vice-President of Operations with Nelson Resources, during which
time; he led a team, which grew daily oil production from zero to 40,000 barrels per day in Kazakhstan.
As president of Big Sky Energy Corporation, Mr. Sehsuvaroglu will build a team focused on developing the Corporations
extensive land holdings in Kazakhstan and expanding into adjacent countries in the region.
Mr. Sehsuvaroglu is fluent in written and spoken English, French and Turkish, with working knowledge of Spanish, Dutch
and Russian.
28
Barry Raymond Swersky – Director, Co-Chairman  & Vice-President, New Developments
Mr. Swersky is an experienced international attorney and consultant.  Mr. Swersky has extensive experience in organizing
major cultural activities in several countries including the United States, Russia, Israel and Europe. Since 2000 he has
consulted on technology investments in Israel together with the Meitav group. Meitav is one of Israel's leading fund
managers. Since December 2000, he has been on the board and is currently Chairman of Netline Communications
Technologies (NCT) a world leader in cellular telephone jamming.  In Israel he is also serving on various other boards
including Suntree Ltd. (since 1993) where he acts as Chairman and CEO and MACS Ltd. (since 1990). He served on the
board of Ongas Limited in England from January 2000 to March 2004. Previously, and within the framework of his activities
in energy in Kazakhstan, Mr. Swersky served on the board of AES Suntree Power Limited. He is engaged in an oil and oil
products transport logistics project between Kazakhstan and China. Mr. Swersky's educational background includes
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Laws degrees from The University of Witwatersrand in South Africa. He was admitted as
an Attorney in South Africa in March 1963 and as an Advocate to the Israel Bar in 1967. He is on the board of the Israel
Festival, Jerusalem and, from October 2000 he serves as a Board Member of Tel-Aviv University's prestigious Jaffee
Center for Strategic Studies. In the past he acted as Country Advisor to Snam S.p.A. (part of the Italian Eni / Agip group) on
the natural gas supply project from Egypt to Israel.
Ruslan Z. Tsarni – Vice President, Business Development & Corporate Secretary
Mr. Ruslan Z. Tsarni, a U.S. citizen, has over 10 years of professional experience in oil and gas legislation and corporate
law.   Previously, Mr. Tsarni served as Corporate Counsel of Nelson Resources Limited Group of companies, as well as
Managing Director of several of its operating subsidiaries, responsible for all matters relating to corporate governance and
placements and filing requirements under the securities regulations of Toronto Stock Exchange and AIM.  He worked with
financial  institutions  and  banks  on  raising  funds  for  acquisition  and  development  of  the  assets  operated  by  Nelson’s
subsidiaries, as well as managed legal and administrative matters for all such subsidiaries.  From 1999 to 2001, Mr. Tsarni
worked as Head of Legal Affairs of Golden Eagle Partners LLC where he developed downstream and upstream oil and
gas businesses in Kazakhstan and served as Managing Director of its wholly owned subsidiary Tobe LLP.  From 1998 to
1999  Mr.  Tsarni  worked  as  Senior  Associate  with  Salans  Hertzfeld  &  Heilbronn  providing  legal  advise  to  major
multinational  companies  on  different  aspects  of  Kazakhstan  legal  issues  on  development  of  mineral  resources,
corporations, taxation, currency, customs, employment, banking, bankruptcy and trade marks.  From 1994 to 1996, Mr.
Tsarni served as a consultant for Financial Markets International LLC and Arthur Andersen LLP contracted by USAID for
projects  aimed  to  develop  securities  markets  in  Central  Asia,  where  he  trained  corporate  governance  and  corporate
finance principals to state and private companies.
Glenn Van Doorne – Executive Vice President
Mr. Van Doorne has served as our Executive Vice President since February 26, 2004.  He was the Chief Executive Officer
and a director of IbrizOil Inc., a private Alberta corporation since 1998 until March 2005.  From 1991 to 1998, Mr. Van
Doorne was Vice President of Exploration and Development of Hurricane Hydrocarbons Ltd. (now known as
Petrokazakhstan Inc.).  During his tenure with Hurricane Hydrocarbons, he was a member of the management team that
secured Hurricane Hydrocarbon's Kazakhstan oil and gas assets.  Mr. Van Doorne obtained his Bachelor's Degree in
Geological and Mineralogical Sciences from the Free University of Brussels (Belgium) in 1972 and his Master's Degree
from the State University of Ghent (Belgium) in 1975.
Daming Yang - Director
Mr. Yang served as our President from April 14, 2000 until March 9, 2005. He continues to sit as a Director on our Board of
Directors He also served as the President and a member of the board of directors of both Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.
and Chengdu Big Sky Technology Services Ltd.  Mr. Yang was a director of Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network Ltd.  Mr.
Yang has been the President of Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. since July 2003 and Chairman of KoZhaN LLP since
August 2003.   From 1995 through 1998, Mr. Yang served as Vice President and then President of Tongli Energy
Technical Service Co. Ltd., an importer of high-technology equipment to China where he was responsible for the day to
day administration of the Corporation and managed a staff of six.  During his time with Tongli Energy, Mr. Yang was a
member of the team that signed the first two oil and gas production sharing agreements between a Chinese and foreign
entity in connection with the Liaohe and Dagang fields in China.  From 1989 to 1993, Mr. Yang was with Tri-City Survey
Limited as a GIS Engineer.  Mr. Yang holds a Masters Degree in Aerial Photography and Remote Sensing from the
Netherlands International Institute for Aerospace Survey and Earth Sciences.
29
None of our executive officers or directors have been involved in any bankruptcy proceedings within the last five years,
been convicted in or has pending any criminal proceeding, been subject to any order, judgment or decree enjoining,
barring, suspending or otherwise limiting involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activity or been found
to have violated any federal, state or provincial securities or commodities laws.
Family Relationships
Mr. Wei Yang, a major shareholder in the Corporation. and Daming Yang’s brother, is part of the group which bought  our
subsidiary Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. as of December 9, 2004.
Mr. Kai Yang, a major shareholder in the Corporation, is Daming Yang’s brother. Mr. Kai Yang is the sole shareholder of
Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd., which owns 4,250,000 of our common shares.
Board and Committees
Our board members are elected annually by our shareholders and hold office until the next annual shareholders meeting
or until a successor is duly elected and qualified.  During 2004, the board of directors met five times including participants
by telephone. All directors attended the board meetings.  Our board of directors also approved eleven additional corporate
matters during 2004 through unanimous written consents.
The Board of Directors has an Audit Committee and a Nominating and Compensation Committee, currently consisting of
(our two) independent directors, Messrs. Pardo and Gaston. Mr. Pardo chairs both committees.
The Audit Committee oversees the actions taken by our independent registered chartered accountants and reviews our
internal financial and accounting controls and policies. The Audit Committee also holds responsibility for our corporate
governance and internal controls. In 2005, Mr. Philip Pardo was designated as the Audit Committee financial expert and
chairman.
The Nominating and Compensation Committee is responsible for determining salaries, incentives and other forms of
compensation for our officers, employees and consultants and administers our incentive compensation and benefit plans.
The Nominating and Compensation Committee also holds responsibility for director selection and governance with
respect to the conduct of our Board.  Our Nominating and Compensation Committee Chairman is Mr. Philip Pardo.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
The Human Resources and Compensation Committee reviews and recommends to the board of directors the
compensation and benefits of all our executive officers and establishes and reviews general policies relating to
compensation and benefits of our employees.  None of our executive officers served as a director, executive officer or
member of a compensation committee of another entity of which one of its executive officers served on our Human
Resources and Compensation Committee.  Except as described in "Certain Relationships and Related Transactions", no
interlocking relationships exist between our board of directors or compensation committee and the board of directors or
compensation committee of any other company, nor has any interlocking relationship existed in the past.
In the past, our board of directors has negotiated all executive salaries of our employees, including our Chief Executive
Officer.  Directors do not participate in approving or authorizing their own salaries as executive officers.  Compensation for
our Chief Executive Officer was determined by the Human Resources and Compensation Committee after considering his
efforts in assisting in the development of our business strategy, the salaries of executives in similar positions, the
development and implementation of our diversification into oil and gas, and our general financial condition.  Our board of
directors believes that the use of direct stock awards is at times appropriate for employees, and in the future intends to use
direct stock awards to reward outstanding service or to attract and retain individuals with exceptional talent and
credentials.  The use of stock options and other awards is intended to strengthen the alignment of interests of executive
officers and other key employees with those of our stockholders.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 requires any person who is our director or executive officer or
who beneficially holds more than 10% of any class of our securities which have been registered with the Securities and
Exchange
30
Commission, to file reports of initial ownership and changes in ownership with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
These persons are also required under the regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission to furnish us with
copies of all Section 16(a) reports they file.
To our knowledge, based solely on our review of the copies of the Section 16(a) reports furnished to us and a review of our
shareholders of record for the fiscal year ended 2004, filing delinquencies were as follows:
Insider
Filing
Due Date
Filing Date
Reason for Deficiency
Matthew Heysel Form 13G 01/10/04
Form 13G 01/10/04
Daming Yang
03/2/04
Form 4
Wei Yang
L-R Offshore
Form 3
05/17/04
Managers LLC
Matthew Heysel Form 4
Matthew Heysel Form 4
Matthew Heysel Form 4
Form 3
A.S.
Sehsuvaroglu
05/09/04
10/01/04
01/04/05
03/19/05
04/12/04
03/18/04
03/22/04
06/14/04
05/13/04
10/12/04
01/11/05
04/01/05
Delay in completing transaction
Delay in completing transaction
Traveling
Difficulty in obtaining signatures
Traveling
Traveling
Traveling
Awaiting notarized signature on
Form ID
In addition to the above noted delinquent filings, the following filings were delayed by the Corporation due to rescheduling
of the Board meetings required to pass the necessary enacting resolutions.
Insider
Barry Raymond
Swersky
Bruce Hill Gaston
Philip Dean Pardo
Filing Due Date Filing Date
Form 3
12/13/04
Reason for Deficiency
03/10/05 Delayed by Corporation
Form 3
Form 3
12/13/04
12/13/04
03/10/05 Delayed by Corporation
03/10/05 Delayed by Corporation
All other Section 16(a) filing requirements applicable to our directors, executive officers and holders of more than 10% of
any class of our registered securities were, to the best of our knowledge, timely complied with.
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics
On March 29, 2004, our board of directors approved and adopted our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, which applies
to all our officers, directors, employees and consultants. The Code is available on our website at
www.bigskycanada.com.   A copy of the Code is available free of charge upon written request made to the office of the
Corporate Secretary by either facsimile at 403-265-8808 or by mail at Big Sky Energy Corporation, 750, 440-2 Avenue
SW, Calgary, Alberta, T2P 5E9.
ITEM 10.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION.
We employ our executive officers as consultants.  The following table sets forth the compensation paid to our Chief
Executive Officer and two other most highly compensated executive officers for the years indicated.  No other executive
officer of the Corporation earned a salary and bonus for such fiscal year in excess of $100,000.
Summary Compensation Table
Name and
Principal
Position
Matthew
Heysel,
Chief
Executive
Officer
Fiscal
Year
Ended
(1)
Annual Compensation
Salary
(US$)
Bonus
(US$)
Other
Annual
Compen-
sation
(Shares)
2004
160,748
2003
140,865
2002
72,956 (2)
0
0
0
0
0
856,027
(2)
Daming Yang,
President
2004
55,000
2003
64,915
2002
  2004
72,860
30,000(7)
2003
2002
2004
4,114 (7)
29,426 (3)
40,000
Thomas Milne,
Chief Financial
Officer
Glenn Van
Doorne,
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Executive Vice-
President
Barry Swersky
2004
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
682,802(3)
0
0
3,100,000(5)
0
0
950,000(6)
0
0
Long Term Compensation  
Awards Payouts  
Restricted
Shares or
Restricted
Payouts
(US$)
LTIP
All Other
Compensa
tion
0
0
0
Securities
under
Option/SAR
Granted (#)
0
0
0
31
0
0
Share
Units
(US$)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Barry Swersky
2004
20,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
Co-chairman &
Vice-President,
New
Developments
(1) 
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
December 31
During 2002, Mr. Heysel took a voluntary deferral in his salary.  As of
December 31, 2002, Mr. Heysel was owed $75,654 in salary, which he has
indicated he will convert to our common stock under the terms of the
Alternative Compensation Plan.  Under this plan, Mr. Heysel will receive
856,027 common shares upon conversion of his salary owing.  As of the
date of this report, Mr. Heysel has not converted his salary owing.  Mr.
Heysel’s services are provided through his personal management company
M.H. Financial Management Ltd.
During 2002, Mr. Milne took a voluntary deferral in his salary.  As of
December 31, 2002, Mr. Milne was owed $60,443 in salary, which he had
indicated he would convert to our common stock under the terms of the
Alternative Compensation Plan.  On August 27, 2003, Mr. Milne elected to
convert all salary owing to him to our common stock under the terms of the
Alternative Compensation Plan and we issued 682,802 shares to Precise
Details, Inc., a company over which Mr. Milne has control.
Mr. Heysel surrendered these options to the Corporation on July 23, 2002
and they were subsequently cancelled on October 21, 2002 by our board of
directors.  Mr. Heysel currently holds 2,000,000 options granted on March 9,
2005.
Mr. Yang surrendered 1,050,000 of these options to the Corporation on July
23, 2002 and they were subsequently cancelled on October 21, 2002 by our
board of directors.  Mr. Yang holds 2,100,000 options at December 31, 2004.
Mr. Milne surrendered a further 500,000 of these options to the Corporation
on July 23, 2002 and they were subsequently cancelled on October 21,
2002 by our board of directors.  Mr. Milne holds 600,000 options at
December 31, 2004.
During 2002, 2003 and early 2004, Mr. Milne provided services on a part-
time basis.
Option Grants
The following table sets forth information regarding stock option grants to our officers and directors as of December 31,
2004 under the Corporations 2000 Stock Award Plan, as amended by a vote of the Shareholders on December 3, 2004:
Individual Grants
Name
Daming Yang
Thomas Milne
Richard Wing Kit
Lam (3)
Number of
Securities
Underlying
Options Granted
% of Total
Options
Granted (1)
Exercise or
Base Price
($/Share)(2)
Expiration Date
(#)
2,100,000
600,000
250,000
20.3
5.8
2.4
$0.05
$0.05
$0.05
October 21, 2007
October 21, 2007
October 21, 2007
(1)Based on options exercisable to acquire a total 10,350,000 shares
(1)Based on options exercisable to acquire a total 10,350,000 shares
to executive officers, directors and employees as at December 31,
2004. An additional 450,000 options were outstanding to former
directors and an employee of the Chinese Internet business, which
was sold on December 9, 2004.
(2)The exercise price per share was equal to or greater than the fair
market value of the common stock on the date of grant as
determined by the Board of Directors.  Each option expires five
years from the date of grant and is fully vested.
(3)Mr. Lam resigned on January 16, 2005 to return to the United
States. He continues to provide service, under contract, as our
webmaster.
On March 9, 2005, the Corporation issued the following additional stock options and common shares to Officers and
Directors:
32
Option
S.A. (Al) Sehsuvaroglu
Bruce Gaston
Barry Swersky
Philip Pardo
Ruslan Tsarni
Matthew Heysel
Amount
4,000,000
1,000,000
200,000
200,000
600,000
2,000,000
Exercise Price
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
Expiry
March 8, 2008
March 8, 2008
March 8, 2008
March 8, 2008
March 8, 2008
March 8, 2008
These Options vest in full over the course of four years from date of grant as follows:  twenty five percent (25%) of the total
number of Shares granted under the Option shall vest after one (1) year of Continuous Status as an Employee or
Consultant; and the remaining seventy-five percent (75%) of the Shares granted under the Option shall vest pro-rata
monthly, on the same date of the month as the date of grant of the option, over the following thirty-six (36) months of
Continuous Status as an Employee or Consultant.
On March 9, 2005, the Corporation issued the following shares to Officers and Directors under the provisions of the 2000
Stock Option Plan:
Shares
Matthew Heysel
Thomas Milne
Amount
500,000
250,000
On March 29, 2005, the Corporation issued the following options:
Option
Nurlan U. Balgimbayev
Amount
5,000,000 (1)
Exercise Price
$0.89
Expiry
March 28, 2008
(1)
The 2000 Stock Award Plan was amended by a vote of the Shareholders at the Annual Meeting of Shareholders on
December 3, 2004 wherein the maximum number of options which the Corporation could issue under the 2000 Stock
Award Plan was increased from 8,000,000 to 15,000,000. A grant of 5,000,000 options to Mr. Balgimbayev would exceed
the maximum number of options available. Therefore, the Corporation issued 1,000,000 options to Mr. Balgimbayev on
March 29, 2005, with a further 4,000,000 options to be issued when Shareholders have approved an amendment to the
Plan.
Option Exercises
The following table sets forth details of each exercise of stock options as of December 31, 2004 by any of the Named
Executive Officers, and the December 31, 2004 value of unexercised options on an aggregate basis.
None of the Named Executive Officers have exercised options to purchase shares of our common stock as of December
31, 2004.
Aggregated Options Exercised
Name
Securities
Acquired
on
Aggregate
Value
Realized ($)
Exercise
(#)
Unexercised
Options
as of December 31,
Value of Unexercised
in the Money-Options
at December 31, 2004
2004
Exercisable/
Exercisable (2)/
Unexercisable (1)
Unexercisable
Matthew Heysel (3)
Nil
Nil
0 (exercisable)
$0 (exercisable)
0 (unexercisable)
$0 (unexercisable)
33
Daming Yang
Thomas Milne
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
2,100,000
(exercisable)
$
1,344,000(exercisable)
0 (unexercisable)
600,000 (exercisable)
$ 0 (unexercisable)
$ 384,000 (exercisable)
0 (unexercisable)
$ 0(unexercisable)
Richard Lam
Nil
Nil
250,000 (exercisable)
$ 160,000(exercisable)
0 (unexercisable)
$ 0 (unexercisable)
(1)Based on closing price of $0.69 on December 31, 2004.
(2)Includes  Options  to  purchase  common  shares  within  60  days  after
December 31, 2004.
(3)Mr. Heysel did not exercise any options during 2002 and surrendered all
his  outstanding  options  to  the  Corporation  on  July  23,  2002  for
cancellation.
Director Compensation
Prior to December 31, 2004, we did not pay our directors any cash or stock compensation. Independent directors received
stock options as compensation for their services to the Corporation. In 2005, we have begun to pay independent directors
a cash amount of $4,000 per calendar quarter. Directors who are executive officers do not receive this cash payment. In
addition, independent directors receive stock options for their service to the Corporation. The Corporation made this
change in recognition that qualified independent directors are a valuable, scarce resource to the Corporation. We wish to
remain competitive in our ability to attract qualified independent directors.
We reimburse directors for out-of-pocket expenses for attending board and committee meetings.  Our independent
directors receive stock options to purchase shares of our common stock as compensation for their service as directors.
 The terms of stock option grants made to independent directors are determined by the board of directors.  See “Option
Grants”.  We do not provide additional compensation for committee participation or special assignments of the board of
directors.
EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS AND TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND CHANGE IN CONTROL
ARRANGEMENTS
We either directly or through our subsidiaries, have entered into consulting agreements with key individuals, including our
executive officers, who perform services for us, as specified in the agreements.  We use a standard form of consulting
agreement, which defines terms of the agreement, services to be performed, compensation and benefits, confidentiality
and individual specific benefits based on the requirements of the position.  The following contracts are in place at March
31, 2005.
Mathew Heysel Consulting Agreement: Mathew Heysel provides services as our Chief Executive Officer on a full-time
basis through his company, M. H. Financial Management Ltd. under a consulting agreement, which expires December 31,
2005.  M. H. Financial Management is paid at a rate of $500 per day to a minimum of $25,000 per month exclusive of travel
expenses and Goods and Services Tax for Mr. Heysel’s services.  The agreement contains non-compete provisions that
restrict Mr. Heysel from doing any business whatsoever with our clients or doing substantially similar work for a period of
one year in the event Mr. Heysel is no longer contracted by us for any reason.  Mr. Matthew Heysel’s consulting contract
provides that should we terminate the agreement, Mr. Heysel would be paid $60,000 at the time of termination. The
agreement provides that in the event of a change of control, Mr. Heysel is to be paid five percent (5%) of the value of the
sale of our assets or the value of the transaction which would constitute a takeover of the Corporation.  This amount is to
be paid within 10 days of the transaction.  A takeover of the Corporation is defined as:
any change in the holding, either direct or indirect, of shares of the Corporation, or any
reconstruction, reorganization, recapitalization, consolidation, amalgamation, merger,
arrangement or other transaction, that results in a person who was, or a group of
persons acting in concert who were, not previously in a position to exercise effective
control of the Corporation, in excess of the number that would entitle the holders
thereof to cast twenty (25%) percent or more of the votes attaching to all shares of the
Corporation, and
-
the exercise of such effective control to cause or result in the election or appointment of
two or more directors of the Corporation, or of the successor to the Corporation, who
were not previously directors of the Corporation
Daming Yang Consulting Agreement:  Daming Yang provided the Corporation services as our President on a full-time
basis under a consulting agreement, which expires in December 15, 2005.  We pay a consulting fee in the monthly amount
of $5,000, subject to annual adjustments at the discretion of our board of directors, for Mr. Yang’s services. The agreement
contains non-
34
compete provisions that restrict Mr. Yang from doing any business whatsoever with our clients or doing substantially
similar work for a period of one year in the event Mr. Yang is no longer contracted by us for any reason.  Mr. Yang resigned
as President, effective March 1, 2005 to make way for Mr. Sehsuvaroglu to join the executive team. He remains as a
director.
Thomas Milne Consulting Agreement:  During 2002 and 2003, Thomas Milne provided services as our Chief Financial
Officer on a part-time basis through his company, Precise Details Inc.  From April 2003 until January 1, 2005, Precise
Details Inc. has had no contract and received no compensation. As of January 1, 2005, Precise Details Inc. has operated
under a consulting agreement, which expires June 30, 2005, at a rate of $600 per day, with a minimum of Cdn.$15,000 per
month,
Barry Raymond Swersky Consulting Agreement:  Mr. Swersky provides consulting services to the Corporation through his
company, Suntree Ltd.  The Corporation and Suntree Ltd. executed a consulting agreement as of October 1, 2004
terminating on March 31, 2006.  Suntree Ltd. is compensated at a rate of $10,000 per month, plus expenses other than
travel.
A.S. Sehsuvaroglu Consulting Agreement:  Mr. Sehsuvaroglu commenced providing services as President of the
Corporation on March 1, 2005.  A consulting agreement was entered into as of that date for a term to continue until
February 29, 2008.  The compensation under this agreement was initially set at the rate of $395,000 per annum, paid
monthly, together with stock options for 3,250,000 share of common stock of the Corporation.   By resolution of the Board of
Directors dated March 29, 2005, the number of stock options was increased to 4,000,000.
Glenn Van Doorne Consulting Agreement:  Mr. Van Doorne served as Executive Vice President of the Corporation under
a consulting agreement entered into as of August 1, 2004, terminating January 31, 2005.  Mr. Van Doorne’s compensation
was in the amount of $10,000 per month.  Mr. Van Doorne’s contract expired January 31, 2005. As at March _, 2005 the
terms of a new contract have not been finalized.
Ruslan Z Tsarni Consulting Agreement:  Mr. Tsarni provides service to the Corporation as Vice President, Business
Development and a Corporate Secretary. A consulting agreement for his services commenced on March 14, 2005 until
March 14, 2008. His compensation is set at $216,000 annually, paid monthly, together with stock options to acquire
600,000 common shares of the Corporation under the terms of the Corporations Stock Option Plan.
ITEM 11.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
The following table sets forth information concerning the beneficial ownership of our outstanding common stock as of
March 31, 2005 for:
-
-
-
each of our directors and executive officers individually;
each person or group that we know owns beneficially more than 5% of our common
stock; and
all directors and executive officers as a group.
Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act defines the term "beneficial ownership". Under this rule, the term includes
shares over which the indicated beneficial owner exercises voting and/or investment power.  The rule also deems
common stock subject to options currently exercisable, or exercisable within 60 days, to be outstanding for purposes of
computing the percentage ownership of the person holding the options but do not deem such stock to be outstanding for
purposes of computing the percentage ownership of any other person.  The applicable percentage of ownership for each
shareholder is based on 97,438,660 shares of common stock outstanding as of April 7, 2005, together with applicable
options for that shareholder.  Except as otherwise indicated, we believe the beneficial owners of the common stock listed
below, based on information furnished by them, have sole voting and investment power over the number of shares listed
opposite their names.
35
Number of Shares
Beneficially Owned
Percent of
Shares Outstanding
3,057,772 (1)
3.14%
Name and
Address
of Beneficial
Owner
Officers and
Directors
Matthew
Heysel 
963 Pacific
Heights
Tower
Apartments,
Oriental Plaza
#1 East Chang
An Avenue
Dong Cheng
District
Beijing, China,
100738
Daming Yang
#4, Mou Gate
25
Baiwanzhuang
Xicheng
District
Beijing, China,
100037
Thomas Milne
224 Sienna
Hills Drive SW
Calgary, AB,
Canada, T3H
2Z1
Glenn Van
Doorne
310-505-8
Avenue SW
Calgary,
Alberta
T2P 5E9
Officers and
Directors as a
Group
 
5%
Shareholders
Societe Privee
de Gestion de
Patrimonie
17 Avenue
Matignon
Paris 78008
France
Wei Yang
Room 837,
China
Merchant
Building
Shenzhen,
Guong Dong,
China 518067
ARC Energy
4,023,750 (2)
4.13%
1,583,002 (3)
1.62%
1,435,389
1.47%
10,099,913 (4)
6,760,000
10.36%
6.94%
6,653,750 (5)
6.82%(4)
8,000,000
8.21%
8,000,000
8.21%
ARC Energy
Fund
C/o Royal
Trust
Corporation of
Canada
200 Bay Street
Toronto,
Ontario
M5J 2J5
(1) Includes 3,057,772 shares of common stock of which 594,422 shares are owned by Big Sky Holdings, a company
over which Mr. Heysel has control, 1,903,883 shares are owned by MH Financial Management Ltd., a company over
which Mr. Heysel has control and 559,467 shares which Mr. Heysel owns directly.
(2) Includes 1,923,750 shares of common stock which Mr. Yang owns directly and options exercisable within 60 days of
March 29, 2005 to acquire 2,100,000 shares of common stock.
(3) Includes 983,002 shares of common stock of which 692,802 shares are owned by Precise Details, Inc., a company
over which Mr. Milne has control, 285,200 shares owned directly by Mr. Milne and 5,000 shares owned by Mr. Milne
indirectly through his spouse; and options exercisable within 60 days of March 29, 2005 to acquire 600,000 shares of
common stock.
(4) Excludes an additional 8,000,000 options issued to directors and officers  in March 2005..
(5) Includes 6,653,750 shares of common stock of which, 4,250,000 shares are owned by Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd.,
of which Mr. Wei Yang is a director.  The board of Big Sky Energy Canada has given him sole voting and dispositive
powers over all equity investments.  The total also includes 1,923,750 shares which are owned directly by Mr. Wei
Yang and options exercisable within 60 days of December 31, 2004 to acquire 500,000 shares of common stock.
As of the filing date of this report on Form 10-KSB, there are no arrangements that may result in a change in control.
36
ITEM 12.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
1)
On September 4, 2003 the board of directors approved the issuance of  300,000 options to three new directors, Messrs.
Feng, Jia and Qu with each person receiving 100,000 options.  These options were priced at fair market value on the date
of the grant with an exercise price of $0.15 per share.  One third of the options vested immediately upon issuance with one
third vesting one year from the date of grant and the last third vesting two years from the date of grant.  All unexercised
options expire on September 4, 2008. Although these individuals have left the Board of Directors effective December 3,
2004, we have permitted them to retain these options in consideration of their otherwise unpaid service to the Corporation.
2)
In March 2005, the Corporation paid $80,000 to a company affiliated with Mr Bruce Gaston, a director since December 3,
2004, for introduction to potential investors.  Certain of these potential investors subsequently participated in the private
placement of $13.7 million raised by the Corporation in February 2005.
ITEM 13.
EXHIBITS
EXHIBIT INDEX
Except for contracts made in the ordinary course of business, the following are the material contracts that have been
entered into by the Corporation:
Exhibit No.
3.1 (1)
3.2 (1)
3.3 (14)
3.4 (25)
3.5 (30)
5.1
10.1(2)
10.2 (2)
10.3 (4)
10.4 (4)
10.5 (4)
10.6 (5)
10.7 (5)
10.8 (5)
10.9 (5)
10.10 (5)
10.11 (5)
10.12 (5)
10.13 (5)
10.14 (5)
Description
Certificate of Incorporation of the Company consisting of the Articles of
Incorporation filed with the Secretary of the State of Nevada on February 9,
1993
By-Laws of the Company, dated November 9, 1993
Amended and Restated By-Laws of the Company, dated August 8, 2001
Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation of China Broadband
Corp. filed with the Secretary of State of Nevada on December 29, 2003
Amended and Restated By-Laws of the Corporation, dated December 3,
2004.
Opinion of Counsel re: Legality
Purchase Agreement for the Acquisition of China Broadband (BVI) Corp.
among Institute For Counseling, Inc. and China Broadband (BVI) Corp.
Cooperative Joint Venture Contract For Shenzhen China Merchants Big
Sky Network Ltd.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among
SoftNet Systems, Inc., China Broadband Corp. and Big Sky Network
Canada Ltd.
Termination Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among SoftNet
Systems, Inc., China Broadband Corp., Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. and
Matthew Heysel, for himself and as attorney-in-fact for Daming Yang, Kai
Yang, Wei Yang, Jeff Xue, Donghe Xue, Lu Wang, Wallace Nesbitt and
Western Capital Corp.
Termination Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among SoftNet
Systems, Inc., China Broadband Corp., Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.,
China Broadband (BVI) Corp., Matthew Heysel and Daming Yang.
Cooperative Joint Venture Contract For Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network
Ltd. dated July 8, 2000
Strategic Partnership Agreement Between Chengdu Huayu Information
Industry Co., Ltd. and Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.
Cooperative Joint Venture Contract For Deyang Guangshi Big Sky Ltd.
dated November 25, 2000
Consulting Agreement between the Company and MH Financial
Management for the services of Matthew Heysel
China Broadband Stock Option Plan
Form of Stock Option Agreement
Form of Restricted Stock Purchase Agreement
Letter Agreement dated July 25, 2000 by and between China Broadband
Corp. and Canaccord International Ltd.
Joint Development Agreement of City-Wide-Area High Speed Broadband
and Data Transmission Services Networks of China Between Big Sky
Network Canada Ltd. and Jitong Network Communications Co. Ltd.
37
10.15 (5)
10.16 (5)
10.17 (8)
10.18 (8)
10.19 (8)
10.20 (8)
10.21 (6)
10.22 (6)
10.23 (8)
10.24 (8)
10.25 (8)
10.26 (8)
10.27 (7)
10.28 (7)
10.29 (7)
10.30 (12)
10.31 (12)
10.32 (12)
10.33 (12)
10.34 (12)
10.35 (12)
Consulting Agreement between the Company and Daming Yang
Consulting Agreement between the Company and Precise Details Inc. for
the services of Thomas Milne
Agreement to the Establishment of Cooperation Joint Venture between Big
Sky Network Canada Ltd. and Zhuhai Cable Television Station, dated May
27, 1999
Letter of Intent, dated March 1, 2000, between Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.
and Dalian Metropolitan Area Network Center
Letter of Intent, dated November 8, 2000, between Big Sky Network Canada
Ltd. and Hunan Provincial Television and Broadcast Media Co. Ltd.
Preliminary Agreement to Form a Contractual Joint Venture, dated March 8,
2001 between Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. and Changsha Guang Da
Television
Purchase and Licence Agreement, dated September 28, 2000, between
China Broadband Corp. and Nortel Networks Limited
Amendment, dated January 1, 2001, to the Purchase and Licence
Agreement between China Broadband Corp. and Nortel Networks Limited
Consulting Agreement, dated December 22, 2000, between China
Broadband Corp and Barry L. Mackie
Consulting Agreement, dated October 1, 2000, between China Broadband
Corp and Richard Lam
Consulting Agreement, dated October 1, 2000, between China Broadband
Corp and Ping Chang Yung
Consulting Agreement, dated October 1, 2000, between China Broadband
Corp and YungPC AP
Common Stock Purchase Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among
SoftNet Systems, Inc., China Broadband Corp. and Big Sky Network
Canada Ltd.
Termination Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among SoftNet
 Systems,  Inc., China Broadband Corp., Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. and
Matthew  Heysel,  for himself and as attorney-in-fact  for Daming Yang, Kai
Yang, Wei Yang, Jeff Xue, Donghe Xue, Lu Wang, Wallace Nesbitt and
Western Capital Corp.
Termination Agreement dated September 29, 2000, among SoftNet
Systems, Inc., China Broadband Corp., Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.,
China Broadband (BVI) Corp., Matthew Heysel and Daming Yang
Letter of Intent dated June 1, 2001 between Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.
and Shanghai Min Hang Cable Television Center
Memorandum of Understanding dated June 18, 2001 between Big Sky
Network Canada Ltd. and Beijing Gehua Cable TV Networks Co., Ltd.
Letter of Intent between Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. and Chong Qing
Branch of Ji Tong Network Communications Co., Ltd.
Consulting Agreement dated April 1, 2001 between China Broadband Corp.
and Precise Details Inc.
Consulting Agreement dated April 1, 2001 between China Broadband Corp.
and M.H. Financial Management Ltd.
Consulting Agreement dated April 1, 2001 between China Broadband Corp.
10.35 (12)
10.36 (12)
10.37 (13)
10.38 (14)
10.39 (15)
10.40 (15)
10.41 (15)
10.42 (17)
10.43 (17)
Consulting Agreement dated April 1, 2001 between China Broadband Corp.
and Daming Yang
Indemnity Agreement dated June 29, 2001 between China Broadband
Corp. and Matthew Heysel
Memorandum of Understanding between Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. and
Fujian Provincial Radio and Television Network Co. Ltd. dated July 10,
2001
Note Cancellation Agreement between China Broadband Corp. and
Canaccord International Ltd.
Consulting Agreement, dated July 1, 2001, between China Broadband Corp
and Barry L. Mackie
Memorandum of Understanding between Chengdu Big Sky Network
Technology Services Ltd. and Jitong Network Communications Co. dated
October 15, 2001
Consulting Agreement, dated April 1, 2001 between China Broadband
Corp. and Richard Lam
Joint Project Contract between the Chong Qing Branch of Jitong Network
Communications Co. Ltd. and Chengdu Big Sky Network Technology
Services Ltd. dated October 31, 2001
Alternative Compensation Plan
38
10.44 (17)
10.45 (18)
10.46 (19)
10.47 (21)
10.48 (22)
10.49 (22)
10.50 (22)
10.51 (22)
10.52 (22)
10.53 (22)
10.54 (22)
Fee Arrangement Agreement dated January 28, 2002, between China
Broadband Corp. and Michael Morrison
Agency Agreement between China Broadband Corp. and Canaccord
Capital (Europe) Limited dated March 13, 2002
Agreement of Cooperative Rights & Interests Assignment between Big Sky
Network Canada Ltd. and Winsco International Limited dated September
13, 2002 – English Translation
Share Exchange Agreement, dated October 27, 2003, between China
Broadband Corp., Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. and its shareholders.
Consulting Agreement dated January 15, 2004, between China Energy
Ventures Corp. and Richard Lam
Consulting Agreement dated January 15, 2004, between China Energy
Ventures Corp. and Daming Yang
Consulting Agreement dated January 15, 2004, between China Energy
Ventures Corp. and M.H. Financial Management Ltd.
Consulting Agreement dated January 1, 2004, between China Energy
Ventures Corp. and Wei Yang
Share Purchase Agreement dated October 7, 2003 between Big Sky
Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. and Shengli Oilfield Junwei Petroleum-Tech
Development Co. Ltd. – English Translation
Frame Agreement of Jointly Cooperation dated November 6, 2003 between
Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd. and Shengli Oilfield Junwei Petroleum-
Tech Development Co. Ltd. – English Translation
Escrow Agreement dated January 30, 2004 between Big Sky Energy
Kazakhstan Ltd., Shengli Oilfield Junwei Petroleum-Tech Development Co.
Ltd. and W. Scott Lawler
10.55 (23)
Asset Purchase Agreement dated February 27, 2004 between IbrizOil Inc.
10.55 (23)
10.56 (23)
10.57 (23)
10.58 (23)
10.59 (23)
10.60 (24)
10.61 (24)
10.62 (24)
10.63 (20)
10.64 (20)
10.65(27)
10.66(28)
10.67(28)
10.68(28)
Asset Purchase Agreement dated February 27, 2004 between IbrizOil Inc.
and China Energy Ventures Corp.
Contract for exploration and production of hydrocarbons at Dauletaly Field
dated February 17, 2003 between KoZhaN LLP and the Ministry of Energy
and Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan
Contract for exploration and production of hydrocarbons at Karatal Field
dated February 17, 2003 between KoZhaN LLP and the Ministry of Energy
and Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan
Contract for exploration and production of hydrocarbons at Morskoe Field
dated February 17, 2003 between KoZhaN LLP and the Ministry of Energy
and Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan
Audit Committee Charter, amended November 12, 2003
Sale and Purchase Agreement between Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd., Batys
Petroleum LLP and Glushich Victor Petrovich dated April 10, 2004
Amendment Agreement No. 1 to the Sale and Purchase Agreement Dated
April 10, 2004 between Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd., Batys Petroleum LLP
and Glushich Victor Petrovich dated April 12, 2004
Agreement for Assignment of the Creditor’s Rights between Vector Energy
West LLP, Lorgate Management Inc. and Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd. dated
April 10, 2004
Contract on prospecting of hydrocarbons at Atyrau Field dated December
28, 2002 between Vector Energy West LLP and the Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
Contract on prospecting and production of hydrocarbons at Liman-2 Field
dated December 28, 2002 between Vector Energy West LLP and the
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan
Share Purchase Agreement dated December 9, 2004, by and between Big
Sky Energy Corporation and Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd.
Consulting Agreement dated December 1, 2004, between Big Sky Energy
Corporation and M.H. Financial Management Ltd.
Consulting Agreement dated June 30, 2004, between Big Sky Energy
Corporation and Daming Yang.
Consulting Agreement dated December 1, 2004, between Big Sky Energy
Corporation and Precise Details, Inc.
39
10.69(28)
Consulting Agreement dated October 1, 2004, between Big Sky Energy
Corporation and Suntree Ltd.
10.70(28)(31) Consulting Agreement dated January 19, 2005, between Big Sky Energy
10.71(29)
10.73(28)
10.74(30)
23.1 (26)
23.2
23.6 (26)
Corporation and A.S. Sehsuvaroglu, together with amendment.
Terms of Business Agreement dated 24 February, 2005 and executed on
behalf of the Company, 7 March 2005, between Big Sky Energy Corporation
and Matrix-Regent/Matrix-Securities Limited, trading as Matrix Corporate
Finance
Consulting Agreement dated March 1, 2005, between Big Sky Energy
Corporation and Ruslan Z.Tsarni.
2000 Stock Award Plan, as amended by the shareholders, December 3,
2004
 
 
 
Consent of PetroGlobe (Canada) Ltd.
23.6 (26)
 
31.1
31.2
32.1
32.2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
Consent of PetroGlobe (Canada) Ltd.
 
Section 302 Certification – Chief Executive Officer
Section 302 Certification – Chief Financial Officer
Certification Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 – Chief Executive Officer
Certification Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 – Chief Financial Officer
 
Previously filed on Form 10-SB on December 2, 1999.
Previously filed on Form 8-K filed on April 28, 2000.
Previously filed on Form 10-KSB on July 11, 2000.
Previously filed on Form 8-K filed on September 29, 2000.  
Previously filed on Form S-1 filed on December 6, 2000.
Previously filed on Form 10-QSB on March 15, 2001.
Previously filed on Form 8-K/A on December 12, 2000.
Previously filed on Form 10-KSB on March 28, 2001.
Previously filed on Form 8K on August 25, 2000.
Previously filed on Form 8K on September 26, 2000.
Previously filed on Form S-1, Amendment No. 1 on April 6, 2001.
Previously filed on Form S-1, Amendment No. 3 on July 2, 2001.
Previously filed on Form S-1, Amendment No. 4 on July 27, 2001.
Previously filed on Form S-1, Amendment No. 5 on August 10, 2001.
Previously filed on Form S-1, Amendment No. 7 on October 25, 2001.
Previously filed on Form 10-QSB on November 14, 2001.
Previously filed on Form 10-KSB on April 1, 2002.
Previously filed on Form S-1 on April 12, 2002.
Previously filed on Form 8-K/Amendment No. 1 on October 30 2002.
Previously filed on Form 10-KSB on April 16, 2003.
Previously filed on Form 8-K on October 31, 2003.
Previously filed on Form SB-2 on February 19, 2004.
Previously filed on Form 10-KSB on March 30, 2004.
Previously filed on Form 8-K on May 18, 2004.
Previously filed on Form 10-QSB on May 21, 2004.
Previously filed on Form SB-2 on July 28, 2004.
Previously filed on Form 8-K on December 14, 2004
Previously reported on Form 8-K on March 9, 2005 - exhibit not attached to
such filing
Previously filed on Form 8-K on March 10, 2005
Previously filed on Form 14C on October 27, 2004
40
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES.
Audit Fees
The aggregate fees billed for each of the last two fiscal years for professional services rendered by Deloitte & Touche LLP
for the audit of our annual financial statements and review of amended and restated financial statements included in our
Form 10-QSB quarterly reports and services normally provided by Deloitte & Touche LLP in connection with statutory and
regulatory filings or engagements were $262,073 for the fiscal year ended 2004 and $126,151for the fiscal year ended
2003.
Audit-Related Fees
There were no fees for other audit related services for the fiscal years ended 2004 and 2003.
Tax Fees
The aggregate fees billed for each of the last two fiscal years for professional services rendered by Deloitte & Touche LLP
for tax compliance, tax advice, and tax planning was $9,485 for the fiscal year ended 2004 and $17,000 for the fiscal year
ended 2003.  The fees charged for 2003 included assistance with the completion and filing of our Canadian income tax
returns.
All Other Fees
There were no other aggregate fees billed in either of the last two fiscal years for products and services provided by
Deloitte & Touche LLP, other than the services reported above.
Pre-approval Policy and Procedure
The following policy and procedure has been adopted and incorporated into our Audit Committee charter:
All services provided by the independent auditor whether they be audit related or non-audit related, shall be pre-approved
in writing either a) prior to the commencement of the contemplated services, or b) after the commencement of the
contemplated services but before the completion of such services.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee or the designated Financial Expert, should they also be, at the time of approval, an
independent director, are empowered to approve the contemplated services to be provided by the independent auditor on
behalf of the committee.  All approvals taken by the Chairman or Financial Expert must be disclosed to the committee as a
whole either a) in writing or by e-mail at the time of the approval; or b) verbally at a subsequent committee meeting.
Since September 4, 2003, the date our Audit Committee members were appointed to the Committee, they have approved
all services provided by Deloitte & Touche LLP.  Prior to this, services were not pre-approved.
Deloitte & Touche LLP has advised us that, in connection with the audit of our amended and restated financial statements
for the year ended December 31, 2004, only full-time, permanent employees of Deloitte & Touche LLP performed the audit
work.
41
SIGNATURES
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the Corporation caused this report to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on November 14, .2005
BIG SKY ENERGY CORPORATION
By:
/s/ S.A. Sehsuvaroglu
Name:  S. A. Sehsuvaroglu
Title:   Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive
Officer)
In accordance with the Exchange Act, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
Corporation and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ Matthew Heysel
Matthew Heysel
Director
November 14, 2005
Daming Yang
Director
/s/Thomas Milne
Thomas Milne
Director
November 14, 2005
/s/Bruce Gaston
Bruce Gaston
/s/ Philip Pardo
Philip Pardo
/s/ Barry Swersky
Barry Swersky
Chief Financial Officer and
Director
(Principal Accounting Officer)
November 14, 2005
Director
November 14, 2005
Vice-President – New
Development and Director
November 14, 2005
Nurlan U. Balgimbayev
Director
/s/ Servet Harunoglu
Servet Harunoglu
Director
November 14, 2005
42
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2004 (RESTATED) AND 2003
BIG SKY ENERGY CORPORATION  (as at December 31, 2004)
 
Report of Independent Registered Chartered Accountants
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Amended and Restated Financial Statements
PAGE
F-1
F2
F-3
F-5
F-8
F-10
43
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Big Sky Energy Corp. (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.):
We have audited the consolidated balance sheets of Big Sky Energy Corp. and subsidiaries (a development stage
enterprise) as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 and the related consolidated statements of operations and deficit,
stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2004 and for the period
from February 1, 2000 (date of incorporation) to December 31, 2004.  These financial statements are the responsibility of
the Corporation’s management.  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our
audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the
financial statements are free of material misstatement.  The Corporation is not required to have, nor were we engaged to
perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control over
financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting. 
Accordingly, we express no such opinion.  An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Big
Sky Energy Corp. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2004 and 2003 and the results of their operations and their cash
flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2004 and for the period from February 1, 2000 (date of
incorporation) to December 31, 2004 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Corporation will continue as a going
concern.  The Corporation is a development stage enterprise engaged in oil and gas exploration in the Republic of
Kazakhstan.  As discussed in Note 2 to the financial statements, the Corporation’s operating losses since inception raise
substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans concerning these matters are also
described in Note 2.  The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these
uncertainties.
As described in Note 27 to the consolidated financial statements, the accompanying financial statements of Big Sky
Energy Corp. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2004 have been restated.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
March 18, 2005 (March 29, 2005 as to the fifth paragraph of Note 26, November 14, 2005 as to the effects of the
restatement described in Notes 6, 10, 25i), and 27.
F-1
Big Sky Energy Corporation  (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)  
(a Development Stage Enterprise)
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
ASSETS  
CURRENT
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Advances to related parties
Interest and other receivables
Other current asset (Note 6)
Prepaid expenses
LONG-TERM
Long-term advances
Advances to related parties
December 31,
December 31,
2004
2003
(Restated,
see Note
27)
$
                   983,734  
63,040
21,351
142,865  
86,160  
484,983  
1,782,133
320,885
24,439
$
                1,068,451
30,000
1,154,941
87,158
-
163,017
2,503,567
-
-
Advances to related parties
Property and equipment (Note 7)
Oil and gas properties (Notes 5, 8)
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES
CURRENT
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note
9)
Short-term interest free loan from ABT LTD (Note
10)
Obligations for social sphere development (Note
12)
Obligations for professional training of personnel
(Note 13)
Obligations for acquisition of the right for
geological information use (Note 14)
Due to related parties (Note 20)
LONG-TERM
Obligations for social sphere development
(Note12)
Obligations for professional training of personnel
   (Note 13)
Obligations for historical cost reimbursement
(Note 21)
Asset retirement obligation (Note 22)
Deferred income tax liability (Note 23)
TOTAL LIABILITIES
 
CONTINUING OPERATIONS (NOTE 2)
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES (NOTE
25)
 
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Common stock (Note 16)
$0.001 par value, shares authorized:
150,000,000;
shares issued and outstanding: 68,119,460
(December
31, 2003 – 31,096,603)
Additional paid in capital
Deferred compensation
Deficit accumulated during development stage
-
287,139
-
2,790,706
262,313
-
-
-
-
-
262,313
-
-
-
-
-
262,313
89,516
26,840,474
(1,008,510)
(23,393,087)
2,528,393
$2,790,706
24,439  
384,077  
23,246,345  
25,757,879
761,158
1,340,423
1,401,000
289,200
758,265  
25,590  
4,575,636
1,255,325
304,641
981,674  
435,868  
4,806,906  
12,360,050
126,538
43,484,352  
(27,926) 
(30,185,135) 
13,397,829  
$25,757,879
F-2
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
(a Development Stage Enterprise)
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Deficit
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
GENERAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENSES (including non-
cash
compensation of $758,264
(2003-
$1,541,174, 2002-$489,654))
DEPRECIATION AND
AMORTIZATION
ACCRETION
 
FOREIGN EXCHANGE GAIN
(LOSS)
INTEREST INCOME
LOSS FROM CONTINUING
OPERATIONS
 
DISCONTINUED
OPERATIONS (Note 4)
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS
(Note 11)
 
LOSS IN BIG SKY NETWORK  
  CANADA LTD.
 
 
LOSS IN SHEKOU JOINT
 
  VENTURE (Note 11)
LOSS IN CHENGDU JOINT
 
  VENTURE (Note 11)
 
GAIN ON SALE OF SHEKOU  
  JOINT VENTURE (Note 11)
 
GAIN ON SALE OF BIG SKY
NETWORK CANADA
INCOME (LOSS) ON
DISCONTINUED OPERATION  
INCOME (LOSS) FROM
DISCONTINUED
OPERATIONS
NET LOSS
 
DEFICIT, BEGINNING OF
PERIOD
Year Ended December 31
2004
2003
2002
$(6,217,720) $(3,038,170)
(126,507)
(247,388) 
(6,591,615)
(170,433)
(3,208,603)
(226,938)
2,301
-
14,235
(6,816,252)
(3,194,368)
-
-
-
-
179,935
-
-
-
-
-
-
(155,731)
64,606
24,204
64,606
$(6,792,048) $(3,129,762)
$(2,004,663)
(213,162) 
 
 (2,217,825)
- 
2,501
(2,215,324)
(400,000) 
 
- 
 
(123,504) 
 
- 
 
125,798
-
21,550
(376,156) 
$(2,591,480)
Cumulative
Period From
Date of
Incorporation
Feb 1, 2000
to
Dec 31, 2004
$(16,482,519)
(3,529,887)
(247,388)
(20,259.794)
(226,938)
415,613
(20,071,119)
(8,628,623)
(181,471)
(609,607)
(1,141,793)
125,798
179,935
141,745
(10,114,016)
$(30,185,135)
$(23,393,087) $(20,263,325)  $(17,671,845)
$                    -
F-3
DEFICIT, END OF PERIOD
LOSS PER SHARE
Basic and diluted loss from
 
continuing
  operations
Basic and diluted on
discontinued
operations
  Basic and diluted – net loss
SHARES USED IN
COMPUTATION
  Basic and diluted
$ (30,185,135) (23,393,087)
$
$
$
(0.132)
0.001
(0.131)
(0.136)
0.003
(0.133)
51,585,004 23,536,537
(20,263,325) $ (30,185,135)
(0.102)
(0.017) 
(0.119)
21,774,775
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this consolidated financial statement.
F-4
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
(a Development Stage Enterprise)
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity
Accumulated Stockholders’
Total
Deficit
$
Equity
$
-
-
-
59,971
Additional
Paid-in
Capital Compensation
Deferred
Amount
$
$
$
Common Stock
Shares
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
 
 
 
 
 
Balance,
  February 1, 2000
 
Issue of common
stock
1,509,850 59,971
for the outstanding
shares
of China
Broadband
13,500,000 13,500
696,529
-
-
710,029
500,000
500
98,835
-
-
99,335
(BVI) Corp.
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
agreements at
$0.20
per share
 
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
agreements at
$1.00
1,530,000 1,530
1,518,289 -
-
1,519,819
9,696,236 -
-
9,697,538
8,496,367 -
44,472
-
15,235
-
-
-
-
8,497,500
44,472
15,235
-
65,381
(65,381)
-
-
-
-
-
-
7,386
-
-
7,386
(3,597,180)
(3,597,180)
1,301,667 1,302
1,133,000 1,133
-
-
per share
 
Stock issued
pursuant to private
placement agreement
at $7.50 per
  share
 
Acquisition of the
shares
  of Big Sky Network
  Canada Ltd.
 
Issuance of warrants -      
 
Non-cash
compensation
 
Deferred
compensation
 
Amortization of
deferred
  compensation
 
Net loss
 
Balance,
  December 31,
-
-
-
-
19,474,517 77,936
20,631,344 (57,995)
(3,597,180) 17,054,105
2000
Deferred
compensation
 
Issuance of warrants
-
-
-
-
1,030,708 (1,030,708)
-
-
277,775
-
-
277,775
Amortization of
deferred
    compensation
-
-
-
369,037
-
369,037
F-5
-
-
-
-      (14,074,665) (14,074,665)
19,474,517
77,936 21,939,827
(719,666)(17,671,845)
3,626,252
-
-
-
326,191
-
-
139,289
(139,289)
-
-
163,463
-
42,124
-
21,062
-
2,997,160 2,997
644,364
-
-
326,191
-
-
-
163,463
-
21,062
-
647,361
-
-
-
-
(2,591,480)
(2,591,480)
22,513,801
80,933 22,908,005
(532,764)(20,263,325)
2,192,849
-
-
-
1,541,174
-
-       2,016,920 (2,016,920)
-
1,541,174
-
-
Net loss
 
Balance,
  December 31,
2001
Amortization of
deferred
   compensation
(Note 17)
Deferred
compensation
 
Alternative
  Compensation
Plan
(Note 19)
 
Issuance of common
    stock to settle legal
fees
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
  agreements at
$0.25
per share
 
Net loss
Balance,
  December 31,
2002
Amortization of
deferred
  compensation
(Note 17)
Deferred
compensation
 
Alternative
  Compensation
Plan
(Note 19)
682,802
683
(683)
-
-
-
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
  agreements at
$0.25
per share
 
Net loss
 
Balance,
  December 31,
7,900,000 7,900       1,916,232
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,924,132
(3,129,762)
(3,129,762)
31,096,603
89,516 26,840,474 (1,008,510)(23,393,087)
2,528,393
-
-
-
-
2003
Amortization of
deferred
  compensation
(Note 17)
Deferred
compensation
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
  agreements at
$0.25
100
100,000
per share
 
Stock issued
pursuant to
  private placement
  agreement at $0.50 24,340,000 24,340
 
Stock issued
pursuant to
  purchase of BSEK 8,000,000 8,000
 
Stock issued
pursuant to
  acquisition of
-
758,264
(46,500)
46,500
F-6
24,900
-
11,515,168 -
2,280,000 -
758,264
-
-
-
-25,000
-11,539,508
-2,288,000
-415,700
-2,555,000
-5,084
--
BSEK
royalty interest
Stock issued
pursuant to
  purchase of BSEA
  minority interests
 
Options exercised
Options cancelled
681,475
681
415,019
-
3,500,000 3,500
2,551,500 -
101,666
-
102
-
4,982
(175,820) 175,820
-
Options cancelled
Warrants exercised
 
Net loss
 
Balance,
-
299,716
-
-
299
-
(175,820) 175,820
74,629
-
-
-
--
-74,928
(6,792,048)(6,792,048)
December 31,
68,119,460 126,538 43,484,352 (27,926)
(30,185,135)13,397,829
2004
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this consolidated financial statement
F-7
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
(a Development Stage Enterprise)
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
Year ended December 31
2004
2003
2002
CASH FLOWS RELATED TO
THE FOLLOWING ACTIVITIES
 
OPERATIONS
Loss from Continuing Operations
Income from Discontinued
Operations
Adjustment for:
  Extinguishment of Debt
  Depreciation and amortization
  Accretion
Unrealized Foreign Exchange
Gain
Loss From Big Sky Network
Canada
Impairment of assets
Loss in Big Sky Network
Canada Ltd.
(Restated,
see Note
27)
$ (6,816,252) (3,194,368)
24,204
64,606
126,507
247,388
70,831
155,731  
-
-
-
170,433
-
-
-
-
(2,215,324) $
(376,156) 
 
- 
213,162  
-
-
400,000
-
Cumulative
Period From
Date of
Incorporation
February 1,
2000 to
December 31,
2004
(Restated,
              see
Note 27)
(20,071,119)
(10,114,016)
(1,422,225)
3,529,887
247,388
70,831
155,731
8,628,623
181,471
Loss in Shekou joint
 
  venture (Note 11)
  Loss in Chengdu joint
venture (Note 11)
Gain on Sale of Big Sky Network
Canada
compensation (Note 17)
Issuance of Common Shares
for settlement of legal fees
Gain on Sale of Shekou
 
joint venture
  Non-cash stock
 
 
 
Changes in operating assets and
liabilities-
  net of the effect of acquisitions
  Restricted cash
 
  Prepaid expenses
  Accounts payable and
Interest and other receivable
accrued liabilities
123,504  
 
-
(125,798) 
 
489,654  
 
21,062
- 
37,703  
156,722  
 
(159,614) 
(1,435,085)
-
--
(179,935)
-
-
-
-
758,264 1,541,174
-
-
(6,219)
(150,465)
(33,040)
(54,229)
(316,292)
266,773
116,421
(5,750,050) (1,458,418)
F-8
FINANCING
Issue of common stock for cash
(Note 16)
Stock issuance costs (Note16)
Repayment of advances for share
subscriptions
Repayment of Debt
Advance from ABT Ltd.  (Note 10)
 
 
INVESTING
  Fixed asset additions
Capital Expenditure-oil & gas
properties
Advances Paid
 
  Proceeds from the sale of the
Shekou joint venture (net of
costs)
Investment in Chengdu joint
venture
Acquisition of Big Sky Network
Canada Ltd. (net of cash
acquired)
Acquisition of Vector Energy West
LLP
Acquisition of BSEK (net of cash
12,275,166 1,975,000
 
(8,785)
(630,646)
(250,000)
(570,000)
500,000
-
 
-
 
-
  11,324,520 1,966,215
(346,194)
(1,319)
(1,391,466)
(320,885)
-
-
(4,506,502)
339,353
-
-
22,800
-
-
-
-
749,290  
(101,929)
- 
- 
- 
647,361  
 
 
(172,599)
- 
-
2,006,400
-
-
-
-
609,607
1,141,793
(179,935)
(125,798)
3,225,221
21,062
(63,040)
(147,328)
(479,309)
(166,797)
(14,957,953)
26,891,959
(817,171)
(250,000)
(570,000)
500,000
25,754,788
(1,048,890)
(1,391,466)
(320,885)
2,029,200
(1,935,590)
(2,395,828)
(4,506,502)
339,353
acquired)
 Advances to related company
Changes in non-cash working
capital:
 
 Other current asset (Note 6)
Increase in short-term interest free
loan from ABT
339,353
-
(187,756) (1,149,000)
(86,160)
-
- 
-
-
840,423
(619,722)
(84,717)
-
  (5,659,187) (1,127,519)
NET DECREASE (INCREASE) IN
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS  
 
 
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS,    
  1,068,451 1,688,173
  BEGINNING OF PERIOD
   
 
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS,    
$
  END OF PERIOD
   
 
SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW
   
   
 
$
  Cash paid for income taxes
$
  Cash paid for interest
983,734 1,068,451
INFORMATION:
- 
1,833,801
1,046,077  
 
 
642,096
1,688,173 $
- 
-
-
-
-
-
339,353
(1,336,756)
(86,160)
840,423
(9,813,101)
983,734
-
983,734
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this consolidated financial statement.
F-9
Big Sky Energy Corporation (formerly China Energy Ventures Corp.)
(a Development Stage Enterprise)
Period From Date of Incorporation,
February 1, 2000 to December 31, 2004
Notes to the Amended and Restated Consolidated Financial Statements
(Expressed in United States Dollars)
1.
INCORPORATION AND BACKGROUND
a)
Incorporation and background
Big Sky Energy Corp. (the "Corporation") was incorporated in Nevada in February 1993 under the name "Institute
for Counseling, Inc." On April 27, 2000, Institute for Counseling, Inc. changed its name to China Broadband Corp.
on  December  29,  2003,  China  Broadband  Corp.  changed  its  name  to  China  Energy  Ventures  Corp.  and  on
December  3,  2004  China  Energy  Ventures  Corp.  changed  it’s  name  to  Big  Sky  Energy  Corporation.  The
Corporation  is  a  development  stage  enterprise  that  is  pursuing  the  acquisition  of  oil  and  gas  exploration  and
production assets.
On April 14, 2000, the Corporation, a public shell company, acquired China Broadband (BVI) Corp. ("CBB - BVI")
through a reverse acquisition, which was accounted for as a recapitalization. As a result of the application of the
accounting principles governing recapitalization, CBB - BVI (incorporated on February 1, 2000) is treated as the
acquiring  or  continuing  entity  for  financial  accounting  purposes.    The  amended  and  restated  consolidated
financial statements are deemed to be a continuation of CBB - BVI's historical financial statements.
b)
Investment in Big Sky Network Canada Ltd.
CBB - BVI acquired Big Sky Network Ltd. ("BSN") on February 1, 2000.  Between February 22 and April 25, 2000
BSN issued 10,000,000 shares to a third party for cash so that the Corporation only held 50% of the issued share
capital of BSN.  The Corporation purchased the other 50% on September 29, 2000.
BSN owned a 50% interest in the joint venture, Shenzhen China Merchants Big Sky Network Ltd. ("Shekou JV"),
which provided Internet access to residential and business customers through the cable television infrastructure.
On September 13, 2002, the Corporation sold its 50% interest in the Shekou JV.
On July 8, 2000, BSN acquired a 50% interest in a 20-year joint venture, Sichuan Huayu Big Sky Network Ltd.
("Chengdu  JV"),  which  provides  Internet  access  to  residential  and  business  customers  through  the  cable
television infrastructure in the Sichuan Province, the PRC. BSN agreed to contribute a maximum of $5,500,000 to
the Chengdu JV in cash or equipment and is entitled to receive 65% of the profits earned between 2001 and 2007,
50% of the profits earned between 2008 and 2013 and 35% of the profits earned between 2014 and 2020. As at
December  31,  2003,  the  Corporation  has  contributed  $1,935,590  to  this  joint  venture.    The  Chengdu  JV  has
incurred losses since inception. In 2002, the Corporation ceased making capital contributions to the Chengdu JV
because  of  the  partners’  lack  of  performance  of  its  commitments  under  the  joint  venture  agreement.  The
Corporation  is  pursuing  remedies  from  its  joint  venture  partner  to  recover  its  investment.    (See  Note  4  –
Discontinued Operations)
c)
Chengdu Big Sky Network Technology Services Ltd.
The Corporation established a wholly owned subsidiary to provide high speed Internet access in the sector of
Chengdu, Sichuan Province designated as a development zone for technology based companies. Chengdu Big
Sky Network Technology Services Ltd. provides its own Internet fibre link, principally to commercial subscribers
and government offices with secondary emphasis placed on residential customers. On December 9, 2004 the
Corporation sold its interest in Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. See Note 4 – Discontinued Operations.
a)
Investment in Oil and Gas properties
Late in 2003, the Corporation began investing in oil and gas assets in addition to its Internet service business in
China, a transition which concluded December 9, 2004, by selling Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., which held all of
the  Corporations  Chinese  investments,  to  become  an  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production  company.  This
began with the acquisition of KoZhaN LLP, described below, and continued with the acquisition of Vector Energy
West LLP,
F-10
also described below.  By acquiring such companies the Corporation gained a significant acreage position in the
prolific pre-Caspian basin of western Kazakhstan located close to infrastructure and transportation.
On January 12, 2004, the Corporation completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued and outstanding share
capital of Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd (“BSEK”) thereby acquiring a 90% interest in KoZhaN LLP, a
Kazakhstan Limited Liability Partnership (“KoZhaN”) and on May 11, 2004, the Corporation completed the
acquisition of 100% of the outstanding share capital of Vector Energy West LLP, a Kazakhstan Limited Liability
Partnership, (“Vector”) through its 75% owned subsidiary, Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd. (“BSEA”) and on
December 10, 2004 completed the acquisition of the remaining 25% of BSEA.  See note 5 “Business
Combination”.
The Corporation through KoZhaN and Vector entered into Subsurface Use Contracts with the Government of the
Republic of Kazakhstan (the “Government”) to explore for and produce hydrocarbons in the Morskoe, Karatal and
Dauletaly  blocks  and  the  Atyrau  and  Liman-2  blocks,  respectively,  all  located  in  the  Atyrau  region  of  western
Kazakhstan (the “Subsurface Use Contracts”).
As a result of these acquisitions, the nature of operations for the Corporation has changed.  The Corporation
intends  to  direct  the  majority  of  future  capital  investment  towards  oil  and  gas  exploration  within  the  acquired
properties. At present the Corporation is in the exploration phase with regards to its oil and gas properties. This
phase is expected to last until the Corporation finds economically profitable oil reserves.
Meeting the Corporation’s future financing requirements for all other projects will be dependent on the success of
the Morskoe well and any follow up wells, with resulting cash flow from operations, its ability to develop further oil
and gas joint venture partnerships on favorable terms, its ability to access equity capital markets and, after
achieving or acquiring sustainable production, credit facilities from institutional lenders. The Corporation will
maintain its exploration and development activities at sustainable levels. While there can be no assurances that
any such funds will be available, and if funds are raised, that they will be sufficient to achieve the Corporation’s
objective, or result in commercial success, management believes that it has a well developed network of
institutional investors who understand the risk of investing in exploration companies. The Corporation cannot
assure you that it will be able to obtain sufficient capital, develop joint venture partnerships or achieve or acquire
sustainable production to satisfy all of its obligations or that its operating subsidiaries will be commercially
successful. (See Note 26)
Should the Corporation be unable to meet its obligation under the Subsurface Use Contracts due to a lack of
capital, the Competent Body has the right to terminate the contracts after giving the Corporation 90 day’s written
notice.
1.
CONTINUING OPERATIONS
These amended and restated consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Corporation has acquired an oil and gas business and must make certain capital expenditures during the
course of the next year and future years (see Note 25). The Corporation's ability to continue as a going concern is
dependent upon its ability to generate profitable operations in the future and to obtain the necessary financing to
meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. The
outcome  of  these  matters  cannot  be  predicted  with  any  certainty  at  this  time.  These  amended  and  restated
consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amounts and classification of assets and
liabilities that may be necessary should the Corporation be unable to continue as a going concern.
During  2004,  the  Corporation  utilized  cash  for  management  and  corporate  administrative  activities  of
approximately $200,000 per month. In 2005, corporate and administrative costs will be higher due to increased
business activity in Kazakhstan. Taking into account prepaid lease rentals for office space, monthly expenditures
for  corporate  and  administrative  costs  are  estimated  at  $400,000  per  month.  Management  anticipates  that  the
Corporation  currently  has  sufficient  working  capital  to  fund  this  level  of  operations  through  December  2006.
Current  cash  resources  are  not  anticipated  to  be  sufficient  to  fund  the  next  phase  of  the  Corporation’s
development, including its expansion in the oil and gas business, and it will consider seeking additional private
equity or debt financing. There can be no assurances that any such funds will be available, and if funds are raised,
that  they  will  be  sufficient  to  achieve  the  Corporation’s  objective,  or  result  in  commercial  success.  The
Corporation cannot assure you that it will be able to obtain sufficient capital to satisfy all of its obligations or that
its operating subsidiaries will be commercially successful. In February 2005, we raised an additional $13.7 million
of common equity from institutional investors and accredited private investors (see Note 26).
F-11
The ability of the Corporation to survive will depend on its ability to finance, acquire, explore for and produce oil
and natural gas on a profitable basis.
The  Corporation's  operations  may  also  be  adversely  affected  by  significant  political,  economic  and  social
uncertainties in Kazakhstan and in other countries in which it may acquire oil and gas operations. Kazakhstan has
emerged from the former Soviet Union with a viable, independent economy and is open to foreign investment.
Kazakhstan is rich in a variety of minerals and raw materials. The economy is evolving from centrally planned
towards  a  free  market.  Government  policies  favoring  foreign  investment  may  change,  commodity  prices  may
decline and political disruptions may occur in the region. These factors may impact the Corporation’s ability to
conduct its business, the results of its operations and its financial condition and its right to pay dividends.
3.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
These amended and restated consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries, BSEK and BSEA.
The equity method of accounting is used for companies in which the Corporation has significant influence, which
generally means common stock ownership of at least 20% and not more than 50%. The Corporation  used  the
equity method to account for its joint venture investments in the Shekou JV (which was sold in 2002) and the
Chengdu JV (sold in 2004). BSN was accounted for as a majority-controlled subsidiary until April 25, 2000. For the
period April 26, 2000 to September 28, 2000, while the Corporation owned 50% of BSN, BSN was accounted for
using the equity method.  For the period since September 29, 2000, BSN has  been  accounted  for  as  a  wholly
owned subsidiary and all material inter-company accounts and transactions have been eliminated. On December
9, 2004 BSN was sold.
Cash and cash equivalents
The  Corporation  considers  all  highly  liquid  debt  instruments  with  maturities  at  the  date  of  purchase  of  three
months or less to be cash equivalents.
Restricted cash
The amount of $63,040 is maintained on deposit to secure corporate credit card balances and as a deposit on oil
and gas operations (2003 - $30,000).
Property and equipment
Property  and  equipment  are  stated  at  cost.  Depreciation  is  computed  using  the  declining  balance  method  as
follows:
Furniture and fixtures
Computer hardware
20%
30%
Amortization  of  leasehold  improvements  and  assets  recorded  under  capital  lease  agreements  are  computed
using the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful lives of the related assets,
currently over 5 years.
Oil and gas properties
We follow successful efforts accounting for our oil and gas business.  All property acquisition costs are initially
capitalized to property, plant and equipment as unproved property costs.  Once proved reserves are discovered,
the acquisition costs are reclassified to proved property acquisition costs.  Exploration drilling costs are
capitalized pending evaluation as to whether sufficient quantities of reserves have been found to justify
commercial production.  If commercial quantities of reserves are not found, exploration drilling costs are
expensed.  All exploratory wells that discover potentially commercial quantities of reserves in areas requiring
major capital expenditures before the commencement of production and where commercial viability requires the
drilling of additional exploratory wells, remain capitalized as long as the drilling of additional exploratory wells is
under way or firmly planned.  All other exploration costs, including geological and geophysical and annual lease
rentals are expensed to earnings as incurred.  All development costs are capitalized as proved property costs.
F-12
Expenditures related to exploratory wells in an area that requires major capital expenditures are carried as an
asset, provided that i) there have been sufficient oil and gas reserves found to justify completion as a producing
well if the required capital expenditure is made, and ii) drilling of additional exploratory wells is underway or firmly
planned for the near future.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization on oil and gas assets are provided on the unit of production basis.  Land
and lease costs relating to producing properties are depreciated and depleted over the remaining estimated
proved reserves.  Development and exploration drilling and equipping costs are depleted over remaining proved
developed reserves and proved property acquisition costs over remaining proved reserves.  Depletion is
considered a cost of inventory when the oil and gas is produced.  When this inventory is sold, the depletion is
charged to depreciation, depletion and amortization expense.
The Company annually assesses all existing capitalized exploratory well costs for impairment. Impairment reserve
is created when either of two criteria is met:
a)
Well has not found a sufficient quantity of reserves to justify its completion as a producing well
b)
The Company is not making sufficient progress assessing the reserves and the economic and operating viability
of the project”.
Impairment of oil and gas properties
The Corporation reviews its long-lived assets, including oil and gas properties, for possible impairment by
comparing the carrying values with the undiscounted future net before-tax cash flows. Asset impairment may
occur if a field discovers lower than anticipated reserves, write downs of proved reserves based on field
performance, significant changes in commodity prices, significant decreases in the market value of an asset, and
significant change in the extent or manner of use or physical change in an asset. Impaired assets will be written
down to their estimated fair values, generally their discounted future net before-tax cash flows. For proved oil and
gas properties, the Corporation performs the impairment test on an individual field basis. Unproved properties are
reviewed periodically to determine if there has been impairment of the carrying value with any such impairment
charged to expense in the current period.
Borrowing costs
Interest costs related to financing the acquisition of the subsurface use rights, conducting exploration activities
and financing major oil and gas development projects are capitalized as part of related assets until the projects
are evaluated, or until the projects are substantially complete and ready for their intended use if the projects are
evaluated as successful.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
The Corporation prospectively adopted SFAS No. 142 effective January 1, 2002. SFAS No. 142 eliminates the
requirement to amortize goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, extends the allowable useful lives of
certain intangible assets, and requires recognition for goodwill and intangible assets and impairment testing,
which must be performed at least annually.
Long-lived assets
The  carrying  value  of  long-lived  assets,  which  includes  goodwill,  is  evaluated  whenever  events  or  changes  in
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized
when the estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to result from the use and disposition of the asset, is
less than the carrying value of the asset. (See Note 11)
F-13
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the liability method in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards No. 109 “Accounting for Income Taxes”.  Tax on the income or loss for the period comprises current
tax and any change in deferred tax. Current tax comprises tax payable calculated on the basis of the expected
taxable income for the year, and any adjustment of tax payable for previous years.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to
temporary differences between the carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax
bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using
enacted rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected
to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in
income in the period when the change is realized.
The ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income
in the reporting periods in which the originating expenditure becomes deductible. In assessing the recoverability
of deferred income tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that the deferred income
tax assets will be realized. In making this assessment, management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred
income tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies.
Foreign currency translation
In accordance with the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52, "Foreign Currency Translation" the
financial statements of two subsidiaries of the Corporation, KoZhaN LLP, a Kazakhstan limited liability partnership
(“KoZhaN”) and Vector Energy West LLP, a Kazakhstan limited liability partnership, have been translated into
United States Dollars (“US Dollars”) from Kazakhstan TengeTenge (“TengeTenge”). KoZhaN and Vector maintain
their accounting records in TengeTenge. A majority of KoZhaN’s and Vector’s capitalized costs, expenses,
liabilities, loans and cash flows are denominated in US Dollars. Accordingly, KoZhaN and Vector have determined
that the US Dollars is its functional currency.
KoZhaN’s and Vector’s long-lived assets and equity are translated using historic exchange rates. Gains and
losses arising from these translations are reported in the consolidated statement of operations.
The Kazakhstan Tenge is not a fully convertible currency outside of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The translation
of Tenge denominated assets and liabilities into US Dollars for the purpose of these financial statements does not
indicate that the Corporation could realize or settle in US Dollars the reported values of the assets and liabilities.
Likewise, it does not indicate that the Corporation could return or distribute the reported US Dollars values of
capital and retained earnings to the partners.
Employee Benefits
Pension Payments - The Corporation pays into an employee accumulated pension fund an amount equivalent to
10% of employees’ salaries for employees of its Kazakhstani operations. These amounts are expensed when they
are incurred.
Social tax - The Corporation makes payments of mandatory social tax in the amount of 21% of employee salaries
for employees of their Kazakhstani operations. These costs are recorded in the period when they are incurred and
capitalized as part of oil and gas properties or included with general and administrative expenses in the
consolidated statement of operations.
Stock-based compensation
The Corporation applies the intrinsic value method allowed by Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25,
Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees ("APB 25") in accounting for its stock option plans. Under APB 25,
compensation expense resulting from awards under variable plans is measured at each reporting period as the
difference between the quoted market price and the exercise price; the cost is recognized over the period the
employee performs related services.
The following table illustrates the effect on net loss and loss per share if the Corporation had applied the fair value
recognition provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ("SFAS") No. 123, Accounting for Stock-
Based Compensation, to stock-based employee compensation.
F-14
Year Ended December 31,
Net loss, as reported
Add: Stock-based employee
compensation
  expense included in reported net
loss,
net of related tax effects
Deduct: Total stock-based employee
  compensation expense determined
under fair
value-based method for all awards,
net of
related tax effects
Pro-forma net loss
 
Net loss per share:
  Basic and diluted – as reported
  Basic and diluted – pro forma
2004
$
2003
$
2002
$
(6,792,048) (3,129,762) (2,591,480)
697,946 1,187,055
-
26,735
94,078
278,432
(6,120,837) (2,036,785) (2,869,912)
(0.131)
(0.119)
(0.133)
(0.087)
(0.119)
(0.132)
The fair value of stock options used in computing the pro forma net loss and basic loss per common share was
estimated at grant date, determined by the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
Dividend yield
Expected volatility
Risk free interest rate
Expected option life
Net loss per share
2004
2003
2002
0%
190%
3.93%
5 years
0%
140%
3.60%
5 years
0%
100%
3.18%
3 years
Basic  loss  per  share  ("EPS")  excludes  dilution  and  is  computed  by  dividing  net  loss  attributable  to  common
stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS reflects
the  potential  dilution  that  could  occur  if  securities  or  other  contracts  to  issue  common  stock  (warrants  to
purchase common stock and common stock options) were exercised or converted into common stock, using the
treasury  stock  method.    Potential  common  shares  in  the  diluted  EPS  computation  are  excluded  in  net  loss
periods,  as  their  effect  would  be  anti-dilutive.  In  2004,  7,267,315  options  and  warrants  were  excluded  in  the
calculation  of  net  loss  per  share.  In    2003,  7,659,716  options  and  warrants  and  in  2002,  7,810,506  options  and
warrants were excluded from the diluted EPS calculation.
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of
revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Such estimates could include the allowance for potentially
uncollectible accounts receivable and a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. Actual results could differ
from those estimates.
F-15
Impact of Recent and Pending Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2003, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) revised FIN No. 46, “Consolidation of
Variable Interest Entities”, which clarifies the application of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51 “Consolidated
Financial Statements” to those entities (defined as VIEs) in which either the equity at risk is not sufficient to permit
that entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or equity
investors lack voting control, an obligation to absorb expected losses or the right to receive expected residual
returns. FIN No. 46(R) requires consolidation by a business of VIEs in which it is the primary beneficiary. The
primary beneficiary is defined as the party that has exposure to the majority of the expected losses and/or
expected residual returns of the VIE. The Corporation does not have an interest in any VIE, and therefore there is
no impact on the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flows from adoption.
In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), “Share-Based Payment”, that will require
compensation costs related to share-based payment transactions to be recognized in financial statements. With
limited exceptions, the amount of compensation cost will be measured based on the grant-date fair value of the
equity or liability instruments issued. In addition, liability awards will be re-measured each reporting period.
Compensation cost will be recognized over the period that an employee provides service in exchange for the
award. The standard replaces SFAS No. 123, “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation”, and supersedes APB
Opinion No. 25, “Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees”. It is effective for small business issuers for the first
interim or annual reporting period beginning after December 15, 2005, meaning that the Corporation will apply the
guidance to all employee awards of share-based payment granted, modified or settled in the first quarter of 2006.
The Corporation is reviewing the standard to determine the potential impact, if any, on its amended and restated
consolidated financial statements.
In June 2004, the FASB issued an exposure draft of a proposed statement, “Fair Value Measurements” to provide
guidance on how to measure the fair value of financial and non-financial assets and liabilities when required by
other authoritative accounting pronouncements. The proposed statement attempts to address concerns about
the ability to develop reliable estimates of fair value and inconsistencies in fair value guidance provided by current
U.S. GAAP, by creating a framework that clarifies the fair value objective and its application in GAAP. In addition,
the proposal expands disclosures required about the use of fair value to re-measure assets and liabilities. The
standard would be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. The
Corporation is reviewing The Exposure Draft to determine the potential impact, if any, on its amended and restated
consolidated financial statements.
In November 2004, the EITF ratified Issue No. 03-13, “Applying the Conditions in Paragraph 42 of FASB Statement
No.144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, in Determining Whether to Report
Discontinued Operations”. The EITF reached a consensus that classification of a disposed of or held-for-sale
component as a discontinued operation is only appropriate if the ongoing entity (i) expects to have no continuing
“direct” cash flows, and (ii) does not retain or expect to retain an interest, contract or other arrangement sufficient
to enable it to exert significant influence over the disposed component’s operating and financial policies after the
disposal transaction. Application of this consensus did not have a material impact on the Corporation’s amended
and restated consolidated financial statements.
In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151, “Inventory Costs”, to clarify that abnormal amounts of idle
facility expense, freight, handling costs and wasted materials (spoilage) should be recognized as current-period
charges, and to require the allocation of fixed production overheads to inventory based on the normal capacity of
the production facilities. The guidance is effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning after
June 15, 2005. Earlier application is permitted. The Corporation does not believe there will be a material impact on
it’s financial position, results of operations or cash flow from operations.
In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement 153, Exchanges of Non-monetary Assets, an amendment of APB
Opinion 29, Accounting for Non-monetary Transactions. This amendment eliminates the exception for non-
monetary exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for exchanges of non-
monetary assets that do not have commercial substance. Under Statement 153, if a non-monetary exchange of
similar productive assets meets a commercial-substance criterion and fair value is determinable, the transaction
must be accounted for at fair value resulting in recognition of any gain or loss. This statement is effective for non-
monetary transactions in fiscal periods that begin after June 15, 2005. The Corporation is reviewing the guidance
to determine the potential impact, if any, on its amended and restated consolidated financial statements.
F-16
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
Big Sky Network Canada Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Corporation, was sold in December of 2004 for a
net gain of $179,935. Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. held all of the Corporations’ investments in China.
5.
BUSINESS COMBINATION
Big Sky Energy Kazakhstan Ltd.
On January 12, 2004, the Corporation completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued and outstanding share
capital of BSEK.  The Corporation issued 8,000,000 common shares at a deemed price of $0.286 per share, being
the trading price of the Corporation’s shares at the date of announcing the transaction, for total consideration
including transaction costs of $2,288,000. Among the sellers of the BSEK shares, was a company which held 80%
of those shares and which was wholly-owned by Kai Yang, the brother of the Corporation’s President, and of
which Matthew Heysel, the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation, and Daming Yang, President
of the Corporation, were directors and senior officers of BSEK at the time.  BSEK holds a 90% interest in KoZhaN,
which holds the rights to explore for and produce oil and natural gas from three properties in the Republic of
Kazakhstan.  The acquired net assets of BSEK and consideration given were as follows:
Oil and gas properties
Other capital assets
$
6,341,710
3,424
Other capital assets
Current assets, including cash of $339,353
Loan receivable from BSEK
Other current liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Net assets acquired
 
Consideration, 8,000,000 common shares
issued
3,424
342,431
(1,154,941)
(968,753)
(2,275,871)
2,288,000
2,288,000
$
 
$
At December 31, 2003, the Corporation had advanced $1,154,941, including accrued interest of $5,941, to BSEK.
 This amount is reflected on the consolidated balance sheet as an advance to related parties. At December 31,
2004, the loan balance was $4,185,500 including $95,602 of accrued interest and is eliminated in these amended
and restated consolidated financial statements. The amount is unsecured, bears interest at the rate of 5% per
annum and is repayable on demand.
Results of operations of BSEK have been included in the consolidated statement of operations of the Corporation
from the period January 12, 2004 to December 31, 2004.
On January 30, 2004, BSEK entered into a subscription and escrow agreement with a third-party to issue common
shares from treasury to this third-party.  The shares were being held in escrow pending receipt of the full amount
of the subscription proceeds totaling $2,300,000.  On June 28, 2004, the subscription agreement was cancelled
and the $250,000 deposit, which had been received in the third quarter of 2003, was refunded.
Royalty Interest
On March 4, 2004, the Corporation issued 681,475 common shares to Ibriz Oil Inc. (“Ibriz”), an Alberta corporation,
as consideration for the purchase of a royalty interest in the net revenues of BSEK at a cost of $415,700. These
shares were valued at $415,700 based on an average closing price of $0.61 from February 20 – 26, 2004. The
purchase price was determined based on the results of the valuation report performed by an independent, third
party petroleum engineering company. The royalty interest amounted  to 5% of BSEK’s net share of the earnings
of its 90%-held subsidiary company, KoZhaN. At the time of this transaction, Mr. Van Doorne, who is a director and
the Chief Executive Officer of Ibriz, was also Executive Vice President and the Managing Director of BSEK.  This
royalty interest has been eliminated by the acquisition of BSEK and accounted for as an increase in oil and gas
property.
F-17
During 2004 $511,612 (2003 – Nil) of BSEK’s expenses were paid by the Corporation.
Vector Energy West LLP
On May 11, 2004, the Corporation, through its 75% owned subsidiary, BSEA, completed the acquisition of 100% of
the issued and outstanding charter capital of Vector (a Kazakhstan limited liability partnership). BSEA was
incorporated under the laws of Alberta on April 8, 2004 with the Corporation subscribing to 75% of the total shares
issued on incorporation. On May 11, 2004, BSEA borrowed $5,000,000 from the Corporation. The funds were paid
as follows; $4,506,611 to acquire 100% of the issued and outstanding charter capital of Vector and $570,000 to
purchase Vector’s loan from a third party.  At December 31, 2004 the loan balance was $6,434,789 including
$177,016 of accrued interest and is eliminated in these amended and restated consolidated financial statements.
The amount is unsecured, bears interest at the rate of 5% per annum and is repayable on demand.   The acquired
net assets of Vector and consideration given would be as follows:
Oil and gas properties
Current assets, including cash of $109
Loan payable
Other current liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Net assets acquired
 
Consideration, paid in cash
$
 
 
 
 
$
 
$
11,112,756
5,123
(548,076)
(1,308,250)
(4,754,942)
4,506,611
4,506,611
As of the acquisition date, May 11, 2004, Vector had a loan outstanding to third parties of $548,076.  In connection
with the purchase of Vector, BSEA was required to purchase the loan and settle it for cash of $570,000
representing a premium of $21,924. This premium has been expensed.
Big Sky Energy Atyrau Ltd.
On November 10, 2004 the Corporation purchased the 25% minority interest in BSEA. The Corporation issued
3,500,000  common  shares  at  a  deemed  price  of  $0.73  per  share,  being  the  trading  price  of  the  Corporation’s
shares at the date the transaction was announced, for total consideration of $2,550,000. BSEA holds 100% of the
charter  capital  of  Vector,  a  Kazakhstan  limited  liability  partnership.  On  November  10,  2004,  BSEA  had  an
accumulated net deficiency in the fair value of net assets of $2,798,167 of which $699,542 relates to the Minority
interest of BSEA. The purchase price of $2,550,000 and a related deferred income tax liability of $894,250 has been
ascribed to oil and gas properties.
During 2004,    $2,051,977 (2003 – Nil) of BSEA’s expenses were paid by the Corporation.
Pro-forma disclosure
SFAS  141  requires  disclosure  on  a  pro-forma  basis  as  though  the  business  combination  had  occurred  at  the
beginning of the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, the Corporation has determined the following pro-
forma information for the BSEK and BSEA business combination:
December 31, 2004 (unaudited)
Revenue
Net loss
Loss per share
As reported Adjustments Pro-forma
$ -
$
(6,872,048)
$ (0.133)
$ -
$
(6,792,048)
$ (0.131)
$ -
$ (80,000)
$-
Loss per share
$ (0.131)
$-
$ (0.133)
As reported Adjustments Pro-forma
$ -
(3,283,762
$ -
$ (154,000)
$ -
$
(3,129,762)
$ (0.133)
$ -
$ (0.140)
F-18
December 31, 2003 (unaudited)
Revenue
Net loss
Loss per share
6.
OTHER CURRENT ASSET
Other current asset represents an advance made by the Company to ABT Ltd. to cover 50% of the costs of a dam
construction related to the Morskoe oil field. The advance was made to ABT Ltd. to satisfy the terms of a farm-out
agreement entered into by the Company with ABT Ltd. (see Note 10).
7.
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Property and equipment consist of:
Furniture and fixtures
Computer hardware and software
Leasehold improvements
 
Accumulated amortization
8.
OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES
December 31
2004
$
325,297
46,382
178,041
549,720
(165,643)
384,077
December
31, 2003
$
163,361
480,300
59,036
702,697
(415,558)
287,139
Oil and gas properties are comprised of the following:
December 31,
2004
(Restated,
see Note
27)            $
December 31,
2003
Subsurface use rights and expenses
Acquisitions costs
Royalty interest
Construction Works
Exploratory well drilling costs
Oil and gas properties
6,208,911  
14,145,677  
415,700  
840,423
1,635,634
23,246,345
$
-
-
-
9.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE AND ACCRUED LIABILITIES
The following amounts are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities:
December 31
December
31, 2003
Trade accounts payable
Professional fees
Office lease
Withholding taxes
Other
10.
2004
$
413,271
98,802
80,323
114,363
54,399
761,158
$
74,609
137,583
46,936
 -
3,185
262,313
SHORT-TERM INTEREST FREE LOAN FROM ABT LTD
On October 12, 2004, KoZhaN entered into two (2) agreements with ABT Ltd. LLP – an Agreement on Partial
Transfer of the Subsoil Use Right (the “Transfer Agreement”) and Agreement No. 1. (“Agreement No. 1”). These
two (2) agreements set the terms and conditions of the transfer by KoZhaN of forty-five percent (45%) of its
interest in the subsoil use right in the Morskoe oil field (the “Interest”).
F-19
Pursuant to Agreement No. 1, ABT is providing consideration for the Interest that consists of performance of
certain construction works and up to 50% of the costs incurred in connection with Well No. 10 in the Morskoe oil
field that are not deemed to be associated with the “drilling works” of such well.
Also pursuant to Agreement No. 1, ABT agreed to provide a loan of up to $550,000 for the drilling works
associated with Well No. 10. “Drilling works” was defined as all costs associated with the drilling, completing,
equipping, coring, logging, perforating and test of Well No. 10. This loan is required to be repaid only in the case of
discovery of oil and production from the Morskoe oil field.
The transfer of the Interest is subject to approval by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan
(the “MEMR”), which has not yet been received.
The Company has recorded the amount of $840,423 paid by ABT in performance of the construction works as an
amount loaned to the Company by ABT. In the event that the transfer of the Interest is approved by the MEMR, this
amount will be converted into an amount received as consideration for the Interest transferred to ABT.
The amounts received from ABT towards the drilling works, which as of December 31, 2004, equaled $500,000,
have been recorded by the Company as a loan, to be repaid from production. In the event that no oil is discovered
or produced by the Company from the Morskoe oil field, this loan will be removed from the Company’s records as
a forgiven loan pursuant to the terms of Agreement No. 1. The Company has the obligation to repay the amount of
$500,000 to ABT Ltd. should the farm out agreement not be approved by the Ministry.
As at December 31, 2004 the short-term interest free loan due to ABT was constituted as follows:
Construction Works incurred by
ABT
Payments for Drilling Works from
ABT
840,423
500,000
$1,340,423
11.
IMPAIRMENT OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
As part of the review of the December 31, 2001 financial results, management performed an assessment of the
carrying value of the long-lived assets recorded as a result of the 2000 acquisition of BSN and from its direct
investments in the Shekou and Chengdu JVs.
Economic trends had negatively impacted technology-companies’ market valuations and management's outlook
on expected future growth rates for the Internet industry and BSN’s businesses in particular. Based on the review,
management concluded that the decline in valuations and expected growth rates within the Internet industry was
more than a temporary condition. Consequently, management performed impairment analysis in accordance with
its  policy  as  disclosed  in  Note  3,  and  as  a  result,  recorded  a  $7,549,111  write-down  of  intangible  assets  and
$679,512  write-down  of  the  investment  in  the  Chengdu  JV  at  December  31,  2001,  representing  the  amount  by
which the carrying values of these assets exceeded their fair values.
Asset
         
 
Investment in Chengdu JV
 
Intangible Assets
Intellectual property
Shekou JV
Write Down at
December 31, 2001
$
679,512
198,010
1,911,939
Shekou JV
Chengdu JV
Goodwill
 
Total Write Down
1,911,939
3,823,875
1,615,287
7,549,111
8,228,623
F-20
The remaining balance of Intellectual property of $400,000 at December 31, 2001 was written off at December 31,
2002  as  the  Corporation  had  sold  its  interest  in  the  Shekou  JV,  discontinued  its  active  participation  in  the
Chengdu JV and discontinued pursuing new Internet joint venture opportunities with cable television stations.
On September 13, 2002, BSN sold its 50% interest in Shekou JV for $2,280,000.  Net proceeds, after agent's fees
and professional fees, were approximately $2,029,200.  At the time of the sale, the Corporation's investment in
Shekou JV, net of its equity share of losses incurred by the joint venture to the date of sale, was approximately
$1,903,402, resulting in a gain of $125,798.
On December 9, 2004, the Corporation sold its remaining assets in China. (See Note 4)
12.
OBLIGATIONS FOR SOCIAL SPHERE DEVELOPMENT
In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts, the Corporation is committed to contribute to social sphere
development of Astana and Atyrau cities in the total amount of $3,030,000 for all oilfields during the exploration
phase.  All Subsurface Use Contracts establish the exploration phase as 6 years from 2003 to 2009, and the
production phase as 25 years from 2009 to 2034. During the year ended, December 31, 2004, the Corporation had
not made any payments. These payments are due over the period from 2003 to 2008.  Management believes that
the Corporation will meet this obligation within the exploration phase and payment delay will not terminate or
deteriorate terms of the Subsurface Use Contracts.
Payment of these obligations is to be made according to a payment schedule agreed to between the Corporation
and the Government. The non-current portion of these obligations is discounted at 15% being the estimated
credit-adjusted risk free discount rate, giving a total discounted obligation of $2,492,368. The accretion expense
for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $193,243 (2003- $Nil).
The social sphere costs are required contributions under the SubSurface Use Contracts that are designed to
contribute to the development of the infrastructure of the cities of Atryau and Astana.
Big Sky has discounted the non-current portion of this liability on the basis of a financial instrument that is due in
the future.  Big Sky believes that FAS 107 paragraph 28 supports the principle of discounting further obligations
that do not have a stated rate of interest as the current value of such obligation is less than the future obligation.
 Moreover, FAS 141, paragraph 37(g) refers to the present value of long-term debt and other claims payable to be
determined at appropriate current interest rates.
13.
OBLIGATIONS FOR PROFESSIONAL TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
December 31,
December 31,
Within one year
In the second to the fifth inclusive
Total obligations
 
Less: discount on obligations on professional
training of personnel
Present value of obligations on professional training
of personnel
 
Amount due for settlement within one year
Amount due for settlement after one year
 
Total
2004
$
$
289,200
389,800
679,000
(85,159)
593,841
289,200
304,641
593,841
2003
$
$
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/a
Management believes that obligations on professional training of personnel should be recognized for future
professional training costs as prescribed by the Subsurface Use Contracts. In accordance with the Subsurface
Use Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to finance professional training of Kazakhstani personnel recruited for
the Subsurface Use Contract’s operations at the rate of not less than 1% of the total amount of minimal
investments. Under the Subsurface Use Contracts, the total amount of minimal investments was established at
$53,900,000 during their exploration phase.
F-21
These obligations are discounted at 15%, being the estimated credit-adjusted risk free discount rate.  The
accretion expense for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $30,041 (2003 - $Nil) was expensed.
14.
OBLIGATIONS FOR ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHT FOR THE GEOLOGICAL INFORMATION USE
In accordance with the Agreements on acquisition of the right on the geological information use # 710 and # 711
dated January 21, 2002, the Corporation is obliged to pay an additional amount for the right of geological
information use if KoZhaN attracts foreign investors.
On May 11, 2004, BSEA acquired 100% of the shares in Vector’s charter fund. Accordingly, Vector recognized
additional obligations on acquisition of the right on the geological information use as at December 31, 2004 in the
amount of $758,265.
15.
SIGNATURE BONUSES AND PENALTY PAYABLE
In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts there was an obligation to pay signature bonuses in total of
$1,000,000 for acquiring the subsurface use rights for all three fields. These bonuses were due for payment within
30 days after signing the Subsurface Use Contracts.
As at December 31, 2003, $1,000,000 had been paid to the Governments as a signature bonus for Morskoe, Karatal
and Dauletaly oilfields. Penalties accrued on delaying the payment of the signature bonuses for those oilfields as
at December 31, 2003 amounted to $98,904. These penalties were paid as at December 31, 2004.
16.
COMMON STOCK
The Corporation has issued the following shares in a series of private placement agreements:
i.
ii.
On April 14, 2000 the Corporation issued 500,000 common shares at $0.20
per share for total proceeds of $100,000;
On May 12, 2000 the Corporation issued 1,530,000 common shares at $1.00
per share for total proceeds of $1,530,000;
iii. On May 12, 2000 the Corporation issued 1,301,667 common shares at $7.50
per share for total proceeds of $9,762,503;
iv. On April 3, 2002, the Corporation issued 2,997,160 common shares at $0.25
v.
vi.
per share for total proceeds of $749,290;
On August 26, 2003, 682,802 common shares were issued pursuant to the
Alternative  Compensation  Plan.    Proceeds  of  the  issue  were  recorded  in
2002; and
In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2003,  the  Corporation  issued  7,900,000  common
shares at $0.25 per share for total proceeds of $1,975,000.
On January 12, 2004, the Corporation completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued and outstanding share
capital of BSEK.  The Corporation issued 8,000,000 common shares at a deemed price of $0.286 per share, being
the trading price of the Corporation’s shares at the date of announcing the transaction, for total consideration
including transaction costs of $2,288,000 as described in Note 5.
On January 26, 2004, the Corporation issued 100,000 restricted common shares in connection with a private
placement conducted in late 2003 for proceeds to $25,000.
On February 11, 2004 we issued 66,666 shares for proceeds of $3,333 on the exercise of non-employee options.
As part of the exercise agreement, the remaining 33,334 unvested options outstanding to the option holder were
cancelled and returned to the stock option plan.
On March 4, 2004, we issued 681,475 common shares to Ibriz in connection with an Asset Purchase Agreement
that we entered into with Ibriz. The amount of common stock issued was determined using the average closing
price of our common stock for the five days prior to February 27, 2004, which resulted in a share price of $0.61 per
shares.
F-22
On March 9, 2004, the Corporation solicited votes from selected stockholders of record and received an
affirmative vote of 51% to approve an increase in the number of the Corporation’s authorized shares of common
stock from 50,000,000 to 150,000,000, par value $0.001 per share.  On April 20, 2004, the Nevada Secretary of State
processed the Corporation’s Certificate of Amendment to adjust the Corporation’s authorized share capital to
150,000,000.
On April 3, 2004, Canaccord Capital (Europe) Limited exercised a warrant for 299,716 shares for proceeds of
$74,928.
On April 12, 2004, the Corporation issued 299,716 common shares to Canaccord Capital (Europe) Limited for total
proceeds of $74,928 in connection with a warrant issued on April 3, 2002.  The warrant was for a total of 299,716
common shares with an exercise price of $0.25.
On May 7, 2004, the Corporation closed on the first tranche of a private placement and issued 13,483,750 shares
for gross proceeds of $6,741,875. The costs associated with the private placement includes a finders fee equal to
6% of the gross proceeds received by the corporation and warrants to be issued to the finders that equal 6% of
the shares issued under the private placement with an exercise price of $0.50. The total share issuance costs for
this tranche are $373,537.
On July 6, 2004, an additional 2,616,250 shares of the Corporation’s common stock was issued at $0.50 per share,
totaling $1,308,125.  The private placements were expressly subject to BSEA closing on the acquisition of Vector.
 Costs associated with this private placement included a finders fee equal to 6% of the gross proceeds received
by the Corporation and warrants with an exercise price of $0.50, issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares
issued under the private placement. The total share issuance costs for this tranche were $97,193.
On September 20, 2004 the Corporation closed on the third tranche of a private placement and issued 2,440,000
shares for gross proceeds of $1,220,000.  The costs associated with this private placement included a finders fee
equal to 6% of the gross proceeds received by the Corporation and warrants with an exercise price of $0.50,
issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued under the private placement. The total share issuance
costs for this tranche were $208,070.
On November 15, 2004 the Corporation issued 35,000 shares on the exercise of stock options for total proceeds of
$1,750.
On November 17, 2004 the Corporation closed on the fourth tranche of a private placement and issued 5,800,000
shares for gross proceeds of $2,900,000. The costs associated with this private placement include a finders fee
equal  to  6%  of  the  gross  proceeds  received  by  the  Corporation  and  warrants  with  an  exercise  price  of  $0.50,
issued to the finders that equal 6% of the shares issued under the private placement. The total share issue costs
for this tranche were $437,241.
On  November  10,  2004  the  Corporation  issued  3,500,000  common  shares  in  exchange  for  the  25%  minority
interests in BSEA at a deemed price of $0.73 per share, which represents the trading price on November 10, 2004
for total proceeds of $2,555,000.
17.
STOCK OPTION PLAN
(a)
Stock Option Plan
The Board of Directors of the Corporation adopted the 2000 Stock Option Plan (the "Plan") during April 2000.
 Shareholders approved the Plan on June 29, 2001. On December 3, 2004 the shareholders approved an increase
in the common shares reserved for the option plan to 15,000,000. Under the Plan, the Corporation had reserved
15,  000,000  (2003-8,000,000)  common  shares  for  issuance  under  options  granted  to  eligible  persons.  As  at
December 31, 2004, 6,175,000 had been granted and 8,723,334 remained available for granting.
Under  the  Plan,  options  to  purchase  common  shares  may  be  granted  to  employees,  directors  and  certain
consultants at prices not less than the fair market value at date of grant for incentive stock options and not less
than 110% of fair market value for incentive stock options where the employee who, at the time of grant, owns
stock representing more than 10% of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of the Corporation.
These stock options expire three to five years from the date of grant and may be fully exercisable immediately, or
may be exercisable according to a schedule or conditions specified by the Board of Directors.
(b)
Option Activity
Option activity under the Plan is as follows:
Opening Balance - January 1
 
Granted
Expired
F-23
2004
2003
2002
Number of Number of Number of
Options
Options
Shares
7,310,000 6,810,000 6,618,333
100,000 1,100,000 8,610,000
-
(200,000)
-
Expired
Exercised
Cancelled
 
 
Closing Balance, December 31
 
Options available for granting
 
Options exercised
 
Option Plan Total
(c)
-
(200,000)
-
(101,666)
(933,334)
(600,000)(8,418,333)
6,175,000 7,310,000 6,810,000
-
-
6,175,000 7,310,000 6,810,000
8,723,334
101,666
690,000 1,190,000
-
-
15,000,000 8,000,000 8,000,000
Additional information regarding options outstanding as of December 31, 2004 is as follows:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted Average
Weighted
Remaining
Average
Range of
Number
Contractual Life
Exercise
Exercise Prices
Outstanding
(Years)
$1.00
$0.15
$0.05
$0.50
125,000
300,000
 5,650,000
100,000
6,175,000
0.5
3.9
3.1
4.7
3.0
(d)
Price
$1.00
$0.15
$0.05
$0.50
$0.08
As discussed in Note 3, the Corporation accounts for its stock-based awards to employees using the intrinsic
value  method  in  accordance  with  Accounting  Principles  Board  No.  25,  "Accounting  for  Stock  Issued  to
Employees”  and  its  related  interpretations.  APB  No.  25  does  not  require  any  amount  to  be  recorded  as  a
compensation expense for stock options that are issued at market price or above and are exercised, cancelled or
allowed to expire under the original terms of the issue.  Where the original terms of the option award are amended,
as  in  an  adjustment  to  the  exercise  price,  the  intrinsic  value  method  requires  that  these  stock  options  be
subjected to variable plan accounting. The amount of $Nil (2003 - $1,987,501) was determined to be the increase in
the intrinsic value of these amended stock options for 2004 and was recorded as Deferred Compensation.   The
Corporation  amortized  $697,946  (2003)  -  $1,187,055)  as  stock  compensation  expense  over  the  course  of  2004,
leaving  a  balance  of  $Nil  (2003  -  $800,446) in  respect  of  Deferred  Compensation  related  to  employees,  on  the
balance sheet at December 31, 2004.
(e)
The Corporation accounts for stock based awards to non-employees in accordance with Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 123, "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation". SFAS 123 requires that
stock option grants to non-employees be accounted for at fair value on the date of the grant, determined by the
Black Scholes option-pricing model.  This fair value is then amortized over the service life of the stock option.  In
2004, compensation expense of $60,318 (2003 - $354,119, 2002 - $489,645) was recognized in the amended and
restated consolidated financial statements and the amount of $27,926 (2003 - $208,064) was included in Deferred
Compensation on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2004 for non-employee stock option grants.
F-24
18.
WARRANTS
The Corporation has previously issued the following warrants.  Each warrant can be exchanged for 1 common
share at the exercise price noted.
Date of
Grant
 
April 2000
May 2004
July 2004
September 2004
November 2004
Number of
Warrants
Exercise
Price
Expiry
Date
50,000
69,000
491,315
134,000
348,000
$1.00
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
$0.50
April, 2005
May 2007
January 2006
January 2006
January 2006
50,000 warrants were granted to a consultant in 2000. The fair value of these warrants was $351 and was expensed
in  2000.    299,716  warrants  were  granted  at  a  price  of  $0.25  per  share  were  expensed  during  2004.  1,042,715
warrants were granted at a price of $0.50 per share under the terms of an agency agreement in connection with a
private placement.
19.
ALTERNATIVE COMPENSATION PLAN
On March 22, 2002 our Board of Directors approved the Alternative Compensation Plan to provide opportunities
for officers, directors, employees and contractors to receive all or a portion of their compensation in the form of
common shares instead of cash. The Alternative Compensation Plan was approved at our Annual Shareholders’
Meeting held on June 14, 2002. The Plan allowed for maximum compensation of 2,000,000 shares.  This maximum
was reached in the third quarter of 2002 and an expense in the amount of $163,463, relating to the future issuance
of 2,000,000 common shares, was accrued under the Alternative Compensation Plan in 2002.  Shares are issued
upon request of the beneficiaries and no further compensation cost is recorded at that time.  During 2004, no
shares were issued under the Alternative Compensation Plan, leaving a balance of 1,317,198 shares still to be
issued at December 31, 2004.
20.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTION
On  December  31,  2004,  the  Corporation  owed  $90,093  to  Matthew  Heysel,  our  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive
Officer  arising  from  having  personally  paid  for  travel  expenditures  while  traveling  on  the  business  of  the
Corporation. The balance at December 31, 2004 was paid to Mr. Heysel in early 2005.  Prepaid expenses on the
balance  sheet  at  December  31,  2003  include  $23,214  that  was  paid  to  Mr.  Heysel  in  December  2003  as  a
prepayment of his regular compensation for the months of January and February 2004.
On December 31, 2004 the Corporation owed $10,000 to Glenn Van Doorne, our executive Vice President, for a
consulting service contract. The balance was paid on January 2005.
The Corporation has been unable to establish a bank account in Beijing.  Each month, the Corporation transfers
funds to Kai Yang, the brother of our President and a consultant to BSN, who is resident in Beijing, to cover the
costs of maintaining an office in Beijing.  During 2004, the Corporation advanced $385,689 to Kai Yang and he
disbursed  the  full  amount  for  salaries,  office  rental,  professional  fees,  travel,  and  other  office  administration
expenses of the Corporation (2003 - $420,000).  Kai Yang retained no part of these funds.
Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd.
At the time of the acquisition of BSEK, Matthew Heysel and Daming Yang were directors and officers of Big Sky
Energy Canada Ltd. and the Corporation and Mr. Kai Yang held all the outstanding shares of Big Sky Energy
Canada Ltd.  As at December 31, 2004, Matthew Heysel and Daming Yang were no longer directors nor officers of
Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd. On March 10, 2004, Daming Yang’s brother, Wei Yang, was appointed to the board
and was given full voting and dispositive control over all shares held by Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd. The loan
arose from
F-25
costs totaling $300,000 that were incurred by Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd. in connection with completing BSEK’s
acquisition of KoZhaN, and a payment of $50,000 to Bolat Mukashev, the President of KoZhaN, as a
reimbursement of costs incurred by the President prior to the signing the purchase agreement on August 11,
2003. The amount of $350,000 was treated as consideration in the allocation of the purchase price of the assets
and liabilities of KoZhaN. The loan is unsecured, bears no interest and is repayable on demand. A balance of
$21,351 was outstanding at December 31, 2004.
During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Corporation advanced to Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd. $39,905 net
of advances from Big Sky Energy Canada Ltd. towards the balance outstanding.
The Corporation sold the shares in Big Sky Network Canada Ltd. to Big Sky Energy Canada for proceeds of
$175,793.
Big Sky Holdings Ltd.
Matthew Heysel controls Big Sky Holdings Ltd..  The loan to the Corporation arose from a cash transfer to BSEK
to cover expenses incurred by BSEK.  The loan is unsecured, bears no interest and is repayable on demand. A
Balance of $25,590 was outstanding at December 31, 2004.
KoZhaN LLP
KoZhaN is a 90% owned subsidiary of BSEK; the Corporation owns 100% of BSEK.  The loan was made to the
President of KoZhaN during 2004.  During the year ended December 31, 2004 various other advances were made
to other related parties of KoZhaN.  These loans are unsecured, bear no interest and are repayable on demand. A
balance of $24,439 was outstanding at December 31, 2004.
Vector Energy West LLP
Vector Energy West LLP is the wholly-owned subsidiary of BSEA, Corporation.  The loan was made to a director
prior to acquisition of Vector, which was acquired when BSEA purchased Vector on May 11, 2004.  Upon the
acquisition of Vector, the director stepped down from the board of directors and remains as an employee of
Vector.  In addition, several other advances were made to related parties of Vector.  These loans are unsecured,
bear no interest and are repayable on demand.
21.
OBLIGATIONS FOR HISTORICAL COSTS REIMBURSEMENT
The Corporation through its purchase of Vector is unavoidably obliged to reimburse $7,784,034, which represents
historical costs incurred by the Republic of Kazakhstan for the Liman-2 oilfield pursuant to the terms of the
Subsurface Use Contract # 1076 dated December 28, 2002 and the Agreement on acquisition of the right on the
geological information use # 711 dated January 21, 2002. Payment of these obligations should be made according
to a payment schedule agreed between Vector and the Government. These payments are due from 2012 to 2027
and should be paid quarterly in equal installments.
These obligations are discounted at 15%, being the estimated credit-adjusted risk free discount rate, giving a
present value of obligation of $973,682 as at December 31, 2004.  The accretion expense for the year ended
December 31, 2004 was $21,819 (2003 - $Nil).
22.
ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
Management determined that an asset retirement obligation should be recognized for future abandonment costs
of 93 wells drilled at Morskoe, Liman -2 and Atyrau  fields  before the Corporation signed the Subsurface Use
Contracts, but which, in management’s opinion were not properly abandoned.  Management believes that this
obligation is likely to be settled at the end of the exploration phase.
As at December 31, 2004, undiscounted future cash flows that will be required to satisfy the Corporation’s liability
by 2009 and 2028 for the Liman-2 field is $930,000. After application of a 15% credit-adjusted risk free discount
rate, the present value of the Corporation’s liability at December 31, 2004 is $435,868 (As at January 12, 2004 -
$19,872).  During the year ended December 31, 2004, the Corporation recorded an accretion expense of $2,284
(2003 - $Nil).
F-26
23.
INCOME TAXES
The Corporation did not provide any current or deferred U.S. federal or foreign income tax provision or benefit
because it has experienced operating losses since inception. The Corporation is not liable for any state taxes.
Loss before income taxes
 
 
Composite statutory income tax rate  
Expected income tax recovery
Tax benefit not recognized
 
Income tax expense (recovery)
2004
2003
2002
$
6,792,048 $
35.0%
3,129,762 $
35.0%
$ (2,377,000) $ (1,095,417) $
2,591,480
35.0%
(907,018)
907,018
2,377,000
-
$
$
1,095,417
-
$
-
Deferred taxation reflects the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and
liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for statutory tax purposes in the respective
countries.
The deferred income tax liability is comprised of the following:
December 31,
December 31,
Temporary differences
Oil and gas property values
Total temporary differences
 
Statutory tax rate
Total
 
Current portion
Non-current portion
Total
-
2004
$
13,734,017  
13,734,017  
 
35% 
4,806,906
4,806,906
4,806,906
2003
$
-
-
-
35%
-
-
-
At December 31, 2004, the Corporation had a net operating loss of approximately $15,650,000 (2003 - $15,500,000)
for U.S. federal purposes. Utilization of the net operating loss, which expires on various dates starting in 2007,
may be subject to certain limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.  Due to
the  uncertainty  of  utilizing  these  net  operating  losses,  the  Corporation  has  made  a  valuation  allowance  of  an
amount equal to the related deferred tax asset.
December
31, 2004
$
15,650,000
15,500,000
December 31
2003
$
December
31, 2002
$
14,200,000
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
5,477,800
(5,477,800)
-
5,425,000
(5,425,000)
-
4,970,000
(4,970,000)
-
F-27
Net operating loss carry forward balance
 
Composite statutory tax rate
Deferred tax asset
Valuation allowance
24.
FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
As at December 31, 2004 the fair value, the related method of determining fair value and carrying value of the
Corporation’s  financial  instruments  were  as  follows:  the  fair  value  of  current  assets  and  current  liabilities
approximates  their  carrying  amounts  due  to  the  short-term  maturity  of  these  instruments.  The  Corporation  is
exposed to market, credit and currency risks arises in the normal course of the Corporation’s business. Derivative
financial instruments are not used to reduce exposure to the above risks.
Concentration of credit risk – Financial instruments that potentially expose the Corporation to concentrations of
credit risk consist primarily of cash and cash equivalent. Management of the Corporation believes the likelihood of
incurring material losses due to concentration of credit risk is remote.
Interest  rate  risk – The Corporations potential interest rate risk is minimal and management considers the risk
insignificant.
Foreign  currency  risk  –  The  Corporation  undertakes  transactions  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.
Accordingly, these activities may result in foreign currency exposure. The Corporation does not hedge its foreign
currency risk.
25.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
In  2004,  the  Corporation  recorded  expenses  for  rental  payments  under  operating  leases,  net  of  amounts
recovered from sub-lessees, totaling (2004 - $121,348; 2003 - $129,965; 2002 - $42,902). Minimum lease payments
under operating leases for the years ending December 31 are as follows:
2005
$
174,900
2005
2006
2007
174,900
125,650
48,250
348,800
The Corporation is subject to potential litigation in the normal course of operations.  There are no claims currently
pending that management considers would materially affect the Corporation’s financial position or results of
operations.
Operating environment – The Corporation’s principal business activities are within the Republic of Kazakhstan.
Laws and regulations affecting businesses operating in the Republic of Kazakhstan are subject to rapid changes
and KoZhaN’s assets and operations could be at risk due to negative changes in the political and business
environment.
Taxation – The taxation system in the Republic of Kazakhstan is constantly changing and subject to inconsistent
application, interpretation and enforcement. There have been many new tax and foreign currency laws and related
regulations introduced in recent years, which are not always clearly written and whose interpretation and
application is subject to the opinions of the local tax authorities. Non-compliance with Kazakhstan laws and
regulations can potentially lead to the imposition of penalties and fines, the amounts of which can be significant.
Environmental matters – The Corporation believes it is currently in compliance with all existing Kazakhstan
environmental laws and regulations. However, Kazakhstan environmental laws and regulations may change in the
future. The Corporation is unable to predict the timing or extent to which these environmental laws and
regulations may change. Such change, if it occurs, may require KoZhaN to modernize technology to meet more
stringent standards.
Financial Commitments and Contingencies – KoZhaN
The Corporation, through its interest in KoZhaN, has the following commitments and contingencies.  As these
commitments and contingencies are subject to the commencement of commercial production and the
Corporation can not determine at this time when it will commence commercial oil and gas production operations,
the likelihood of payment of the following commitments and contingencies is currently indeterminable.
Consequently no amounts have been recorded as provisions in these financial statements for the following
commitments and contingencies:
F-28
a) Commitment to repay historical costs of the Government – In accordance with
the Subsurface Use Contracts the Corporation is obliged to reimburse to the
Government for historical costs incurred during preparation of certain geological
information on the Morskoe, Karatal and Dauletaly oilfields.  The total amount
reimbursable is $3,756,422. Of this amount, $116,178 was paid in 2002-2003. The
remaining amount of $3,640,244 is expected to be settled by equal quarterly
installments during 20 years after the Corporation enters into the production phase
b) Commitments to contribute to social development of Astana and Atyrau – In
on these oilfields. If commercial production does not commence no further
payments become due in this respect.
accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to
invest an equivalent of $850,000 during the production phase for the development
of the social sector of Atyrau and Astana cities in the Republic of Kazakhstan.
c) Commitment to develop local personnel– In accordance with the Subsurface
Use Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to invest not less than 1% of total
investments for professional development of the local personnel involved in works
under the Subsurface Use Contracts
d) Liquidation fund – In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts, the
Corporation is obliged to establish a liquidation fund to finance the adequate
disposal of the Corporation’s oil and gas operations in the amount of 1% of
operating costs.  The Corporation is also obliged to apply for approval of this fund
with the Government under the contracts, including budget of disposal costs, no
later than 2 years before the end of the exploration phase and start of the
production phase. Although the Corporation has not yet carried out major
exploration activities to date, the Corporation has recorded an asset retirement
obligation for certain wells in these financial statements. Upon achieving an
agreement with the Government, this asset retirement obligation may be
considered as part of the contractually required liquidation fund.
-
Upon awarding of a new tender for subsurface use rights, KoZhaN shall pay a
$0.05 bonus based on total oilfield reserves as defined in the State Balance
of Reserves (Oil) of Kazakhstan as of January 1, 2000, equivalent to proven
recoverable reserves.
e) Contingencies related to purchase of geological information from the
Government – In accordance with the Purchase Agreements concluded with the
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan on July
10, 2002, the Corporation may incur a penalty for delaying payment for the
geological information purchases from the Government relating to the Morskoe,
Karatal and Dauletaly oilfields at a rate of 10% per annum. Payments for the
geological information purchase for the Karatal and Dauletaly oilfields were made
by the Corporation with a significant delay. Management believes that the
obligation for the penalty is not probable and thus no provision has been
recognized in the financial statements for this amount.
Commitment to make payments based on production – Arising from BSEK’s
acquisition of KoZhaN interest, the Corporation is committed to make the following
payments to the non-controlling partners of KoZhaN, as a group, upon achieving
the following production milestones, where production is calculated after
deducting the government’s share of production, if any, and where one tonne
equals seven barrels of oil:
-
$100,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for two sales of a
commercial quantity of oil produced, saved, marketed and sold by KoZhaN.
 Each sale shall not be less than 4,000 tonnes of oil;
$300,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative
production of 40,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved,
marketed and sold by KoZhaN;
$400,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative
production of 150,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved,
marketed and sold by KoZhaN;
-
-
f)
F-29
-
$500,000 after the receipt by KoZhaN of payment in full for a cumulative
production of 250,000 tonnes of a commercial quantity of oil produced, saved,
marketed and sold by KoZhaN;
-
$0.35 per barrel if the price of oil is equal to or less than $14.00;
g)
-
-
-
-
$0.35 per barrel if the price of oil is equal to or less than $14.00;
$0.75 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $14.00 and less than or
equal to $18.00;
$1.00 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $18.00 and less than or
equal to $22.00; or
$1.50 per barrel if the price of oil is greater than $22.00
Investment commitments – In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts
KoZhaN is obliged to invest a minimum of $69,000,000 over the period covered by
the Subsurface Use Contracts. An amount of $14,000,000 should be invested
during the exploration phase. All three Subsurface Use Contracts establish the
exploration phase as 6 years from 2003 to 2009, and the production phase as 25
years from 2009 to 2034.  The governments’ objective in setting minimum work
commitments is to ensure certain types of exploratory work is carried out by the
license holder, including drilling new wells and seismic activity. The government
will measure the degree to which the Corporation has met its commitments in
terms of work completed. The government estimates the work commitment in terms
of expected spending amounts. The government measures the performance of the
Corporation towards meeting its work commitment by evaluating the actual work
performed in comparison with the agreed requirements. Actual spending is not a
performance measure.
h) Commercial discovery bonus – In accordance with the Subsurface Use
Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to pay to the Government a commercial
discovery bonus in the amount of 0.1% of the value of proved reserves using the
market price of the hydrocarbons. This amount is due within 30 days after the
hydrocarbon reserves are approved by the State Committee on Reserves of the
Republic of Kazakhstan.  As at December 31, 2004, a commercial discovery has
not been made as so no accrual for any bonus has been made in these financial
statements.
Commitments related to transfer of 45% share in Morskoe oil field –
i)
On October 12, 2004, KoZhaN entered into two (2) agreements with ABT Ltd. LLP
– an Agreement on Partial Transfer of the Subsoil Use Right (the “Transfer
Agreement”) and Agreement No. 1. (“Agreement No. 1”). These two (2)
agreements set the terms and conditions of the transfer by KoZhaN of forty-five
percent (45%) of its interest in the subsoil use right in the Morskoe oil field (the
“Interest”).
Pursuant to Agreement No. 1, ABT is providing consideration for the Interest that
consists of performance of certain construction works and up to 50% of the costs
incurred in connection with Well No. 10 in the Morskoe oil field that are not
deemed to be associated with the “drilling works” of such well.  Also pursuant to
Agreement No. 1, ABT agreed to provide a loan of up to $550,000 for the drilling
works associated with Well No. 10. “Drilling works” was defined as all costs
associated with the drilling, completing, equipping, coring, logging, perforating and
test of Well No. 10. This loan is required to be repaid only in the case of discovery
of oil and production from the Morskoe oil field.
The transfer of the Interest is subject to approval by the Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources of Kazakhstan (the “MEMR”), which has not yet been received.
The Company has recorded the amount of $840,423 paid by ABT in performance
of the construction works as an amount loaned to the Company by ABT. In the
event that the transfer of the Interest is approved by the MEMR, this amount will be
converted into an amount received as consideration for the Interest transferred to
ABT.
The amounts received from ABT towards the drilling works, which as of December
31, 2004, equaled $500,000, have been recorded by the Company as a loan, to be
repaid from production. In the event that no oil is discovered or produced by the
Company from the Morskoe oil field, this loan will be removed from the Company’s
records as a forgiven loan pursuant to the terms of Agreement No. 1. The
Company has the obligation to repay the amount of $500,000 to ABT Ltd. should
the farm out agreement not be approved by the Ministry.
F-30
Other Contingencies
a) Non-compliance with the Subsurface Use Contracts – The Government has
the right to suspend these contracts or even cancel them if the Corporation is in
material breach of obligations and commitments under the Subsurface Use
Contracts.
In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts signed on February 17, 2003
the Corporation was obliged to commence exploration activities within 60 days
after signing the Contracts. However, as at December 31, 2004, the Corporation
had not started exploration activities on the Karatal and Dauletaly oilfields. In the
case of failure to remedy such violations, these Subsurface Use Contracts can be
terminated by the Government, which may affect recoverability of capitalized
costs of approximately $1.2 million related to Dauletaly and Karatal oilfields. The
Corporation expects to conduct new exploration activities in the two license areas
in 2005, and may farmout portions of these licenses to third parties in 2005, in
order to fulfill its obligations under the Subsurface Use Contracts.
b) Commitment to sell produced oil in Kazakhstan – In accordance with the
Subsurface Use Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to sell 100% of oil
produced during the exploration stage, and 20% of oil produced during the
production stage, to oil refineries located in Kazakhstan.
Financial Commitments and Contingencies – Vector Energy West
The Corporation, through its interest in Vector, has the following commitments and contingencies.  As these
commitments and contingencies are subject to the commencement of commercial production and the
Corporation can not determine at this time when it will commence commercial oil and gas production operations,
the likelihood of payment of the following commitments and contingencies is currently indeterminable.
Consequently, no amounts have been recorded as provisions in these financial statements for the following
commitments and contingencies:
a) Non-compliance with the Subsurface Use Contracts – The Government has
the right to suspend or cancel these Subsurface Use Contracts if KoZhaN is in
material breach of the obligations and commitments under the Subsurface Use
Contracts.
In accordance with the letter # 14-04-38 27 dated May 26, 2004 the Corporation
was notified by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of
Kazakhstan (the “Competent Body”) that the Corporation had failed to comply with
the terms of the Contract # 1076 dated December 28, 2002 on exploration of
hydrocarbons in the Liman-2 oilfield, in the following way:
-To carry out the Minimal Work Program during the exploration phase;
-To submit the Annual Work Program to the Competent Body and report on the
progress of the Minimal Work Program implementation;
-To provide professional training to the personnel employed for the Subsurface
Use Contract’s operations;
-To contribute funds to the Atyrau region for social programs and programs on
infrastructure development;
-To submit quarterly reports on the Subsurface Use Contract’s activities to the
Competent Body;
-To develop the Business, Property and Liability Risk Insurance Program and to
submit it for approval to the Competent Body; and
-To establish and make contributions to the Liquidation Fund.
In accordance with the letter # 14-04-38 28 dated May 26, 2004 the Corporation
was notified by the Competent Body that the Corporation had failed to comply with
the terms of the Contract # 1077 dated December 28, 2002 on exploration of
hydrocarbons in the Atyrau oilfield, in the following way:
-To carry out the Minimal Work Program during the exploration phase;
-To submit the Annual Work Program to the Competent Body and report on the
progress of the Minimal Work Program implementation;
F-31
-To provide professional training to the personnel employed for the Subsurface
Use Contract’s operations;
-To contribute funds to the Atyrau region for social programs and programs on
infrastructure development;
-To submit quarterly reports on the Subsurface Use Contract’s activities to the
Competent Body;
-To develop the Business, Property and Liability Risk Insurance Program and
to submit it for approval to the Competent Body; and
-To establish and make contributions to the Liquidation Fund.
Accordingly, under both Notices the Corporation was required by July 31, 2004 to
remedy these deficiencies and to submit all required documents as confirmation of
fulfillment of its obligations and actions taken to remedy these deficiencies and to
report on corrective and preventive actions undertaken against any further breach
of contractual obligations.
As at February 12, 2005, Management has remedied the following violations of the
Subsurface Use Contracts:
-On November 16, 2004 the Corporation has submitted and approved with
Competent Body and annual work program for 2004 and annual work program
for 2005.
-The Corporation provided in September 2004 Petroleum Management training
b)
-The Corporation provided in September 2004 Petroleum Management training
for its Vice President and;
-The Corporation opened a special account with HSBC bank in Kazakhstan
where it deposited an amount of $33, 040 to finance the liquidation of the
consequences of its oil and gas operations( See Note 7).
As at February 12, 2005, Management has remedied the following violations of the
Subsurface Use Contracts:
1.To carry out the Minimal Work Program during the exploration phase;
2.Contribute funds to Atyrau region for social programs and programs for
infrastructure development;
3.Develop the Business, Property and Liability Risk Insurance Program and to
submit it for approval to the Competent Body. The Corporation has appointed
AIG as its Insurance Underwriter but as at the date of these financial
statements the Business, Property and Liability Risk Insurance Program has
not yet been submitted to the Competent Body;
Investment commitments – In accordance with the Subsurface Use Contracts,
the Corporation is obliged to invest a minimum of $53,900,000 over the period
covered by the Subsurface Use Contracts. The Subsurface Use Contract # 1076
dated December 28, 2002 establishes the exploration phase as 6 years from 2003
to 2008. The Subsurface Use Contract # 1077 dated December 28, 2002
establishes the exploration phase as 5 years from 2003 to 2007 and the production
phase as 20 years from 2008 to 2028.  The governments’ objective in setting
minimum work commitments is to ensure certain types of exploratory work is
carried out by the licence holder, including drilling new wells and seismic activity.
The government will measure the degree to which the Corporation has met its
commitments in terms of work completed. The government estimates the work
commitment in terms of expected spending amounts. The government measures
the performance of the Corporation towards meeting its work commitment by
evaluating the actual work performed in comparison with the agreed requirements.
Actual spending is not a performance measure.
c) Commitment to reimburse historical costs of the Government – In accordance
with the Subsurface Use Contract, the Corporation is obliged to reimburse to the
Government for historical costs incurred at the expense of the Government on the
Atyrau oilfield. The total amount reimbursable is $22,507,380. From this amount,
$112,537 was paid to the Government in 2003. The remaining amount of
$22,394,843 is expected to be settled according to a payment schedule to be
agreed between the Corporation and the Government not later than 120 days after
approval of the hydrocarbon reserves. However, in the event that no approval of
the hydrocarbon reserves is received, there will be no liability upon the
Corporation in respect of the remaining amount of $22,394,843. No approval of the
hydrocarbon reserves has been applied for or received as at December 31, 2004
and December 31, 2003 and so no provision in respect of the remaining amount
has been made in these financial statements.
F-32
d) Commercial discovery bonus – In accordance with the Subsurface Use
Contracts, the Corporation is obliged to pay to the Government a commercial
discovery bonus in the amount of 0.1% of the value of approved recoverable
reserves using the market price of the hydrocarbons. This amount is due within 30
days after the hydrocarbon reserves are approved by the State Committee on
Reserves of the Republic of Kazakhstan. However, in the event that no approval of
the hydrocarbon reserves is received, there will be no liability upon the
Corporation in respect of the commercial discovery bonus. No approval of the
hydrocarbon reserves has been applied for or received as at December 31, 2004
and December 31, 2003 and so no provision in respect of the commercial
discovery bonus has been made in these financial statements.
26.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
In February 2005, the Corporation raised additional common equity in a series of private placement transactions,
which raised $13,625,000. The Corporation issued 27, 250,000 common shares at a price of $0.50 per share.
The Corporation paid a finders fee of 6% in cash and warrants equal to 6% of the common shares issued. Finders
fees of $817,140. were paid and 1,634,280 Warrants to purchase additional 1,634,280 common shares at $0.50 per
share were issued.
On March 7, 2005, the Corporation entered into a contract with Matrix-Regent and Matrix-Regent Securities
Limited, carrying on business as Matrix Corporate Finance) for the provision of corporate financial advice and
services as a financial adviser to the Corporation. The terms of the agreement provide that if the Corporation is
admitted to the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange, the Corporation will appoint Matrix
Corporate Finance as its Nominating Advisor (“NOMAD”)
On March 9, 2005, the Corporation awarded 8,050,000 stock options to officers, directors and consultants under
the terms of the Corporations 2000 Stock Award Plan. The options have an exercise price of $0.50 per share and
an expiry date of March 8, 2008. The options vest in four annual increments beginning March 9, 2006.  In addition,
the Corporation granted stock awards to the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of 500,000 and
250,000 shares respectively, for prior period service with reduced compensation.
In March 2005 the Corporation issued 1,750,000 common shares to four option holders who exercised their
options   under the Corporations 2000 Stock Award Plan. The Corporation realized proceeds of $ 87,500.
On March 29, 2005, the Corporation appointed Mr. Nurlan U. Balgimbayev to its Board of Directors. Mr.
Balgimbayev will receive options to purchase 5,000,000 common shares of the Corporation under the 2000 Stock
Award Plan. Options for 1,000,000 have been issued to Mr. Balgimbayev in accordance with the terms of the Plan
and the remaining 4,000,000 options will be issued, subject to shareholder approval at the next Annual General
Meeting of Shareholders.
In March 2005, the Corporation paid $80,000 to a company affiliated with Mr. Bruce Gaston, a director since
December 3, 2004, for introductions to potential investors. Certain of these potential investors subsequently
participated in the private placement of $13.7 million raised by the Corporation in February 2005.
27.
RESTATEMENT
Subsequent to the issuance of the Company’s 2004 financial statements, the Company’s management determined
that its belief that no obligation would exist to repay ABT Ltd. for costs they incurred or advanced to KoZhaN LLP
in relation to the Morskoe oil field under the farm-out agreement signed October 12, 2004 (see Note 10), should
Ministry approval not be received on the transfer of 45% of the subsurface rights of the Morskoe licence to ABT
Ltd., was incorrect, and that in fact an obligation would exist to repay ABT Ltd. for all costs incurred or advanced
by them relating to the Morskoe oil field should Ministry approval not be received.  As a result, the “Short-Term
Interest Free Loan from ABT LTD” liability account, the “Oil and Gas Properties” asset account and the “Other
Current Asset” account were understated in the amounts of $1,174,423, $1,088,263, and $86,160 respectively as
previously reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets included in the December 31, 2004 Form 10-KSB. The
error described above also resulted in an understatement in cash flow from financing activities in the amount of
$334,000 and an overstatement in cash flow from investing activities in the amount of $334,000 on the
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The
F-33
Consolidated Balance Sheets and the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as at December 31, 2004 have
been restated to correct these previous misstatements.  The restatement does not impact earnings or equity.
The changes to the Consolidated Balance Sheets and the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows as at and for
the year ended December 31, 2004 can be summarized as follows:
Affected Statements & Accounts
Balance Sheets:
     Other current asset
     Total Current assets
     Oil and gas properties
     Total Assets
     Short-term interest free loan from
ABT Ltd
     Total Current Liabilities
     Total Liabilities
     Total Liabilities and Equity
Statements of Cash Flows:
     Financing:
         Advance from ABT Ltd.
         Total Cash Flow from Financing
      Investing:
          Capital Expenditure-oil and gas
properties
          Cash flow from non-cash working
capital:
            Advance to ABT Ltd.
Increase in short-term loan interest free
   loan from ABT Ltd
 Total Cash Flow from Investing
As at and for the Year December 31, 2004
As Restated
As Previously Reported
-
1,695,973
22,158,082
24,583,455
166,000
3,401,213
11,185,627
24,583,455
166,000
10,990,520
(303,203)
-
-
86,160
1,782,133
23,246,345
25,787,879
1,340,423
4,575,636
12,360,050
25,757,879
500,000
11,324,520
1,391,466
(86,160)
840,423
(5,325,187)
(5,659,187)
28.
SUPPLEMENTAL QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (Unaudited)
Interim Quarter Ended
December 31,
September
June 30,
March 31,
June 30,
March 31,
2004
$
(924,040)
2004
$
(794,943)
(13,315)
(12,016)
(937,355)
(0.02)
(806,959)
(0.02)
March 31,
2003
$
June 30,
2003
$
(506,093) 
 
13,226  
(506,093) 
 
(0.02)
(380,860)
5,703
(380,860)
(0.02)
Interim Quarter Ended
December 31,
Loss from continuing
operations
Income (loss) from
Discontinued Operations
Net loss
 
Loss per share
Interim Quarter Ended
Loss from continuing
operations
Income (Loss) from
Discontinued Operations
Net loss
 
Loss per share
2004
$
(3,197,888)
47,102
(3,150,786)
(0.06)
December 31,
2003
$
(1,692,883) 
 
37,055  
(1,692,883) 
 
(0.06)
September
30, 2004
$
(1,899,381)
2,433
(1,896,948)
(0.03)
September
30, 2003
$
(549,926) 
 
8,622  
(549,926) 
 
(0.02)
F-34