
EX-99.1 2 exhibit99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1 Timmins Gold Corp.: Exhibit 99.1 - Filed by
newsfilecorp.com
Suite 615 – 700 West Pender Street
Vancouver, BC, V6C 1G8
Tel.: (604) 682-4002
Fax: (604) 682-4003
August 11, 2016
TSX: TMM, NYSE MKT: TGD
NEWS RELEASE
Timmins Gold Outlines Complete Pre-Construction Program for Ana Paula
US$9.2 million budget approved to complete drilling, feasibility and permitting
Vancouver, BC - Timmins Gold Corp. (“Timmins Gold” or the “Company”) (TSX:TMM, NYSE
MKT:TGD)  is  pleased  to  report  that  its  Board  of  Directors  have  approved  a  pre-construction
program, including commencement of a Feasibility Study, for the Ana Paula Gold Project (“Ana
Paula”) in Guerrero State, Mexico. The Feasibility Study is advancing on the back of a positive
Preliminary Economic Assessment (“PEA”) that was updated earlier this year and indicates that
Ana Paula represents a robust, high-margin, open pit mining project at a $1,200 gold price (all
amounts are in US dollars unless otherwise noted).
Pre-construction  activities  will  commence  immediately,  and  will  include  feasibility  work,  infill
drilling, metallurgical test–work, and environmental baseline and permitting activities. With this
$9.2 million budget, the Company expects the Feasibility Study to be complete by Q3 2017 and
have all permits required to start construction by Q1 2018.
The  Company  is  also  pleased  to  announce  that  the  disassembly  program  of  the  El  Sauzal
facilities, acquired in October 2015 from Goldcorp is complete, on time and on budget, with zero
lost-time accidents.
“We are extremely pleased to commence work on the Feasibility Study,” stated Mark Backens,
Interim CEO. “With the improvements in our balance sheet and operations at the San Francisco
Mine, we can begin to unlock the value of Ana Paula. We continue to view this project as one of
the best development-stage gold projects in North America. With its higher grade, low cash costs,
high capital efficiency and industry leading Internal Rate of Return (“IRR”), Ana Paula will be a
very  profitable  mine.  Further,  the  El  Sauzal  facilities  will  provide  us  a  head  start  to  rapidly
advance the project to construction-ready status.”
PEA SUMMARY
On March 23, 2016, the Company announced results of an updated PEA for the Ana Paula Gold
Project, highlights of which are presented below:
-
-
After-tax NPV5% of $248 million and IRR of 43% at $1,200 per gold ounce; After-tax NPV5%
of $295 million and IRR of 48% at $1,300 per gold ounce;
Average annual production of 116,000 gold ounces and 239,000 silver ounces over a 8.2
year mine life;
Construction  capital  costs  of  $121.7  million,  including contingency  costs  of  $19.8  million;
-  
-
Construction  capital  costs  of  $121.7  million,  including contingency  costs  of  $19.8  million;
and,
Cash  costs  of  $470  per  gold  ounce;  cash  costs  of  $442  per gold  ounce  on  a  by-product
basis; and all-in sustaining cash costs of $507 per gold ounce.
PRE-CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM
The  estimated  budget  for  the  pre-construction  program  is  approximately  $9.2  million  and
includes:
-
-  
-
$2.2 million - Drilling, including soil sampling and trenching; 10,000 meters of core drilling
for resource definition, 2,000 meters of core drilling for geotechnical work, and 4,000 meters
of reverse circulation drilling for condemnation;
$3.4 million - Feasibility work program; and,
$3.6 million - Environmental studies and construction permits.
The Company has contracted M3 Engineering & Technology Corp (“M3”) to lead its Feasibility
Study. M3 has extensive experience in Mexico. More specifically, M3 was the lead engineering
firm responsible for the Feasibility Study and the EPCM for Torex Gold’s El-Limon Guajes Mine
in Guerrero, which is in close proximity to the Ana Paula Gold Project.
Qualified Persons
Technical information contained in this news release was reviewed and approved by Taj Singh,
M.Eng., P.Eng., the Vice President of Engineering and Project Development for Timmins, who is
recognized as a QP under NI 43-101.
About Timmins Gold
Timmins Gold is a Canadian gold mining company engaged in exploration, development and
production exclusively in Mexico. Its principal assets include the producing San Francisco mine
in Sonora, Mexico and the development stage Ana Paula Gold Project in Guerrero, Mexico. The
Company also has a portfolio of other exploration properties, all of which are located in Mexico.
Contacts:
Timmins Gold Corp. 
Mark Backens 
Interim CEO and Director 
604-638-8980 
mark.backens@timminsgold.com 
www.timminsgold.com
Neither the TSX nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the
TSX)  nor  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  MKT  accepts  responsibility  for  the  adequacy  or
accuracy of this news release.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain  statements  contained  herein  may  constitute  forward-looking  statements  and  are  made
pursuant to the “safe harbor” provisions of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform
Act  of  1995  and  Canadian  securities  laws.  Forward-looking  statements  are  statements  which
relate  to  future  events  including  projected  production  (and  estimated  cash  costs).  Such
statements include estimates, forecasts and statements as to management’s expectations with
respect  to,  among  other  things,  receipt  of  the  requisite  approvals  for  business  and  financial
prospects, financial multiples and accretion estimates, future trends, plans, strategies, objectives
and  expectations,  including  with  respect  to  liquidity,  working  capital  management  and  to
production, possible capital savings and estimates of capital, exploration drilling, reserves and
resources,  exploitation  activities  and  events  or  future  operations.  Information  inferred  from  the
interpretation of drilling results and information concerning mineral resource estimates may also
be deemed to be forward-looking statements, as it constitutes a prediction of what might be found
to be present when, and if, a project is actually developed.
In  some  cases,  you  can  identify  forward-looking  statements  by  terminology  such  as  “may”,
“should”,  “expects”,  “plans,  “anticipates”,  believes”,  “estimates”,  “predicts”,  “potential”,  or
“continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are
only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may
cause our or our industry’s actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements to be
materially  different  from  any  future  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance,  or  achievements
expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are
made  in  good  faith  and  reflect  our  current  judgment  regarding  the  direction  of  our  business,
actual  results  will  almost  always  vary,  sometimes  materially,  from  any  estimates,  predictions,
projections, assumptions or other future performance suggestions herein. Except as required by
applicable  law,  the  Company  does  not  intend  to  update  any  forward-looking  statements  to
conform these statements to actual results.
Cautionary Note to United States Investors
The  Company  is  subject  to  the  reporting  requirements  of  the  applicable  Canadian  securities
laws,  and  as  a  result  it  reports  its  mineral  reserves  and  resources  according  to  Canadian
standards. Canadian reporting requirements for disclosure of mineral properties are governed by
NI 43-101. The definitions of NI 43-101 are adopted from those given by the Canadian Institute of
Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum. U.S. reporting requirements are governed by Industry Guide 7
(“Guide  7”)  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the  “Commission”).  These  reporting
standards  have  similar  goals  in  terms  of  conveying  an  appropriate  level  of  confidence  in  the
disclosures being reported, but embody different approaches and definitions.
For example, under Industry Guide 7, mineralization may not be classified as a “reserve” unless
the  determination  has  been  made  that  the  mineralization  could  be  economically  and  legally
produced or extracted at the time the reserve determination is made. In particular, the Company
reports “resources” in accordance with NI 43-101.
While the terms “Mineral Resource”, “Measured Mineral Resource”, “Indicated Mineral Resource”
and “Inferred Mineral Resource” are recognized and required by Canadian regulations, they are
not  defined  terms  under  standards  of  the  Commission  and  generally,  U.S.  companies  are  not
permitted  to  report  resources  in  documents  filed  with  the  Commission.  As  such,  certain
information  contained  in  this  press  release  concerning  descriptions  of  mineralization  and
resources under Canadian standards is not comparable to similar information made public by
United  States  companies  subject  to  the  reporting  and  disclosure  requirements  of  the
Commission.
In addition, an Inferred Mineral Resource has a great amount of uncertainty as to its existence
and as to its economic and legal feasibility, and it cannot be assumed that all or any part of an
Inferred Mineral Resource will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under Canadian rules,
estimates of Inferred Mineral Resources may not form the basis of feasibility or other economic
studies.
It  cannot  be  assumed  that  all  or  any  part  of  Measured  or  Indicated  Resources  will  ever  be
converted into Mineral Reserves, and it cannot be assumed that all or any part of an Inferred
Mineral  Resource  exists,  or  is  economically  or  legally  mineable.  In  addition,  the  definitions  of
“Proven  Mineral  Reserves”  and  “Probable  Mineral  Reserves”  under  CIM  standards  differ  in
certain respects from the standards of the Commission.