
NOTICES OF MEETINGS
AND
JOINT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
FOR A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF
REBGOLD CORPORATION
TO BE HELD DECEMBER 30, 2013
AND
A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF
AQUILA RESOURCES INC.
TO BE HELD DECEMBER 30, 2013
WITH RESPECT TO, AMONG OTHER THINGS,
A PROPOSED PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT
INVOLVING AQUILA RESOURCES INC., REBGOLD CORPORATION
AND THE SHAREHOLDERS OF REBGOLD CORPORATION
AND
THE PROPOSED ACQUISITION OF HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC.
BY AQUILA RESOURCES INC.
DECEMBER 2, 2013
These  materials  are  important  and  require  your  immediate  attention.    They  require  shareholders  of  Aquila 
Resources Inc. and REBgold Corporation to make important decisions.  If you have any questions as to how to make 
such  decisions,  you  should  consult  your  investment  dealer,  broker,  bank  manager,  lawyer  or  other  professional 
advisor.  No securities regulatory authority in Canada has expressed an opinion about, or passed upon the fairness 
or merits of the transaction described in this document, the securities offered pursuant to such transaction or the 
adequacy of the information contained in this document and it is an offense to claim otherwise.
Neither the TSX or the TSX Venture Exchange Inc. nor any securities regulatory authority has in any way passed 
upon the merits of the transactions described in this information circular.
LETTER TO REBGOLD SHAREHOLDERS
December 2, 2013
Dear Shareholders of REBgold Corporation:
You  are  invited  to  attend  a  special  meeting  (the  “REBgold  Meeting”)  of  the  holders  (the  “REBgold 
Shareholders”) of the common shares (“REBgold Shares”) of REBgold Corporation (“REBgold”) to be held at 
333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7 at 10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013.  At the 
REBgold  Meeting,  REBgold  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and  vote  upon  (i) a  special  resolution  (the 
“REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution”)  approving  a  statutory  plan  of  arrangement  (the  “Arrangement”)  under 
Section  192  of  the  Canada  Business  Corporations  Act,  as  amended,  involving  REBgold,  Aquila  Resources  Inc. 
(“Aquila”)  and  the  REBgold  Shareholders,  (ii) an  ordinary  resolution  (the  “REBgold  Financing  Resolution”) 
approving  the  participation  by  investment  funds  managed  or  controlled  by  Baker  Steel  Capital  Managers  LLP 
(“Baker  Steel”)  in  a  non-brokered  private  placement  of  REBgold  Shares  of  a  minimum  of  $4 million  and  a 
maximum of $6 million at a price of $0.13 per share (the “REBgold Financing”), and (iii) a special resolution (the 
“REBgold Stated Capital Resolution”) to reduce the stated capital of the REBgold Shares, which is required in 
order to address a technical requirement necessary to facilitate completion of the Arrangement.  The completion of 
the REBgold Financing is a condition to the completion of the Arrangement.
Aquila  and  REBgold  entered  into  an  arrangement  agreement  dated  November  7,  2013  (the  “Arrangement 
Agreement”) that was unanimously approved by the boards of directors of Aquila and REBgold.  The Arrangement 
provides  for,  among  other  things,  Aquila’s  acquisition  of  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  REBgold  Shares  in 
exchange  for  common  shares  of  Aquila  (“Aquila  Shares”)  on  the  basis  of  one  Aquila  Share  for  each  REBgold 
Share held.
Aquila and REBgold have also entered into a purchase agreement with HudBay Minerals Inc. (“HudBay”) dated 
November 7, 2013 (the “HMI Acquisition Agreement”) pursuant to which Aquila will acquire, immediately after 
completion of the Arrangement and the REBgold Financing, all of the issued and outstanding shares of HudBay 
Michigan Inc. (“HMI”) from HudBay (the “HMI Acquisition”).  HMI holds HudBay’s 51% interest in Back Forty 
Joint  Venture  LLC  (the  “Back  Forty  Joint  Venture”)  which  owns  the  Back  Forty  project  (the  “Back  Forty 
Project”) located in Michigan.  Aquila currently holds the remaining 49% interest in the Back Forty Joint Venture.  
The  consideration  payable  by  Aquila  to  HudBay  for  the  shares  of  HMI  under  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement 
consists  of  up  to  $2.5  million  of  Aquila  Shares  (valued  at  $0.13  per  share),  installment  payments  of  up  to  an 
aggregate  of  $9 million  tied  to  development  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  and  a  1%  net  smelter  return  royalty  on 
production from certain land parcels, capped at $7 million.
The  directors  of  REBgold  believe  that  the  Arrangement  is  in  the  best  interests  of  REBgold  and  will  have  the 
following benefits:




a  strong  board  and  leadership  team  with  experience  in  mine  development,  operations,  and  capital 
markets;
strategic investor backing from Baker Steel and a supportive significant shareholder in HudBay;
100%  ownership  of  the  high-grade,  poly-metallic  Back  Forty  Project,  located  in  the  Great  Lakes 
Region;
100% ownership of the Bend Copper-Gold project, a VMS deposit located in the Great Lakes Region;
- i -


100%  ownership  of  the  Reef  Gold  project,  a  high-grade  deposit  potentially  amenable  to  open-pit 
mining;
a highly prospective joint venture in Finland with established resources; and
  REBgold’s metallurgical capabilities and proprietary bioleaching technology.
After  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  the  REBgold  Financing  and  the  HMI  Acquisition,  there  will  be 
approximately  192.5 million  Aquila  Shares  outstanding  together  with  outstanding  stock  options,  convertible 
debentures and warrants that will collectively be exercisable for up to approximately additional 27.5 million Aquila 
Shares.  The Aquila Shares are currently listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) under the ticker symbol 
“AQA”.  Aquila has applied to the TSX to list the Aquila Shares issuable pursuant to the Arrangement and the HMI 
Acquisition  and  the  TSX  has  approved  such  listing  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  customary  conditions.  Upon 
completion of the Arrangement, the REBgold Shares will be delisted from the TSX Venture Exchange and REBgold 
will cease to be a reporting issuer.
Completion  of  the  Arrangement  is  conditional  upon,  among  other  things,  requisite  approval  of  the  REBgold 
Arrangement  Resolution  and  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  by  REBgold  Shareholders,  approval  by  Aquila 
shareholders  of  resolutions  in  respect  of  a  number  of  matters  relating  to  the  Arrangement,  including  issuance  of 
Aquila  Shares  pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  and  the  approval  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  (collectively,  the  “Aquila 
Resolutions”) at a special meeting of Aquila shareholders (the “Aquila Meeting”), the concurrent completion of the 
REBgold Financing and the HMI Acquisition and requisite court and TSX approvals.
If the Arrangement is completed, REBgold will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Aquila.  The new Aquila will 
be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive Officer of Aquila, will continue 
in this capacity and lead the management team that will also include Louis Nagy, Chief Financial Officer, Coen 
Louwarts,  Vice-President-Corporate  Development,  Thomas  Quigley,  Vice-President-Exploration  and  Senior 
Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  Mark Burridge, current 
Chairman of REBgold will also Chair the new board, in addition to providing advisory support to the management 
team  in  areas  of  business  development  and  corporate  finance.    The  Board  will  also  include  Barry  Hildred,  two 
existing members of the Aquila board of directors (Peter Bradshaw and Edward Munden), two existing members of 
the REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new director, Ed Guimaraes.
If  the  requisite  shareholder,  court  and  regulatory  approvals  are  obtained  and  if  the  other  conditions  to  the 
Arrangement becoming effective are satisfied or waived, it is expected that the Arrangement will become effective 
and the REBgold Financing and the HMI Acquisition will be completed on or about January 8, 2014 (the “Effective 
Date”).
To be effective, the REBgold Arrangement Resolution and the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution must each be 
approved by at least two-thirds of the votes cast by holders of issued and outstanding REBgold Shares present in 
person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting, which holders are entitled to one vote for each REBgold 
Share held.  To be effective, the REBgold Financing Resolution must be approved by a majority of the votes cast by 
holders of issued and outstanding REBgold Shares present in person or by proxy at the REBgold Meeting, other than 
Baker  Steel.    Baker  Steel  and  certain  other  REBgold  Shareholders,  together  holding  approximately  50%  of  the 
outstanding REBgold Shares, have entered into voting support agreements with Aquila and REBgold pursuant to 
which they have agreed to, among other things, vote their REBgold Shares in favour of the REBgold Arrangement 
Resolution, the REBgold Financing Resolution and the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution.  HudBay and certain 
other Aquila shareholders, together holding approximately 23% of the outstanding Aquila Shares, have entered into 
support agreements with Aquila and REBgold pursuant to which they have agreed, among other things, to vote their 
Aquila Shares in favour of the Aquila Resolutions at the Aquila Meeting.
The board of directors of REBgold unanimously recommends that the REBgold Shareholders vote FOR the 
REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution,  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  and  the  REBgold  Stated  Capital 
Resolution.
The accompanying joint information circular (the “Circular”) contains a detailed description of the Arrangement, 
the HMI Acquisition and the matters to be considered at the REBgold Meeting and the Aquila Meeting, as well as
- ii -
information  regarding  REBgold  and  Aquila  and  certain  pro  forma  and  other  combined  information  after  giving 
effect to the Arrangement, the REBgold Financing and the HMI Acquisition.  It also includes certain risk factors 
relating  to  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  other  transaction  described  in  the 
Circular.  Please give this material your careful consideration and, if you require assistance, consult your financial, 
tax or other professional advisors.
We hope you can attend the REBgold Meeting.  Whether or not you are able to attend it is important that you 
be  represented  at  the  REBgold  Meeting.    If  you  are  a  registered  REBgold  Shareholder  (i.e.,  you  hold  a 
physical  certificate  representing  REBgold  Shares  in  your  name)  and  are  unable  to  attend  the  REBgold 
Meeting  in  person,  please  exercise  your  right  to  vote  by  dating,  signing  and  returning  the  accompanying 
yellow form of proxy to REBgold.  To be valid, completed proxy forms must be dated, completed, signed and 
deposited  to  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.:  (i)  by  mail  using  the  enclosed  return  envelope  or  one 
addressed  to  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.,  100  University  Avenue,  9th  Floor,  Toronto,  Ontario, 
M5J 2Y1;  (ii)  hand  delivered  to  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.,  100  University  Avenue,  9th  Floor, 
Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1; or (iii) by facsimile to 1-866-249-7775/(416) 263-9524.  REBgold Shareholders 
may also vote through the internet.
If you are a non-registered holder of REBgold Shares and have received these materials from your broker or 
another intermediary, please complete and return the authorization form or voting instructions provided to 
you  by  your  broker  or  intermediary  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  provided.    Failure  to  do  so  may 
result in your REBgold Shares not being eligible to be voted at the REBgold Meeting.
Your  proxy  or  voting  instructions  must  be  received  in  each  case  not  later  than  10:00  a.m.  (Toronto  time)  on 
December 24, 2013 or not less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) prior to any adjournment 
or postponement of the REBgold Meeting.
On  behalf  of  the  REBgold  Board,  I  would  like  to  express  our  gratitude  for  the  support  our  shareholders  have 
demonstrated with respect to our decision to move forward with the Arrangement.  We look forward to receiving 
your support at the REBgold Meeting.
Yours very truly,
(signed) “Mark Burridge”
Mark Burridge 
Executive Chairman 
REBgold Corporation
- iii -
LETTER TO AQUILA SHAREHOLDERS
December 2, 2013
Dear Shareholders of Aquila Resources Inc.:
You  are  invited  to  attend  a  special  meeting  (the  “Aquila  Meeting”)  of  the  holders  (“Aquila  Shareholders”)  of 
common shares (“Aquila Shares”) of Aquila Resources Inc. (“Aquila”) to be held at 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, 
Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7 at 11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013.  At the Aquila Meeting, Aquila 
Shareholders will be asked to consider and vote upon, resolutions (the “Aquila Resolutions”) relating to a proposed 
plan  of  arrangement  (the  “Arrangement”)  under  Section  192  of  the  Canada  Business  Corporations  Act,  as 
amended, involving Aquila, REBgold Corporation (“REBgold”) and the holders (the “REBgold Shareholders”) of 
the common shares of REBgold (“REBgold Shares”) and Aquila’s proposed acquisition (the “HMI Acquisition”) 
of  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  HudBay  Michigan  Inc.  (“HMI”)  from  HudBay  Minerals  Inc. 
(“HudBay”).  HMI  holds  HudBay’s  51%  interest  in  Back  Forty  Joint  Venture  LLC  (the  “Back  Forty  Joint 
Venture”) which owns the Back Forty project (the “Back Forty Project”) located in Michigan. Aquila currently 
owns the remaining 49% interest in the Back Forty Joint Venture. The Aquila Resolutions include (i) an ordinary 
resolution  approving  the  issuance  of  Aquila  Shares  in  connection  with  the  Arrangement  (the  “Aquila  Share 
Issuance  Resolution”);  (ii) an  ordinary  resolution  approving  the  HMI  Acquisition;  (iii) an  ordinary  resolution 
approving the granting of stock options to certain directors, officers and service providers of Aquila and REBgold 
who  will  be  continuing  with  Aquila  following  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement  (the  “Aquila  Stock  Option 
Resolution”); and (iv) an ordinary resolution approving the issuance of debt satisfaction and compensation shares to 
certain  directors,  officers  and  service  providers  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  who  will  be  continuing  with  Aquila 
following the completion of the Arrangement (the “Aquila Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution”).  If 
you cannot attend the Aquila Meeting, please complete the enclosed form of Aquila proxy and submit it as 
soon  as  possible.    Your  vote  is  important  to  Aquila  and  we  strongly  encourage  you  to  attend  the  Aquila 
Meeting or submit the enclosed form of proxy.
Aquila  and  REBgold  entered  into  an  arrangement  agreement  dated  November  7,  2013  (the  “Arrangement 
Agreement”) that was unanimously approved by the boards of directors of Aquila and REBgold.  The Arrangement 
provides  for,  among  other  things,  Aquila’s  acquisition  of  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  REBgold  Shares  in 
exchange  for  common  shares  of  Aquila  (“Aquila  Shares”)  on  the  basis  of  one  Aquila  Share  for  each  REBgold 
Share held.
Immediately  prior  to  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  REBgold  intends  to  complete  a  non-brokered  private 
placement of REBgold shares for gross proceeds of a minimum of $4 million and a maximum of $6 million at a 
price of $0.13 per share (the “REBgold Financing”).  Baker Steel Capital Partners LLP, on behalf of investment 
funds  managed  or  controlled  by  it  (“Baker  Steel”)  has  committed  to  invest  a  minimum  of  $4.5 million  in  the 
REBgold  Financing.    Baker  Steel  is  currently  REBgold’s  largest  shareholder  and  will  be  Aquila’s  largest 
shareholder upon completion of the Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing.
In  connection  with  the  HMI  Acquisition,  Aquila  and  REBgold  entered  into  a  purchase  agreement  with  HudBay 
dated  November  7,  2013  (the  “HMI  Acquisition  Agreement”).    Pursuant  to  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement, 
Aquila will purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of HMI from HudBay in exchange for consideration 
consisting  of  up  to  $2.5 million  of  Aquila  Shares  (valued  at  $0.13  per  share),  installment  payments  of  up  to  an 
aggregate  of  $9 million  tied  to  development  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  and  a  1%  net  smelter  return  royalty  on 
production from certain land parcels, capped at $7 million.
- iv -
The directors of Aquila believe that the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisitions are in the best interests of Aquila 
and will have the following benefits:






a  strong  board  and  leadership  team  with  experience  in  mine  development,  operations,  and  capital 
markets;
strategic investor backing from Baker Steel and a supportive significant shareholder in HudBay;
100%  ownership  of  the  high-grade,  poly-metallic  Back  Forty  Project,  located  in  the  Great  Lakes 
Region;
100% ownership of the Bend Copper-Gold project, a VMS deposit located in the Great Lakes Region;
100%  ownership  of  the  Reef  Gold  project,  a  high-grade  deposit  potentially  amenable  to  open-pit 
mining;
a highly prospective joint venture in Finland with established resources;
  REBgold’s metallurgical capabilities and proprietary bioleaching technology; and

access  to  REBgold’s  proprietary  bioleaching  technology  and  process  knowledge,  which  utilizes 
bacteria in the extraction of precious and base metals, and which has been implemented at three gold 
mines.
After  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  the  REBgold  Financing  and  the  HMI  Acquisitions,  there  will  be 
approximately  192.5 million  Aquila  Shares  outstanding  together  with  outstanding  stock  options,  convertible 
debentures and warrants that will collectively be exercisable for up to approximately 27.8 million Aquila Shares.  
The Aquila Shares are currently listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) under the ticker symbol “AQA”.  
Aquila  has  applied  to  the  TSX  to  list  the  Aquila  Shares  issuable  pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  and  the  HMI 
Acquisition and the TSX has approved such listing subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions.
Completion of the Arrangement is conditional upon, among other things, approval of the Aquila Shareholders of the 
Aquila  Resolutions  at  the  Aquila  Meeting,  approval  of  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  and  the  REBgold 
Financing  Resolution  by  the  REBgold  Shareholders  at  a  special  meeting  of  the  REBgold  Shareholders  (the 
“REBgold  Meeting”),  concurrent  completion  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  REBgold  Financing  and  requisite 
court and stock exchange approvals.
Completion of the HMI Acquisition is conditional upon , among other things, approval of the Aquila Shareholders 
of  the  Aquila  Resolutions  at  the  Aquila  Meeting,  approval  of  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  and  the 
REBgold Financing Resolution by the REBgold Shareholders at the REBgold Meeting, completion of the REBgold 
Financing and the Arrangement and requisite stock exchange approvals.
If the Arrangement is completed, REBgold will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Aquila.  The new Aquila will 
be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive Officer of Aquila, will continue 
in this capacity and lead the management team that will also include Louis Nagy, Chief Financial Officer, Coen 
Louwarts,  Vice-President-Corporate  Development,  Thomas  Quigley,  Vice-President-Exploration  and  Senior 
Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  Mark Burridge, current 
Chairman of REBgold will also Chair the new board, in addition to providing advisory support to the management 
team  in  areas  of  business  development  and  corporate  finance.    The  Board  will  also  include  Barry  Hildred,  two 
existing members of the Aquila board of directors (Peter Bradshaw and Edward Munden), two existing members of 
the REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new director, Ed Guimaraes.
If  the  requisite  shareholder,  court  and  regulatory  approvals  are  obtained  and  if  the  other  conditions  to  the 
Arrangement becoming effective are satisfied or waived, it is expected that the Arrangement will become effective 
and the HMI Acquisition will be completed on or about January 8, 2014 (the “Effective Date”).
- v -
To be effective, the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution must be approved by a majority of the votes cast by holders of 
issued  and  outstanding  Aquila  Shares  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  at  the  Aquila  Meeting.    To  be 
effective, the HMI Acquisition Resolution must be approved by a majority of the votes cast by holders of issued and 
outstanding Aquila Shares present in person or by proxy at the Aquila Meeting, other than HudBay.  To be effective, 
the  Aquila  Stock  Option  Resolution  must  be  approved  by  a  majority  of  the  votes  cast  by  holders  of  issued  and 
outstanding Aquila Shares present in person or by proxy at the Aquila meeting, other than the directors, officers and 
eligible service providers who will receive the stock options being approved.
Baker Steel and certain other REBgold Shareholders who collectively hold approximately 50% of the outstanding 
REBgold  Shares  have  entered  into  support  agreements  with  Aquila  and  REBgold  pursuant  to  which  they  have 
agreed to, among other things, vote their REBgold Shares in favour of the REBgold Arrangement Resolution and the 
REBgold  Financing  Resolution.    HudBay  and  certain  other  Aquila  Shareholders  who  collectively  hold 
approximately  23%  of  the  outstanding  Aquila  Shares  have  entered  into  support  agreements  with  Aquila  and 
REBgold  pursuant  to  which  they  have  agreed,  among  other  things,  to  vote  their  Aquila  Shares  in  favour  of  the 
Aquila Resolutions.
The  board  of  directors  of  Aquila  unanimously  recommends  that  the  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  the 
Aquila Resolutions.
The accompanying joint information circular (the “Circular”) contains a detailed description of the Arrangement, 
the HMI Acquisition and the matters to be considered at the Aquila Meeting and the REBgold Meeting, as well as 
information  regarding  Aquila  and  REBgold  and  certain  pro  forma  and  other  combined  information  after  giving 
effect to the Arrangement, the REBgold Financing and the HMI Acquisition.  It also includes certain risk factors 
relating  to  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  other  transactions  described  in  the 
Circular.  Please give this material your careful consideration and, if you require assistance, consult your financial, 
tax or other professional advisors.
We hope you can attend the Aquila Meeting.  Whether or not you are able to attend it is import that you be 
represented  at  the  Aquila  Meeting.    If  you  are  a  registered  Aquila  Shareholder  (i.e.,  you  hold  a  physical 
certificate representing your Aquila Shares in your name) and are unable to attend the Aquila Meeting in 
person, please exercise your right to vote by dating, signing and returning the accompanying form of Aquila 
proxy to Trans Canada Transfer Inc., Aquila’s transfer agent.  To be valid, completed proxy forms must be 
dated, completed, signed and deposited to Trans Canada Transfer Inc., (i) by mail using the enclosed return 
envelope  or  one  addressed  to  Trans  Canada  Transfer  Inc.,  25  Adelaide  Street  East,  Suite  1301,  Toronto, 
Ontario, M5C 3A1; (ii) hand delivered to Trans Canada Transfer Inc., 25 Adelaide Street East, Suite 1301, 
Toronto,  Ontario,  M5C 3A1;  or  (iii) by  facsimile  to  (416) 603-4402.    Aquila  Shareholders  may  also  vote 
through the internet.
If you are a non-registered holder of Aquila Shares and have received these materials from your broker or 
another  intermediary,  please  complete  and  return  the  form  of  Voting  Instruction  Form  or  other 
authorization  form  provided  to  you  by  your  broker  or  intermediary  in  accordance  with  the  instructions 
provided.  Failure  to  do  so  may  result  in  your  Aquila  Shares  not  being  eligible  to  be  voted  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting.
Your  proxy  or  voting  instructions  must  be  received  in  each  case  not  later  than  11:00  a.m.  (Toronto  time)  on 
December 24, 2013 or not less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) prior to any adjournment 
or postponement of the Aquila Meeting.
- vi -
On behalf of Aquila, we would like to thank all Aquila Shareholders for their ongoing support as we prepare to take 
part in this important transformational transaction.
Yours very truly,
(signed) “Barry Hildred”
Barry Hildred  
Chief Executive Officer 
Aquila Resources Inc.
- vii -
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF
REBGOLD CORPORATION
to be held on December 30, 2013
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  a  special  meeting  (the  “REBgold  Meeting”)  of  the  holders  (“REBgold 
Shareholders”)  of  common  shares  (“REBgold  Shares”)  of  REBgold  Corporation  (“REBgold”)  will  be  held  at 
10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013 at 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7 for the 
following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
to consider and, if thought advisable, to pass, with or without variation, a special resolution to approve a 
reduction in REBgold’s stated capital (the “REBgold Stated Capital Resolution”);
to  consider  and  if  thought  advisable,  to  approve,  with  or  without  amendment,  a  special  resolution  (the 
“REBgold Arrangement Resolution”), the full text of which is set out in the accompanying joint proxy 
circular  (“Circular”),  approving  a  plan  of  arrangement  (the  “Arrangement”)  under  Section  192  of  the 
Canada  Business  Corporations  Act  (“CBCA”)  among  REBgold,  its  shareholders  and  optionholders  and 
Aquila Resources Inc. (“Aquila”);
to consider and if thought advisable, to approve, with or without amendment, an ordinary resolution (the 
“REBgold Financing Resolution”) approving the participation by investment funds managed or controlled 
by Baker Steel Capital Managers LLP (“Baker Steel”) in a non-brokered private placement of common 
shares  of  REBgold  (the  “REBgold  Financing”),  for  gross  proceeds  of  a  minimum  of  $4 million  and  a 
maximum of $6 million at a price of $0.13 per share as more particularly described in the Circular; and
to transact such other business as may properly come before the REBgold Meeting or any postponement or 
adjournment thereof.
Specific details of the matters to be put forth before the REBgold Meeting are set forth in the Circular.
Approval of the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution, the REBgold Arrangement Resolution and the REBgold 
Financing  Resolution  is  a  condition  to  completion  of  the  Arrangement  and  to  completion  of  Aquila’s 
proposed acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of HudBay Michigan Inc.
The board of directors of REBgold unanimously recommends that REBgold Shareholders vote FOR each of 
the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution, the REBgold Arrangement Resolution and the REBgold Financing 
Resolution (collectively, the “REBgold Resolutions”).
Each REBgold Share entitled to be voted at the REBgold Meeting  will entitle the holder to one vote at the REBgold 
Meeting.  The REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must each be approved 
by at least two-thirds of the votes cast by REBgold Shareholders present in person or represented by proxy at the 
REBgold Meeting.  The REBgold Financing Resolution must be approved by a simple majority of the votes cast by 
REBgold Shareholders present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting, other than Baker Steel.
Record Date for Notice and Voting
The record date (the “Record Date”) for the determination of REBgold Shareholders entitled to receive notice of, 
and to vote at, the REBgold Meeting was the close of business on November 29, 2013.  Only REBgold Shareholders 
whose names have been entered in the register of REBgold Shareholders at the close of business on the Record Date 
are being sent notice of, and entitled to vote at, the REBgold Meeting.
Proxies and Letter of Transmittal
Accompanying  this  Notice  of  Special  Meeting  are:  (i) the  Circular,  (ii) a  yellow  form  of  proxy  for  REBgold 
Shareholders and (iii) a green letter of transmittal.
- viii -
If you are a registered REBgold Shareholder, please ensure that you complete the enclosed yellow form of proxy 
and the green letter of transmittal and return these documents in accordance with the instructions.
A registered REBgold Shareholder may attend the REBgold Meeting in person or may be represented by proxy.  
Registered REBgold Shareholders who are unable to attend the REBgold Meeting or any adjournment thereof in 
person  are  requested  to  date,  sign  and  return  the  accompanying  yellow  form  of  proxy  for  use  at  the  REBgold 
Meeting or any adjournment thereof.  To be valid, completed proxy forms must be dated, completed, signed and 
deposited to Computershare Investor Services Inc.: (i) by mail using the enclosed return envelope or one addressed 
to Computershare Investor Services Inc., 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1; (ii) hand 
delivered to Computershare Investor Services Inc., 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1; or 
(iii) by facsimile to 1-866-249-7775/(416) 263-9524.  REBgold Shareholders may also vote through the internet.
Your proxy must be received in each case not later than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 24, 2013 or not less 
than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) prior to any adjournment of the REBgold Meeting.  The 
Chair of the REBgold Meeting shall have the discretion to accept or reject late proxies, and the Chair is under no 
obligation to accept or reject any particular proxy received after the foregoing deadline and prior to the REBgold 
Meeting.
The  yellow  form  of  proxy  enclosed  herewith  confers  discretionary  authority  with  respect  to:  (i) amendments  or 
variations  to  the  matters  of  business  to  be  considered  at  the  REBgold  Meeting;  and  (ii) other  matters  that  may 
properly  come  before  the  REBgold  Meeting.    As  of  the  date  hereof,  management  of  REBgold  knows  of  no 
amendments, variations or other matters to come before the REBgold Meeting other than the matters set forth in this 
Notice of Meeting.  REBgold Shareholders who are planning on returning the accompanying yellow form of proxy 
are encouraged to review the Circular carefully before submitting the proxy form.
It is the intention of the persons named in the enclosed yellow form of proxy, if not expressly directed to the 
contrary in such form of proxy, to vote FOR the REBgold Resolutions.
Dated at the City of Toronto, in the Province of Ontario, this 2nd day of December, 2013.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
OF REBGOLD CORPORATION
(signed) “Mark Burridge”
Mark Burridge 
Executive Chairman 
REBgold Corporation
- ix -
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF
AQUILA RESOURCES INC.
to be held on December 30, 2013
NOTICE  IS  HEREBY  GIVEN  that  a  special  meeting  (the  “Aquila  Meeting”)  of  the  holders  (“Aquila 
Shareholders”)  of  common  shares  (“Aquila  Shares”)  of  Aquila  Resources  Inc.  (“Aquila”)  will  be  held  at 
11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013 at 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2S7 for the 
following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
to consider, and if thought advisable, to approve, with or without amendment, an ordinary resolution (the 
“Aquila Share Issuance Resolution”) approving the issuance of Aquila Shares in connection with a plan 
of  arrangement  under  Section  192  of  the  Canada  Business  Corporations  Act  (the  “Arrangement”) 
involving  Aquila,  REBgold  Corporation  (“REBgold”)  and  holders  of  common  shares  of  REBgold 
(“REBgold Shares”) pursuant to an arrangement agreement dated November 7, 2013 between Aquila and 
REBgold  (the  “Arrangement  Agreement”),  as  more  particularly  described  in  the  accompanying  joint 
information circular of Aquila and REBgold dated December 2, 2013 (the “Circular”);
to consider, and if thought advisable, to approve, with or without amendment, an ordinary resolution (the 
“HMI Acquisition Resolution”) approving the acquisition by Aquila of all of the issued and outstanding 
shares  of  HudBay  Michigan  Inc.  (“HMI”)  from  HudBay  Minerals  Inc.  (“HudBay”)  (the  “HMI 
Acquisition”) as more particularly described in the Circular;
to consider, and if thought advisable, to approve, with or without amendment, an ordinary resolution (the 
“Aquila Stock Option Resolution”) approving the grant of an aggregate of 13,525,000 stock options to the 
holders  of  REBgold  RSUs  and  certain  directors,  officers  and  eligible  service  providers  of  Aquila  and 
REBgold  who  will  be  continuing  with  Aquila  following  the  completion  of  the  Arrangement,  as  more 
particularly described in the Circular;
to consider, and if thought advisable, to approve, with or without amendment, an ordinary resolution (the 
“Aquila Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution”) approving the issuance of an aggregate of 
1,435,000  Aquila  Shares  to  the  holders  of  REBgold  RSUs  and  certain  directors,  officers  and  eligible 
service providers of Aquila and REBgold who will be continuing with Aquila following the completion of 
the Arrangement, as more particularly described in the Circular; and
to transact such other business as may properly come before the Aquila Meeting or any postponement or 
adjournment thereof.
Specific details of the matters to be put forth before the Aquila Meeting are set forth in the Circular.
Approval of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the HMI Acquisition Resolution at the Aquila Meeting 
is a condition precedent to completion of the HMI Acquisition and the Arrangement.
The board of directors of Aquila unanimously recommends that Aquila Shareholders vote FOR each of the 
Aquila Share Issuance Resolution, the HMI Acquisition Resolution, the Aquila Stock Option Resolution and 
the Aquila Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution (collectively, the “Aquila Resolutions”).
Each  Aquila  Share  entitled  to  be  voted  at  the  Aquila  Meeting  will  entitle  the  holder  to  one  vote  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting.  The Aquila Share Issuance Resolution must be approved by a simple majority of the votes cast by the 
Aquila  Shareholders  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  at  the  Aquila  Meeting.    The  HMI  Acquisition 
Resolution must be approved by a simple majority of the votes cast by the Aquila Shareholders present in person or 
represented  by  proxy  at  the  Aquila  Meeting,  other  than  HudBay.  The  Aquila  Stock  Option  Resolution  must  be 
approved by a majority of the votes cast by holders of issued and outstanding Aquila Shares present in person or by 
proxy at the Aquila Meeting, other than the directors, officers and eligible service providers who will receive the 
stock options being approved. The Aquila Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution must be approved by a 
majority of the votes cast by holders of issued and outstanding Aquila Shares present in person or by proxy at the
- x -
Aquila Meeting, other than the directors, officers and eligible service providers who will receive the Aquila Shares 
being approved.
Record Date for Notice and Voting
The record date (the “Record Date”) for the determination of Aquila Shareholders entitled to receive notice of and 
to vote at, the Aquila Meeting was the close of business on November 29, 2013.  Only Aquila Shareholders whose 
names have been entered in the register of Aquila Shareholders at the close of business on the Record Date will be 
entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Aquila Meeting.
Proxies
Accompanying  this  Notice  of  Special  Meeting  are:  (i) the  Circular  and  (ii) a  blue  form  of  proxy  for  Aquila 
Shareholders.
If you are a registered Aquila Shareholder, please ensure that you complete the enclosed blue form of proxy and 
return this document in accordance with the instructions.
A  registered  Aquila  Shareholder  may  attend  the  Aquila  Meeting  in  person  or  may  be  represented  by  proxy.  
Registered Aquila Shareholders who are unable to attend the Aquila Meeting or any adjournment thereof in person 
are requested to date, sign and return the accompanying form of Aquila proxy for use at the Aquila Meeting or any 
adjournment thereof.  To be valid, completed proxy forms must be dated, completed, signed and deposited to Trans 
Canada Transfer Inc.: (i) by mail using the enclosed return envelope or one addressed to Trans Canada Transfer Inc., 
25 Adelaide Street East, Suite 1301, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3A1; (ii) hand delivered to Trans Canada Transfer Inc., 
25 Adelaide Street East, Suite 1301, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3A1; or (iii) by facsimile to (416) 603-4402.  Aquila 
Shareholders may also vote through the internet.
Your proxy must be received not later than 11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 24, 2013 or not less than 48 
hours  (excluding  Saturdays,  Sundays  and  holidays)  prior  to  any  adjournment  or  postponement  of  the  Aquila 
Meeting.  The Chair of the Aquila Meeting shall have the discretion to accept or reject late proxies at his discretion 
and the Chair is under no obligation to accept or reject any particular proxy received after the foregoing deadline and 
prior to the Aquila Meeting.
If  you  are  a  non-registered  holder  of  Aquila  Shares  and  have  received  these  materials  through  a  broker, 
investment  dealer,  bank,  trust  company,  nominee  or  other  intermediary,  please  complete  and  return  the 
form(s)  provided  to  you  by  your  broker,  investment  dealer  or  other  intermediary  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions provided therein.
The blue form of Aquila proxy enclosed herewith confers discretionary authority with respect to: (i) amendments or 
variations to the matters of business to be considered at the Aquila Meeting; and (ii) other matters that may properly 
come before the Aquila Meeting.  As of the date hereof, management of Aquila knows of no amendments, variations 
or  other  matters  to  come  before  the  Aquila  Meeting  other  than  the  matters  set  forth  in  this  Notice  of  Meeting.  
Aquila Shareholders who are planning on returning the accompanying blue form of proxy are encouraged to review 
the Circular carefully before submitting the proxy form.
It is the intention of the persons named in the enclosed blue form of proxy, if not expressly directed to the 
contrary in such form of proxy, to vote FOR each of the Aquila Resolutions.
Dated at the City of Toronto, in the Province of Ontario, this 2nd day of December, 2013.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
OF AQUILA RESOURCES INC.
(signed) “Barry Hildred” 
Barry Hildred 
Chief Executive Officer 
Aquila Resources Inc.
- xi -
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GLOSSARY OF TERMS .............................................................................................................................................. 1 
GENERAL INFORMATION ...................................................................................................................................... 10 
CAUTIONARY NOTICE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS AND INFORMATION ......... 12 
SUMMARY INFORMATION .................................................................................................................................... 15 
REBGOLD CORPORATION ..................................................................................................................................... 24 
REBGOLD AFTER THE TRANSACTIONS ............................................................................................................. 26 
AQUILA RESOURCES INC. ..................................................................................................................................... 26 
HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC. ...................................................................................................................................... 29 
AQUILA AFTER THE TRANSACTIONS ................................................................................................................ 29 
COMPARISON OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS BETWEEN THE CBCA AND THE OBCA ................................. 30 
THE ARRANGEMENT .............................................................................................................................................. 30 
THE ARRANGEMENT AGREEMENT .................................................................................................................... 40 
THE HMI ACQUISITION .......................................................................................................................................... 46 
THE HMI ACQUISITION AGREEMENT................................................................................................................. 48 
REGULATORY MATTERS ....................................................................................................................................... 53 
DISSENT RIGHTS ..................................................................................................................................................... 55 
REBGOLD SPECIAL BUSINESS ............................................................................................................................. 56 
AQUILA SPECIAL BUSINESS ................................................................................................................................. 58 
CERTAIN CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS .............................................................. 68 
RISK FACTORS RELATING TO THE TRANSACTIONS ...................................................................................... 73 
GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE REBGOLD MEETING AND VOTING .................................. 75 
GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE AQUILA MEETING AND VOTING ..................................... 78 
INTERESTS OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS ........................................................ 81 
GENERAL MATTERS ............................................................................................................................................... 81 
BOARD APPROVALS ............................................................................................................................................... 82 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ............................................................................................................................... 82 
CERTIFICATE OF REBGOLD .................................................................................................................................. 83 
CERTIFICATE OF AQUILA ..................................................................................................................................... 84 
CONSENT OF JENNINGS CAPITAL INC. .............................................................................................................. 85 
CONSENT OF CLARUS SECURITIES INC. ............................................................................................................ 86
APPENDIX A INFORMATION CONCERNING NEW AQUILA 
APPENDIX B PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT 
APPENDIX C FORM OF REBGOLD ARRANGEMENT RESOLUTION 
APPENDIX D INTERIM ORDER 
APPENDIX E NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR FINAL ORDER 
APPENDIX F FAIRNESS OPINION OF CLARUS SECURITIES INC. 
APPENDIX G FORMAL VALUATION AND FAIRNESS OPINION OF JENNINGS CAPITAL INC. 
APPENDIX H SECTIONS 190-192 OF THE CANADA BUSINESS CORPORATIONS ACT 
APPENDIX I COMPARISON OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS BETWEEN THE CBCA AND THE OBCA 
APPENDIX J FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC. 
APPENDIX K DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
The following is a glossary of certain terms used in this Circular, including in the Summary and Appendices:
“Acquisition Proposal” means any offer, proposal or inquiry (other than in respect of the matters set out in the 
disclosure letters delivered in connection with the Arrangement Agreement) from any person or group of persons 
(other than Aquila or REBgold, as applicable) after November 7, 2013 relating to (i) the direct or indirect acquisition 
or  purchase  (including  by  any  asset  acquisition,  lease,  long-term  supply  arrangement,  licence,  joint  venture  or 
similar transaction) by any person or group of persons of (A) assets (including voting or equity securities of any 
REBgold Subsidiary or Aquila Subsidiary, as applicable) representing 10% or more of the consolidated assets of 
REBgold and REBgold Subsidiaries or Aquila and Aquila Subsidiaries, as applicable, or contributing 10% or more 
of  the  consolidated  revenues  or  net  income  of  REBgold  and  REBgold  Subsidiaries  or  Aquila  and  Aquila 
Subsidiaries,  as  applicable,  or  (B) 20%  or  more  of  the  voting  or  equity  securities  of  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as 
applicable (or rights or interests therein), other than pursuant to the REBgold Financing or (C) 20% or more of the 
voting  or  equity  securities  of  any  of  REBgold  Subsidiaries  or  Aquila  Subsidiaries,  as  applicable,  (or  rights  or 
interests therein or thereto) whose assets, revenues or net income, individually or in the aggregate, constitute 10% or 
more of the consolidated assets, revenues or net income of REBgold or Aquila, as applicable; (ii) any take-over bid 
or exchange offer by any person or group of persons that, if consummated, would result in any person or group of 
persons beneficially owning 20% or more of any class of voting or equity securities of (A) REBgold or Aquila, as 
applicable, or (B) any of REBgold Subsidiaries or Aquila Subsidiaries, as applicable, whose assets, revenues or net 
income, individually or in the aggregate, constitute 10% or more of the consolidated assets, revenues or net income 
of  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as  applicable;  (iii) a  plan  of  arrangement,  merger,  amalgamation,  consolidation,  share 
exchange, business combination, reorganization, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution, extra-ordinary dividend or 
share  repurchase,  or  other  similar  transaction  involving  REBgold  or  any  of  REBgold  Subsidiaries  or  Aquila  or 
Aquila  Subsidiaries,  as  applicable,  whose  assets  or  revenues,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  constitute  10%  or 
more  of  the  consolidated  assets,  revenues  or  net  income  of  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as  applicable;  or  (iv) any 
combination of the foregoing, in each case of clause (i) through (iii) of this definition whether in a single transaction 
or a series of related transactions.
“Affiliate” has the meaning ascribed thereto in NI 45-106.
“Alliance Agreement” means the exploration alliance agreement between HudBay, Aquila and Aquila Alliance Inc. 
dated October 15, 2010.
“Aquila” means Aquila Resources Inc.
“Aquila Board” means the board of directors of Aquila.
“Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution”  means  an  ordinary  resolution  of  the  Aquila 
Shareholders approving the issuance of the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Shares.
“Aquila  Locked-Up  Shareholders”  means  each  of  HudBay,  Barry  Hildred,  Edward  Munden,  William  West, 
Thomas Quigley, Peter Bradshaw, Robin Dunbar and Nexxt Capital Corp.
“Aquila  Meeting”  means  the  special  meeting  of  the  Aquila  Shareholders  (including  any  adjournments, 
continuations or postponements thereof) to be held to consider the Aquila Resolutions.
“Aquila Notice of Meeting” means the notice of the Aquila Meeting sent to Aquila Shareholders together with this 
Circular.
“Aquila Options” means options to acquire Aquila Shares.
“Aquila Proxy” means the form of proxy, printed on blue paper, included with this Circular for use at the Aquila 
Meeting.
- 1 -
“Aquila Resolutions” means collectively, the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution, the HMI Acquisition Resolution, 
the Aquila Stock Option Resolution and the Aquila Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution.
“Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution”  means  an  ordinary  resolution  of  the  Aquila  Shareholders  approving  the 
issuance of the Consideration Shares and the REBgold Convertible Security Shares.
“Aquila Shareholders” means the holders from time to time of Aquila Shares.
“Aquila Shares” means common shares in the capital of Aquila.
“Aquila Stock Option Plan”  means  the  amended  and restated  stock option plan  of  Aquila  dated as  of  June 25, 
2013, as amended and as it may be further amended from time to time.
“Aquila Stock Option Resolution” means an ordinary resolution of the Aquila Shareholders approving the grant of 
up to 7,200,000 Aquila Options to the holders of REBgold RSUs and certain directors, officers and eligible service 
provider of Aquila and REBgold who will be continuing with Aquila following completion of the Arrangement.
“Aquila Subsidiaries” means, collectively Aquila Resources Corp., Aquila Resources USA Inc., 2079537 Ontario 
Ltd., Aquila Gold Inc. and Aquila Alliance Inc.
“Aquila Voting Agreements” means the voting and support agreements dated November 7, 2013 among Aquila, 
REBgold and each of the Aquila Locked-up Shareholders.
“Arrangement” means the arrangement of REBgold under Section 192 of the CBCA on the terms and subject to the 
conditions set out in the Plan of Arrangement, subject to any amendments or variations thereto made in accordance 
with  the  Arrangement  Agreement  or  the Plan of  Arrangement  or  made  at  the direction  of  the  Court  in  the  Final 
Order  (provided  that  any  such  amendment  or  variation  is  acceptable  to  both  Aquila  and  REBgold,  each  acting 
reasonably).
“Arrangement Agreement” means the arrangement agreement dated as of November 7, 2013, between Aquila and 
REBgold (including the schedules thereto) as supplemented, modified or amended.
“Back Forty Joint Venture” means Back Forty Joint Venture LLC.
“Back Forty NSR” means a 1% net smelter return royalty on the production from certain land parcels in the Back 
Forty Project, capped at $7 million, to be granted by Aquila to HudBay as partial consideration for the acquisition by 
Aquila of all of the issued and outstanding shares of HMI pursuant to the terms of the HMI Acquisition Agreement.
“Back  Forty  Project”  means  the  Back  Forty  project  located  in  Michigan,  U.S.A.  owned  by  Back  Forty  Joint 
Venture LLC.
“Baker  Steel”  means,  collectively,  Baker  Steel  Capital  Managers  LLP  and  the  investment  funds  managed  or 
controlled by it.
“Beneficial  Shareholder”  means  an  Aquila  Shareholder  or  a  REBgold  Shareholder  who  holds  Aquila  Shares  or 
REBgold Shares, as applicable, through a broker, investment dealer or other intermediary.
“Broadridge” means Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc.
“Business Day” means a day, other than a Saturday or Sunday, on which the principal commercial banks located in 
the cities of Toronto, Ontario are open for business during normal banking hours.
“Canadian  Shareholder”  has  the  meaning  set  forth  under  the  heading  “Certain  Canadian  Federal  Income  Tax 
Considerations – Residents of Canada”.
“CBCA” means the Canada Business Corporations Act, as amended.
- 2 -
“Certificate of Arrangement” means the certificate giving effect to the Arrangement issued pursuant to Section 
192(7) of the CBCA.
“Circular”  means  this  joint  management  proxy  circular  including  all  appendices  hereto  and  all  documents 
incorporated by reference herein, sent by REBgold to the REBgold Shareholders in connection with the REBgold 
Meeting and sent by Aquila to the Aquila Shareholders in connection with the Aquila Meeting.
“Clarus” means Clarus Securities Inc.
“Clarus  Fairness  Opinion”  means  the  fairness  opinion  of  Clarus  dated  November  7,  2013  with  respect  to  the 
Arrangement, a copy of which is attached as Appendix F to this Circular.
“Collins Barrow” means Collins Barrow LLP, Chartered Accountants.
“Confidentiality  Agreement”  means  the  confidentiality  agreement  dated  February  26,  2013  between  HudBay, 
Aquila and REBgold.
“Consideration Shares” means the Aquila Shares to be issued pursuant to the Arrangement.
“Corporation” means Aquila or REBgold, as applicable.
“Court” means the Supreme Court of Ontario.
“Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Shares”  means  an  aggregate  of  1,435,000  Aquila  Shares  to  be  issued 
following  completion  of  the  Transactions  (a) in  partial  satisfaction  of  (i) the  entitlements  of  the  holders  of  the 
REBgold RSUs and (ii) accrued and unpaid salary and fees owing to certain directors, officers and service providers 
of REBgold; and (b) as an additional compensation to certain directors, officers and service providers of Aquila for 
their services in facilitating completion of the Transactions.
“Depositary” means Trans Canada Transfer Inc.
“Depositing REBgold Shareholders” has the meaning set forth under the heading “The Arrangement – Procedure 
for Exchange of REBgold Shares”.
“Direct Registration Advice” means a written statement confirming book-entry form of security ownership.
“Dissent  Rights”  means  the  rights  of  dissent  in  favour  of  registered  REBgold  Shareholders  in  respect  of  the 
Arrangement as described in the Interim Order and the Plan of Arrangement.
“Dissenting Holder” means any registered REBgold Shareholder who has duly exercised its Dissent Rights in strict 
compliance therewith and has not withdrawn or been deemed to have withdrawn such exercise of its Dissent Rights.
“Effective Date” means the date shown on the Certificate of Arrangement.
“Effective Time” means 12:01 a.m. (Toronto time) on the Effective Date, or such other time on the Effective Date 
as may be specified in writing by REBgold with the consent of Aquila.
“Final Order” means the final order of the Court approving the Arrangement, as such order may be amended or 
modified, with the mutual written consent of Aquila and REBgold, at any time prior to the Effective Time or, if 
appealed, then unless such appeal is withdrawn or denied, as affirmed, amended or modified on appeal (provided 
that any such amendment or modification is acceptable to REBgold and Aquila, each acting reasonably.
“Governmental Authority” means:
(a)
any  international,  multinational  or  supranational  body  or  organization,  any  national,  state, 
provincial, territorial, regional, municipal, community or local government or quasi-government  
or  any  ministry,  department  or  political  subdivision  thereof,  any  administrative,  judicial  or
- 3 -
regulatory authority, agency, board, body, bureau, commission, instrumentality, court, arbitrator, 
arbitration  panel  or  tribunal,  any  central  bank  or  similar  monetary  or  regulatory  authority,  any 
taxing authority, or any agency of any of the foregoing;
any self-regulatory organization or stock exchange, including the TSX and the TSXV;
any entity exercising executive, legislative, judicial, regulatory or administrative functions of or 
pertaining to government; and
any person owned or controlled, through stock or capital ownership or otherwise, by any of the 
aforementioned entities or other bodies.
(b)
(c)
(d)
“HMI” means HudBay Michigan Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of HudBay.
“HMI Acquisition” means Aquila’s acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of HMI.
“HMI Acquisition Agreement” means the purchase agreement dated November 7, 2013 among Aquila, REBgold 
and HudBay, as supplemented, modified or amended.
“HMI  Acquisition  Resolution”  means  an  ordinary  resolution  of  the  Aquila  Shareholders,  other  than  HudBay, 
approving the HMI Acquisition.
“HMI Acquisition Shares” means the Aquila Shares issued to HudBay as partial consideration for the acquisition 
by  Aquila  of  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  HMI  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement.
“HMI Closing Time” means 9:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on the date on which the HMI Acquisition is completed or 
any other time on such date that is mutually agreed by Aquila, REBgold and HudBay in writing.
“HudBay” means HudBay Minerals Inc.
“IFRS” means international financial reporting standards.
“Interim  Order”  means  the  interim  order  of  the  Court  to  be  issued  following  the  application  contemplated  by 
Section 2.02 of the Arrangement Agreement, in a form acceptable to REBgold and Aquila, each acting reasonably, 
as the same may be amended or modified, with the mutual written consent of the parties, providing for, among other 
things, the calling and holding of the Meeting.
“Intermediary” means a broker, investment dealer, bank, trust company, nominee or other intermediary that holds 
Aquila Shares or REBgold Shares on behalf of a Aquila Shareholder or REBgold Shareholder.
“Jennings” means Jennings Capital Inc.
“Jennings Fairness Opinion” means the fairness opinion of Jennings dated November 7, 2013 with respect to the 
Arrangement , a copy of which is attached as Appendix G to this Circular.
“Jennings Formal Valuation” means the formal valuation of the Back Forty Project prepared by Jennings dated 
November 7, 2013, a copy of which is attached as Appendix G to this Circular.
“Material Adverse Effect” means, in respect of a Party, any change, effect, event, development, occurrence or state 
of facts that, individually or in the aggregate, is, or would reasonably be expected to be, material and adverse to the 
business, condition (financial or otherwise), properties, assets (tangible or intangible), liabilities (whether absolute, 
accrued, conditional, contingent or otherwise), or capitalization of such person and its subsidiaries taken as a whole, 
other than any effect:
(a)
relating to the announcement of the entering into of the Arrangement Agreement or relating to the 
Arrangement or any other transactions contemplated by the Arrangement Agreement;
- 4 -
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
relating  to  a  decrease  in  the  market  price  of,  in  the  case  of  REBgold,  the  REBgold  Common 
Shares or, in the case of Aquila, the Aquila Common Shares (it being understood that, if the cause 
or causes of any such decrease, in and of itself or themselves, is otherwise a Material Adverse 
Effect, then such decrease may be taken into consideration when determining whether a Material 
Adverse Effect has occurred);
relating to Canadian or world economic, financial or political conditions or securities markets in 
general;
affecting the gold mining industry in general;
relating to any effect resulting from any act of terrorism or any outbreak of hostilities or war (or 
any escalation or worsening thereof) or any natural disaster;
relating  to  shortages  or  price  changes  with  respect  to  raw  materials,  transportation  or  other 
products or services used by such person or any of its subsidiaries;
relating to changes in the price of gold;
relating to any change in Applicable Laws or in the interpretation thereof by any Governmental 
Authority  (but  excluding  orders,  judgments  or  decrees  against  such  person  or  any  of  its 
subsidiaries) or in IFRS; or
relating  to  any  action  taken  by  Aquila  or  REBgold  that  is  required  by  the  Arrangement 
Agreement;
provided, however, that the effect referred to in clauses (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) above does not primarily 
relate to (or have the effect of primarily relating to) such person and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or 
disproportionately adversely affect such person and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, compared to other 
companies  of  similar  size  operating  in  the  industry  in  which  such  Party  and  its  subsidiaries  operate,  or 
(ii) prevents  or  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  prevent  such  Party’s  ability  to  perform  in  all  material 
respects  its  obligations  under  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  to  consummate  the  Arrangement  in 
accordance with the terms hereof.
“Meeting” means the Aquila Meeting or REBgold Meeting, as applicable.
“Milestone  Payment  Shares”  has  the  meaning  set  forth  under  the  heading  “The  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  – 
Purchase Price”.
“MI  61-101”  means  Multilateral  Instrument  61-101  –  Protection  of  Minority  Security  Holders  in  Special 
Transactions.
“New Aquila” means Aquila after giving effect to the Arrangement, the REBgold Financing, the HMI Acquisition 
and the matters contemplated by the Aquila Resolutions.
“New Aquila Board” means the board of directors of New Aquila.
“NI 43-101” means National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects.
“NI 45-106” means National Instrument 45-106 – Prospectus and Registration Exemptions.
“NI 51-102” means National Instrument 51-102 – Continuous Disclosure Obligations.
“NI 52-110” means National Instrument 52-110 – Audit Committees.
“NI  54-101”  means  National  Instrument  54-101  –  Communication  with  Beneficial  Owners  of  Securities  of  a 
Reporting Issuer.
- 5 -
“NOBO” has the meaning set forth under the heading “General Information Concerning the Aquila Meeting and 
Voting – Voting By Non-Registered Aquila Shareholders”.
“OBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (Ontario), as amended.
“OBO”  has  the  meaning  set  forth  under  the  heading  “General  Information  Concerning  the  Aquila  Meeting  and 
Voting – Voting By Non-Registered Aquila Shareholders”.
“Outside Date” means February 28, 2014, or such other date as the Parties may mutually agree in writing.
“Parties” means Aquila and REBgold, and “Party” means either one of them.
“Person” means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, a trust, an unincorporated 
association,  a  joint  venture,  a  joint  stock  company,  a  Government  Authority  or  any  agency,  instrumentality  or 
political subdivision of a Government Authority, or any other entity or body and shall include any successor (by 
merger, amalgamation, consolidation, business combination, plan of arrangement or otherwise) of such entity.
“Plan” has the meaning set forth under the heading “Appendix A – Information Concerning New Aquila - Equity 
Compensation Arrangements”.
“Plan of Arrangement” means the plan of arrangement of REBgold in the form of Appendix B to this Circular, 
subject to any amendments or variations thereto made in accordance with the Arrangement Agreement and the Plan 
of Arrangement or at the direction of the Court in the Final Order with the consent of Aquila and REBgold, each 
acting reasonably.
“Proposed Agreement” means any agreement, other than a confidentiality and standstill agreement, providing for 
or to facilitate any Acquisition Proposal or to withdraw, modify or qualify the approval or recommendation of the 
Arrangement and recommend or approve an Acquisition Proposal.
“REBgold” means REBgold Corporation.
“REBgold Arrangement Resolution” means the special resolution in respect of the Arrangement to be considered 
by the REBgold Shareholders at the REBgold Meeting.
“REBgold Board” means the board of directors of REBgold.
“REBgold Convertible Debentures” means the convertible debenture of REBgold which are, prior to the Effective 
Time, convertible into REBgold Shares, and after the Effective Time are convertible into Aquila Shares.
“REBgold  Convertible  Security  Shares”  means  the  Aquila  Shares  issuable  at  or  following  the  Effective  Time 
upon the exercise or conversion of the REBgold Warrants and the REBgold Convertible Debentures.
“REBgold Financing” means the non-brokered private placement of REBgold Shares to be completed on or before 
completion of the Arrangement raising gross proceeds to REBgold of a minimum of $4 million and a maximum of 
$6 million at a price of $0.13 per share.
“REBgold  Financing  Resolution”  means  the  ordinary  resolution  in  respect  of  the  REBgold  Financing  to  be 
considered by the disinterested REBgold Shareholders at the REBgold Meeting.
“REBgold Letter of Transmittal” means the letter of transmittal, printed on green paper, provided to registered 
REBgold Shareholders together with this Circular pursuant to which such holders are required to deliver certificates 
representing  their  REBgold  Shares  in  order  to  receive  the  Aquila  Shares  issuable  to  them  pursuant  to  the 
Arrangement.
“REBgold Locked-Up Shareholders” means Baker Steel, Mark Burridge, Ross Orr, Lou Nagy, Massif Ltd. and 
China Commodities Absolute Return Fund.
- 6 -
“REBgold  Meeting”  means  the  special  meeting  of  the  REBgold  Shareholders  (including  any  adjournments, 
continuations  or  postponements  thereof)  to  be  held  as  provided  in  the  Interim  Order  to  consider  the  REBgold 
Arrangement Resolution and the REBgold Financing Resolution.
“REBgold Notice of Meeting” means the notice of the REBgold Meeting sent to REBgold Shareholders together 
with this Circular.
“REBgold Options” means the options to acquire REBgold Shares issued pursuant to the REBgold Option Plan, but 
does not include the options to acquire REBgold Shares that will be converted or cancelled pursuant to a written 
agreement  between  REBgold  and  the  REBgold  Optionholder  entered  into  prior  to  the  Effective  Time  and  that 
remains in effect at the Effective Time.
“REBgold Option Plan” means the amended and restated incentive stock option plan of REBgold adopted by the 
REBgold Board on May 17, 2006.
“REBgold Optionholders” means the holders from time to time of the REBgold Options.
“REBgold Proxy”  means  the  form  of  proxy,  printed  on  yellow  paper,  included with  this  Circular for  use  at  the 
REBgold Meeting.
“REBgold  Resolutions”  means  collectively,  the  REBgold  Stated  Capital  Resolution,  the  REBgold  Arrangement 
Resolution and the REBgold Financing Resolution.
“REBgold RSU Plan” means the restricted share unit plan of REBgold effective February  23, 2013.
“REBgold RSUs” means RSUs and PSUs (as such terms are defined under the REBgold RSU Plan) granted under 
the RSU Plan.
“REBgold Shareholders” means the holders from time to time of REBgold Shares.
“REBgold Shares” means the common shares in the capital of REBgold.
“REBgold Stated Capital Reduction” means the proposed reduction in stated capital in respect of the REBgold 
Shares in an amount to be determined at the discretion of the REBgold Board as described under “REBgold Special 
Business - REBgold Stated Capital Reduction”.
“REBgold  Stated  Capital  Resolution”  means  the  special  resolution  in  respect  of  the  REBgold  Stated  Capital 
Reduction to be considered by the REBgold Shareholders at the REBgold Meeting.
“REBgold Subsidiaries” means, collectively, BacTech (Barbados) Limited, BacTech (Australia) Pty Ltd., BacTech 
Nevada Corporation, BacTech Gold Corporation, REBgold oy and REBgold Mining oy.
“REBgold Voting Agreements” means the voting and support agreements dated November 7, 2013 among Aquila, 
REBgold and each of the REBgold Locked-up Shareholders.
“REBgold  Warrants”  means,  prior  to  the  Effective  Time,  warrants  to  acquire  REBgold  Shares  and  after  the 
Effective Time, warrants to acquire Aquila Shares.
“Replacement Option” means a fully vested option to purchase Aquila Shares which has been issued pursuant to 
the Plan of Arrangement in exchange for an REBgold Option outstanding and not exercised prior to the Effective 
Time.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“SEDAR” means the System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval.
“Shareholders” means Aquila Shareholders or REBgold Shareholders, as applicable.
- 7 -
“Stock Exchange Approvals” means all approvals of the TSX and TSXV that are required in connection with the 
completion of the Transactions.
“Subsidiary” has the meaning ascribed thereto in NI 45-106.
“Superior Proposal” means a bona fide Acquisition Proposal in respect of Aquila or REBgold, as applicable:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
that is made in writing after November 7, 2013;
that  did  not  result  from  a  breach  by  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as  applicable,  of  the  non-solicitation 
covenants relating to the Acquisition Proposals set out in the Arrangement Agreement;
that  is  made  for  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  assets  of  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as  applicable,  not 
owned by the person making such Acquisition Proposal and offers or makes available to all the 
shareholders or that corporation the same consideration in form and amount per REBgold Share or 
Aquila Share, as applicable;
that in the good faith determination of the REBgold Board or Aquila Board, as applicable, (after 
receipt of written advice from its outside legal advisor and its financial advisor, if any) would, if 
consummated in accordance with its terms (but not assuming away any risk of non-completion), 
result in a transaction more favourable to the shareholders of REBgold or Aquila, as applicable, 
from  a  financial  point  of  view  than  the  Arrangement  (including,  in  the  case  of  REBgold,  any 
amendment  to  the  Arrangement  offered  by  Aquila  taking  into  account  the  amount  of 
consideration,  the  likelihood  and  timing  of  completion  and  the  other  terms  thereof  (after  due 
consideration  of  all  legal,  financial,  regulatory  and  other  aspects  of  such  Acquisition  and  the 
person making such Acquisition Proposal);
that is not subject to any due diligence or access condition;
that is reasonably capable of being completed in accordance with its terms without undue delay, 
taking into account all legal, financial, regulatory and other aspects of such Acquisition Proposal 
and the person making such Acquisition Proposal; and
that is not subject to any financing condition and, in respect of which, where applicable, financing 
commitment  letters  reasonably  satisfactory  to  REBgold  or  Aquila,  as  applicable,  have  been 
furnished to REBgold or Aquila, as applicable.
“Tax Act” means the Income Tax Act (Canada), as amended from time to time.
“Termination Payment” means $500,000.
“Transaction Documents” means, collectively, the Arrangement Agreement, the Plan of Arrangement, the HMI 
Acquisition Agreement, the Aquila Voting Agreements and the REBgold Voting Agreements.
“Transactions” means the Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing.
“TSX” means the Toronto Stock Exchange.
“TSXV” means the TSX Venture Exchange.
“U.S.  Exchange  Act”  means  the  United  States  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  and  the  rules, 
regulations and orders promulgated thereunder.
“U.S. Securities Act” means the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the rules, regulations and 
orders promulgated thereunder.
- 8 -
“United States” means the United States of America, its territories and possessions, any state of the United States 
and the District of Columbia.
“Voting  Instruction  Form”  means  the  voting  instruction  form  provided  by  Broadridge  to  beneficial  holders  of 
Aquila Shares.
Words imparting the singular include the plural and vice versa and words importing any gender include all genders.
- 9 -
GENERAL INFORMATION
This  Circular  is  furnished  in  connection  with  the  solicitation  of  proxies  by  and  on  behalf  of  the  management  of 
Aquila and REBgold, as applicable, for use at the:
(a)
(b)
at the REBgold Meeting to be held at 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7 at 
10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013, for the purposes set out in the accompanying 
REBgold Notice of Meeting; and
at  the  Aquila Meeting  to be  held  at 333 Bay  Street,  Suite  3400,  Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7  at 
11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013, for the purposes set out in the accompanying 
Aquila Notice of Meeting.
No  person  has  been  authorized  to  give  any  information  or  make  any  representation  in  connection  with  the 
Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition, the REBgold Financing or the issuance of the Aquila Shares in connection with 
the  Arrangement  or  the  HMI  Acquisition,  or  any  other  matters  to  be  considered  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  or  the 
Aquila Meeting, respectively, other than those contained in this Circular (or incorporated by reference herein) and, if 
given or made, any such information or representation must not be relied upon as having been authorized.
This Circular does not constitute an offer to buy, or a solicitation of an offer to sell, any securities, or the solicitation 
of a proxy, by any person in any jurisdiction in which such an offer or solicitation is not authorized or in which the 
person making such an offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it is unlawful to make 
such an offer or solicitation.  Neither the delivery of this Circular nor any distribution of the securities referred to in 
this Circular will, under any circumstance, create an implication that there has been no change in the information set 
forth herein since the date as of which such information is given in this Circular.
Reporting Currency and Financial Information
In this Circular, unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, all dollar amounts are expressed in 
Canadian dollars and references to “dollars” or “$” are to Canadian dollars.  Unless otherwise specified, all financial 
information contained herein or incorporated by reference in this Circular has been presented in accordance with 
IFRS.
Information for United States Shareholders
REBgold  Shareholders  who  are  residents  of  the  United  States  should  be  aware  that  the  disposition  of  REBgold 
Shares pursuant to the Arrangement described in this Circular might have tax consequences both in Canada and in 
the United States, which are not described fully herein.  Shareholders should consult their own tax advisor for advice 
on the Arrangement.
The enforcement by Shareholders of civil liabilities under United States securities laws may be affected adversely 
by  the  fact  that  Aquila  and  REBgold  are  incorporated  and  organized  under  the  laws  of  Ontario  and  Canada, 
respectively, that some or all of their respective officers and directors are residents of countries other than the United 
States and that all or a substantial portion of the assets of Aquila and REBgold are located outside of the United 
States.  As a result, it may be difficult or impossible for Shareholders in the United States to effect service of process 
within  the  United  States  upon  Aquila  or  REBgold,  or  their  directors  or  officers,  or  to  realize  against  them  upon 
judgments  of  courts  of  the  United  States  predicated  upon  civil  liabilities  under  the  federal  securities  laws  of  the 
United States or “blue sky” laws of any state within the United States. In addition, Shareholders should not assume 
that  the  courts  of  Canada:  (a) would  enforce  judgments  of  United  States  courts  obtained  in  actions  against  such 
persons predicated upon civil liabilities under the federal securities laws of the United States or “blue sky” laws of 
any  state  within  the  United  States;  or  (b) would  enforce,  in  original  actions,  liabilities  against  such  persons 
predicated upon civil liabilities under the federal securities laws of the United States or “blue sky” laws of any state 
within the United States.
The  Consideration  Shares  and  the  Replacement  Options  issuable  pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  have  not  been 
registered  under  the  U.S.  Securities  Act  and  will  be  issued  in  reliance  on  the  exemption  from  the  registration
- 10 -
requirements of the U.S. Securities Act provided by Section 3(a)(10) of the U.S. Securities Act.  Section 3(a)(10) of 
the U.S. Securities Act provides an exemption from registration under the U.S. Securities Act for offers and sales of 
securities issued in exchange for one or more outstanding securities where the terms and conditions of the issuance 
and exchange of such securities have been approved by a court authorized to grant such approval after a hearing 
upon  the  fairness  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  issuance  and  exchange  at  which  all  persons  to  whom  the 
securities will be issued have the right to appear.  The Court is authorized to conduct a hearing at which the fairness 
of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Arrangement  will  be  considered.    The  Court  issued  the  Interim  Order  on 
November 28, 2013 and, subject to the approval of the Arrangement by the Shareholders, a hearing for a final order 
approving  the  Arrangement  will  be  held  on  or  about  January  7,  2014  at  10:00  a.m.  (Toronto  time)  (or  as  soon 
thereafter as legal counsel can be heard) at the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, 330 University Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario.  All REBgold Shareholders and REBgold Optionholders are entitled to appear and be heard at this hearing.  
See “The Arrangement - Court Approval and Completion of the Arrangement” in this Circular.
This  Arrangement  involves  the  securities  of  issuers  located  in  Canada.    The  solicitation  of  proxies  made  in 
connection with this Circular is being effected in accordance with the corporate laws of the province of Ontario, 
Canada,  and  it  is  not  subject  to  the  requirements  of  Section  14(a)  of  the  U.S.  Exchange  Act.    Accordingly,  this 
Circular has been prepared in accordance with disclosure requirements applicable in Canada and in accordance with 
applicable  Canadian  corporate  and  securities  laws.  Shareholders  in  the  United  States  should  be  aware  that  such 
disclosure requirements are different from those of the United States applicable to registration statements under the 
U.S. Securities Act and to proxy statements under the U.S. Exchange Act.
Information concerning the properties and operations of REBgold and Aquila has been prepared in accordance with 
the requirements of Canadian securities laws, which differ from the requirements of United States securities laws.  
Unless otherwise indicated, all mineral reserve and mineral resource estimates included or incorporated by reference 
in this Circular have been prepared in accordance with NI 43-101 and the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy 
and Petroleum definitions and classification system.
Canadian standards, including NI 43-101, differ significantly from the requirements of the SEC, and mineral reserve 
and mineral resource information contained or incorporated by reference in this Circular may not be comparable to 
similar information disclosed by United States companies.  In particular, and without limiting the generality of the 
foregoing, the term “resource” does not equate to the term “reserve”.  Under United States standards, mineralization 
may  not  be  classified  as  a  “reserve”  unless  the  determination  has  been  made  that  the  mineralization  could  be 
economically and legally produced or extracted at the time the reserve determination is made.  The SEC’s disclosure 
standards normally do not permit the inclusion of information concerning “measured mineral resources”, “indicated 
mineral resources” or “inferred mineral resources” or other descriptions of the amount of mineralization in mineral 
deposits that do not constitute “reserves” by United States standards in documents filed with the SEC.  United States 
investors should also understand that “inferred mineral resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to their 
existence and as to their economic and legal feasibility.  It cannot be assumed that all or any part of an “inferred 
mineral resource” will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under Canadian rules, estimates of “inferred mineral 
resources”  may  not  form  the  basis  of  feasibility  or  pre-feasibility  studies  except  in  rare  cases.    Disclosure  of 
“contained ounces” in a mineral resource estimate is permitted disclosure under NI 43-101 provided that the grade 
or quality and the quantity of each category  is stated; however, the SEC normally only permits issuers to report 
mineralization that does not constitute “reserves” by SEC standards as in place tonnage and grade without reference 
to unit measures. The requirements of NI 43-101 for identification of “reserves” are also not the same as those of the 
SEC,  and  reserves  reported  in  compliance  with  NI 43-101  may  not  qualify  as  “reserves”  under  SEC  standards.  
Accordingly, information contained in this Circular and the documents incorporated by reference herein containing 
descriptions of mineral deposits that comply with NI 43-101 may not be comparable to similar information made 
public by U.S. companies subject to the reporting and disclosure requirements under the U.S. federal securities laws 
and the rules and regulations thereunder.
The financial statements of Aquila and REBgold incorporated by reference in this Circular have been prepared in 
accordance with IFRS and are subject to Canadian auditing and auditor independence standards, and thus may not 
be comparable in all respects to financial statements of United States companies.  Likewise, unless expressly noted, 
information concerning the properties and operations of Aquila and REBgold contained or incorporated herein by 
reference has been prepared in accordance with Canadian standards and may not be comparable in all respects to 
similar information for United States companies set forth in the registration statements and reports filed with the 
SEC.
- 11 -
The U.S. Securities Act imposes restrictions on the resale of securities received pursuant to the Arrangement by 
persons who were “affiliates” of Aquila within 90 days prior to the Arrangement and persons who are “affiliates” of 
New Aquila after the Arrangement.  As defined in Rule 144 under the U.S. Securities Act, an “affiliate” of an issuer 
is a person that directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, controls, or is controlled by, or is under 
common control with the issuer.
Section 3(a)(10) of the U.S. Securities Act does not exempt the issuance of securities upon the exercise of securities 
that were previously issued pursuant to Section 3(a)(10) of the U.S. Securities Act.  Therefore, the Aquila Shares 
issuable upon the exercise of the Replacement Options (following the Effective Time) may not be issued in reliance 
upon Section 3(a)(10) of the U.S. Securities Act.  The Replacement Options may be exercised only pursuant to an 
available  exemption  from  the  registration  requirements  of  the  U.S.  Securities  Act  and  applicable  state  securities 
laws.  Prior to the issuance of Aquila Shares pursuant to any such exercise, Aquila may require the delivery of an 
opinion of counsel or other evidence satisfactory to Aquila, acting reasonably, to the effect that the issuance of such 
Aquila Shares does not require registration under the U.S. Securities Act or applicable state securities laws.
THE ARRANGEMENT AND THE SECURITIES ISSUABLE PURSUANT TO THE ARRANGEMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED BY THE SEC OR ANY STATE SECURITIES REGULATORY 
AUTHORITY  NOR  HAS  THE  SEC  OR  ANY  STATE  SECURITIES  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  PASSED 
UPON  THE  FAIRNESS  OR  MERITS  OF  THE  ARRANGEMENT  OR  UPON  THE  ACCURACY  OR 
ADEQUACY OF THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS DOCUMENT.  ANY REPRESENTATION TO 
THE CONTRARY IS UNLAWFUL.
Information Contained in this Circular
The  information  contained  in  this  Circular  is  given  as  at  December  2,  2013,  except  where  otherwise  noted,  and 
information  contained  in  documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein  is  given  as  of  the  dates  noted  in  those 
documents.
The information concerning REBgold contained in this Circular has been provided by REBgold. Although Aquila 
has no knowledge that would indicate that any of such information is untrue or incomplete, Aquila does not assume 
any responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of such information or the failure by REBgold to disclose events 
that may have occurred or may affect the completeness or accuracy of such information but which are unknown to 
Aquila.
The information concerning Aquila contained in this Circular has been provided by Aquila. Although REBgold has 
no knowledge that would indicate that any of such information is untrue or incomplete, REBgold does not assume 
any responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of such information or the failure by Aquila to disclose events 
that may have occurred or may affect the completeness or accuracy of such information but which are unknown to 
REBgold.
REBgold Shareholders and Aquila Shareholders should not construe the contents of this Circular as legal, tax or 
financial  advice  and  should  consult  with  their  own  professional  advisors  in  considering  the  relevant  legal,  tax, 
financial or other matters contained in this Circular.
CAUTIONARY NOTICE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING
STATEMENTS AND INFORMATION
This  Circular,  including  documents  incorporated  by  reference  herein,  contain  forward-looking  statements  and 
information (collectively referred to as “forward-looking statements”) within the meaning of applicable securities 
laws. All statements other than statements of historical fact included, or incorporated by reference in this Circular, 
are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are often, but not always, identified by the use of words 
such  as  “expect”,  “anticipate”,  “continue”,  “could”,  “estimate”,  “forecast”,  “guidance”,  “intend”,  “predict”, 
“objective”, “ongoing”, “may”, “will”, “project”, “should”, “target”, “believe”, “plan”, “intends”, “potential”, “pro 
forma” and similar expressions suggesting future outcomes or language suggesting an outlook. In particular, this 
Circular and the documents incorporated by reference herein contain forward-looking statements pertaining to, but 
not limited to, those relating to the proposed benefits of Arrangement, the timing of the closing of the proposed 
Arrangement, information concerning Aquila’s, REBgold’s and New Aquila’s operations, business prospects and
- 12 -
opportunities of Aquila, REBgold and New Aquila and other statements that are not historical facts are forward-
looking statements.
Undue reliance should not be placed on forward-looking statements, which are inherently uncertain, are based on 
estimates  and  assumptions,  and  are  subject  to  known  and  unknown  risks  and  uncertainties  (both  general  and 
specific)  that  contribute  to  the  possibility  that  the  future  events  or  circumstances  contemplated  by  the  forward-
looking statements will not occur.  There can be no assurance that the plans, intentions or expectations upon which 
forward-looking statements are based will in fact be realized.  Actual results may differ, and the difference may be 
material  and  adverse  to  any  or  all  of  New  Aquila,  REBgold,  Aquila,  the  REBgold  Shareholders  and  the  Aquila 
Shareholders.  Forward-looking statements are provided for the purpose of providing information about REBgold’s 
and Aquila’s management’s current expectations and plans relating to the future.  Reliance on such information may 
not be appropriate for other purposes, such as making investment decisions.
Various assumptions or factors are typically applied in drawing conclusions or making the forecasts or projections 
set out in forward-looking statements.  Those assumptions and factors are based on information currently available 
to Aquila and REBgold, as applicable, including information obtained from third-party industry analysts and other 
third party sources.  In some instances, material assumptions and factors are presented or discussed elsewhere in this 
Circular, including the documents incorporated by reference herein, in connection with the statements or disclosure 
containing  the  forward-looking  statements.    Actual  results  or  outcomes  may  differ  from  those  predicted  by  such 
statements  or  disclosure.    You  are  cautioned  that  the  following  list  of  material  factors  and  assumptions  is  not 
exhaustive.  The factors and assumptions include, but are not limited to:
  matters related to the Arrangement;














the approval of the Arrangement by the Court;
the approval of the REBgold Resolutions by the REBgold Shareholders;
the approval of the Aquila Resolutions by the Aquila Shareholders;
the receipt of the Stock Exchange Approvals;
the satisfaction or waiver of all the conditions to completion of the Arrangement in accordance with 
the Arrangement Agreement;
the completion of the Arrangement;
the satisfaction or waiver of all the conditions to completion of the HMI Acquisition in accordance 
with the HMI Acquisition Agreement;
the completion of the HMI Acquisition;
the completion of the REBgold Financing;
no material changes in the legislative and operating framework for the business of REBgold;
the financial performance of New Aquila after giving effect to the Arrangement;
prevailing regulatory, tax, and securities laws and regulations;
stock market volatility and market valuations; and
no material adverse effect in the business of any of Aquila, REBgold or HMI or in respect of the Back 
Forty Project.
- 13 -
Although  the  management  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  consider  these  assumptions  to  be  reasonable  based  on 
information currently available, they may prove to be incorrect.
By their very nature, forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties (both general and specific), 
some of which are beyond the control of Aquila and REBgold.  These factors include, but are not limited to,












uncertainties associated with the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition;
the Aquila Shares issued in connection with the Arrangement may have a market value different than 
expected;
costs associated with the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition;
if the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition are not completed, Aquila and REBgold’s future business 
and operations could be harmed;
all conditions precedent to the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition may not be satisfied;
the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  may  be  terminated  in  certain 
circumstances;
income tax laws;
dependence on key personnel;
potential dilution of existing Aquila Shareholders with the issuance of Aquila Shares pursuant to the 
Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition;
the prior operations and conduct of both Aquila and REBgold;
competition; and
litigation.
This  Circular  also  contains  information  and/or  statements  derived  from  third  party  sources,  including  HudBay.  
Neither REBgold nor Aquila, nor any of their respective directors, officers or agents, has verified the accuracy or 
completeness of the statements contained herein, which are made by, or derived from, third party sources.
The  reader  is  further  cautioned  that  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  IFRS  requires 
management to make certain judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues 
and expenses. These estimates may change, having either a negative or positive effect on net earnings as further 
information becomes available, and as the economic environment changes.
Readers are cautioned that the foregoing lists are not exhaustive. Readers should carefully review and consider the 
risk  factors  described  under  “Risk  Factors  Related  to  the  Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition”,  “Certain 
Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations” and other risks described elsewhere in this Circular (including but 
not  limited  to  those  set  forth  in  Appendix A  -  Information  Concerning  New  Aquila  to  this  Circular)  and  in  the 
documents incorporated by reference herein.  Although Aquila and REBgold have attempted to identify important 
factors that could cause actual results to differ materially, there may be other factors that cause results not to be as 
anticipated,  estimated  or  intended.    There  can  be  no  assurance  that  such  statements  will  prove  to  be  accurate  as 
actual  results  and  future  events  will  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  in  such  statements.    Accordingly, 
readers should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements.  Neither REBgold nor Aquila undertakes an 
obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements other than as required by applicable law.
- 14 -
SUMMARY INFORMATION
The following is a summary of certain information contained elsewhere in this Circular, including the Appendices 
hereto,  and  is  qualified  in  its  entirety  by  reference  to  the  more  detailed  information  contained  or  referred  to 
elsewhere in this Circular or in the Appendices hereto.  Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein are defined in 
the “Glossary of Terms”.
The REBgold Meeting
The  REBgold  Meeting  will  be  held  at  333  Bay  Street,  Suite  3400,  Toronto,  Ontario  M5H  2S7,  at  10:00  a.m. 
(Toronto  time)  on  December  30,  2013,  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in  the  accompanying  Notice  of  Meeting  of 
REBgold  Shareholders.    The  primary  business  of  the  REBgold  Meeting  will  be  to  consider  and  vote  upon  the 
REBgold Resolutions.
See “The Arrangement” and “REBgold Special Business”.
The Aquila Meeting
The Aquila Meeting will be held at 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7, at 11:00 a.m. (Toronto 
time)  on  December  30,  2013,  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in  the  accompanying  Notice  of  Meeting  of  Aquila 
Shareholders.    The  primary  business  of  the  Aquila  Meeting  will  be  to  consider  and  vote  upon  the  Aquila 
Resolutions.  The Aquila Resolutions address, among other things, approval of (i) the issuance of Aquila Shares in 
connection with the Arrangement, and (ii) the HMI Acquisition.
See “The Arrangement”, the “HMI Acquisition” and “Aquila Special Business”.
Record Dates
The record date for determining the REBgold Shareholders entitled to receive notice of, and to vote at, the REBgold 
Meeting is November 29, 2013.  Only REBgold Shareholders of record as of the close of business on the record date 
are entitled to receive notice of, and to vote at, the REBgold Meeting.
The  record  date  for  determining  the  Aquila  Shareholders  entitled  to  receive  notice  of  and  to  vote  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting is November 29, 2013.  Only Aquila Shareholders of record as of the close of business on the record date 
are entitled to receive notice of, and to vote at, the Aquila Meeting.
REBgold Corporation
REBgold was incorporated on February 13, 1997 under the CBCA and is a natural resource company engaged in the 
acquisition, exploration and development of mineral resource properties in Finland and elsewhere.  REBgold also 
owns proprietary bioleaching technology through its wholly owned subsidiaries.  This technology utilizes bacteria to 
extract precious and basemetals from difficult-to-treat sulphide ores and concentrates.
The REBgold shares are listed on the TSXV under the ticker symbol “RBG”.
See “REBgold Corporation”.
Aquila Resources Inc.
Aquila was incorporated on February 17, 1997 under the OBCA and is a natural resource company engaged in the 
acquisition,  exploration  and  development  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  and  other  mineral  resource  properties  in  the 
United States.
The Aquila Shares are listed on the TSX under the ticker symbol “AQA”.
See “Aquila Resources Inc.”.
- 15 -
HudBay Michigan Inc.
HMI  was  incorporated  on  August  25,  2009  as  a  Michigan  corporation.    HMI  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of 
HudBay and holds HudBay’s 51% interest in the Back Forty Joint Venture.  HMI does not conduct any business 
other than holding HudBay’s interest in the Back Forty Venture.
See Appendix J to this Circular for HMI’s audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 
31,  2012  and  2011  and  the  nine  months  ended  September  30,  2013.    See  Appendix K  to  this  Circular  for  the 
discussion and analysis of those financial statements prepared by Aquila and REBgold.  HudBay was not involved 
in the preparation, and is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness, of such discussion and analysis.
New Aquila
If the Arrangement is completed, REBgold will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Aquila.  New Aquila will 
continue the business of Aquila and REBgold.
See “REBgold Corporation”, “Aquila Resources Inc.” and Appendix A “Information Concerning New Aquila”.
New Aquila will be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive Officer of 
Aquila,  will  continue  in  this  capacity  and  lead  the  management  team  that  will  also  include  Louis  Nagy,  Chief 
Financial  Officer,  Coen  Louwarts,  Vice-President-Corporate  Development,  Thomas  Quigley,  Vice-President-
Exploration and Senior Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  
Mark  Burridge,  current  Chairman  of  REBgold  will  also  Chair  the  new  board,  in  addition  to  providing  advisory 
support  to  the  management  team  in  areas  of  business  development  and  corporate  finance.    The  Board  will  also 
include  Barry  Hildred,  two  existing  members  of  the  Aquila  board  of  directors  (Peter  Bradshaw  and  Edward 
Munden), two existing members of the REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new 
director, Ed Guimaraes.
See Appendix A “Information Concerning New Aquila” and Schedule 1 to Appendix A for the unaudited pro forma 
financial statements of New Aquila.
Description of the Arrangement
If all of the conditions to completion of the Arrangement are satisfied or, where permitted, waived, the Arrangement 
will become effective at the Effective Time.  At the Effective Time, without any further act or formality, each of the 
events set out below shall occur and shall be deemed to occur in the following sequence:



each REBgold Share in respect of which an REBgold Shareholder has validly exercised his, her or its 
Dissent Rights shall be directly transferred and assigned by such Dissenting Holder to Aquila and such 
Dissenting Holders shall cease to be the holders of such REBgold Shares and to have any rights as 
REBgold Shareholders other than the right to be paid fair value for such REBgold Shares pursuant to 
the Dissent Rights;
each REBgold Share (other than any REBgold Shares in respect of which an REBgold Shareholder has 
validly  exercised  his,  her  or  its  Dissent  Rights)  shall  be  transferred  to  Aquila  in  exchange  for  one 
Aquila Share; and
each REBgold Option which is outstanding and has not been duly exercised prior to the Effective Date 
shall  be  exchanged  for  a  fully  vested  Replacement  Option  to  purchase  one  Aquila  Share.    Such 
Replacement Option shall provide for an exercise price per Aquila Share equal to the exercise price per 
REBgold  Share  otherwise  purchasable  pursuant  to  such  REBgold  Option.    All  other  terms  and 
conditions  of  a  Replacement  Option,  including  the  term  to  expiry,  conditions  to  and  manner  of 
exercising, will be the same as the REBgold Option for which it was exchanged, and shall be governed 
by  the  terms  of  the  current  Aquila  Stock  Option  Plan  and  any  certificate  or  option  agreement 
previously evidencing the REBgold Option shall thereafter evidence and be deemed to evidence such 
Replacement Option.
- 16 -
See “The Arrangement — Description of the Arrangement”.
Description of the HMI Acquisition
If  all  of  the  conditions  in  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  including  completion  of  the  Arrangement  and  the 
REBgold  Financing,  are  satisfied  or  waived,  the  HMI  Acquisition  will  be  completed  immediately  following  the 
Effective Time.  The consideration payable by Aquila for all of the issued and outstanding shares of HMI is up to 
$2.5 million of Aquila Shares (valued at $0.13 per share), installment payments of up to an aggregate of $9 million 
tied to development of the Back Forty Project and the Back Forty NSR.  Upon completion of the HMI Acquisition, 
Aquila will indirectly own 100% of the Back Forty Project.
See “The HMI Acquisition”.
Effect of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition
If  the Arrangement  is  completed,  each  REBgold  Shareholder (excluding Dissenting Holders) will exchange each 
REBgold Share held at the Effective Time for one Aquila Share.  Upon completion of the Arrangement, REBgold 
will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Aquila.
Following completion of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition:


the Aquila Shares will continue to trade on the TSX;
the  REBgold  Shares  will  be  delisted  from  trading  on  the  TSXV  and  REBgold  will  cease  to  be  a 
reporting issuer in Canada;
  REBgold  will  be  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Aquila  and  the  current  REBgold  Shareholders  will
become Aquila Shareholders;
  New Aquila will carry on Aquila’s and REBgold’s businesses and will indirectly own 100% of the
Back Forty Project; and
  New Aquila will be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive 
Officer of Aquila, will continue in this capacity and lead the management team that will also include 
Louis Nagy, Chief Financial Officer, Coen Louwarts, Vice-President-Corporate Development, Thomas 
Quigley, Vice-President-Exploration and Senior Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul 
Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  Mark Burridge, current Chairman of REBgold will also Chair the 
new  board,  in  addition  to  providing  advisory  support  to  the  management  team  in  areas  of  business 
development and corporate finance.  The Board will also include Barry Hildred, two existing members 
of the Aquila board of directors (Peter Bradshaw and Edward Munden), two existing members of the 
REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new director, Ed Guimaraes.
See “The Arrangement — Effect of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition”.
Recommendation of the REBgold Board
Approval of the REBgold Resolutions by the REBgold Shareholders is a condition precedent to completion of the 
Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition.    See  “The  Arrangement  Agreement  -  Conditions  Precedent  to  the 
Arrangement”.
The REBgold Board retained Clarus to provide the Clarus Fairness Opinion.  Clarus has given the Clarus Fairness 
Opinion to the effect that as of the date thereof, and based upon and subject to the scope of the review, analyses 
undertaken and various assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion, the consideration to be 
received by REBgold Shareholders pursuant to the Arrangement is fair, from a financial point of view, to REBgold 
Shareholders.  The Clarus Fairness Opinion is attached to this Circular as Appendix F.
- 17 -
The REBgold Board, having taking into account the Clarus Fairness Opinion and such other matters as it considered 
relevant, has unanimously determined that proceeding with the Arrangement and the REBgold Financing is in the 
best interest of REBgold.
To be effective, the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must each 
be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the votes cast on the 
REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution, as applicable, by all REBgold 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative  vote  of  a  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  by  all  REBgold 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding Baker Steel, present in person or represented by proxy at the 
REBgold Meeting.
The REBgold Board unanimously recommends that REBgold Shareholders vote FOR each of the REBgold 
Resolutions.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of REBgold in 
the REBgold Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the REBgold Resolutions.
See “The Arrangement – REBgold Shareholder Approval”, “The Arrangement – Recommendation of the REBgold 
Board” and “The Arrangement - Clarus Fairness Opinion”.
Recommendation of the Aquila Board
Approval of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the HMI Acquisition Resolution by the Aquila Shareholders 
is  a  condition  precedent  to  completion  of  the  Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition.    See  “The  Arrangement 
Agreement  -  Conditions  Precedent  to  the  Arrangement”  and  “The  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  -  Conditions 
Precedent to the HMI Acquisition”.
The Aquila Board retained Jennings to provide the Jennings Fairness Opinion and the Jennings Formal Valuation.  
Jennings has given the Jennings Fairness Opinion and the Jennings Formal Valuation to the effect that as of the date 
thereof,  and  based  upon  and  subject  to  the  scope  of  the  review,  analyses  undertaken  and  various  assumptions, 
limitations  and  qualifications  set  forth  in  its  opinion,  the  Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition  is  fair,  from  a 
financial  point  of  view,  to  the  Aquila  Shareholders.    Jennings  is  also  of  the  opinion  that,  as  of  the  date  of  the 
Jennings Formal Valuation, and subject to the assumptions, limitations and qualifications contained therein, the fair 
market value of the Back Forty Project is in the range of $45 million to $56 million.  The Jennings Fairness Opinion 
and the Jennings Formal Valuation are attached to this Circular as Appendix G.
The Aquila Board, having taking into account the Jennings Fairness Opinion, the Jennings Formal Valuation and 
such other matters as it considered relevant, has unanimously determined that proceeding with the Arrangement and 
the HMI Acquisition is in the best interest of Aquila.
To be effective, the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the 
affirmative vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution by all Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the Aquila Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  by  all  Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding HudBay, present in person or represented by proxy at the 
Aquila Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Stock  Option  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Stock Option Resolution, by all Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding those directors, officers and eligible service providers who 
will  receive  the  stock  options  being  approved,  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting.
- 18 -
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or 
without  variation,  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  Aquila  Debt 
Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution,  by  all  Aquila  Shareholders  voting  as  a  single  class,  excluding 
those  directors,  officers  and  eligible  service  providers  who  will  receive  the  Aquila  Shares  being  approved, 
present in person or represented by proxy at the Aquila Meeting.
The  Aquila  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  each  of  the  Aquila 
Resolutions.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of such resolutions.
See  “The  Arrangement  -  Aquila  Shareholder  Approval”,  “The  Arrangement  -  Recommendation  of  the  Aquila 
Board”, “The HMI Acquisition - Aquila Shareholder Approval”, “The HMI Acquisition - Recommendation of the 
Aquila  Board”,  “The  Arrangement  -  Jennings  Fairness  Opinion”,    “The  HMI  Acquisition  -  Jennings  Formal 
Valuation” and “Aquila Special Business - Grant of Stock Options”.
Reasons for the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition
The directors of REBgold and Aquila believe that the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition are in the best interests 
of REBgold and Aquila, respectively, and will have the following benefits:






a  strong  board  and  leadership  team  with  experience  in  mine  development,  operations,  and  capital 
markets;
strategic investor backing from Baker Steel and a supportive significant shareholder in HudBay;
100%  ownership  of  the  high-grade,  poly-metallic  Back  Forty  Project,  located  in  the  Great  Lakes 
Region;
100% ownership of the Bend Copper-Gold project, a VMS deposit located in the Great Lakes Region;
100%  ownership  of  the  Reef  Gold  project,  a  high-grade  deposit  potentially  amenable  to  open-pit 
mining;
a highly prospective joint venture in Finland with established resources; and
  REBgold’s metallurgical capabilities and proprietary bioleaching technology.
See “The Arrangement – Reasons for the Arrangement”.
REBgold Options
Almost all of the 2,112,500 outstanding REBgold options have exercise prices that are higher than the $0.13 per 
share price at which REBgold Shares are anticipated to be sold pursuant to the REBgold Financing and are therefore 
“out-of-the-money”.    Pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  Agreement,  REBgold  has  agreed  to  use  its  commercially 
reasonable efforts to seek the voluntary surrender of all of the REBgold options prior to the Effective Time.
If, upon completion of the Arrangement, any REBgold Options have not been surrendered and remain outstanding, 
each  such  REBgold  Option,  whether  vested  or  unvested,  will  be  exchanged  with  Aquila  for  a  fully-vested  and 
immediately exercisable Replacement Option.  Each Replacement Option will entitle the holder to purchase from 
Aquila one Aquila Share and with an exercise price per Aquila Share equal to the exercise price per REBgold Share 
of such REBgold Option immediately prior to the Effective Time.  All other terms and conditions of a Replacement 
Option,  including  the  term  to  expiry,  conditions  to  and  manner  of  exercising,  will  be  the  same  as  the  REBgold 
Option for which it was exchanged, and shall be governed by the terms of the Aquila Option Plan.
See “The Arrangement - Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities - REBgold Options”.
- 19 -
REBgold Warrants
The  Arrangement  will  constitute  a  “Capital  Reorganization”  or  similarly  defined  event  under  the  terms  of  the 
REBgold Warrants.  Accordingly, if the Arrangement is completed pursuant to its terms, upon the Effective Time 
holders of REBgold Warrants shall be entitled to receive, upon the exercise of their REBgold Warrants at any time 
after the Effective Date, in lieu of the number of REBgold Shares to which they were otherwise entitled to receive 
the Aquila Shares that they would have received pursuant to the Arrangement had they owned such REBgold Shares 
immediately prior to the Effective Time.
See “The Arrangement - Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities - REBgold Warrants”.
REBgold Convertible Debentures
Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  REBgold  Convertible  Debentures,  if  the  Arrangement  is  completed  pursuant  to  its 
terms, upon the Effective Time holders of the REBgold Convertible Debentures shall be entitled to receive, upon the 
conversion of their REBgold Convertible Debentures at any time after the Effective Date, in lieu of the number of 
REBgold Shares to which they were otherwise entitled to receive, the Aquila Shares that they would have received 
pursuant to the Arrangement had they owned such REBgold Shares immediately prior to the Effective Time.
Baker Steel has also agreed that, upon the Effective Time, the 8% Unsecured Convertible Debentures due April 2, 
2015  held  by  Baker  Steel  shall  automatically  be  amended  to  delete  the  adjustment  to  the  conversion  price  and 
automatic conversion of such REBgold Convertible Debentures upon the occurrence of a “Significant Acquisition” 
(as defined therein).
See “The Arrangement - Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities - REBgold Convertible Debentures”.
REBgold RSUs
REBgold  currently  has  4,690,000  REBgold  RSUs  outstanding,  all  of  which  are  eligible  to  become  vested  at  the 
Effective  Time.  REBgold  and  Aquila  expect  to  enter  into  agreements  with  the  holders  of  all  of  the  outstanding 
REBgold RSUs prior to the Effective Time pursuant to which all entitlements under the outstanding REBgold RSUs, 
together with accrued and unpaid salary and fee obligations owing to certain of the holders of the REBgold RSUs, 
will be settled at or prior to the Effective Time in exchange for aggregate consideration consisting of $233,000 in 
cash, 795,000 Aquila Shares and 3,986,250 Aquila Options exercisable at $0.15 per share for five years from the 
Effective Date.
See “Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities - REBgold RSUs”.
The Arrangement Agreement
The Arrangement will be effected pursuant to the Arrangement Agreement.  The Arrangement Agreement contains 
covenants,  representations  and  warranties  of  and  from  each  of  REBgold  and  Aquila  and  various  conditions 
precedent, both mutual and in favour of each of REBgold and Aquila.
See “The Arrangement Agreement”.
The HMI Acquisition Agreement
The  HMI  Acquisition  will  be  effected  pursuant  to  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement.    The  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement contains covenants, representations and warranties of and from each of HudBay, REBgold and Aquila.  
The  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  also  contains  mutual  indemnities  from  HudBay  and  Aquila  that  will  apply 
following completion of the HMI Acquisition as well as various closing conditions, both mutual and in favour of 
each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold,  on  the  one  hand,  and  HudBay,  on  the  other  hand,  including  completion  of  the 
REBgold Financing and the Arrangement.
See “The HMI Acquisition Agreement”.
- 20 -
Support Agreements
REBgold Voting Agreements
Baker Steel and certain other REBgold Shareholders who collectively hold approximately 50% of the outstanding 
REBgold Shares as of the date of this Circular, have entered into REBgold Voting Agreements with REBgold and 
Aquila pursuant to which they have agreed, subject to the terms and conditions of the REBgold Voting Agreements, 
among other things:



to vote any REBgold Shares held by them in favour of the REBgold Resolutions;
not to dispose of any REBgold Shares other than pursuant to the Arrangement; and
to vote any REBgold Shares held by them against any Acquisition Proposal.
See “The Arrangement — Voting Agreements – REBgold Voting Agreements”.
Aquila Voting Agreements
HudBay and certain other Aquila Shareholders who collectively hold approximately 23% of the outstanding Aquila 
Shares  as  of  the  date  of  this  Circular,  have  entered  into  Aquila  Voting  Agreements  with  REBgold  and  Aquila 
pursuant to which they have agreed, subject to the terms and conditions of the Aquila Voting Agreements, among 
other things:



to vote the Aquila Shares controlled by them in favour of the Aquila Resolutions (other than, in the 
case of HudBay, the HMI Acquisition Resolution);
not to dispose of any Aquila Shares; and
to vote the Aquila Shares controlled by them against any Acquisition Proposal.
See “The Arrangement — Voting Agreements – Aquila Voting Agreements”.
Stock Exchange Listing
The Aquila Shares are currently listed on the TSX under the symbol “AQA”.  On November 6, 2013, the last trading 
day  on  which  Aquila  Shares  traded  prior  to  announcement  of  the  Arrangement,  the  closing  price  of  the  Aquila 
Shares was $0.095.
The REBgold Shares are currently listed on the TSXV under the symbol “RBG”.  On November 6, 2013, the last 
trading day on which REBgold Shares traded prior to announcement of the Arrangement, the closing price of the 
REBgold Shares was $0.06.
Aquila  has  applied  to  the  TSX  to  list  the  Consideration  Shares,  the  HMI  Acquisition  Shares,  the  REBgold 
Convertible Security Shares, the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Shares and the Aquila Shares underlying the 
Aquila  Options.    The  TSX  has  approved  the  listing  of  all  such  shares  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  customary 
conditions, including approval of the Aquila Resolutions at the Aquila Meeting. It is anticipated that the REBgold 
Shares will be delisted from the TSXV following completion of the Arrangement.
It is a mutual condition to the completion of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition that Aquila and REBgold 
shall have received the Stock Exchange Approvals.
See “Regulatory Matters – Stock Exchange Listing”.
- 21 -
Procedure for the Arrangement to Become Effective
Procedural Steps
The  Arrangement  requires  approval  by  the  Court  under  Section  192  of  the  CBCA.    Prior  to  the  mailing  of  this 
Circular, REBgold obtained the Interim Order providing for the calling and holding of the REBgold Meeting and 
other procedural matters.  A copy of the Interim Order is attached hereto as Appendix D.  A copy of the Petition 
applying for the Final Order is attached hereto as Appendix E.
In order for the Arrangement to become effective:


the Court must grant the Final Order approving the Arrangement; and
all conditions precedent to the Arrangement further described in the Arrangement Agreement must be 
satisfied or waived by the appropriate party.
If both of these steps are completed, the Arrangement will be completed at the Effective Time on the Effective Date. 
The Parties currently anticipate that the Effective Date will be on or about January 8, 2014.
REBgold Shareholder Approval
Approval  of  REBgold  Resolutions  by  the  REBgold  Shareholders  is  a  condition  precedent  to  completion  of  the 
Arrangement.
Aquila Shareholder Approval
Approval of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the HMI Acquisition Resolution by the Aquila Shareholders 
is a condition precedent to completion of the Arrangement.
See “The Arrangement — Court Approval and Completion of the Arrangement”.
Timing
If  the  requisite  shareholder,  court  and  regulatory  approvals  are  obtained  and  if  the  other  conditions  to  the 
Arrangement becoming effective are satisfied or waived, it is expected that the Arrangement will become effective 
on or about January 8, 2014.
Procedure for Exchange of REBgold Shares
The  REBgold  Letter  of  Transmittal  has  been  sent  to  registered  REBgold  Shareholders  with  this  Circular.  If  the 
Arrangement  becomes  effective,  in  order  to  receive  a  physical  certificate(s)  or  Direct  Registration  Advice 
representing  Aquila  Shares  in  exchange  for  the  deposited  REBgold  Shares  to  which  a  Depositing  REBgold 
Shareholder  is  entitled  under  the  Plan  of  Arrangement,  a  Depositing  REBgold  Shareholder  must  deliver  the 
REBgold Letter of Transmittal, properly completed and duly executed, together with certificate(s) representing the 
deposited  REBgold  Shares  and  all  other  required  documents  to  the  Depositary  at  the  address  set  forth  in  the 
REBgold Letter of Transmittal.
Additional copies of the REBgold Letter of Transmittal are available by contacting the Depositary, Trans Canada 
Transfer Inc. at 25 Adelaide Street East, Suite 1301, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3A1.
Dissent Rights
Registered REBgold Shareholders have Dissent Rights with respect to the REBgold Arrangement Resolution.  Each 
Dissenting Shareholder is entitled to be paid the fair value of all of the holder’s REBgold Shares, provided that the 
holder duly dissents to the REBgold Arrangement Resolution and the Arrangement becomes effective.
- 22 -
To exercise the Dissent Rights, written objection to the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must be sent to REBgold 
by registered REBgold Shareholders who wish to dissent not later than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto Time) on the date that is 
one  business  day  preceding  the  REBgold  Meeting  or  any  postponements  or  adjournments  thereof.    REBgold’s 
address for such purpose is REBgold, c/o Goodmans LLP, 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2S7, 
Attention: Michael Partridge.
The statutory provisions dealing with the right of dissent are technical and complex.  Any Dissenting Holders 
should seek independent legal advice, as failure to comply strictly with the provisions of Sections 190 to 192 of 
the CBCA may result in the loss of all Dissent Rights.
See “Dissent Rights”.
Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations
In general, the exchange of REBgold Shares for Aquila Shares under the Arrangement will not give rise to a capital 
gain (or capital loss) to a Canadian REBgold Shareholder unless such shareholder elects to report such capital gain 
or capital loss in its income tax return for the year in which the exchange occurs.
A Non-Resident REBgold Shareholder who participates in the Arrangement will also not be subject to tax under the 
Tax Act on any capital gain realized on the exchange of REBgold Shares for Aquila Shares provided that the shares 
disposed of are not “taxable Canadian property” of the Non-Resident Shareholder at the time of the exchange.
See “Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Considerations”.
REBgold Stated Capital Reduction
The REBgold Stated Capital Reduction is intended to reduce the stated capital of the REBgold Shares in an amount 
to be determined at the discretion of the REBgold Board.  A corresponding reduction will also be made to retained 
deficit  by  the  same  amount.    Stated  capital,  within  the  meaning  of  the  CBCA,  is  comprised  of  the  aggregate 
cumulative  consideration  received  by  REBgold  for  all  of  the  REBgold  Shares  issued  by  it  since  incorporation, 
subject to any adjustments made upon the issuance of REBgold Shares for other than cash consideration.
The  REBgold  Stated  Capital  Reduction  is  intended  to  address  a  technical  requirement  necessary  to  facilitate  the 
completion  of  the  Arrangement.    It  is  anticipated  that,  after  giving  effect  to  the  Arrangement  and  the  other 
transactions contemplated hereby, the REBgold Stated Capital Reduction would not result in any material adverse 
effect to REBgold, Aquila or their shareholders.
See “REBgold Special Business - REBgold Stated Capital Reduction”.
REBgold Financing
Pursuant to the REBgold Financing, REBgold intends to complete a non-brokered private placement of REBgold 
Shares prior to the Effective Time for gross proceeds of a minimum of $4 million and a maximum of $6 million at a 
price  of  $0.13  per  share.    Baker  Steel  has  agreed  to  subscribe  for  $4.5 million  of  the  REBgold  Shares  offered 
through the REBgold Financing.
Baker  Steel  is  a  “related  party”  of  REBgold  under  MI 61-101.    Accordingly,  Baker  Steel’s  participation  in  the 
REBgold Financing must be approved by REBgold Shareholders pursuant to the REBgold Financing Resolution.
See “REBgold Special Business - REBgold Financing”.
Risk Factors
There  are  a  number  of  risk  factors  relating  to  the  Transactions,  REBgold’s  business  and  Aquila’s  business  that 
should be carefully considered by Aquila Shareholders and REBgold Shareholders.
See “Risk Factors Relating to the Transactions”.
- 23 -
REBGOLD CORPORATION
REBgold was incorporated on February 13, 1997 under the CBCA.  REBgold’s principal and head office is located 
at  50  Richmond  Street,  Suite  300,  Toronto,  Ontario,  M5C  1N7.    REBgold’s  auditors  are  MNP,  LLP,  Chartered 
Accountants.
The REBgold Shares are listed on the TSXV under the ticker symbol “RBG”.
REBgold is a natural resource company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of gold and other 
mineral resource properties in Finland and elsewhere.
Information Respecting Directors and Officers
The names of the directors and officers of REBgold, the positions held by them with REBgold and the number of 
REBgold Shares and REBgold Options beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, or over which control or direction 
is  exercised  by  each  of  them  and,  where  known,  after  reasonable  enquiry,  by  their  respective  associates,  are  as 
follows:
Securities of REBgold Beneficially Owned, Directly or Indirectly or
over which Control or Direction is Exercised(1)
Name
Position with REBgold
M. Ross Orr 
Mark Burridge
Peter Secker 
Stephen Fabian 
Luke Leslie(3) 
Louis Nagy
Director 
Chairman, Acting CEO 
and President 
Director 
Director 
Director 
Chief Financial Officer
REBgold 
Shares
215,201
322,000
–
484,143 
1,850,000 
88,700
% REBgold
Shares
Outstanding
0.8%
1.2%
–
1.8% 
6.7% 
0.3%
REBgold 
Options
255,000
425,000
185,000 
155,000 
100,000 
212,500
% REBgold
Options
Outstanding(2)
12.1%
20.1%
8.8% 
7.3% 
4.7% 
10.1%
Notes: 
(1)  The  information  as  to  securities  of  REBgold  beneficially  owned  or  over  which  control  or  direction  is  exercised,  not  being  within  the
knowledge of REBgold, has been furnished by the respective directors and officers.
(2)  As at December 2, 2013, there were 2,112,500 REBgold Options outstanding. 
(3)  Mr. Leslie is the portfolio manager of China Commodities Absolute Return Fund which owns 6.7% of the REBgold Shares.
Trading Price and Volume of REBgold Shares
The closing price of the REBgold Shares on the TSXV on November 6, 2013 being the last trading day prior to 
announcement of the Transactions, was $0.06.  The following table sets forth, for the calendar periods indicated, the 
intraday high and low sale prices and composite volume of trading of the REBgold Shares as reported on the TSXV.
November 1 – November 30, 2012 
December 1 – December 31, 2013 
January 1 – January 31, 2013 
February 1 – February 28, 2013 
March 1 – March 31, 2013 
April 1 – April 30, 2013 
May 1 – May 31, 2013 
June 1 – June 30, 2013
Price Range ($)
High 
0.12 
0.11 
0.12 
0.09 
0.10 
0.10 
0.09 
0.10
Low 
0.08 
0.08 
0.09 
0.08 
0.04 
0.03 
0.05 
0.05
Volume 
73,706 
38,683 
28,300 
53,355 
192,376 
154,151 
65,816 
70,333
- 24 -
July 1 – July 31, 2013 
August 1 – August 31, 2013 
September 1 – September 30, 2013 
October 1 – October 31, 2013 
November 1 – November 29
Prior Sales
Price Range ($)
High 
0.09 
0.08 
0.07 
0.10 
0.135
Low 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.05 
0.06
Volume 
12,401 
33,400 
19,750 
45,576 
525,275
The following table summarizes the issuances of REBgold Shares, REBgold Convertible Debentures and REBgold 
Options granted by REBgold within the 12 months prior to the date of this Circular.
Price per REBgold Share / 
Conversion Price of REBgold
Convertible Debentures / Exercise
Price per REBgold Option
Date of Sale 
August 16, 2013 
June 24, 2013 
April 29, 2013
Available Information
($) 
0.12 
0.12 
0.15
Number of Securities
Reasons for Issuance
697,500 options 
7,394,334 common shares 
$510,000 principal amount 
convertible debentures
Compensation
Financing 
Financing
REBgold  files  reports  and  other  information  with  Canadian  Securities  Administrators.    These  reports  and 
information are available to the public free of charge on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
Risk Factors
The business and operations of REBgold are subject to risks.  In addition to considering the other information in this 
Circular,  Aquila  Shareholders  should  consider  carefully  the  contingencies  set  forth  REBgold’s  management’s 
discussion  and  analysis  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2012  and  the  nine  months  ended  September  30,  2013, 
which are incorporated by reference herein.
REBgold Documents Incorporated by Reference
The following documents filed by REBgold with the securities commission or similar authority in the provinces of 
British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Ontario are specifically incorporated by reference in this Circular:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the  audited  consolidated  annual  financial  statements  of  REBgold  as  at  and  for  the  years  ended 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, together with the notes thereto and the auditors’ report thereon;
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results of REBgold for 
the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011;
the unaudited consolidated financial statements of REBgold as at and for the nine month periods 
ended September 30, 2013 and 2012, together with the notes thereto;
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results of REBgold for 
the nine month periods ending September 30, 2013 and 2012;
REBgold’s  management  information  circular  dated  May  13,  2013  with  respect  to  the  annual 
general and special meeting of REBgold Shareholders held on June 17, 2013; and
- 25 -
(f)
the material change report of REBgold dated November 15, 2013 in respect of the announcement 
of the Arrangement.
Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein shall 
be  deemed to  be  modified or  superseded,  for the  purposes of this Circular, to  the  extent that  a  statement 
contained herein, or in any other subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated 
by reference herein, modifies or supersedes such statement.  The modifying or superseding statement need 
not state that it has modified or superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in 
the document that it modifies or supersedes.  The making of a modifying or superseding statement shall not 
be  deemed  to  be  an  admission  for  any  purposes  that  the  modified  or  superseded  statement,  when  made, 
constituted a misrepresentation, an untrue statement of a material fact or an omission to state a material fact 
that  is  required  to  be  stated  or  that  is  necessary  to  make  a  statement  not  misleading  in  light  of  the 
circumstances in which it was made.  Any statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed, in its 
unmodified or non-superseded form, to constitute a part of this Circular.
Copies  of  the  documents  incorporated  herein  by  reference  may  be  obtained  on  request  without  charge  from  the 
Corporate  Secretary  of  REBgold  at  50  Richmond  Street  East,  Suite  300,  Toronto,  Ontario,  M5C 1N7.    These 
documents are also available through the internet on SEDAR that can be accessed at www.sedar.com.
REBGOLD AFTER THE TRANSACTIONS
If the Transactions are completed REBgold will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Aquila which will carry on 
the combined businesses of REBgold and Aquila, including ownership of 100% of the Back Forty Project, as “New 
Aquila”.  New Aquila will continue to be a publicly traded company listed on the TSX and a reporting issuer in 
British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Nova Scotia.  New Aquila’s registered and head office will 
be located at 50 Richmond Street East, Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 1N7.  The auditors of Aquila will act as 
the auditors for New Aquila following the Arrangement.  See Appendix A “Information Concerning New Aquila”.
New Aquila will be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive Officer of 
Aquila,  will  continue  in  this  capacity  and  lead  the  management  team  that  will  also  include  Louis  Nagy,  Chief 
Financial  Officer,  Coen  Louwarts,  Vice-President-Corporate  Development,  Thomas  Quigley,  Vice-President-
Exploration and Senior Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  
Mark  Burridge,  current  Chairman  of  REBgold  will  also  Chair  the  new  board,  in  addition  to  providing  advisory 
support  to  the  management  team  in  areas  of  business  development  and  corporate  finance.    The  Board  will  also 
include  Barry  Hildred,  two  existing  members  of  the  Aquila  board  of  directors  (Peter  Bradshaw  and  Edward 
Munden), two existing members of the REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new 
director, Ed Guimaraes.
See Appendix A to this Circular for additional information in respect of New Aquila and Schedule 1 to Appendix A 
to this Circular for the unaudited pro forma financial statements of New Aquila.
AQUILA RESOURCES INC.
Aquila was incorporated on February 17, 1997 under the OBCA.  Aquila’s principal and head office is located at 65 
Queen Street West, Suite 530, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2M5.  Aquila’s auditors are Collins Barrow LLP.
The Aquila Shares are listed on the TSX under the ticker symbol “AQA”.
Aquila is a natural resource company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of the Back Forty 
Project and other mineral resource properties in the United States.
Information Respecting Directors and Officers
The names of the directors and officers of Aquila, the positions held by them with Aquila and the number of Aquila 
Shares  and  options  to  acquire  Aquila  Shares  beneficially  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  or  over  which  control  or
- 26 -
direction is exercised by each of them and, where known, after reasonable enquiry, by their respective associates, are 
as follows:
Securities of Aquila Beneficially Owned, Directly or Indirectly or
over which Control or Direction is Exercised(1)
Name
Position with Aquila
Aquila Shares
% Aquila 
Shares
Outstanding
Edward Munden 
Peter Bradshaw
Thomas Quigley
William J. West
Barry Hildred
Robin E. Dunbar
Director 
Chairman
Director
Director
Chief Executive Officer
Director and Chief 
Financial Officer
516,612 
500,000
1,134,507
4,322,768
1,358,693
665,476
0.53% 
0.51%
1.16%
4.41%
1.39%
0.68%
Aquila 
Options
650,000 
700,000 
1,200,000
600,000
1,000,000(3)
725,000
% Aquila 
Options
Outstanding(2)
12% 
12.96%
22.22%
11.11%
18.52%
13.43%
Notes: 
(1)  The  information  as  to  securities  of  Aquila  beneficially  owned  or  over  which  control  or  direction  is  exercised,  not  being  within  the
knowledge of Aquila, has been furnished by the respective directors and officers.
(2)  As at November 12, 2013, there were 5,400,000 Aquila Options outstanding. 
(3)  Vesting over 2 years starting March 2013 / 333,333 vested to date.
Trading Price and Volume of Aquila Shares
The closing price of the Aquila Shares on the TSX on November 6, 2013, being the last trading day prior to the 
announcement of the Transactions was $0.095 per share.  The following table sets forth, for the calendar periods 
indicated, the intraday high and low sale prices and composite volume of trading of the Aquila Shares as reported on 
the TSX.
November 1 – November 30, 2012 
December 1 – December 31, 2013 
January 1 – January 31, 2013 
February 1 – February 28, 2013 
March 1 – March 31, 2013 
April 1 – April 30, 2013 
May 1 – May 31, 2013 
June 1 – June 30, 2013 
July 1 – July 31, 2013 
August 1 – August 31, 2013 
September 1 – September 30, 2013 
October 1 – October 31, 2013 
November 1 – November 29, 2013
Price Range ($)
High 
0.22 
0.195 
0.18 
0.20 
0.175 
0.16 
0.14 
0.12 
0.11 
0.11 
0.105 
0.11 
0.165
Low 
0.155 
0.135 
0.13 
0.13 
0.115 
0.10 
0.085 
0.085 
0.075 
0.08 
0.08 
0.08 
0.095
Volume 
428,996 
1,184,581 
477,313 
439,444 
349,891 
1,020,800 
706,944 
307,196 
445,554 
409,555 
379,134 
467,737 
3,100,341
- 27 -
Prior Sales
The following table summarizes the issuances of Aquila Shares and Aquila Options granted by Aquila within the 12 
months prior to the date of this Circular.
Price per Aquila Share or 
Aquila Warrant / Exercise 
Price per Aquila Option
($) 
0.135 
0.123 
0.10 
0.10 
0.096 
0.10 
0.92 
0.10 
0.081 
0.104 
0.91 
0.102
Date of Sale 
26-April-13 
30-April-13 
17-May-13 
21-May-13 
31-May-13 
21-June-13 
17-July-2013 
16-August-13 
27-August-13 
4-September-13 
1-October-13 
5-November-13
Available Information
Number of securities
Reasons for issuance
36,906 
81,278 
3,565,000 
1,625,000 
103,862 
700,000 
108,186 
506,035 
123,623 
95,995 
110,492 
98,351
Compensation 
Compensation
Financing 
Financing
Compensation
Financing
Compensation
Third Party Payment
Compensation 
Compensation 
Compensation 
Compensation
Aquila files reports and other information with Canadian Securities Administrators.  These reports and information 
are available to the public free of charge on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
Risk Factors
The business and operations of Aquila are subject to risks.  In addition to considering the other information in this 
Circular,  REBgold  Shareholders  should  consider  carefully  the  contingencies  set  forth  Aquila’s  management’s 
discussion and analysis for the year ended December 31, 2012 and the nine months ended September 30, 2013 and 
in Aquila’s annual information form dated March 28, 2013, which are incorporated by reference herein.
Aquila Documents Incorporated by Reference
The following documents filed by Aquila with the securities commission or similar authority in the provinces of 
British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Nova Scotia are specifically incorporated by reference in this 
Circular:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the  audited  consolidated  annual  financial  statements  of  Aquila  as  at  and  for  the  years  ended 
December 31, 2012 and 2011, together with the notes thereto and the auditors’ report thereon;
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results of Aquila for 
the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011;
the  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  of  Aquila  as  at  and  for  the  nine  month  periods 
ended September 30, 2013 and 2012, together with the notes thereto;
management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results of Aquila for 
the nine month periods ending September 30, 2013 and 2012;
the annual information form of Aquila dated March 28, 2013;
- 28 -
(f)
(g)
Aquila’s management information circular dated May 21, 2013 with respect to the annual general 
and special meeting of Aquila Shareholders held on June 25, 2013; and
the material change report of Aquila dated November 15, 2013 in respect of the announcement of 
the Arrangement.
Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein shall 
be  deemed to  be  modified or  superseded,  for the  purposes of this Circular, to  the  extent that  a  statement 
contained herein, or in any other subsequently filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated 
by reference herein, modifies or supersedes such statement.  The modifying or superseding statement need 
not state that it has modified or superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in 
the document that it modifies or supersedes.  The making of a modifying or superseding statement shall not 
be  deemed  to  be  an  admission  for  any  purposes  that  the  modified  or  superseded  statement,  when  made, 
constituted a misrepresentation, an untrue statement of a material fact or an omission to state a material fact 
that  is  required  to  be  stated  or  that  is  necessary  to  make  a  statement  not  misleading  in  light  of  the 
circumstances in which it was made.  Any statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed, in its 
unmodified or non-superseded form, to constitute a part of this Circular.
Copies  of  the  documents  incorporated  herein  by  reference  may  be  obtained  on  request  without  charge  from  the 
Corporate Secretary of Aquila at 65 Queen Street West, Suite 530, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2M5.  These documents 
are also available through the internet on SEDAR that can be accessed at www.sedar.com.
HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC.
HMI  was  incorporated  on  August  25,  2009  as  a  Michigan  corporation.    HMI  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of 
HudBay and holds HudBay’s 51% interest in the Back Forty Joint Venture.  HMI does not conduct any business 
other than holding HudBay’s interest in the Back Forty Venture.
As of December 2, 2013,  518 common shares of HMI were issued and outstanding.
See Appendix J to this Circular for HMI’s audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 
31,  2012  and  2011  and  the  nine  months  ended  September  30,  2013.    See  Appendix K  to  this  Circular  for  the 
discussion and analysis of those financial statements prepared by Aquila and REBgold.  HudBay was not involved 
in the preparation, and is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness, of such discussion and analysis.
AQUILA AFTER THE TRANSACTIONS
If the Transactions are completed, New Aquila will continue to be a publicly traded company listed on the TSX and 
a reporting issuer in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Nova Scotia.  New Aquila’s registered 
and head office will be located at 50 Richmond Street East, Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 1N7.  The current 
auditors of Aquila will act as the auditors for New Aquila following the Arrangement.
New Aquila will assume the business of REBgold.  See Appendix A “Information Concerning New Aquila”.
The New Aquila will be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive Officer of 
Aquila,  will  continue  in  this  capacity  and  lead  the  management  team  that  will  also  include  Louis  Nagy,  Chief 
Financial  Officer,  Coen  Louwarts,  Vice-President-Corporate  Development,  Thomas  Quigley,  Vice-President-
Exploration and Senior Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  
Mark  Burridge,  current  Chairman  of  REBgold  will  also  Chair  the  new  board,  in  addition  to  providing  advisory 
support  to  the  management  team  in  areas  of  business  development  and  corporate  finance.    The  Board  will  also 
include  Barry  Hildred,  two  existing  members  of  the  Aquila  board  of  directors  (Peter  Bradshaw  and  Edward 
Munden), two existing members of the REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new 
director, Ed Guimaraes.
See Appendix A to this Circular for additional information in respect of New Aquila and Schedule 1 to Appendix A 
to this Circular for the unaudited pro forma financial statements of New Aquila.
- 29 -
COMPARISON OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS BETWEEN THE CBCA AND THE OBCA
REBgold was incorporated under and is governed by the CBCA.  Aquila was incorporated under and is governed by 
the OBCA.  Accordingly, if the Arrangement is completed, shareholders of REBgold will become shareholders of an 
OBCA governed entity.  Although the rights of shareholders under the OBCA are in many instances comparable to 
those under the CBCA, there are certain differences. See Appendix I – “Comparison of Shareholder Rights Between 
the CBCA and the OBCA” to this Circular for a comparison of these rights.
Background to the Transactions
THE ARRANGEMENT
The Arrangement is the result of negotiations between representatives of Aquila and REBgold and their respective 
advisors  and  the  HMI  Acquisition  is  the  result  of  negotiations  between  representatives  of  Aquila,  REBgold  and 
HudBay and their respective advisors.  The following is a summary of the background leading up to the execution of 
the Arrangement Agreement and the HMI Acquisition Agreement and the public announcement of the Transactions.
Aquila  and  REBgold  are  both  junior  mining  exploration  and development  companies.    Aquila  has  most  recently 
been focused on the exploration and development of its principal asset, the Back Forty Project and REBgold has 
most recently been focused on the exploration and development of its joint venture properties in Finland.
Over  the  past  10  years,  Aquila  and  various  venture  partners  have  spent  more  than  $60  million  exploring  and 
advancing  the  Back  Forty  Project.    HudBay  first  became  involved  in  the  Back  Forty  Project  in  2009  and  has 
operated the Back Forty Joint Venture since March 2012.  In July 2012, HudBay announced that it was ceasing the 
funding  of  development  activities  at  the  Back  Forty  Project.    Since  then,  both  Aquila  and  HudBay  considered  a 
range of potential structures and transactions that might allow development of the Back Forty Project to continue 
but,  until  the  Transactions,  none  of  those  opportunities  or  transactions  ultimately  proved  compelling  enough  to 
pursue beyond the investigation and discussion stage.
Over the past two years, REBgold has considered a number of potential transactions and investment opportunities 
that  would  expand  the  number  of  its  projects  and  none  of  those  opportunities  or  transactions  ultimately  proved 
compelling enough to pursue beyond the investigation and discussion stage, until the Transactions.
In December 2012, REBgold identified the Back Forty Project as a project that it was interested in pursuing as part 
of its business development activities.  In January 2013, REBgold contacted HudBay to determine if there was an 
opportunity for REBgold to acquire the Back Forty Project.  Shortly thereafter, REBgold contacted Aquila and made 
similar inquiries of it.
In  February  2013,  HudBay,  Aquila  and  REBgold  entered  into  a  mutual  non-disclosure  agreement  in  order  to 
facilitate further discussions and the exchange of confidential information.  REBgold then conducted site visits at the 
Back Forty Project and reviewed various information regarding the Back Forty Project and Aquila and REBgold 
also  undertook  confidential  discussions  with  HudBay  with  respect  to  the  acquisition  of  HudBay’s  interest  in  the 
Back Forty Project.
In  March  2013,  Aquila  hired  Barry  Hildred  as  its  new  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  in  April  2013  REBgold 
approached  Aquila  to  discuss  a  potential  transaction  involving  REBgold  acquiring  Aquila.    After  preliminary 
discussions regarding this proposal, both companies spent the next few months pursuing other potential transactions.
Over the summer of 2013, Aquila and REBgold resumed discussions regarding a potential business combination 
transaction involving the two companies and REBgold and Aquila began discussions with Baker Steel regarding 
Baker Steel providing financing for the combined company.  In August 2013, Aquila and REBgold entered into a 
non-binding letter that contemplated a transaction involving a merger of REBgold’s business into Aquila by way of 
a share exchange transaction.  Aquila and REBgold also entered into a mutual non-disclosure agreement to facilitate 
the exchange of confidential information between the two companies and began discussing a potential acquisition of 
HudBay’s 51% interest in the Back Forty Project with HudBay.
- 30 -
In September 2013, Aquila, REBgold and HudBay negotiated and entered into a non-binding letter of intent with 
respect to the acquisition of HudBay’s 51% interest in the Back Forty Project by Aquila in conjunction with the 
Arrangement.    Over  the  balance  of  September,  October  and  the  first  week  of  November  of  2013,  Aquila  and 
REBgold, together with their respective advisors, conducted a due diligence review of each other and negotiated the 
terms of the Arrangement Agreement and the Plan of Arrangement.  At the same time, REBgold continued its due 
diligence review of the Back Forty Project and discussions with Baker Steel, and Aquila, REBgold and HudBay, 
together with their respective advisors, negotiated the terms of the HMI Acquisition Agreement.  In early October 
2013, Baker Steel delivered a preliminary commitment to provide financing to Aquila and REBgold in connection 
with their proposed business combination, subject to completion of satisfactory due diligence, satisfactory terms of 
the business combination and acquisition of HMI and various other conditions.
On November 4, 2013, the REBgold Board met to consider the results of REBgold’s due diligence review of Aquila, 
the Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing.  REBgold’s legal advisors reviewed the terms 
of the Arrangement Agreement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing with the REBgold Board.  Clarus 
participated  in  the  meeting  and  orally  presented  its  conclusions  as  to  the  fairness  of  the  Arrangement,  from  a 
financial  point  of view,  to  the  REBgold  Shareholders.   On  November  6,  2013,  after  careful  consideration  of  the 
Clarus Fairness Opinion, the proposed Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing, including, 
among other things, the terms of the Arrangement Agreement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing and 
the impact of the proposed transactions on the various stakeholders of REBgold, the REBgold Board unanimously 
approved,  subject  to  the  finalization  of  definitive  agreements,  the  execution  and  delivery  of  the  Arrangement 
Agreement, the HMI Acquisition Agreement and the REBgold Financing.  The REBgold Board also resolved to 
recommend that REBgold Shareholders vote in favour of the REBgold Resolutions.
On November 5, 2013, the Aquila Board met to consider the results of Aquila’s due diligence review of REBgold, 
the Arrangement, the HMI Acquisition and the REBgold Financing.  Aquila’s legal advisors reviewed the terms of 
the Arrangement Agreement, the HMI Acquisition Agreement and the REBgold Financing with the Aquila Board.  
Jennings participated  in  the meeting  and presented  its  conclusions  as  to  the fairness of  the Arrangement,  from  a 
financial point of view, to the Aquila Shareholders and as to the fair market value of the Back Forty Project.  After 
careful  consideration  of  the  Jennings  Formal  Valuation  and  the  Jennings  Fairness  Opinion  and  the  proposed 
Arrangement,  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  REBgold  Financing,  including,  among  other  things,  the  terms  of  the 
Arrangement  Agreement,  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  and  the  REBgold  Financing  and  the  impact  of  the 
proposed  transactions  on  Aquila  and  its  shareholders,  the  Aquila  Board  unanimously  approved,  subject  to  the 
finalization  of  definitive  agreements,  the  execution  and  delivery  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  the  HMI 
Acquisition Agreement.  The Aquila Board also resolved at such meeting to recommend that Aquila Shareholders 
vote in favour of the Aquila Resolutions.
On November 7, 2013, (i) REBgold and Aquila executed and delivered the Arrangement Agreement, (ii) REBgold, 
Aquila  and  HudBay  executed  and  delivered  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  (iii) the  Aquila  Locked-Up 
Shareholders  executed  and  delivered  the  Aquila  Voting  Agreements,  (iv) the  REBgold  Locked-Up  Shareholders 
executed and delivered the REBgold Voting Agreements and (v) Baker Steel executed and delivered its commitment 
to participate in the REBgold Financing.  REBgold and Aquila then issued a joint press release that day announcing 
the Transactions.
Effect of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition
On completion of the Arrangement, each REBgold Shareholder (other than those REBgold Shareholders who have 
validly exercised their Dissent Rights) will exchange each of his, her or its REBgold Shares held at the Effective 
Time for one Aquila Share.
Following completion of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition:

the Aquila Shares will continue to trade on the TSX;
  REBgold Shares will be delisted from trading on the TSXV and REBgold will cease to be a reporting
issuer in Canada;
- 31 -
  REBgold will  be  a wholly-owned subsidiary  of New  Aquila  and  the  current  REBgold  Shareholders
would become Aquila Shareholders;
  New Aquila will carry on REBgold’s business and will indirectly own 100% of the Back Forty Project;
and
  New Aquila will be led by Mark Burridge and Barry Hildred.  Barry Hildred, current Chief Executive 
Officer of Aquila, will continue in this capacity and lead the management team that will also include 
Louis Nagy, Chief Financial Officer, Coen Louwarts, Vice-President-Corporate Development, Thomas 
Quigley, Vice-President-Exploration and Senior Technical Advisor to the Back Forty Project, and Paul 
Miller, Vice-President-Metallurgy.  Mark Burridge, current Chairman of REBgold will also Chair the 
new  board,  in  addition  to  providing  advisory  support  to  the  management  team  in  areas  of  business 
development and corporate finance.  The Board will also include Barry Hildred, two existing members 
of the Aquila board of directors (Peter Bradshaw and Edward Munden), two existing members of the 
REBgold board of directors (Peter Secker and Stephen Fabian) and one new director, Ed Guimaraes.
Recommendation of the REBgold Board
Approval of the REBgold Resolutions by the REBgold Shareholders is a condition precedent to completion of the 
Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition.    See  “The  Arrangement  Agreement  -  Conditions  Precedent  to  the 
Arrangement” and “The HMI Acquisition Agreement - Conditions Precedent to the HMI Acquisition”.
The REBgold Board retained Clarus to provide the Clarus Fairness Opinion.  Clarus has given the Clarus Fairness 
Opinion to the effect that as of the date thereof, and based upon and subject to the scope of the review, analyses 
undertaken and various assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion, the consideration to be 
received by REBgold Shareholders pursuant to the Arrangement is fair, from a financial point of view, to REBgold 
Shareholders.
The REBgold Board, having taking into account the Clarus Fairness Opinion and such other matters as it considered 
relevant, has unanimously determined that proceeding with the Arrangement and the REBgold Financing are in the 
best interest of REBgold.
To be effective, the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must each 
be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the votes cast on the 
REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution, as applicable, by all REBgold 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative  vote  of  a  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  by  all  REBgold 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding Baker Steel, present in person or represented by proxy at the 
REBgold Meeting.
The REBgold Board unanimously recommends that REBgold Shareholders vote FOR each of the REBgold 
Resolutions.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of REBgold in 
the REBgold Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the REBgold Resolutions.
See “The Arrangement – REBgold Shareholder Approval”, “The Arrangement – Recommendation of the REBgold 
Board” and “The Arrangement - Clarus Fairness Opinion”.
Recommendation of the Aquila Board
Approval of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the HMI Acquisition Resolution by the Aquila Shareholders 
is  a  condition  precedent  to  completion  of  the  Arrangement  and  the  HMI  Acquisition.    See  “The  Arrangement 
Agreement  -Conditions  Precedent  to  the  Arrangement”  and  “The  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  -  Conditions 
Precedent to the HMI Acquisition”.
- 32 -
The Aquila Board retained Jennings to provide the Jennings Fairness Opinion and the Jennings Formal Valuation.  
Jennings has given the Jennings Fairness Opinion to the effect that as of the date thereof, and based upon and subject 
to the scope of the review, analyses undertaken and various assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in 
its opinion, the Arrangement is fair from a financial point of view to the Aquila Shareholders.  Jennings is also of the 
opinion  that,  as  of  the  date  of  the  Jennings  Formal  Valuation,  and  subject  to  the  assumptions,  limitations  and 
qualifications contained therein, the fair market value of the Back Forty Project is in the range of $45 million to 
$56 million.
The Aquila Board, having taking into account the Jennings Fairness Opinion, the Jennings Formal Valuation and 
such other matters as it considered relevant, has unanimously determined that proceeding with the Transactions is in 
the best interest of Aquila.
To be effective, the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the 
affirmative vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution by all Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  by  all  Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding HudBay, present in person or represented by proxy at the 
Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Stock  Option  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Stock Option Resolution, by all Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding those directors, officers and eligible service providers who 
will receive the stock options being approved, present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or 
without  variation,  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  Aquila  Debt 
Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution,  by  all  Aquila  Shareholders  voting  as  a  single  class,  excluding 
those  directors,  officers  and  eligible  service  providers  who  will  receive  the  Aquila  Shares  being  approved, 
present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
The  Aquila  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  each  of  the  Aquila 
Resolutions.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of such resolutions.
See  “The  Arrangement  –  Aquila  Shareholder  Approval”,  “The  Arrangement  –  Recommendation  of  the  Aquila 
Board”, “The HMI Acquisition - Aquila Shareholder Approval”, “The HMI Acquisition - Recommendations of the 
Aquila  Board”,  “The  Arrangement  –Jennings  Fairness  Opinion”,  and  “The  HMI  Acquisition  -  Jennings  Formal 
Valuation”.
Clarus Fairness Opinion
Clarus was engaged by REBgold pursuant to an engagement letter dated October 29, 2013 to provide the Clarus 
Fairness Opinion.  Clarus delivered its opinion to the REBgold Board to the effect that, as of November 7, 2013, and 
based upon and subject to the assumptions, limitations, qualifications and other matters stated in the Clarus Fairness 
Opinion,  Clarus  is  of  the opinion  that  the  consideration under  the Arrangement  is  fair,  from  a  financial  point  of 
view, to REBgold Shareholders.  A copy of the Clarus Fairness Opinion is attached as Appendix F.
Clarus is a Canadian investment banking firm with operations in a broad range of investment banking activities, 
including corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions, equity sales and trading, and investment research. Clarus is a 
member  of  the  Investment  Industry  Regulatory  Organization  of  Canada  (formerly  the  Investment  Dealers 
Association  of  Canada),  the  Canadian  Investor  Protection  Fund  and  a  participating  organization  of  the  Toronto 
Stock Exchange.  Clarus is registered as a broker and investment dealer in British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario and 
Quebec.
- 33 -
The  Clarus  Fairness  Opinion  is  not  intended  to  be  and  does  not  constitute  a  recommendation  to  REBgold 
Shareholders  with  respect  to  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution.  The  REBgold  Board  urges  REBgold 
Shareholders to read the Clarus Fairness Opinion carefully and in its entirety.
The full text of the Clarus Fairness Opinion, which sets forth the assumptions made, general procedures followed, 
matters considered and limitations on the review undertaken by Clarus, is reproduced as Appendix F to this Circular.  
The Clarus Fairness Opinion should be read in its entirety by REBgold Shareholders.  This summary of the Clarus 
Fairness Opinion is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Clarus Fairness Opinion.  REBgold has 
agreed to pay Clarus a fee for providing its opinion which fee is not contingent on the conclusions reached in the 
Clarus Fairness Opinion or the successful completion of the Arrangement.  REBgold has also agreed to indemnify 
Clarus in respect of certain liabilities that may be incurred by Clarus in connection with the provision of its services.
Jennings Fairness Opinion
Jennings was engaged by Aquila pursuant to an engagement letter dated October 21, 2013 to provide the Jennings 
Fairness Opinion.  Jennings delivered its opinion to the Aquila Board to the effect that, as of November 7, 2013, and 
based  upon  and  subject  to  the  assumptions,  limitations,  qualifications  and  other  matters  stated  in  the  Jennings 
Fairness Opinion, Jennings is of the opinion that the consideration under the Arrangement is fair, from a financial 
point of view, to Aquila Shareholders.  A copy of the Jennings Fairness Opinion is attached as Appendix F.
In rendering the Jennings Fairness Opinion, Jennings relied, without independent verification, on financial and other 
information  that  was  obtained  by  Jennings  from  public  sources,  senior  management  of  Aquila,  Aquila  and  their 
respective  affiliates,  associates,  advisors  or  otherwise.    Jennings  assumed  that  this  information  was  complete, 
accurate and fairly presented.
Jennings is a fully licensed, full service, independent investment banking firm with offices in Toronto and Calgary 
and with operations in corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions, equity sales and trading and investment research. 
Jennings  is  a  member  of  the  Investment  Industry  Regulatory  Organization  of  Canada  (formerly  the  Investment 
Dealers Association of Canada), the Canadian Investor Protection Fund, a participating organization of the Toronto 
Stock  Exchange  and  of  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange.    The  Jennings  Fairness  Opinion  represents  the  opinion  of 
Jennings and the form and content herein have been approved for release by a committee of its directors, each of 
whom is experienced in merger, acquisition, divestiture and fairness opinion matters.
The Jennings Fairness Opinion does not constitute a recommendation to Aquila Shareholders with respect to the 
Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution.    The  Aquila  Board  urges  Aquila  Shareholders  to  read  the  Jennings  Fairness 
Opinion carefully and in its entirety.
The full text of the Jennings Fairness Opinion, which sets forth the assumptions made, general procedures followed, 
matters  considered  and  limitations  on  the  review  undertaken  by  Jennings,  is  reproduced  as  Appendix F  to  this 
Circular.  The Jennings Fairness Opinion should be read in its entirety by Aquila Shareholders.  This summary of the 
Jennings Fairness Opinion is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Jennings Fairness Opinion.  
Aquila has agreed to pay Jennings a fee for providing its opinion which fee is not contingent on the conclusions 
reached in the Jennings Fairness Opinion or the successful completion of the Arrangement.  Aquila has also agreed 
to  indemnify  Jennings  in  respect  of  certain  liabilities  that  may  be  incurred  by  Jennings  in  connection  with  the 
provision of its services.
Reasons for the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition
The directors of REBgold and Aquila believe that the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition are in the best interests 
of REBgold and Aquila, respectively, and will have the following benefits:


a  strong  board  and  leadership  team  with  experience  in  mine  development,  operations,  and  capital 
markets;
strategic investor backing from Baker Steel and a supportive significant shareholder in HudBay;
- 34 -




100%  ownership  of  the  high-grade,  poly-metallic  Back  Forty  Project,  located  in  the  Great  Lakes 
Region;
100% ownership of the Bend Copper-Gold project, a VMS deposit located in the Great Lakes Region;
100%  ownership  of  the  Reef  Gold  project,  a  high-grade  deposit  potentially  amenable  to  open-pit 
mining;
a highly prospective joint venture in Finland with established resources; and
  REBgold’s metallurgical capabilities and proprietary bioleaching technology.
Description of the Arrangement
The following description of the Arrangement is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Plan of 
Arrangement, a copy of which is attached as Schedule B to the Arrangement Agreement and which is attached as 
Appendix B to this Circular.
If all of the conditions to completion of the Arrangement are satisfied or, where permitted, waived, the Arrangement 
will become effective at the Effective Time.  At the Effective Time, without any further act or formality, each of the 
events set out below shall occur and shall be deemed to occur in the following sequence:



each REBgold Share in respect of which an REBgold Shareholder has validly exercised his, her or its 
Dissent Rights shall be directly transferred and assigned by such Dissenting Holder to Aquila and such 
Dissenting Holders shall cease to be the holders of such REBgold Shares and to have any rights as 
REBgold Shareholders other than the right to be paid fair value for such REBgold Shares pursuant to 
the Dissent Rights;
each REBgold Share (other than any REBgold Shares in respect of which an REBgold Shareholder has 
validly  exercised  his,  her  or  its  Dissent  Rights)  shall  be  transferred  to  Aquila  in  exchange  for  one 
Aquila Share; and
each REBgold Option which is outstanding and has not been duly exercised prior to the Effective Date 
shall  be  exchanged  for  a  fully  vested  Replacement  Option  to  purchase  one  Aquila  Share.    Such 
Replacement Option shall provide for an exercise price per Aquila Share equal to the exercise price per 
REBgold  Share  otherwise  purchasable  pursuant  to  such  REBgold  Option.    All  other  terms  and 
conditions  of  a  Replacement  Option,  including  the  term  to  expiry,  conditions  to  and  manner  of 
exercising, will be the same as the REBgold Option for which it was exchanged, and shall be governed 
by  the  terms  of  the  current  Aquila  Stock  Option  Plan  and  any  certificate  or  option  agreement 
previously evidencing the REBgold Option shall thereafter evidence and be deemed to evidence such 
Replacement Option.
Procedure for the Arrangement to Become Effective
The Arrangement is proposed to be carried out pursuant to Section 192 of the CBCA.  In order for the Arrangement 
to become effective:


the Court must grant the Final Order approving the Arrangement; and
all conditions precedent to the Arrangement as further described in the Arrangement Agreement must 
be satisfied or waived by the appropriate party.
If both of these steps are completed, the Arrangement will be completed at the Effective Time on the Effective Date.  
The Parties currently anticipate that the Effective Date will be on or about January 8, 2014.
- 35 -
REBgold Shareholder Approval
To be effective, the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must each be 
approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the votes cast on the REBgold 
Stated Capital Resolution and the REBgold Arrangement Resolution, as applicable, by all REBgold Shareholders 
voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
To be effective, the REBgold Financing Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote of a majority of the votes cast on the REBgold Financing Resolution by all REBgold Shareholders voting as a 
single class, excluding Baker Steel, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
The REBgold Board unanimously recommends that REBgold Shareholders vote FOR each of the REBgold 
Resolutions.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of REBgold in 
the REBgold Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the REBgold Resolutions.
Aquila Shareholder Approval
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution by all Aquila Shareholders 
voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
To be effective, the HMI Acquisition Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote of a majority of the votes cast on the HMI Acquisition Resolution by all Aquila Shareholders voting as a single 
class, excluding HudBay, present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
To be effective, the Aquila Stock Option Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Stock Option Resolution, by all Aquila Shareholders voting 
as a single class, excluding those directors, officers and eligible service providers who will receive the stock options 
being approved, present in person or represented by proxy at the Meeting.
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without 
variation,  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and 
Compensation Resolution, by all Aquila Shareholders voting as a single class, excluding those directors, officers and 
eligible service providers who will receive the Aquila Shares being approved, present in person or represented by 
proxy at the Meeting.
The  Aquila  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  each  of  the  Aquila 
Resolutions. In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of such resolutions.
Voting Agreements
REBgold Voting Agreements
Baker Steel and certain other REBgold Shareholders who collectively hold approximately 50% of the outstanding 
REBgold Shares as of the date of this Circular, have entered into REBgold Voting Agreements with REBgold and 
Aquila pursuant to which they have agreed, subject to the terms and conditions of the REBgold Voting Agreements, 
among other things:



to vote any REBgold Shares held by them in favour of the REBgold Resolutions;
not to dispose of any REBgold Shares other than pursuant to the Arrangement; and
to vote any REBgold Shares held by them against any Acquisition Proposal.
- 36 -
The REBgold Voting Agreements will terminate and be of no further force or effect upon the earliest of: (a) the 
mutual agreement in writing of Aquila and the REBgold Shareholder; (b) the Effective Time; and (c) the termination 
of the Arrangement Agreement in accordance with its terms.
Aquila Voting Agreements
HudBay and certain other Aquila Shareholders who collectively hold 23% of the outstanding Aquila Shares as of the 
date of this Circular, have entered into Aquila Voting Agreements with REBgold and Aquila pursuant to which they 
have agreed, subject to the terms and conditions of the Aquila Voting Agreements, among other things:



to vote the Aquila Shares controlled by them in favour of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the 
HMI Acquisition Resolution (other than, in the case of HudBay, the HMI Acquisition Resolution);
not to dispose of any Aquila Shares; and
to vote the Aquila Shares controlled by them against any Acquisition Proposal.
The Aquila Voting Agreements other than the Aquila Voting Agreement signed by HudBay will terminate and be of 
no  further  force  or  effect  upon  the  earliest  of:  (a) the  mutual  agreement  in  writing  of  REBgold  and  the  Aquila 
Shareholder; (b) the Effective Time; and (c) the termination of the Arrangement Agreement in accordance with its 
terms.
The Aquila Voting Agreement signed by HudBay will terminate and be of no further force or effect upon the earliest 
of: (a) the mutual agreement in writing of Aquila, REBgold and HudBay; (b) the Effective Time; (c) the termination 
of the HMI Acquisition Agreement in accordance with its terms; and (d) any non-compliance by either of Aquila or 
REBgold with their respective covenants under the Aquila Voting Agreement.
Court Approval and Completion of the Arrangement
The  Arrangement  requires  approval  by  the  Court  under  Section  192  of  the  CBCA.    Prior  to  the  mailing  of  this 
Circular, REBgold obtained the Interim Order providing for the calling and holding of the REBgold Meeting and 
other procedural matters.  A copy of the Interim Order is attached hereto as Appendix D.  A copy of the Petition 
applying for the Final Order is attached hereto as Appendix E.
Subject  to  the  approval  of  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  by  REBgold  Shareholders  at  the  REBgold 
Meeting,  the  hearing  in  respect  of  the  Final  Order  is  expected  to  take  place  on  January  7,  2014  at  the  Ontario 
Superior  Court  of  Justice,  330  University  Avenue,  Toronto,  Ontario,  or  as  soon  thereafter  as  is  reasonably 
practicable.  Any REBgold Shareholder or REBgold Optionholder who wishes to appear or be represented and to 
present evidence or arguments must serve and file a Response to a Petition as set out in the Petition for the Final 
Order and satisfy any other requirements of the Court.  The Court will consider, among other things, the fairness and 
reasonableness  of  the  Arrangement  and  the  rights  of  every  person  affected.    The  Court  may  approve  the 
Arrangement in any manner the Court may direct, subject to compliance with such terms and conditions, if any, as 
the Court deems fit.  The Court has further been advised that the exemption from the registration requirements of the 
U.S. Securities Act provided by Section 3(a)(10) thereof will be based on the Final Order granted by the Court.
Assuming the Final Order is granted and the other conditions to closing contained in the Arrangement Agreement 
are satisfied or waived, it is currently anticipated that the Arrangement will be effective on or about January 8, 2014.
Although  REBgold’s  and  Aquila’s  objective  is  to  have  the  Effective  Date  occur  as  soon  as  possible  after  the 
Meeting, the Effective Date could be delayed for a number of reasons, including, but not limited to, an objection 
before  the  Court  at  the  hearing  of  the  application  for  the  Final  Order  or  any  delay  in  obtaining  any  required 
approvals.
- 37 -
Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities
REBgold Options
Almost all of the 2,112,500 outstanding REBgold Options have exercise prices that are higher than the $0.13 per 
share price at which REBgold Shares are anticipated to be sold pursuant to the REBgold Financing and are therefore 
“out-of-the-money”.    Pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  Agreement,  REBgold  has  agreed  to  use  its  commercially 
reasonable efforts to seek the voluntary surrender of all of the REBgold Options prior to the Effective Time.
If, upon completion of the Arrangement, any REBgold options have not been surrendered and remain outstanding, 
each  such  REBgold  Option,  whether  vested  or  unvested,  will  be  exchanged  with  Aquila  for  a  fully-vested  and 
immediately exercisable Replacement Option.  Each Replacement Option will entitle the holder to purchase from 
Aquila one Aquila Share and with an exercise price per Aquila Share equal to the exercise price per REBgold Share 
of such REBgold Option immediately prior to the Effective Time.  All other terms and conditions of a Replacement 
Option,  including  the  term  to  expiry,  conditions  to  and  manner  of  exercising,  will  be  the  same  as  the  REBgold 
Option for which it was exchanged, and shall be governed by the terms of the Aquila Option Plan.
REBgold Warrants
The  Arrangement  will  constitute  a  “Capital  Reorganization”  or  similarly  defined  event  under  the  terms  of  the 
REBgold Warrants.  Accordingly, if the Arrangement is completed pursuant to its terms, upon the Effective Time 
holders of REBgold Warrants shall be entitled to receive, upon the exercise of their REBgold Warrants at any time 
after the Effective Date, in lieu of the number of REBgold Shares to which they were otherwise entitled to receive 
the Aquila Shares that they would have received pursuant to the Arrangement had they owned such REBgold Shares 
immediately prior to the Effective Time.
REBgold Convertible Debentures
Pursuant  to  the  terms  of  the  REBgold  Convertible  Debentures,  if  the  Arrangement  is  completed  pursuant  to  its 
terms, upon the Effective Time holders of the REBgold Convertible Debentures shall be entitled to receive, upon the 
conversion of their REBgold Convertible Debentures at any time after the Effective Date, in lieu of the number of 
REBgold Shares to which they were otherwise entitled to receive, the Aquila Shares that they would have received 
pursuant to the Arrangement had they owned such REBgold Shares immediately prior to the Effective Time.
Baker Steel has also agreed that, upon the Effective Time, the 8% Unsecured Convertible Debentures due April 2, 
2015  held  by  Baker  Steel  shall  automatically  be  amended  to  delete  the  adjustment  to  the  conversion  price  and 
automatic conversion of such REBgold Convertible Debentures upon the occurrence of a “Significant Acquisition” 
(as defined therein).
REBgold RSUs
REBgold  currently  has  4,690,000  REBgold  RSUs  outstanding,  all  of  which  are  eligible  to  become  vested  at  the 
Effective  Time.  REBgold  and  Aquila  expect  to  enter  into  agreements  with  the  holders  of  all  of  the  outstanding 
REBgold RSUs prior to the Effective Time pursuant to which all entitlements under the outstanding REBgold RSUs, 
together with accrued and unpaid salary and fee obligations owing to certain of the holders of the REBgold RSUs, 
will be settled at or prior to the Effective Time in exchange for aggregate consideration consisting of $233,000 in 
cash, 795,000 Aquila Shares and 3,986,250 Aquila Options exercisable at $0.15 per share for five years from the 
Effective Date.
Depositary
Aquila  and  REBgold  have  retained  the  services  of  the  Depositary  for  the  receipt  of  the  REBgold  Letter  of 
Transmittal and the certificates representing REBgold Shares and, for the delivery of the Aquila Shares issuable in 
exchange for the REBgold Shares under the Arrangement.  The Depositary will receive reasonable and customary 
compensation for its services in connection with the Arrangement, will be reimbursed for certain reasonable out-of-
pocket  expenses  and will  be  indemnified  against  certain liabilities,  including  liabilities  under  securities  laws  and 
expenses in connection therewith.
- 38 -
Procedure for Exchange of REBgold Shares
Letters of Transmittal
The  REBgold  Letter of  Transmittal  has  been  sent to registered  REBgold Shareholders  with  this  Circular.  
The REBgold Letter of Transmittal sets out the procedure to be followed by registered REBgold Shareholders to 
deposit their REBgold Shares (the “Depositing REBgold Shareholders”).  If the Arrangement becomes effective, 
in order to receive a physical certificate(s) or Direct Registration Advice representing Aquila Shares in exchange for 
the  Deposited  REBgold  Shares  to  which  the  Depositing  REBgold  Shareholder  is  entitled  under  the  Plan  of 
Arrangement,  a  Depositing  REBgold  Shareholder  must  deliver  the  REBgold  Letter  of  Transmittal,  properly 
completed  and  duly  executed,  together  with  certificate(s)  representing  its  deposited  REBgold  Shares  (the 
“Deposited REBgold Shares”) and all other required documents to the Depositary at the address set forth in the 
REBgold  Letter  of  Transmittal.    It  is  each  Depositing  REBgold  Shareholder’s  responsibility  to  ensure  that  the 
REBgold Letter of Transmittal is received by the Depositary. If the Arrangement is not completed, the REBgold 
Letter of Transmittal will be of no effect and the Depositary will return all certificates representing the Deposited 
REBgold  Shares  to  the  holders  thereof  as  soon  as  practicable  at  the  address  specified  in  the  REBgold  Letter  of 
Transmittal.  Additional copies of the REBgold Letter of Transmittal are available by contacting the Depositary, 
Trans Canada Transfer Inc. at 25 Adelaide Street East, Suite 1301, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3A1.
Any certificate formerly representing REBgold Shares that is not deposited with all other documents as required by 
the Plan of Arrangement on or prior to the Business Day prior to the sixth anniversary (or such other earlier date as 
required by  applicable  laws) of  the  Effective  Date will  cease  to represent  a  right or  claim  of  any kind  or nature 
including the right of the REBgold Shareholder to receive Aquila Shares (and any dividend or other distributions 
thereon).    In  such  case,  such  Aquila  Shares  (together  with  all  dividends  or  other  distributions  thereon)  will  be 
returned to Aquila and such Aquila Shares will be cancelled.
Depositing  REBgold  Shareholders  are  encouraged  to  deliver  a  properly  completed  and  duly  executed 
REBgold Letter of Transmittal together with the relevant certificate(s) representing the Deposited REBgold 
Shares and any other required documents to the Depositary as soon as possible.  None of Aquila, REBgold or 
the  Depositary  are  liable  for  failure  to  notify  REBgold  Shareholders,  nor  do  they  have  an  obligation  to  notify 
REBgold Shareholders who make a deficient deposit with the Depositary.
The use of mail to transmit certificates representing the Deposited REBgold Shares and the REBgold Letter 
of Transmittal is at each Depositing REBgold Shareholder’s risk. REBgold recommends that such certificates 
and documents be delivered by hand to the Depositary and a receipt therefor be obtained or that registered 
mail be used and appropriate insurance be obtained.
Whether  or  not  REBgold  Shareholders  forward  the  certificate(s)  representing  their  REBgold  Shares,  upon 
completion  of  the  Arrangement  on  the  Effective  Date,  REBgold  Shareholders  will  cease  to  be  REBgold 
Shareholders as of the Effective Date and will only be entitled to receive that number of Aquila Shares to which they 
are entitled under the Arrangement or, in the case of REBgold Shareholders who properly exercise Dissent Rights, 
the right to receive fair value for their REBgold Shares in accordance with the dissent procedures.  See “Dissent 
Rights”.
Lost Securities
If any certificate which represented an interest in outstanding REBgold Shares and that immediately  prior to the 
Effective Time was transferred or cancelled pursuant to the Plan of Arrangement has been lost, stolen or destroyed, 
upon  the  making  of  an  affidavit  of  that  fact  by  the  person  claiming  such  certificate  to  have  been  lost,  stolen  or 
destroyed,  the  Depositary  will  issue  and  deliver  in  exchange  for  such  lost,  stolen  or  destroyed  certificate  the 
consideration to which the holder is entitled pursuant to the Arrangement (and any dividends or distributions with 
respect thereto).  Unless otherwise agreed to by Aquila and the Depositary, the person who is entitled to receive such 
consideration  shall,  as  a  condition  precedent  to  the  receipt  thereof,  give  a  bond  to  Aquila  and  its  transfer  agent, 
which  bond  is  in  form  and  substance  satisfactory  to  Aquila  and  its  transfer  agent,  or  shall  otherwise  indemnify 
Aquila and its transfer agent against any claim that may be made against any of them with respect to the certificate 
alleged to have been lost, stolen or destroyed.
- 39 -
Withholding Rights
REBgold,  Aquila  and  the  Depositary  shall  be  entitled  to  deduct  and  withhold  from  any  consideration  otherwise 
payable under the Plan of Arrangement to any REBgold Shareholder or REBgold Optionholder such amounts as 
REBgold, Aquila or the Depositary is required or permitted to deduct and withhold with respect to such payment 
under the Tax Act or any provision of provincial, local or foreign tax law, in each case as amended.  To the extent 
that amounts are so withheld, such withheld amounts shall be treated for all purposes as having been paid to the 
relevant REBgold Shareholder or REBgold Optionholder in respect of which such deduction and withholding was 
made, provided that such withheld amounts are actually remitted to the appropriate taxing authority.
THE ARRANGEMENT AGREEMENT
The Arrangement will be carried out pursuant to the Arrangement Agreement and the Plan of Arrangement. The 
following  is  a  summary  of  the  principal  terms  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  Plan  of  Arrangement.  This 
summary does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the Arrangement Agreement, 
which has been filed by Aquila on SEDAR at www.sedar.com, and to the Plan of Arrangement, which is attached as 
Exhibit B to the Arrangement Agreement and is appended hereto as Appendix B.
On November 7, 2013, Aquila and REBgold entered into the Arrangement Agreement, pursuant to which Aquila 
and REBgold agreed that, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Arrangement Agreement, Aquila will 
acquire all of the issued and outstanding REBgold Shares.  Upon completion of the Arrangement, each REBgold 
Shareholder (other than Dissenting REBgold Shareholders) will receive, in exchange for each REBgold Share, one 
Aquila Share.  The terms of the Arrangement Agreement are the result of arm’s length negotiation between Aquila 
and REBgold and their respective advisors.
Representations and Warranties
The  Arrangement  Agreement  contains  representations  and  warranties  made  by  REBgold  to  Aquila  and 
representations  and  warranties  made  by  Aquila  to  REBgold  relating  to,  among  other  things,  their  respective 
organization,  capitalization,  operations,  properties,  compliance  with  laws  and  regulations  and  other  matters, 
including their authority to enter into the Arrangement Agreement and to consummate the Arrangement.
The  representations  and  warranties  in  the  Arrangement  Agreement  were  made  solely  for  the  purposes  of  the 
Arrangement  Agreement  and  are  subject  to  important  qualifications  and  limitations  agreed  to  by  the  parties  in 
connection  with  negotiating  its  terms.  Moreover,  some  of  the  representations  and  warranties  contained  in  the 
Arrangement Agreement are subject to a contractual standard of materiality (including a Material Adverse Effect) 
that  is  different  from  that  generally  applicable  to  the  public  disclosure  to  REBgold  Shareholders  and  Aquila 
Shareholders, or those standards used for the purpose of allocating risk between parties to an agreement. You should 
not rely on the representations and warranties contained in the Arrangement Agreement as to statements of factual 
information at the time they were made or otherwise.
Conditions Precedent to the Arrangement
Mutual Conditions
The obligations of the Parties to complete the Arrangement are subject to the fulfilment of each of the following 
conditions precedent on or before the Effective Time, each of which may only be waived in whole or in part with the 
mutual consent of the Parties:


the Interim Order and the Final Order shall each have been obtained in form and substance satisfactory 
to the Parties, each acting reasonably, and consistent with the Arrangement Agreement and shall not 
have been set aside or modified in a manner unacceptable to the Parties;
the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  and  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  shall  have  been 
approved  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  by,  in  the  case  of  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolutions,  the 
REBgold Shareholders in accordance with the Interim Order;
- 40 -




the Aquila Resolutions shall have been approved at the Aquila Meeting by the Aquila Shareholders;
there will  not be  in  force  any  applicable  law,  and no Governmental  Authority  will  have  issued  any 
order or decree, restraining or prohibiting the completion of the transactions contemplated herein;
the TSX will have (i) conditionally approved the listing of the Aquila Shares to be issued pursuant to 
the Arrangement as of the Effective Time and pursuant to the exercise or conversion, as applicable, of 
any convertible securities of REBgold that will remain issued and outstanding immediately following 
the Effective Time or as soon as practicable thereafter, and (ii) if required, accepted notice for filing of 
all of the Transactions, subject only to the usual requirements of the TSX;
the REBgold Financing will have been completed upon terms and conditions satisfactory to each of 
Aquila and REBgold, each acting reasonably, and, immediately prior to the Effective Time, REBgold 
will  have  cash  or  cash  equivalents  of  not  less  than  $4,000,000  free  and  clean  of  all  liens  and 
encumbrances (less funds used to satisfy the fees and expenses associated with the Transactions);
  Aquila and the Aquila Board shall have taken all necessary actions to ensure that immediately after the 
Effective Time (i) the Aquila Board shall be comprised of three nominees designated by Aquila, three 
nominees designated by REBgold and one nominee that is designated jointly by Aquila and REBgold 
and  that  does  not  have  any  material  relationship  with  either  Aquila  or  REBgold  and  (ii) the  senior 
executives  of  Aquila  shall  consist  of  such  individuals  as  Aquila  and  REBgold  shall  have  mutually 
agreed;

all  of  the  conditions  to  completion  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  under  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement, 
other than completion of the Arrangement, shall have been satisfied or waived in accordance with the 
terms of the HMI Acquisition Agreement such that Aquila’s acquisition of HMI shall be completed 
immediately following the Effective Time; and

the Arrangement Agreement will not have been terminated.
Additional Conditions in Favour of REBgold
The  obligation  of  REBgold  to  complete  the  Arrangement  is  subject  to  the  fulfillment  of  each  of  the  following 
additional  conditions  precedent  on  or  before  the  Effective  Time  (each  of  which  is  for  the  exclusive  benefit  of 
REBgold and may be waived by REBgold in whole or in part at any time):

(i) certain specified representations and warranties of Aquila contained in the Arrangement Agreement 
shall be true and correct in all respects, in each case as of the date of the Arrangement Agreement and 
the  Effective  Date  as  though  made  on  the  Effective  Date  (except  to  the  extent  that  any  such 
representation and warranty expressly speaks as of an earlier date, in which case such representation 
and warranty shall be true and correct as of such earlier date); and (ii) all other representations and 
warranties of Aquila set forth in the Arrangement Agreement shall be true and correct (without giving 
effect to any qualifications or limitations as to materiality or Material Adverse Effect set forth therein) 
as of the date hereof and the Effective Date as though made on the Effective Date (except to the extent 
that any such representation and warranty expressly speaks as of an earlier date, in which case such 
representation and warranty shall be true and correct as of such earlier date), except, in the case of this 
clause  (ii),  for  such  failures  to  be  true  and  correct  that  would  not  constitute,  individually  or  in  the 
aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect on Aquila;
  Aquila  shall  have  complied  in  all  material  respects  with  all  its  covenants  under  the  Arrangement
Agreement required to be performed by it at or prior to the Effective Date;

since the date of the Arrangement Agreement, there shall not have occurred or been disclosed to the 
public (if previously undisclosed to the public) a Material Adverse Effect with respect to Aquila after 
the  date  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  that  has  had,  or  would  reasonably  be  expected  to  have,  a 
Material Adverse Effect on Aquila;
- 41 -
  REBgold shall have received from Aquila a certificate dated the Effective Date signed on behalf of 
Aquila by a senior officer of Aquila certifying the matters set forth in the three bullets above are true 
and correct; and

there will not be threatened in writing or pending any investigation, suit, action or proceeding by any 
Governmental  Authority  against  Aquila,  any  of  the  Aquila  Subsidiaries,  or  any  of  their  respective 
current or former directors or officers challenging the Arrangement Agreement, the HMI Acquisition 
Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, seeking to delay, restrain or prohibit 
the  Arrangement  or  the  HMI  Acquisition,  seeking  to  prohibit  or  impose  material  limitations  on  the 
ownership  or  operation  of  all  or  a  portion  of  the  operations  or  assets  of  REBgold  or  any  REBgold 
Subsidiary  or  on  the  Aquila’s  direct  or  indirect  ownership  of  HMI,  REBgold  or  any  REBgold 
Subsidiary  on  or  following  the  Effective  Time,  or  seeking  to  compel  Aquila  to  dispose  of  or  hold 
separate any portion of the business or assets of HMI, REBgold or any REBgold Subsidiary (or any 
equity interest in such entities).
Additional Conditions in Favour of Aquila
The  obligation  of  Aquila  to  complete  the  Arrangement  is  subject  to  the  fulfillment  of  each  of  the  following 
additional conditions precedent on or before the Effective Time (each of which is for the exclusive benefit of Aquila 
and may be waived by Aquila in whole or in part at any time):

(i) certain  specified  representations  and  warranties  of  REBgold  contained  in  the  Arrangement 
Agreement shall be true and correct in all respects, in each case as of the date hereof and the Effective 
Date  as  though  made  on  the  Effective  Date  (except  to  the  extent  that  any  such  representation  and 
warranty expressly speaks as of an earlier date, in which case such representation and warranty shall be 
true and correct as of such earlier date); and (ii) all other representations and warranties of REBgold 
set  forth  in  the  Arrangement  Agreement  shall  be  true  and  correct  (without  giving  effect  to  any 
qualifications or limitations as to materiality or Material Adverse Effect set forth therein) as of the date 
hereof and the Effective Date as though made on the Effective Date (except to the extent that any such 
representation and warranty expressly speaks as of an earlier date, in which case such representation 
and warranty shall be true and correct as of such earlier date), except, in the case of this clause (ii), for 
such failures to be true and correct that would not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in 
the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect on REBgold;
  REBgold  shall  have  complied,  in  all  material  respects,  with  its  covenants  under  the  Arrangement
Agreement required to be performed by it at or prior to the Effective Date;

since the date of the Arrangement Agreement there shall not have occurred or been disclosed to the 
public  (if  previously  undisclosed  to  the  public)  a  Material  Adverse  Effect  with  respect  to  REBgold 
after the date hereof that has had, or would reasonably be expected to have, a Material Adverse Effect 
on REBgold;
  Aquila shall have received from REBgold a certificate dated the Effective Date signed on behalf of 
REBgold by a senior officer of REBgold certifying the matters set forth in the three bullets above are 
true and correct;
  REBgold  Shareholders  holding  no  more  than  10%  of  the  outstanding  REBgold  Shares  shall  have
validly exercised Dissent Rights calculated on a fully-diluted basis; and

there will not be threatened in writing or pending any investigation, suit, action or proceeding by any 
Governmental Authority against REBgold, any of the REBgold Subsidiaries, or any of their respective 
current or former directors or officers challenging the Arrangement Agreement, the HMI Acquisition 
Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, seeking to delay, restrain or prohibit 
the  Arrangement  or  the  HMI  Acquisition,  seeking  to  prohibit  or  impose  material  limitations  on  the 
ownership  or  operation  of  all  or  a  portion  of  the  operations  or  assets  of  REBgold  or  any  REBgold 
Subsidiary  or  on  the  Aquila’s  direct  or  indirect  ownership  of  HMI,  REBgold  or  any  REBgold 
Subsidiary  on  or  following  the  Effective  Time,  or  seeking  to  compel  Aquila  to  dispose  of  or  hold
- 42 -
separate any portion of the business or assets of HMI, REBgold or any REBgold Subsidiary (or any 
equity interest in such entities.
Covenants
General
In the Arrangement Agreement, each of Aquila and REBgold has agreed to certain covenants, including customary 
affirmative and negative covenants relating to the operation of their respective businesses, and using commercially 
reasonable  efforts  to  satisfy  the  conditions  precedent  to  their  respective  obligations  under  the  Arrangement 
Agreement.
Covenants Regarding Non-Solicitation
Each of REBgold and Aquila has agreed that each of them and their Subsidiaries shall not (and shall cause any of 
their respective Affiliates, shareholders, directors, officers, employees or agents not to) directly or indirectly:


solicit, assist, initiate, knowingly encourage, or otherwise facilitate any inquiries, proposals or offers 
regarding, or that may reasonably be expected to lead to any Acquisition Proposal;
engage in any discussions or negotiations, or assist, knowingly encourage, or otherwise facilitate any 
effort  or  attempt  to  encourage  or  participate  in  any  discussions  or  negotiations  regarding  any 
Acquisition Proposal or potential Acquisition Proposal;
  withdraw, modify, or qualify or propose publicly to approve or recommend to withdraw, modify or
qualify, the approval or recommendation of the Arrangement Agreement or the Arrangement;


approve, recommend, or propose publicly to approve, or recommend, any Acquisition Proposal; or
accept  or  enter  into,  or  publicly  propose  to  accept  or  enter  into,  any  letter  of  intent,  agreement  in 
principle, agreement, arrangement or undertaking related to any Acquisition Proposal.
The REBgold Board or the Aquila Board may to provide information to, or engage in discussions with a person 
making an Acquisition Proposal that the REBgold Board or Aquila Board, as applicable, has determined constitutes 
or could reasonably be expected to result in a Superior Proposal subject to (i) such person executing a confidentiality 
and standstill agreement which, taken as a whole, is no less favourable to REBgold or Aquila, as applicable, than the 
Confidentiality  Agreement  and  (ii) the  disclosing  Party  providing  to  the  other  Party  (A) a  copy  of  any  such 
confidentiality and standstill agreement and (B) access to any information that was provided to such person and not 
previously provided to the other Party.
Each  Party  is  required  to  promptly  provide  the  other  Party  with  notice  of  (i) any  Acquisition  Proposal,  (ii) any 
request to engage in discussions or negotiations in connection with an Acquisition Proposal, (iii) any request for 
non-public information, (iv) any request for representation on the REBgold Board or Aquila Board, as applicable or 
(v) any material amendment to any of the foregoing.
Neither  Party  may  accept,  approve  or  enter  into  any  agreement  (a  “Proposed  Agreement”),  other  than  a 
confidentiality and standstill agreement described above providing for or to facilitate any Acquisition Proposal or 
withdraw,  modify or qualify  its  approval or  recommendation of  the Arrangement  and  recommend or  approve an 
Acquisition Proposal unless:



the REBgold Board or the Aquila Board, as applicable, determines, after consultation with its financial 
advisors and outside legal counsel, that the Acquisition Proposal constitutes a Superior Proposal;
the REBgold Meeting or Aquila Meeting, as applicable, has not occurred;
such Party has complied with its non-solicitation restrictions in the Arrangement Agreement;
- 43 -



such Party has provided the other Party with a notice in writing that there is a Superior Proposal and 
the REBgold Board or the Aquila Board, as applicable, proposes to accept, approve, recommend or 
execute  a  Proposed  Agreement  not  less  than  five  business  days  prior  to  the  proposed  acceptance, 
approval, recommendation or execution of the Proposed Agreement by the applicable Party;
in  the  case  of  an  Acquisition  Proposal  received  by  REBgold,  five  business  days  shall  have  elapsed 
from  the  date  Aquila  received  the  notice  of  a  Proposed  Agreement  and,  if  Aquila  has  proposed  to 
amend  the  terms  of  the  Arrangement,  the  REBgold  Board  shall  have  determined,  after  consultation 
with  its  financial  advisors  and  outside  legal  counsel,  that  the  Acquisition  Proposal  is  a  Superior 
Proposal compared to the proposed amendment to the terms of the Arrangement by Aquila; and
such Party has terminated the Arrangement Agreement and paid the Termination Payment to the other 
Party.
Termination of the Arrangement Agreement
The Arrangement Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the Effective Date:


by mutual written agreement of Aquila and REBgold;
by Aquila or REBgold, if: 
o  REBgold  Shareholders  do  not  approve  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  or  the  REBgold 
Financing  Resolution  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  in  the  manner  required  by,  in  the  case  of  the 
REBgold Arrangement Resolution, the Interim Order;
o  Aquila Shareholders do not approve the HMI Acquisition Resolution or the Aquila Share Issuance
Resolution at the Aquila Meeting;
o 
o
o
o
the HMI Acquisition Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms;
there will have been enacted and in force any applicable law, or any Governmental Authority will 
have  issued  an  order,  decree  or  ruling,  permanently  restraining  or  enjoining,  making  illegal  or 
otherwise prohibiting any of the Transactions which applicable law, order, decree or ruling has 
become final and non-appealable;
a  breach  of  any  representation  or  warranty  of  the  other  Party,  or  failure  by  the  other  Party  to 
perform any covenant or agreement of such other Party contained in the Arrangement Agreement, 
such  that  the  applicable  closing  condition  related  to  the  accuracy  or  performance  of  such 
representations,  warrants,  consents,  or  agreements  would  be  incapable  of  satisfactions  by  the 
Outside Date; or
the Effective Time has not occurred on or prior to the Outside Date;

by Aquila, if: 
o  Aquila  publicly  announces  its  intention  to  enter  into  a  definitive  agreement,  or  to  approve  or 
recommend  an  Acquisition  Proposal  which  constitutes  a  Superior  Proposal  in  each  case  with 
respect  to  a  Superior  Proposal,  provided  that  Aquila  has  not  breached  any  of  its  covenants  or 
obligations  in  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  Aquila  has  previously  paid  to  REBgold  the 
Termination Payment; or
o  REBgold breaches its non-solicitation covenants in the Arrangement Agreement in any material
respect;
- 44 -
o
o
the  REBgold  Board  or  any  committee  thereof  withdraws,  modifies,  changes  or  qualifies  its 
approval  or  recommendation  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  or  the  REBgold  Arrangement 
Resolution;
the  REBgold  Board  or  any  committee  thereof  approves  or  publicly  recommends,  publicly 
proposes  to  approve  or  recommend,  or  enters  into  any  agreement  with  respect  to  a  REBgold 
Acquisition Proposal; or
o  REBgold  Board  fails  to  reaffirm  its  recommendation  of  the  Arrangement  and  the  Arrangement
Agreement within one business day of Aquila requesting it to do so;

by REBgold, if: 
o  REBgold publicly announces its intention to enter into a definitive agreement, or to approve or 
recommend  an  Acquisition  Proposal  which  constitutes  a  Superior  Proposal,  in  each  case  with 
respect to a Superior Proposal, provided that REBgold has not breached any of its covenants or 
obligations  in  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and  REBgold  has  previously  paid  to  Aquila  the 
Termination Payment; or
o  Aquila  breaches  its  non-solicitation  covenants  in  the  Arrangement  Agreement  in  any  material
respect;
o
o
o
the Aquila Board or any committee thereof withdraws, modifies, changes or qualifies its approval 
or recommendation of the Acquisition Resolution or the Share Issuance Resolution;
the Aquila Board or any committee thereof approves or publicly recommends, publicly proposes 
to  approve  or  recommend,  or  enters  into  any  agreement  with  respect  to  an  Aquila  Acquisition 
Proposal; or
the Aquila Board fails to reaffirm its recommendation of the HMI Acquisition Resolution and the 
Aquila Share Issuance Resolution within one business day of Aquila requesting to do so.
Termination Payment
Aquila  will  be  entitled  to  receive  the  Termination  Payment  from  REBgold  if  the  Arrangement  Agreement  is 
terminated:




by REBgold, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with respect to or to approve or recommend a 
Superior Proposal;
by Aquila due to REBgold breaching its non-soliciting obligations under the Arrangement Agreement 
in any material respect;
by  Aquila,  if  the  REBgold  Board  (i) withdraws,  modifies,  changes  or  qualifies  its  approval  of  the 
Arrangement Agreement or the Arrangement; (ii) publicly approves or recommends, or enters into any 
agreement with respect to an Acquisition Proposal or (iii) fails to reaffirm its recommendation of the 
Arrangement and the Arrangement Agreement after being requested to do so by Aquila; or
by  Aquila  due  to  the  REBgold  Shareholders  failing  to  approve  either  REBgold  Resolutions  at  the 
REBgold Meeting and prior to the REBgold Meeting, a REBgold Acquisition Proposal was publicly 
announced  and  not  publicly  withdrawn or  abandoned prior  to  the  REBgold  Meeting,  and within 12 
months  following  the  termination  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  (i) any  REBgold  Acquisition 
Proposal  is  consummated,  (ii) an  agreement  to  consummate  any  REBgold  Acquisition  Proposal  is 
entered  and  such  REBgold  Acquisition  Proposal  is  subsequently  consummated  into,  or  (iii) the 
REBgold Board or any committee thereof approves or recommends any REBgold Acquisition Proposal 
and such REBgold Acquisition Proposal is subsequently consummated.
- 45 -
REBgold will be entitled to the Termination Payment from Aquila if the Arrangement Agreement is terminated:




by Aquila, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with respect to or to approve or recommend a 
Superior Proposal;
by REBgold due to Aquila breaching its non-soliciting obligations under the Arrangement Agreement 
in any material respect;
by  REBgold  if,  the  Aquila  Board  (i) withdraws,  modifies,  changes  or  qualifies  its  approval  of  the 
Arrangement Agreement or the Arrangement; (ii) publicly approves or recommends, or enters into any 
agreement with respect to an Acquisition Proposal or (iii) fails to reaffirm its recommendation of the 
Arrangement and the Arrangement Agreement after being requested to do so by REBgold; or
by REBgold due to the Aquila Shareholders failing to approve the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution or 
the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  at  the  Aquila  Meeting  prior  to  the  Aquila  Meeting,  an  Aquila 
Acquisition Proposal was publicly announced and not publicly withdrawn or abandoned prior to the 
Aquila  Meeting,  and  within  12  months  following  the  termination  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement 
(i) any  Aquila  Acquisition  Proposal  is  consummated,  (ii) an  agreement  to  consummate  any  Aquila 
Acquisition Proposal is entered and such Aquila Acquisition Proposal is subsequently consummated 
into,  or  (iii) the  Aquila  Board  or  any  committee  thereof  approves  or  recommends  any  Aquila 
Acquisition Proposal and such Aquila Acquisition Proposal is subsequently consummated.
Expenses of the Arrangement
If Aquila or REBgold terminates the Arrangement Agreement due to (i) a breach of the Arrangement Agreement by 
the other Party or (ii) the REBgold Shareholders or the Aquila Shareholders, as applicable, failing to approve the 
REBgold Resolutions or the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution of the HMI Acquisition Resolution, as applicable, the 
other Party shall reimburse the terminating Party for all reasonable and documented fees and expenses incurred by 
the terminating Party in connection with the Transaction up to a maximum aggregate amount of $300,000 (in the 
case of termination due to the failure to obtain shareholder approval of the applicable resolutions) or $200,000 (in 
the case of termination due to and breach of the Arrangement).  In all other circumstances, subject to the Parties’ 
respective obligations to pay the Termination Payment, each Party has agreed to bear its own costs and expenses in 
connection with the Transaction.
THE HMI ACQUISITION
If  all  of  the  conditions  in  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  including  completion  of  the  Arrangement  and  the 
REBgold  Financing,  are  satisfied  or  waived,  the  HMI  Acquisition  will  be  completed  immediately  following  the 
Effective Time.  The consideration payable by Aquila for all of the issued and outstanding shares of HMI is up to 
$2.5 million of Aquila Shares (valued at $0.13 per share), installment payments of up to an aggregate of $9 million 
tied to development of the Back Forty Project and the Back Forty NSR.  Upon completion of the HMI Acquisition, 
Aquila will indirectly own 100% of the Back Forty Project.
See “The HMI Acquisition Agreement” for a summary of the terms of the HMI Acquisition and “The Arrangement - 
Reasons  for  the  Arrangement  and  the HMI  Acquisition”  for  a description  of  the  anticipated benefits  of  the  HMI 
Acquisition.
Jennings Formal Valuation
Selection and Engagement of Jennings
The  Aquila  Board  contacted  Jennings  regarding  a  potential  advisory  assignment  relating  to  the  Transactions  in 
September, 2013.  The Aquila Board determined, based in part on certain representations made to it by Jennings, 
that  Jennings  was  independent  and  qualified  to  prepare  a  formal  valuation  and  should  be  retained  as  financial 
advisor to the Aquila Board for the purposes of preparing and delivering to the Aquila Board a formal valuation of 
the Back Forty Project required under MI 61-101.
- 46 -
Aquila entered into an engagement letter with Jennings dated October 21, 2013.  The engagement letter provides for 
the payment of fees to Jennings for the Jennings Formal Valuation, which fees do not depend in whole or in part on 
the conclusions reached in the Jennings Formal Valuation or the successful outcome of the HMI Acquisition.  In the 
Engagement Letter, Aquila has agreed to indemnify Jennings in respect of certain liabilities that might arise out of 
its engagement and to reimburse it for its reasonable out-of-pocket expenses.
Credentials of Jennings
Jennings is a fully licensed, full service, independent investment banking firm with offices in Toronto and Calgary 
and with operations in corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions, equity sales and trading and investment research. 
Jennings  is  a  member  of  the  Investment  Industry  Regulatory  Organization  of  Canada  (formerly  the  Investment 
Dealers Association of Canada), the Canadian Investor Protection Fund, a participating organization of the Toronto 
Stock Exchange and of the TSX Venture Exchange.
Jennings  and  its  professionals  have  extensive  experience  in  preparing  valuations  and  fairness  opinions  and  in 
transactions similar to the HMI Acquisition.  The opinions expressed herein are the opinions of Jennings, and the 
form and content hereof have been approved for release by a committee of its directors and officers, each of whom 
is experienced in merger, acquisition, divestiture and valuation matters.
Relationships with Interested Parties
Jennings is not an “issuer insider”, “associated entity” nor an “affiliated entity”, or "interested party” (as such terms 
are defined in the MI 61-101) of Aquila or HudBay or any of their respective associates or affiliates and neither 
Jennings nor any of its affiliates was an advisor to Aquila or HudBay over the last 24 months. During the two years 
preceding  the  date  of  Jennings’  engagement,  Jennings  has  not  provided  any  financial  advisory  services,  lead 
managed or participated in any brokered equity financing involving Aquila or HudBay or any of their respective 
associates or affiliates.
Concurrent with providing the Jennings Formal Valuation, Jennings was retained by Aquila to provide the Jennings 
Fairness Opinion as to the fairness from a financial point of view to the Aquila Shareholders, of the Arrangement 
pursuant to the terms of the Arrangement Agreement.
Jennings acts as trader and dealer, both as principal and agent, in major Canadian equity markets and, as such, may 
execute  transactions on behalf  of  clients or  on behalf of  the parties or  their related  entities  for which  it  receives 
compensation.  In  addition,  as  an  investment  dealer,  Jennings  conducts  research  on  securities  and  may,  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  business,  be  expected  to  provide  research  support  and  investment  advice  to  its  clients  on 
investment matters pertaining to the Aquila or HudBay.
Valuation
The following summary is qualified in its entirety by the full text of the Jennings Formal Valuation which sets forth 
the assumptions made, matters considered and limitations on the review undertaken in connection therewith, and 
which is included in the Jennings Formal Valuation attached as Appendix G to this Circular.  Aquila Shareholders 
are urged to read the Jennings Formal Valuation in its entirety.
Scope of Review
In preparing the Jennings Formal Valuation, Jennings reviewed certain public and non-public documents regarding 
Aquila  and  the  Back  Forty  Project,  information  regarding  the  HMI  Acquisition  (including  a  draft  of  the  HMI 
Acquisition Agreement), NI 43-101 compliant technical reports and the preliminary economic analysis of the Back 
Forty Project.  In addition, Jennings held discussions with senior management of Aquila, held discussions with the 
Aquila Board, and carried out other investigative exercises, all as more specifically described in the Jennings Formal 
Valuation.
- 47 -
Assumption and Limitations
With  the  Aquila  Board’s  approval,  and  as  provided  for  in  its  engagement  letter,  Jennings  has  relied  upon  the 
completeness, accuracy and fair presentation of all of the financial and other information, data, advice, opinions or 
representations obtained by it from public sources, Aquila and Aquila’s consultants and advisors (collectively, the 
“Information”).    The  Jennings  Formal  Valuation  is  conditional  upon  such  completeness,  accuracy  and  fair 
presentation of such Information.
Senior officers of Aquila represented to Jennings, among other things, that the Information provided by Aquila or 
any  of  its  subsidiaries  or  their  respective  agents  to  Jennings  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  the  Jennings  Formal 
Valuation  was  complete,  true  and  correct  in  all  material  respects  and  did  not  contain  any  untrue  statement  of  a 
material fact in respect of HMI, the Back Forty Project or the HIM Acquisition and did not omit to state a material 
fact in respect of Aquila, the Back Forty Project or the HIM Acquisition necessary to make the Information or any 
statement contained therein not misleading in light of the circumstances under which the Information was provided 
or any statement was made, and that since the dates on which the Information was provided to Jennings, except as 
disclosed  in  writing  to  Jennings,  there  had  been  no  material  change,  financial  or  otherwise,  in  the  financial 
condition, assets, liabilities (contingent or otherwise), business, operations or prospects of Aquila or the Back Forty 
Project  and no  material  change  had  occurred  in  the Information  or  any  part  thereof which  would have or which 
would reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the Jennings Formal Valuation.
In preparing the Jennings Formal Valuation, Jennings made several assumptions, including that the HMI Acquisition 
would be completed.  The Jennings Formal Valuation was rendered on the basis of securities markets, economic, 
financial and general business conditions prevailing as at the date thereof and the condition and prospects, financial 
and otherwise, of Aquila and the Back Forty Project, as they were reflected in the Information and as they had been 
represented to Jennings in discussions with management of Aquila.  In its analyses and in preparing the Jennings 
Formal Valuation, Jennings made numerous assumptions with respect to industry performance, general business and 
economic conditions and other matters.
Fair Market Value
For purposes of the Jennings Formal Valuation, fair market value means the highest price, expressed in terms of 
money  or  money's  worth,  obtainable  in  an  open  and  unrestricted  market  between  knowledgeable,  informed  and 
prudent  parties,  each  acting  at  arm's  length,  where  neither  party  is  under  any  compulsion  to  enter  into  the  HMI 
Acquisition.
Valuation Methods
For  the  purposes  of  determining  the  fair  market  value  of  Back  Forty  Project,  Jennings  relied  on  three  principal 
methodologies: (a) net asset value; (b) comparable companies analysis; and (c) precedent transactions analysis.
In  arriving  at  an  opinion  as  to  the  fair  market  value  of  the  Back  Forty  Project,  Jennings  combined  all  three 
methodologies and calculated the median to arrive at its conclusion.  Jennings selected the median in order to “even 
out” the effects of the commodities cycle with current market comparables yielding the lowest valuation – which is 
reflective of today’s bearish sentiment in this sector, and precedent transactions which yielded the highest valuation 
– which is reflective of past transactions when the sector had a more bullish sentiment.
Valuation Conclusion
Based upon and subject to the factors set out in the Jennings Formal Valuation, Jennings is of the opinion that, as of 
the  date  of  the  Jennings  Formal  Valuation,  the  fair  market  value  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  is  in  the  range  of 
$45 million to $56 million.
THE HMI ACQUISITION AGREEMENT
The HMI Acquisition will be carried out pursuant to the HMI Acquisition Agreement.  The following is a summary 
of the principal terms of the HMI Acquisition Agreement.  This summary does not purport to be complete and is
- 48 -
qualified in its entirety by reference to the HMI Acquisition Agreement, which has been filed by Aquila and REBgold 
on SEDAR at www.sedar.com.
On November 7, 2013, Aquila, REBgold and HudBay entered into the HMI Acquisition Agreement, pursuant to 
which  Aquila  and  REBgold  agreed  that,  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement,  Aquila  will  acquire  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  HMI  from  HudBay  immediately 
following completion of the REBgold Financing and the Arrangement.  Upon completion of the HMI Acquisition, 
Aquila will indirectly own 100% of the Back Forty Project.
Purchase Price
The purchase price payable by Aquila for HMI consists of:


that number of Aquila Shares equal to the lesser of: 
o
(a) the  lesser  of  (i) 50%  of  the  gross  proceeds  received  by  REBgold  pursuant  to  the  REBgold 
Financing  and  (ii) $2,500,000,  divided  by  (b) the  price  per  share  at  which  REBgold  issues 
REBgold Shares pursuant to the REBgold Financing; and
o
such number of Aquila Shares that, together with the number of Aquila Shares beneficially owned 
by HudBay immediately prior to the issuance of such Aquila Shares, equals 19.9% of the Aquila 
Shares  that  will  be  outstanding  immediately  following  the  completion  of  the  Transactions 
(rounded to the nearest whole number of shares);
up to $9 million in post-closing milestone payments tied to development of the Back Forty Project as 
follows: 
o  $3 million payable upon completion of any form of financing for purposes including funding the 
commencement  of  development  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  (up  to  50%  of  such  amount  to  be 
payable, at Aquila's option, in Aquila Shares with the balance payable in cash);
o  $2 million in cash payable 90 days after the commencement of commercial production; 
o  $2 million in cash payable 270 days after commencement of commercial production; and 
o  $2 million in cash payable 450 days after commencement of commercial production; and

the Back Forty NSR.
Aquila will acquire HMI on a cash free basis and any cash held by HMI at the HMI Closing Time will be transferred 
to HudBay.
Assuming the REBgold Financing is completed for gross proceeds of $5,000,000 and at a price of $0.13 per share, 
the  maximum  number  of  Aquila  Shares  issuable  to  HudBay  upon  completion  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  would  be 
19,230,769 or approximately 19.6% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.  Provided, however that 
in no event will the number of Aquila Shares issued to HudBay result in HudBay having ownership or control of 
more than 19.9% of the Aquila Shares that will be issued and outstanding following completion of the Transactions.
If Aquila elects to issue Aquila Shares in partial satisfaction of the initial $3 million milestone payment described 
above (the “Milestone Payment Shares”), the Milestone Payment Shares would be issued at a price per share equal 
to (i) the price per share at which Aquila Shares are issued in the financing that triggers Aquila’s obligation to make 
the initial $3 million milestone payment or (ii) if no Aquila shares are issued in such financing, the volume weighted 
average  trading  price  of  Aquila  Shares  on  the  TSX  over  the  ten  trading  day  period  ending  on  the  trading  day 
immediately prior to the date on which the Aquila Board approved such financing.  The following table illustrates 
the number of Milestone Payment Shares that would be issuable, both as an absolute number and as a percentage of 
the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares, at various prices, assuming that Aquila elected to satisfy the 
maximum $1.5 million amount of the initial $3 million milestone payment by issuing Milestone Payment Shares:
- 49 -
Price per Milestone
Payment Share
Number of Milestone 
Payment Shares Issued
% of Currently Issued and 
Outstanding Aquila Shares
$0.05 
$0.13 
$0.25 
$0.50
30,000,000 
11,538,462 
6,000,000 
3,000,000
Representations and Warranties
30.5% 
11.7% 
6.1% 
3.1%
The HMI Acquisition Agreement contains representations and warranties made by HudBay to each of Aquila and 
REBgold and representations and warranties made by each of Aquila and REBgold to HudBay relating to, among 
other things, their respective organization, capitalization, compliance with laws and regulations and other matters, 
including  their  authority  to  enter  into  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  and  to  consummate  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement.  The representations and warranties made by HudBay also relate to matters such as the capitalization of 
HMI, HudBay’s ownership of the shares of HMI, the absence of liabilities relating to HMI and the Back Forty Joint 
Venture  and  the  concessions  and  lands  comprising  the  Back  Forty  Project.    Such  representations  and  warranties 
generally relate only to any event, fact, state of facts or circumstances with respect to the Back Forty Project that 
occurred or arose on or after the date that HudBay became the operator of the Back Forty Project pursuant to an 
operating agreement (March 9, 2012); prior to such date, HudBay’s representations and warranties with respect to 
such matters are limited to any event, fact, state of facts or circumstances within HudBay’s knowledge.
The  representations  and  warranties  in  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  will  generally  survive  for  12  months 
following completion of the HMI Acquisition, with certain representations and warranties surviving indefinitely and 
others surviving until after the date on which a governmental assessment or reassessment of the relevant Party may 
no longer occur.
The representations and warranties in the HMI Acquisition Agreement were made solely for the purposes of the 
HMI Acquisition Agreement and are subject to important qualifications and limitations agreed to by the parties in 
connection with negotiating its terms. Moreover, some of the representations and warranties contained in the HMI 
Acquisition  Agreement  are  subject  to  a  contractual  standard  of  materiality  that  is  different  from  that  generally 
applicable to the public disclosure to REBgold Shareholders and Aquila Shareholders, or those standards used for 
the  purpose  of  allocating  risk  between  parties  to  an  agreement.  You  should  not  rely  on  the  representations  and 
warranties  contained  in  the HMI Acquisition Agreement  as  to  statements  of  factual  information  at  the  time  they 
were made or otherwise.
Conditions Precedent to the HMI Acquisition
Mutual Conditions
The obligations of the Parties to complete the HMI Acquisition are subject to the fulfilment of each of the following 
conditions precedent on or before the closing of the HMI Closing Time, each of which may only be waived in whole 
or in part with the mutual consent of the Parties:




all necessary TSX approvals for the HMI Acquisition and the issuance of Aquila Shares to HudBay as 
consideration under the HMI Acquisition Agreement shall have been obtained;
the REBgold Resolutions shall have been approved at the REBgold Meeting;
the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution and the HMI Acquisition Resolution shall have been approved at 
the Aquila Meeting;
the REBgold Financing and the Arrangement shall have been completed;
- 50 -


no action, suit or proceeding shall have been taken, and there will not be in force any applicable law, to 
prohibit or that would frustrate the HMI Acquisition or the Arrangement in any way; and
neither the HMI Acquisition Agreement nor the Arrangement Agreement shall have been terminated.
Additional Conditions in Favour of Aquila
The  obligation  of  Aquila  to  complete  the  HMI  Acquisition  is  subject  to  the  fulfillment  of  each  of  the  following 
additional conditions precedent on or before the HMI Closing Time (each of which is for the exclusive benefit of 
Aquila and REBgold and may be waived by Aquila and REBgold in whole or in part at any time):
  HudBay shall have performed all of its covenants under the HMI Acquisition Agreement required to
be performed by it prior to the HMI Closing Time in all material respects;



the representations and warranties of HudBay set out in the HMI Acquisition Agreement qualified as 
to  materiality,  shall  be  true  and  correct,  and  those  not  so  qualified  shall  be  true  and  correct  in  all 
material  respects,  in  each  case  as  of  the  HMI  Closing  Time  as  though  made  at  and  as  of  the  HMI 
Closing Time, except to the extent such representations and warranties expressly relate to an earlier 
date (in which case such representations and warranties qualified as to materiality shall be true and 
correct, and those not so qualified shall be true and correct in all material respects, on and as of such 
earlier date);
since the date of the HMI Acquisition Agreement there shall not have occurred any Material Adverse 
Effect (as defined in the HMI Acquisition Agreement);
each  director  and  officer  of  HMI  and  the  Back  Forty  Joint  Venture  shall  have  delivered  a  written 
resignation and release and HMI and the Back Forty Joint Venture shall provide a release in favour of 
each such director and officer;
  HudBay shall have assigned all of its right, title and interest in and to the Alliance Agreement to HMI;


all  intercompany  indebtedness  between  HudBay  and  the  Back  Forty  Joint  Venture  shall  have  been 
satisfied, repaid or cancelled; and
all liens on the shares of HMI or HMI’s interest in the LLC associated with HudBay’s credit facilities 
shall have been discharged.
Additional Conditions in Favour of HudBay
The obligation of HudBay to complete the HMI Acquisition is subject to the fulfillment of each of the following 
additional conditions precedent on or before the HMI Closing Time (each of which is for the exclusive benefit of 
HudBay and may be waived by HudBay in whole or in part at any time):


each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  shall  have  performed  all  of  its  covenants  under  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement required to be performed by it prior to the HMI Closing Time in all material respects;
the  representations  and  warranties  of  each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  set  out  in  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement qualified as to materiality shall be true and correct, and those not so qualified shall be true 
and correct in all material respects, in each case as of the HMI Closing Time as though made at and as 
of the HMI Closing Time, except to the extent such representations and warranties expressly relate to 
an earlier date (in which case such representations and warranties qualified as to materiality shall be 
true and correct, and those not so qualified shall be true and correct in all material respects, on and as 
of such earlier date); and
  HudBay shall have received a fully executed copy of the Back Forty NSR.
- 51 -
Covenants
General
In  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  each  of  Aquila,  REBgold  and  HudBay  has  agreed  to  certain  covenants, 
including  customary  affirmative  and  negative  covenants  by  HudBay  relating  to  the  operation  of  HMI,  the  Back 
Forty Joint Venture and the Back Forty Project, and using commercially reasonable efforts to satisfy the conditions 
precedent  to  their  respective  obligations  under  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  and,  in  the  case  of  Aquila  and 
REBgold, the Arrangement Agreement.
HudBay Repurchase Right
Under the HMI Acquisition Agreement, if, as of the date that is 10 years from completion of the HMI Acquisition, 
(a) Aquila directly or indirectly owned an equity interest in the Back Forty Project of at least 51% and (b) HudBay 
has not received any of the milestone payments included in the purchase price for HMI or gross proceeds of at least 
$2,500,000 from the sale of the Aquila Shares it received upon completion of the HMI Acquisition then, subject to 
regulatory approval, HudBay will have the right to repurchase a 51% interest in the Back Forty Project from Aquila 
for consideration consisting of the Aquila Shares that HudBay received upon completion of the HMI Acquisition or 
cash in an amount equal to the then current market value of such shares.
Indemnification
In the HMI Acquisition Agreement, Aquila and HudBay have agreed that if the HMI Acquisition is completed, they 
will indemnify each other against certain damages, losses and expenses they suffer or incur as a result of a breach by 
the other Party of its representations, warranties and covenants in the HMI Acquisition Agreement. HudBay has also 
agreed to indemnify Aquila against certain taxes and severance obligations.
The  indemnities  in  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  are  subject  to  certain  limits,  including  a  $200,000  claims 
threshold and a cap equal to the aggregate amount of the purchase price actually received by HudBay from time to 
time, provided that (i) this limitation shall not apply to damages arising out of or resulting from fraud or in respect of 
claims  for  indemnification  relating  to  certain  withholding  taxes  or  severance,  and  (ii)  subject  always  to  the 
maximum  aggregate  liability  noted  above,  HudBay’s  liability  to  indemnify  for  damages  in  respect  of  any  claim 
relating  to  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  the  Back  Forty  Joint  Venture  or  the  Back  Forty  Project,  other  than 
certain claims relating to specified withholding taxes or severance, shall not be greater than the aggregate amount of 
indemnifiable damages in respect of such claim multiplied by 51% (reflecting Aquila’s 49% interest in the Back 
Forty  Project).    HudBay  will  be  entitled  to  satisfy  any  indemnification  obligations  it  incurs  under  the  HMI 
Acquisition Agreement by surrendering Aquila Shares it received as part of the purchase price for HMI, up to a 
maximum of $5,000,000.
Termination of the HMI Acquisition Agreement
The HMI Acquisition Agreement shall be terminated and the HMI Acquisition abandoned at any time prior to the 
HMI Closing Time:



by mutual written agreement of HudBay, Aquila and REBgold;
immediately  upon  termination  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement,  the  Aquila  Shareholders  failing  to 
approve  the  Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution  or  the  HMI  Acquisition  Resolution  or  the  REBgold 
Shareholders failing to approve the REBgold Resolutions;
by either HudBay or Aquila and REBgold, if: 
o
there  will  have  been  enacted  and  in  force  any  applicable  law,  or  any  Governmental  Entity  (as 
defined  in  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement)  will  have  issued  an  order,  decree  or  ruling, 
permanently restraining or enjoining, making illegal or otherwise prohibiting the Arrangement or 
the  HMI  Acquisition  which  applicable  law,  order,  decree  or  ruling  has  become  final  and  non-
appealable;
- 52 -
o
o
a breach of any representation or warranty of HudBay or one or both of Aquila and REBgold, as 
applicable, or failure by HudBay or one or both of Aquila and REBgold, as applicable, to perform 
any covenant or agreement of such party contained in the HMI Acquisition Agreement shall have 
occurred  such  that  the  relevant  closing  condition  relating  to  the  performance  of  covenants  or 
accuracy  of  representations  and  warranties  would  be  incapable  of  satisfaction  by  February  28, 
2014, provided that the party seeking to terminate is not then in breach of the HMI Acquisition 
Agreement so as to cause any condition in favour of all parties or in favour of the other party not 
to be satisfied; or
the HMI Acquisition has not occurred on or prior to February 28, 2014, provided that the right to 
terminate shall not be available to any party whose failure to fulfill any obligation under the HMI 
Acquisition Agreement shall be the cause of the failure of the HMI Closing Time to occur on or 
before such date.
REGULATORY MATTERS
Securities Law Matters
Qualification and Resale of Aquila Shares
The  Aquila  Shares  to  be  issued  in  exchange  for  REBgold  Shares  pursuant  to  the  Arrangement  will  be  issued  in 
reliance  upon  exemptions  from  the  prospectus  and  registration  requirements  of  securities  legislation  in  each 
province  and  territory  of  Canada.    Subject  to  certain  disclosure  and  regulatory  requirements  and  to  customary 
restrictions applicable to distributions of shares that constitute “control distributions”, Aquila Shares issued pursuant 
to the Arrangement will generally be “freely tradeable” and may be resold in each province and territory in Canada, 
subject  in  certain  circumstances,  to  the  usual  conditions  that  no  unusual  effort,  or  no  effort,  has  been  made  to 
prepare the market or create demand.
Ongoing Canadian Reporting Obligations
REBgold is a reporting issuer (or the equivalent) in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario.  The 
REBgold  Shares  currently  trade  on  the  TSXV.    After  the  Arrangement,  REBgold  intends  to  delist  the  REBgold 
Shares from the TSX, and Aquila will apply to the applicable Canadian securities regulators to have REBgold cease 
to be a reporting issuer.
Aquila is a reporting issuer (or the equivalent) in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario 
and Nova Scotia.  The Aquila Shares currently trade on the TSX.  After the Transactions, the Aquila Shares will 
continue to trade on the TSX and Aquila will continue to be a reporting issuer in the same provinces.
Special Transaction Rules
Since each of Aquila and REBgold is a reporting issuer in the Province of Ontario, the Transactions are subject to 
MI 61-101.    MI 61-101  is  intended  to regulate  certain  types  of  transactions  to  ensure  that  all  securityholders  are 
treated  in  a  manner  that  is  fair,  generally  requiring  enhanced  disclosure,  approval  by  a  majority  of  “minority” 
securityholders  by  excluding  interested  or  related  parties,  an  independent  valuation  and,  in  certain  instances, 
approval  and  oversight  of  certain  transactions  by  a  special  committee  of  independent  directors.    The  protections 
afforded by MI 61-101 apply to “related party transactions” (as such term is defined in MI 61-101).
Baker Steel’s participation in the REBgold Financing is a related party transaction under MI 61-101 because Baker 
Steel is a “related party” of REBgold by virtue of having beneficial ownership or control over more than 10% of the 
voting rights attached to all of the REBgold Shares.
The HMI Acquisition is a related party transaction under MI 61-101 because HudBay is a “related party” of Aquila 
by virtue of having beneficial ownership or control over more than 10% of the voting rights attached to all of the 
Aquila Shares.
- 53 -
Minority Approval
Under MI 61-101 a related party transaction is subject to minority shareholder approval.
In  relation  to  the  REBgold  Financing  and  for  purposes  of  the  required  REBgold  Shareholder  approval  for  the 
REBgold Financing, the “minority” shareholders of REBgold are all REBgold Shareholders other than Baker Steel.
In relation to the HMI Acquisition and for purposes of the required Aquila Shareholder approval for the Acquisition 
Resolution, the “minority” shareholders of Aquila are all Aquila Shareholders other than HudBay.
To  the  knowledge  of  the  directors  and  executive  officers  of  REBgold,  after  reasonable  inquiry,  an  aggregate  of 
10,868,501 votes attached to the REBgold Shares beneficially owned or over which control or direction is exercised 
by Baker Steel, representing approximately 39.5% of the issued and outstanding REBgold Shares, will be excluded 
in determining whether minority shareholder approval of the REBgold Financing Resolution has been obtained for 
purposes of MI 61-101.
To  the  knowledge  of  the  directors  and  executive  officers  of  Aquila,  after  reasonable  inquiry,  an  aggregate  of 
14,367,565 votes attached to the Aquila Shares beneficially owned or over which control or direction is exercised by 
HudBay,  representing  approximately  14.6%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  Aquila  Shares,  will  be  excluded  in 
determining whether minority shareholder approval of the Acquisition Resolution has been obtained for purposes of 
MI 61-101.
Formal Valuation Requirements
MI 61-101 requires in certain circumstances that an issuer carrying out a related party transaction obtain a formal 
valuation  prepared  by  an  independent  valuator.    REBgold  is  exempt  from  the  formal  valuation  requirement  in 
connection with the REBgold Financing since no securities of REBgold are listed or quoted for trading on the TSX, 
the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  the  American  Stock  Exchange,  The  NASDAQ  Stock  Market  or  certain  other 
exchanges  located  outside  Canada  and  the  United  States  as  set  out  in  Section 5.5(b)  of  MI 61-101.    Aquila  was 
required  to  obtain  a  formal  valuation  in  connection  with  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  Aquila  Board  retained 
Jennings to do so.  See “The HMI Acquisition – Jennings Formal Valuation”.
Prior Valuations
Neither Aquila nor any director or senior officer of Aquila, after reasonable inquiry, has knowledge of any “prior 
valuation”  (as defined  in  MI 61-101)  in  respect  of  HMI  or  the  Back  Forty  Project  that  has  been  made  in  the  24 
months before the date of this Circular.
Stock Exchange Listing
The Aquila Shares are currently listed on the TSX under the symbol “AQA”.  On November 6, 2013, the last trading 
day  on  which  Aquila  Shares  traded  prior  to  announcement  of  the  Arrangement,  the  closing  price  of  the  Aquila 
Shares was $0.095.
The REBgold Shares are currently listed on the TSXV under the symbol “RBG”.  On November 6, 2013, the last 
trading day on which REBgold Shares traded prior to announcement of the Arrangement, the closing price of the 
REBgold Shares was $0.06.
Aquila  has  applied  to  the  TSX  to  list  the  Consideration  Shares,  the  HMI  Acquisition  Shares,  the  REBgold 
Convertible Security Shares, the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Shares and the Aquila Shares underlying the 
Aquila  Options.    The  TSX  has  approved  the  listing  of  all  such  shares  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  customary 
conditions, including approval of the Aquila Resolutions at the Aquila Meeting.  It is anticipated that the REBgold 
Shares will be delisted from the TSXV following completion of the Arrangement.
It is a mutual condition to the completion of the Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition that Aquila and REBgold 
shall have received the Stock Exchange Approvals.
- 54 -
DISSENT RIGHTS
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  provisions  of  the  CBCA  relating  to  an  REBgold  Shareholder’s  dissent  and 
appraisal rights in respect of the REBgold Arrangement Resolution, as modified by the Interim Order and the Plan 
of Arrangement.  Such summary is not a comprehensive statement of the procedures to be followed by a Dissenting 
Holder who seeks payment of the fair value of its REBgold Shares and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the 
full text of Sections 190 to 192 of the CBCA, which is attached to this Circular as Appendix H.
The statutory provisions dealing with the right of dissent are technical and complex. Any Dissenting Holders 
should seek independent legal advice, as failure to comply strictly with the provisions of Sections 190 to 192 of 
the CBCA may result in the loss of all Dissent Rights.
The Interim Order expressly provides registered holders of REBgold Shares with the right to dissent with respect to 
the REBgold Arrangement Resolution. Each Dissenting Holder is entitled to be paid the fair value (determined as of 
the close of business on the day before the Final Order becomes effective) of all, but not less than all, of the holder’s 
REBgold  Shares,  provided  that  the  holder  duly  dissents  to  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  and  the 
Arrangement becomes effective.
Subject to Section 3.l of the Plan of Arrangement, pursuant to the Interim Order, a registered REBgold Shareholder, 
other than an affiliate of REBgold, may exercise rights of dissent under Section 190 of the CBCA, as modified by 
Section 3.1 of the Plan of Arrangement, the Interim Order and the Final Order (the “Dissent Rights”) with respect to 
REBgold Shares in connection with the Arrangement; provided that, notwithstanding Section 190 of the CBCA, the 
written objection to the REBgold Arrangement Resolution must be sent to REBgold by REBgold Shareholders who 
wish to dissent not later than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto Time) on the date that is one business day preceding the REBgold 
Meeting  or  any  postponements  or  adjournments  thereof.  REBgold’s  address  for  such  purpose  is  REBgold,  c/o 
Goodmans LLP, 333 Bay Street, Suite 3400, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2S7, Attention: Michael Partridge.
A Dissenting Holder must dissent with respect to all REBgold Shares of which it is the registered and beneficial 
owner.  A registered REBgold Shareholder who wishes to dissent must deliver written notice of dissent to REBgold 
as  set  forth  above  and  such  notice  of  dissent  must  strictly  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Section 190  of  the 
CBCA.  Any failure by an REBgold Shareholder to fully comply with the provisions of the CBCA, as modified 
by Section 3.1 of the Plan of Arrangement, the Interim Order and the Final Order, may result in the loss of 
that holder’s Dissent Rights.
A Dissenting Holder must prepare a notice of dissent for him, her or itself, if dissenting on his, her or its own behalf, 
and  for  each  other  non-registered  holder  who  beneficially  owns  REBgold  Shares  registered  in  the  Dissenting 
Holder’s name and on whose behalf the Dissenting Holder is dissenting; and must dissent with respect to all of the 
REBgold  Shares  registered  in  his,  her  or  its  name  or  beneficially  owned  by  the  non-registered  holder  on  whose 
behalf the Dissenting Holder is dissenting.  The notice of dissent must set out the number of REBgold Shares in 
respect  of  which  the  Dissent  Rights  are  being  exercised  (the  “Notice  Shares”)  and:  (a) if  such  REBgold  Shares 
constitute  all  of  the  REBgold  Shares  of  which  the  Dissenting  Holder  is  the  registered  and  beneficial  owner,  a 
statement to that effect; (b) if such REBgold Shares constitute all of the REBgold Shares of which the Dissenting 
Holder  is  both  the  registered  and  beneficial  owner,  but  the  Dissenting  Holder  owns  additional  REBgold  Shares 
beneficially,  a  statement  to  that  effect  and  the  names  of  the  registered  REBgold  Shareholders,  the  number  of 
REBgold Shares held by such registered REBgold Shareholder and a statement that written notice of dissent has or 
will be sent with respect to such REBgold Shares; or (c) if the Dissent Rights are being exercised by a registered 
REBgold Shareholder who is not the beneficial owner of such REBgold Shares, a statement to that effect and the 
name  of  the  non-registered  REBgold  Shareholder  and  a  statement  that  the  registered  REBgold  Shareholder  is 
dissenting with respect to all REBgold Shares of the non-registered REBgold Shareholder that are registered in such 
registered REBgold Shareholder’s name.
If  the  REBgold  Arrangement  Resolution  is  approved  by  REBgold  Shareholders,  and  REBgold  notifies  the 
Dissenting Holder of its intention to act upon the REBgold Arrangement Resolution pursuant to Section 190 of the 
CBCA,  the  Dissenting  Holder  is  then  required  within  one  month  after  REBgold  gives  such  notice,  to  send  to 
REBgold a written notice that such holder requires the purchase of all of the REBgold Shares in respect of which 
such  holder  has  given  notice  of  dissent,  together  with  the  certificate  or  certificates  representing  those  REBgold 
Shares (including a written statement prepared in accordance with Section 190 of the CBCA if the dissent is being
- 55 -
exercised  by  the  REBgold  Shareholder  on  behalf  of  a  non-registered  REBgold  Shareholder),  whereupon  the 
Dissenting Holder is bound to sell and REBgold is bound to purchase those REBgold Shares.  Once the Dissenting 
Holder has done this, the Dissenting Holder may not vote or exercise any shareholder rights in respect of the Notice 
Shares.
A Dissenting Holder who has duly complied with the aforementioned provisions of the Interim Order and Sections 
190 and 191 of the CBCA will be entitled to be paid the fair value for their Notice Shares.  A Dissenting Holder and 
REBgold may agree on the payout value of the Notice Shares; otherwise, either party may apply to the Court, and 
the Court may determine the payout value of the Notice Shares and make consequential orders and give directions as 
the Court considers appropriate.  In accordance with the Plan of Arrangement, the Dissenting Holder will be entitled 
to receive the fair value that the REBgold Shares had as of the close of business on the day before the Final Order 
becomes effective.
Dissenting Holders who are:


ultimately entitled to be paid fair value for their REBgold Shares, shall be paid an amount equal to 
such  fair  value  by  Aquila,  and  shall  be  deemed  to  have transferred  such  REBgold  Shares  as  of  the 
Effective Time to Aquila, without any further act or formality, and free and clear of all liens, claims 
and encumbrances; or
ultimately not entitled, for any reason, to be paid fair value for their REBgold Shares, shall be deemed 
to  have  participated  in  the  Arrangement,  as  of  the  Effective  Time,  on  the  same  basis  as  a  non-
dissenting REBgold Shareholder and shall be entitled to receive Aquila Shares in exchange for their 
REBgold Shares on the basis determined in accordance with Section 2.2 of the Plan of Arrangement, 
as if such holder had not exercise Dissent Rights.
In no case shall REBgold, Aquila or the Depositary or any other person be required to recognize Dissenting Holders 
as REBgold Shareholders after the Effective Time, and the names of such Dissenting Holders shall be deleted from 
the central securities register as REBgold Shareholders at the Effective Time.
Dissent Rights with respect to Notice Shares will terminate and cease to apply to the Dissenting Holder if, before 
full payment is made for the Notice Shares, the Arrangement in respect of which the notice of dissent was sent is 
abandoned or by its terms will not proceed, a court permanently enjoins or sets aside the corporate action approved 
by the REBgold Arrangement Resolution, or the Dissenting Holder withdraws the notice of dissent with REBgold’s 
written consent.  If any of these events occur, REBgold must return the share certificates representing the REBgold 
Shares to the Dissenting Holder and the Dissenting Holder regains the ability to vote and exercise its rights as an 
REBgold Shareholder.
The discussion above is only a summary of the Dissent Rights, which are technical and complex.  An REBgold 
Shareholder  who  intends  to  exercise  Dissent  Rights  must  strictly  adhere  to  the  procedures  established  in 
Sections 190 to 192 of the CBCA and failure to do so may result in the loss of all Dissent Rights.  Persons who are 
non-registered  holders  of  REBgold  Shares  registered  in  some  other  name  who  wish  to  exercise  Dissent  Rights 
should be aware that only the registered owner of such REBgold Shares is entitled to dissent.
Accordingly, each REBgold Shareholder wishing to avail himself, herself or itself of the Dissent Rights should 
carefully consider and comply with the provisions of the Interim Order and Sections 190 to 192 of the CBCA, 
which are attached to this Circular as Appendix D and Appendix H, respectively, and seek his, her or its own 
legal advice.
REBgold Stated Capital Reduction
REBGOLD SPECIAL BUSINESS
The REBgold Stated Capital Reduction is intended to reduce the stated capital of the REBgold Shares in an amount 
to be determined at the discretion of the REBgold Board.  A corresponding reduction will also be made to retained 
deficit  by  the  same  amount.    Stated  capital,  within  the  meaning  of  the  CBCA,  is  comprised  of  the  aggregate
- 56 -
cumulative  consideration  received  by  REBgold  for  all  of  the  REBgold  Shares  issued  by  it  since  incorporation, 
subject to any adjustments made upon the issuance of REBgold Shares for other than cash consideration.
The  REBgold  Stated  Capital  Reduction  is  intended  to  address  a  technical  requirement  necessary  to  facilitate  the 
completion  of  the  Arrangement.    It  is  anticipated  that,  after  giving  effect  to  the  Arrangement  and  the  other 
transactions contemplated hereby, the REBgold Stated Capital Reduction would not result in any material adverse 
effect to REBgold, Aquila or their shareholders.
Approval of the REBgold Stated Capital Reduction
At  the  REBgold  Meeting,  REBgold  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and  if  thought  fit,  approve,  with  or 
without  variation,  the  following  special  resolution  (the  “REBgold  Stated  Capital  Resolution”)  to  approve  the 
REBgold Stated Capital Reduction:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
1.
2.
3.
A  reduction  in  stated  capital  of  the  common  shares  of  REBgold  Corporation  (the 
“Corporation”) in an amount to be determined at the discretion of the board of directors 
of the Corporation is hereby authorized and approved.
Notwithstanding  that  this  resolution  has  been  passed  by  the  shareholders  of  the 
Corporation,  the  directors  of  the  Corporation  are  hereby  authorized  and  empowered 
without  further  notice  to  or  approval  of  the  shareholders  of  the  Corporation  not  to 
proceed with the proposed reduction in stated capital.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
Approval of the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution at the REBgold Meeting is a condition to completion of the 
Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition.
To  be  effective,  the  REBgold  Stated  Capital  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the votes cast on the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution by all REBgold 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
The REBgold Board unanimously recommends that REBgold Shareholders vote FOR the REBgold Stated 
Capital  Resolution.    In  the  absence  of  a  contrary  instruction,  the  persons  designated  by  management  of 
REBgold in the REBgold Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the REBgold Stated Capital Resolution.
Arrangement
At  the  REBgold  Meeting,  REBgold  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and  if  thought  fit,  approve,  with  or 
without variation, the REBgold Financing Resolution.
See “The Arrangement – REBgold Shareholder Approval”.
REBgold Financing
Immediately prior to completion of the Arrangement, REBgold intends to complete the REBgold Financing.  Baker 
Steel  has  committed  to  invest  a  minimum  of  $4.5 million  in  the  REBgold  Financing.    Baker  Steel  is  currently 
REBgold’s largest shareholder and will be Aquila’s largest shareholder upon completion of the Transactions.
- 57 -
Approval of REBgold Financing
At  the  REBgold  Meeting,  REBgold  Shareholders  will  be  asked  to  consider  and  if  thought  fit,  approve,  with  or 
without  variation,  the  following  ordinary  resolution  (the  “REBgold  Financing  Resolution”)  to  approve  Baker 
Steel’s participation in the REBgold Financing:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
1.
2.
The  participation  by  investment  funds  managed  or  controlled  by  Baker  Steel  Capital 
Managers  LLP  in  a  non-brokered  private  placement  of  common  shares  by  REBgold 
Corporation (the “Corporation”) for gross proceeds of a minimum of $4 million and a 
maximum of $6 million at a price of $0.13 per share is hereby authorized, approved and 
adopted.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
Approval of the REBgold Financing at the REBgold Meeting is a condition to completion of the Arrangement and 
the HMI Acquisition.
To be effective, the REBgold Financing Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  REBgold  Financing  Resolution  by  all  REBgold  Shareholders 
voting as a single class, excluding Baker Steel, present in person or represented by proxy at the REBgold Meeting.
The  REBgold  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  REBgold  Shareholders  vote  FOR  the  REBgold 
Financing Resolution.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of 
REBgold in the REBgold Proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the REBgold Financing Resolution.
Aquila Share Issuance
AQUILA SPECIAL BUSINESS
The Arrangement, if completed, will result in the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding REBgold Shares by 
Aquila in exchange for Aquila Shares (the “Consideration Shares”) on a one-for-one basis.  Assuming (i) REBgold 
completes the REBgold Financing for gross proceeds of $6 million and (ii) 73,679,034 REBgold Shares are issued 
and outstanding as at the Effective Time (including 46,153,846 REBgold Shares issued immediately prior to the 
Effective  Time  pursuant  to  the  REBgold  Financing),  73,679,034  Aquila  Shares  would  be  issued  pursuant  to  the 
Arrangement.  The terms of the Arrangement were determined in arm’s length negotiations between REBgold and 
Aquila.
As of December 2, 2013, there were:
  REBgold Warrants outstanding that collectively entitle the holders thereof to acquire up to 6,061,500
REBgold Shares, and

$920,000  principal  amount  of  REBgold  Convertible  Debentures  outstanding,  $510,000  principal 
amount  of  which  is  convertible  into  REBgold  shares  at  a  price  of  $0.15  per  share  and  $410,000 
principal amount of which is convertible into REBgold shares at a price of $1.00 per share (for a total 
of  up  to  3,810,000  REBgold  Shares  issuable  upon  conversion  of  the  REBgold  Convertible 
Debentures).
- 58 -
Further details regarding the outstanding REBgold Warrants and REBgold Convertible Debentures are set out in the 
tables below.
REBgold Warrants
Warrant Series
REBgold Shares
Issuable on Exercise
Exercise Price per 
REBgold Share
Series B 
Series C 
Series D 
Series DC
1,701,500 
410,000 
2,000,000 
1,950,000
$1.00 
$1.20 
$1.00 
$1.00
Expiry Date
June 17, 2015 
April 13, 2015
November 10, 2016 
November 10, 2016
To REBgold’s knowledge, REBgold Warrants exercisable for up to 1,527,500 REBgold Shares are directly owned 
or controlled by Baker Steel and the directors and officers of REBgold.
REBgold Debentures
Original Principal
Amount 
$410,000 
$510,000
Interest Rate
Conversion Price
Maturity Date
18% 
8%
$1.00 
$0.15
April 13, 2015 
April 2, 2015
All of the $510,000 principal amount of the 8% REBgold Convertible Debentures (3,400,000 REBgold Shares upon 
full  conversion)  are  held  by  Baker  Steel  and,  to  REBgold’s  knowledge,  $40,000  principal  amount  of  the  18% 
REBgold Convertible Debentures (40,000 REBgold Shares upon full conversion) are directly or indirectly owned or 
controlled by Baker Steel and directors and officers of REBgold.
Assuming none of the REBgold Warrants or REBgold Convertible Debentures are exercised or converted prior to 
the Effective Date, following the Effective Date the REBgold Warrants and REBgold Convertible Debentures will 
remain outstanding in accordance with their terms, except that the holders thereof shall be entitled to receive, upon 
the  exercise  or  conversion  of  their  REBgold  Warrants  or  REBgold  Convertible  Debentures  at  any  time  after  the 
Effective Date,  in  lieu  of  the  number  of  REBgold  Shares  to  which  they  were  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon 
exercise  or  conversion  of  the  REBgold  Warrants  or  REBgold  Convertible  Debentures,  the  equivalent  number  of 
Aquila Shares (i.e., an aggregate of up to 9,871,500 Aquila Shares). If any of the 2,112,500 REBgold Options  are 
not surrendered and remain outstanding, they will be exchanged for Replacement Options. See  “ The Arrangement -
Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities- REBgold Options” on page 38.
Based on the foregoing, the aggregate number of Aquila Shares currently expected to be issuable pursuant to or 
following the Arrangement upon the exercise or conversion of the REBgold Warrants and the REBgold Convertible 
Debentures is 9,871,500 (collectively, the “REBgold Convertible Security Shares”). The REBgold Warrants and 
REBgold Debentures contain industry standard anti-dilution provisions.
In addition, in connection with (i) the settlement of all of the REBgold RSUs, (ii) satisfaction of deferred salary 
obligations and fees payable to certain directors, officers, employees and service providers of REBgold, and (iii) 
fees payable to certain directors and officers of  REBgold and Aquila,  Aquila expects to issue to such individuals, 
on successful completion of the Transactions, consideration that includes up to 1,435,000 Aquila Shares (the “Debt 
Satisfaction and Compensation Shares”).  See “Aquila Special Business – Debt Satisfaction and Compensation 
Share Issuance”.
Based on the foregoing, the aggregate number of Aquila Shares currently expected to be issuable pursuant to or 
following the Arrangement upon the exchange of REBgold Shares (at deemed price of $0.13 per share)  and the 
exercise  or  conversion  of  the  REBgold  Warrants,  the  Replacement  Options  and  the  REBgold  Convertible 
Debentures is 85,663,034 representing approximately 87% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.  
Of that total up to 62,266,429 Aquila Shares or approximately 63.5% of the total currently issued and outstanding
- 59 -
shares of Aquila are issuable to REBgold insiders (including Baker Steel). The deemed price of the Consideration 
Shares represents a premium of 23.8% to the five day weighted average trading price of the Aquila Shares of $0.105 
on the TSX on November 6, 2013 being the last trading day prior to announcement of the Transactions.
Currently  Baker  Steel  does  not  own  any  Aquila  Shares.  Upon  completion  of  the  Transactions,  Baker  Steel  will 
become a new insider and control person of Aquila as it will hold 45,483,886 Aquila Shares or approximately 20.7% 
of  the  outstanding  Aquila  Shares  following  completion  of  the  Transactions.    See  “Appendix A  -  Information 
Concerning New Aquila”.  As a result, and also because the Consideration Shares and the REBgold Convertible 
Security Shares collectively represent more than 25% of the current number of outstanding Aquila Shares, Aquila 
Shareholders  are  required  to  approve  the  issuance  of  the  Consideration  Shares  and  the  REBgold  Convertible 
Security Shares under Section 501 of the TSX Company Manual.
At the Aquila Meeting, Aquila Shareholders will be asked to consider and if thought fit, approve, with or without 
variation, the following ordinary resolution to approve the issuance of the Consideration Shares and the REBgold 
Convertible Security Shares:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
1.
2.
The issuance of the Consideration Shares, the Aquila Shares underlying the Replacement 
Options and the REBgold Convertible Security Shares (representing an aggregate of up to 
85, 663,034 Aquila Shares or approximately 86% of the currently issued and outstanding 
Aquila  Shares)  as  described  in  the  joint  management  information  circular  of  Aquila 
Resources Inc. (the “Corporation”) and REBgold Corporation dated December 2, 2013, 
is hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
Approval  of  the  Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution  at  the  Aquila  Meeting  is  a  condition  to  completion  of  the 
Arrangement and the HMI Acquisition.
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without  variation,  by  the 
affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  Aquila  Share  Issuance  Resolution  by  all  Aquila 
Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by proxy at the Aquila Meeting.
The Aquila Board unanimously recommends that Aquila Shareholders vote FOR the Aquila Share Issuance 
Resolution.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the Aquila Share Issuance Resolution.
HMI Acquisition
At the Aquila Meeting, Aquila Shareholders will be asked to consider and if thought fit, approve, with or without 
variation,  the  following  ordinary  resolution  to  approve  the  HMI  Acquisition  and  the  issuance  of  the  HMI 
Acquisition Shares.  The terms and conditions of HMI Acquisition are described under the section headed “The HMI 
Acquisition  Agreement”  on  page  48  of  this  Circular.  The  terms  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  were  determined  by 
negotiations among REBgold, Aquila and HudBay. REBgold is arm’s length to both Aquila and HudBay.
- 60 -
The purchase price payable by Aquila for HMI consists of:


that number of Aquila Shares equal to the lesser of: 
o
(a) the  lesser  of  (i) 50%  of  the  gross  proceeds  received  by  REBgold  pursuant  to  the  REBgold 
Financing  and  (ii) $2,500,000,  divided  by  (b) the  price  per  share  at  which  REBgold  issues 
REBgold Shares pursuant to the REBgold Financing; and
o
such number of Aquila Shares that, together with the number of Aquila Shares beneficially owned 
by HudBay immediately prior to the issuance of such Aquila Shares, equals 19.9% of the Aquila 
Shares  that  will  be  outstanding  immediately  following  the  completion  of  the  Transactions 
(rounded to the nearest whole number of shares);
up to $9 million in post-closing milestone payments tied to development of the Back Forty Project as 
follows: 
o  $3 million payable upon completion of any form of financing for purposes including funding the 
commencement  of  development  of  the  Back  Forty  Project  (up  to  50%  of  such  amount  to  be 
payable, at Aquila's option, in Aquila Shares with the balance payable in cash);
o  $2 million in cash payable 90 days after the commencement of commercial production; 
o  $2 million in cash payable 270 days after commencement of commercial production; and 
o  $2 million in cash payable 450 days after commencement of commercial production; and

the Back Forty NSR.
Aquila will acquire HMI on a cash free basis and any cash held by HMI at the HMI Closing Time will be transferred 
to HudBay.
Under the HMI Acquisition Agreement, if, as of the date that is 10 years from completion of the HMI Acquisition, 
(a) Aquila directly or indirectly owns an equity interest in the Back Forty Project of at least 51% and (b) has not 
received  any  of  the  milestone  payments  included  in  the  purchase  price  for  HMI  or  gross  proceeds  of  at  least 
$2,500,000 from the sale of the Aquila Shares it received upon completion of the HMI Acquisition then, subject to 
regulatory approval,  HudBay will have the right to repurchase a 51% interest in the Back Forty Project from Aquila 
for consideration consisting of the Aquila Shares that HudBay received upon completion of the HMI Acquisition or 
cash in an amount equal to the then current market value of such shares.
Assuming the REBgold Financing is completed for gross proceeds of $5,000,000 and at a price of $0.13 per share, 
the  maximum  number  of  Aquila  Shares  issuable  to  HudBay  upon  completion  of  the  HMI  Acquisition  would  be 
19,230,769 or approximately 19.6% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.  Provided, however that 
in no event will the number of Aquila Shares issued to HudBay result in HudBay having ownership or control of 
more than 19.9% of the Aquila Shares that will be issued and outstanding following completion of the Transactions.
HudBay currently owns 14,367,565 Aquila Shares, representing approximately 14.6% of the currently issued and 
outstanding  Aquila  Shares,  and  upon  completion  of  the  Transactions  will  own,  without  taking  into  account  the 
Milestone Payment Shares, 33,598,334 Aquila Shares or approximately 17.5% of the  issued and outstanding Aquila 
Shares, assuming the HMI Acquisition Shares are issued at a price of $0.13 per share and the REBgold Financing 
will be completed at a price of $0.13 per share.
If Aquila elects to issue Milestone Payment Shares in partial satisfaction of the initial $3 million milestone payment 
described above, the Milestone Payment Shares would be issued at a price per share equal to (i) the price per share 
at which Aquila Shares are issued in the financing that triggers Aquila’s obligation to make the initial $3 million 
milestone  payment  or  (ii) if no Aquila shares  are  issued in  such  financing,  the  volume  weighted  average  trading 
price of Aquila Shares on the TSX over the ten trading day period ending on the trading day immediately prior to the 
date on which the Aquila Board approved such financing.  The following table illustrates the number of Milestone
- 61 -
Payment Shares that would be issuable, both as an absolute number and as a percentage of the currently issued and 
outstanding  Aquila  Shares,  at  various  prices,  assuming  that  Aquila  elected  to  satisfy  the  maximum  $1.5  million 
amount of the initial $3 million milestone payment by issuing Milestone Payment Shares:
Price per Milestone Payment
Share
Number of Milestone Payment
Shares Issued
% of Currently Issued and 
Outstanding Aquila Shares
$0.05
$0.13
$0.25
$0.50
Approval of the HMI Acquisition
30,000,000
11,538,462
6,000,000
3,000,000
30.5%
11.7%
6.1%
3.1%
In  addition  to minority  shareholder  approval  requirements  under  MI 61-101, Aquila  Shareholders  are  required  to 
approve  the  HMI  Acquisition  under  Section 501  of  the  TSX  Company  Manual  because  (i) the  value  of  the 
consideration  to  be  received by  HudBay  (an  insider)  exceeds  10%  of Aquila’s  market  capitalization;  and (ii) the 
number  of  Aquila  Shares  expected  to  be  issued  to  HudBay  represents  more  than  10%  of  the  current  number  of 
outstanding Aquila Shares and could after giving effect to the issuance of the Milestone Payment Shares, represent 
more than 25% of the current number of outstanding Aquila Shares. If the Milestone Payment Shares are issued,  
this may materially affect control of Aquila.
Aquila Shareholders are being asked to approve the following ordinary resolution in respect of the HMI Acquisition:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
1.
2.
3.
The  HMI  Acquisition,  on  the  terms  and  conditions  provided  in  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Agreement,  as  such  agreement  may  be  amended,  modified  or  supplemented  and  as 
described  in  the  joint  management  information  circular  of  Aquila  Resources  Inc.  (the 
“Corporation”) and REBgold Corporation dated December 2, 2013 (the “Circular”), is 
hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
The issuance of the HMI Acquisition Shares (being a maximum of 19,230,769 common 
shares of Aquila or approximately 19.6% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila 
common shares assuming the HMI Acquisition Shares are issued at a price of $0.13 per 
share)  and  the  issuance  of  the  Milestone  Payment  Shares  (as  defined  in  the  Circular) 
pursuant  to  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement,  as  such  agreement  may  be  amended, 
modified  or  supplemented  and  as  described  in  the  Circular,  is  hereby  authorized, 
approved and adopted.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
Approval of the HMI Acquisition Resolution at the Aquila Meeting is a condition to completion of the Arrangement 
and the HMI Acquisition.
To be effective, the HMI Acquisition Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the HMI Acquisition Resolution by all Aquila Shareholders voting as a 
single class, excluding HudBay, present in person or represented by proxy at the Aquila Meeting.  HudBay, who
- 62 -
will not be entitled to vote on the resolution, currently holds 14,367,565 Aquila Shares, representing approximately 
14.6% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.
The  Aquila  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  the  HMI  Acquisition 
Resolution.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the HMI Acquisition Resolution.
Grant of Stock Options
As  of  December  2, 2013,  there  were  5,400,000  Aquila  Options outstanding,  4,615,000 of which  (the  “Replaced 
Aquila  Options”)  are  held  by  certain  directors,  officers  and  eligible  service  providers  of  Aquila  who  will  be 
continuing as directors, officers and service providers of New Aquila.  All of these Aquila Options have exercise 
prices that are higher than the $0.13 per share price at which the REBgold Shares are anticipated to be sold pursuant 
to the REBgold Financing and are therefore “out-of-the-money” relative to that price.
In  order  to  ensure  that  the  continuing  directors,  officers  and  service  providers  of  New  Aquila  are  appropriately 
motivated  to  continue  to  provide  services  to  New  Aquila  and  to  increase  shareholder  value,  effective  as  of  the 
completion  of  the  Transactions  Aquila  intends  to  enter  into  agreements  with  the  holders  of  the  Replaced  Aquila 
Options  pursuant  to  which  such  options  will  be  cancelled  and  replaced  with  a  new  grant  of  an  aggregate  of 
7,200,000 Aquila Options (the “New Aquila Options”).  The New Aquila Options will be granted to the current 
directors, officers and service providers of Aquila who will be continuing with New Aquila at an exercise price of 
$0.15 per share and will be exercisable for five years from the Effective Date.
The following table sets out each of the Aquila directors, officers and service providers who will be receiving New 
Aquila Options in exchange for Replaced Aquila Options, the number of New Aquila Options to be received and the 
number of Replaced Aquila Options held by each:
Name and Position
Barry Hildred 
Director and Chief Executive Officer  
Peter Bradshaw 
Chairman
Robin Dunbar 
Director and Chief Financial Officer
Edward Munden 
Director
Number / Exercise Price / Expiry Date
of Replaced Aquila Options 
1,000,000 / $0.15 / March 18, 2018
Number of New Aquila
Options 
5,000,000
400,000
400,000
400,000
250,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
100,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
200,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
150,000 / $0.15 / July 22, 2018 
 
Total – 700,000 
125,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
150,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
300,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
150,000 / $0.15 / July 22, 2018 
 
Total – 725,000 
200,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
100,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
200,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
150,000 / $0.15 / July 22, 2018 
 
Total – 650,000
- 63 -
Name and Position
Robin Quigley 
Assistant Corporate Secretary
Thomas Quigley 
President and Director
Office and Support Staff
Number / Exercise Price / Expiry Date
of Replaced Aquila Options
Number of New Aquila
Options
50,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
30,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
150,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
50,000 / $0.15 / July 22, 2018 
 
Total – 280,000 
350,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
250,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
400,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
200,000 / $0.15 / July 22, 2018 
 
Total – 1,200,000 
30,000 / $0.15 / March 2, 2014 
10,000 / $0.25 / November 10, 2014 
20,000 / $0.90 / February 2, 2016 
 
Total – 60,000 
4,615,000
Total
100,000
800,000
100,000
7,200,000
In  addition,  upon  completion  of  the  Transactions  certain  of  REBgold’s  existing  directors,  officers  and  service 
providers will become directors, officers and service providers of New Aquila. REBgold expects that the REBgold 
Options held by each of these directors, officers and service providers will be cancelled prior to the Effective Time 
and therefore will not be exchanged for Replacement Options pursuant to the Plan of Arrangement.  In order to 
retain these directors, officers and services providers and ensure that they are appropriately motivated to provide 
services to New Aquila and to increase shareholder value, effective as of the completion of the Transactions Aquila 
intends grant these individuals, together with Ed Guimaraes (a new independent director who will be joining the 
New Aquila board of directors at the Effective Time) an aggregate of 2,338,750 Aquila Options on the same terms 
as the New Aquila Options.  The following table sets out New Aquila Options to be granted to directors, officers and 
service providers of REBgold who will be continuing with New Aquila and the new independent director:
Name and Position with New Aquila
Number of New Aquila Options
Mark Burridge, Chairman 
Coen Louwarts 
Vice-President Corporate Development 
Ed Guimaraes, Director 
Peter Secker, Director 
Stephen Fabian, Director 
Lou Nagy, Chief Financial Officer
Total
620,833 
616,667
500,000 
250,000 
207,500 
143,750 
2,338,750
Aquila also expects to issue 3,986,250 Aquila Options at the Effective Time to the holders of the REBgold RSUs in 
partial settlement of all of the entitlements of the holders of the REBgold RSUs as well as in satisfaction of deferred 
salary obligations and fees payable to such holders of REBgold RSUs.  REBgold currently has 4,690,000 REBgold 
RSUs outstanding, all of which are eligible to become vested at the Effective Time.  REBgold and Aquila expect to 
enter into agreements with the holders of all of the outstanding REBgold RSUs prior to the Effective Time pursuant 
to which all entitlements under the outstanding REBgold RSUs, together with accrued and unpaid salary and fee 
obligations owing to certain of the holders of the REBgold RSUs, will be settled at or prior to the Effective Time in 
exchange for aggregate consideration consisting of $233,000 in cash, 795,000 Aquila Shares and 3,986,250 Aquila 
Options exercisable at $0.15 per share for five years from the Effective Date.  The consideration payable to each
- 64 -
holder of REBgold RSU’s also takes into account the number of REBgold Options that each such holder will be 
surrendering in connection with the Transactions.
Name and Position
with REBgold
Mark Burridge 
Executive Chairman 
Paul Miller 
Vice President, 
Minerals Engineering 
Coen Louwarts 
Senior Advisor 
Business 
Development 
Ross Orr 
Director 
Louis Nagy 
Chief Financial 
Officer 
Stephen Fabian 
Director 
Peter Secker 
Director 
Luke Leslie 
Director 
Gary Williams 
Senior Advisor 
Geology and 
Environmental 
Other Employees and 
Consultants
Accrued and 
Unpaid Salary /
Fees
REBgold RSUs
Surrendered
REBgold Options
$301,000
2,500,000
425,000
-
-
500,000
305,000
500,000
100,000
$95,000
225,000
255,000
-
225,000
212,500
150,000
150,000
150,000
155,000
185,000
100,000
$42,000
$42,000
$32,000
-
-
Closing Payment
(Cash / Aquila Shares /
Aquila Options)
$131,000 / 400,000 /
1,879,167
$10,000 / 100,000 /
400,000
$10,000 / 100,000 /
383,333
$20,000 / 50,000 /
227,500
$5,000 / 50,000 /
256,250
$15,000 / 20,000 /
192,500
$15,000 / 20,000 /
150,000
$15,000 / 20,000 /
137,500
$9,000 / 20,000 /
282,500
$233,000 / 795,000 /
3,986,250
75,000
55,000
$3,000 / 15,000 / 77,500
215,000
210,000
Total
$512,000
4,690,000
2,002,500
See “Appendix A “Information Concerning New Aquila - Directors and Executive Officers”, “The Arrangement - 
Treatment of REBgold Convertible Securities – REBgold Options” and “The Arrangement - Treatment of REBgold 
Convertible Securities - REBgold RSUs”.
Accordingly, Aquila intends to issue an aggregate of 13,525,000 Aquila Options on the terms described above upon 
completion of the Transactions.  After giving effect to these new options, the cancellation of the Replaced Aquila 
Options and 785,000 existing Aquila Options that will remain outstanding in accordance with their existing terms, 
and  assuming  all  of  the  REBgold  Options  are  surrendered  for  cancellation  prior  to  the  Effective  Time,  upon 
completion of the Transactions Aquila expects that there will be 14,310,000 Aquila Options outstanding, of which 
13,525,000 Aquila Options will have an exercise price of $0.15 per share and expire five years from the Effective 
Date.
Aquila  Shareholders  are  required  to  approve  the  grant  of  the  Aquila  Options  under  Section  613  of  the  TSX 
Company Manual in order to ensure that the Aquila Options can be issued upon completion of the Transactions with 
an exercise price of $0.15 per share.
- 65 -
At the Aquila Meeting, Aquila Shareholders will be asked to consider and if thought fit, approve, with or without 
variation, the following ordinary resolution to approve the grant of an aggregate of 13,525,000 Aquila Options:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
1.
2.
The  grant  of  an  aggregate  of  13,525,000  stock  options  of  Aquila  Resources  Inc.  (the 
“Corporation”),  representing  approximately  13.8%  of  the  currently  issued  and 
outstanding Aquila common shares, pursuant to the stock option plan of the Corporation 
to the directors, officers and eligible service providers of the Corporation and of REBgold 
Corporation  (“REBgold”)  who  will  be  continuing  with  the  Corporation  following 
completion  of  the  Transactions  and  to  be  holders  of  restricted  share  units  and 
performance share units of REBgold, as described in the joint management information 
circular of the Corporation and REBgold dated December 2, 2013 (the “Circular”), at an 
exercise price of $0.15 per share exercisable for a period of five years from the Effective 
Date (as defined in the Circular) be and is hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
To be effective, the Aquila Stock Option Resolution must be approved, with or without variation, by the affirmative 
vote of a simple majority of the votes cast on the Aquila Stock Option Resolution by all Aquila Shareholders voting 
as a single class, excluding those directors, officers and service providers who will receive the stock options to be 
granted,  present  in  person  or  represented  by  proxy  at  the  Aquila  Meeting.    Those  directors,  officers  and  service 
providers  who  will  be  receiving  the  stock  options  to  be  granted  and  who  will  not  be  entitled  to  vote  on  the 
resolution, hold 4,192,288 Aquila Shares or 4.2% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.
The Aquila Board unanimously recommends that Aquila Shareholders vote FOR the Aquila Stock Option 
Resolution.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated by management of Aquila in the 
Aquila proxy intend to vote FOR the approval of the Aquila Stock Option Resolution.
Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Share Issuance
As noted above, in connection with the settlement of all of the REBgold RSUs as well as in satisfaction of deferred 
salary  obligations  and  accrued  fees  payable  to  certain  directors,  officers,  employees  and  service  providers  of 
REBgold  and  as  compensation  to  certain  directors  and  officers  of  Aquila  upon  successful  completion  of  the 
Transactions,  Aquila  expects  to  issue  consideration  that  includes  up  to  1,435,000  Aquila  Shares  (the  “Debt 
Satisfaction and Compensation Shares”).
Directors  and  officers  of  Aquila  will  receive  aggregate  cash  payments  of  $70,000  and  an  aggregate  of  600,000 
Aquila  Shares  at  a  deemed  issue  price  of  $0.13  per  share  as  compensation  for  their  services  in  facilitating 
completion  of  the  Transactions  which  will  be  paid  upon  completion  of  the  Transactions.  Directors,  officers, 
employees and service providers of REBgold will receive aggregate cash payments of $233,000 and an aggregate of 
795,000 Aquila Shares at a deemed issue price of $0.13 in connection with settlement of all REBgold RSUs and 
satisfaction  of  deferred  salary  obligations  and  accrued  fees  which  will  also  be  paid  on  completion  of  the 
Transactions.
The  settlement  amounts  for  the  RSUs,  deferred  salary  and  fee  obligations  and  compensation  payments  to  the 
directors, officers, employees and service providers  of Aquila and REBgold and the holders of the REBgold RSUs 
were the result of  negotiations between the individuals receiving such settlement amounts and the management of 
Aquila  and  the    management  of    REBgold  and  are  considered  by  both  Aquila  and  REBgold  to  be  reasonable 
consideration for the satisfaction of those obligations.
- 66 -
The  following  tables  set  forth  the details  of  the  Debt  Satisfaction  and Compensation  Shares  and payments  to  be 
issued  or  paid  to  the  Aquila  directors  and  officers  and  the  holders  of  REBgold  RSU’s  upon  completion  of  the 
Transactions:
Aquila
Name and Position
Barry Hildred 
Director and Chief Executive Officer 
Thomas Quigley 
President and Director 
Robin Dunbar 
Director and Chief Financial Officer
REBgold
Closing Payment
(Cash / Aquila Shares)
$50,000 / 400,000
$10,000 / 100,000
$10,000 / 100,000
$70,000 / 600,000
Total
Name and Position
Accrued and Unpaid
Salary / Fees
REBgold RSUs
Closing Payment
(Cash / Aquila Shares)
Mark Burridge 
Executive Chairman 
Paul Miller 
Vice President, Minerals 
Engineering 
Coen Louwarts 
Senior Advisor Business 
Development 
Ross Orr 
Director 
Louis Nagy 
Chief Financial Officer 
Stephen Fabian 
Director 
Peter Secker 
Director 
Luke Leslie 
Director 
Gary Williams 
Senior Advisor Geology and 
Environmental 
Other Employees and Consultants 
REBgold Total 
Aquila + REBgold Total
$301,000
2,500,000
$131,000 / 400,000
-
-
$95,000
-
$42,000
$42,000
$32,000
-
-
$512,000 
$512,000
500,000
$10,000 / 100,000
500,000
$10,000 / 100,000
225,000
225,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
$20,000 / 50,000
$5,000 / 100,000
$15,000 / 20,000
$15,000 / 20,000
$15,000 / 20,000
75,000
$3,000 / 15,000
215,000 
4,690,000 
4,690,000
$9,000 / 10,000
$233,000 / 835,000 
$303,000 / 1,435,000
Aquila Shareholders are required to approve the grant of the issuance of the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation 
Shares under Section 613 of the TSX Company Manual as the issuance of the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation
- 67 -
Shares constitutes non-cash compensation to certain of the directors, officers, employees and service providers of 
Aquila.
At the Aquila Meeting, Aquila Shareholders will be asked to consider and if thought fit, approve, with or without 
variation,  the  following  ordinary  resolution  to  approve  the  issuance  of  the  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation 
Shares:
“BE IT RESOLVED AS AN ORDINARY RESOLUTION THAT:
3.
4.
The issuance of the Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Shares (being an aggregate of 
up  to  1,435,000  Aquila  Shares  or  approximately  1.5%  of  the  currently  issued  and 
outstanding  Aquila  common  shares)  as  described  in  the  joint  management  information 
circular of Aquila Resources Inc. (the “Corporation”) and REBgold Corporation dated 
December 2, 2013, is hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
Any officer or director of the Corporation is hereby authorized and directed for and on 
behalf  of  the  Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the 
Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver or cause to be delivered, all such documents and 
instruments and to perform or cause to be performed all such other acts and things as may 
be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing resolutions and the matters 
authorized hereby, such determination to be conclusively evidenced by the execution and 
delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.”
To  be  effective,  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Resolution  must  be  approved,  with  or  without 
variation,  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  a  simple  majority  of  the  votes  cast  on  the  Aquila  Debt  Satisfaction  and 
Compensation Resolution by all Aquila Shareholders voting as a single class, present in person or represented by 
proxy  at  the  Aquila  Meeting.    Those  directors,  officers  and  service  providers  who  will  be  receiving  the  Debt 
Satisfaction  and  Compensation  Shares  to  be  issued  and  who  will  not  be  entitled  to  vote  on  the  resolution,  hold 
3,658,676 Aquila Shares or 3.7% of the currently issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.
The  Aquila  Board  unanimously  recommends  that  Aquila  Shareholders  vote  FOR  the  Aquila  Debt 
Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution.  In the absence of a contrary instruction, the persons designated 
by  management  of  Aquila  in  the  Aquila  proxy  intend  to  vote  FOR  the  approval  of  the  Aquila  Debt 
Satisfaction and Compensation Resolution.
CERTAIN CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  principal  Canadian  federal  income  tax  considerations  generally  applicable  to 
REBgold Shareholders who, for the purposes of the Tax Act and at all relevant times, deal with REBgold and Aquila 
at arm’s length, are not affiliated with REBgold or Aquila and who hold their REBgold Shares, and will hold their 
Aquila Shares acquired pursuant to the Arrangement, as capital property.
A holder’s REBgold Shares and Aquila Shares generally will be considered capital property to a holder unless either 
the holder holds such securities in the course of carrying on a business of buying and selling securities or the holder 
has acquired such securities in a transaction or transactions considered to be an adventure or concern in the nature of 
trade.
This summary is based upon the facts set out in the Circular, the current provisions of the Tax Act and regulations 
thereunder in force as of the date hereof, all specific proposals to amend the Tax Act and regulations thereunder that 
have  been publicly  announced by  or on  behalf of  the  Minister of  Finance  (Canada) prior  to  the date  hereof (the 
“Proposed  Amendments”)  and  counsel’s  understanding  of  the  current  administrative  policies  and  assessing 
practices of the Canada Revenue Agency.  This summary assumes that the Proposed Amendments will be enacted as 
currently  proposed;  however,  there  is  no  certainty  that  the  Proposed  Amendments  will  be  enacted  in  the  form 
proposed or at all.  This summary does not take into account or anticipate any changes in applicable law, whether 
made  by  judicial,  governmental  or  legislative  action  or  any  provincial,  territorial  or  foreign  tax  laws  or 
considerations, which might differ significantly from the Canadian federal income tax discussed herein.
- 68 -
This summary is not exhaustive of all Canadian federal income tax considerations and is of a general nature only.  It 
is not intended to be, and should not be construed to be, legal or tax advice to any particular REBgold Shareholder. 
Accordingly,  REBgold  Shareholders  should  consult  their  own  tax  advisers  with  respect  to  the  income  tax 
consequences to them of the Arrangement (including the exercise of Dissent Rights) under federal, provincial, 
territorial and other applicable tax legislation.  The discussion below is qualified accordingly.
This summary is not applicable to a REBgold Shareholder: (i) that is a “specified financial institution” (as defined in 
the Tax Act), (ii) that is a “financial institution” for the purposes of the “mark-to-market property” rules contained in 
the Tax Act, (iii) who acquired their REBgold Shares pursuant to the exercise of an employee stock option, (iv) an 
interest in which is a “tax shelter investment” (as defined in the Tax Act), (v) who has made an election pursuant to 
the functional currency reporting election rules in the Tax Act, (vi) that is a foreign affiliate (as defined in the Tax 
Act) of a taxpayer resident in Canada, or (vii) that has entered or will enter into a “derivative forward agreement” as 
that term is defined in Proposed Amendments contained in Bill C-4 (“Bill C-4”) which received Second Reading in 
the  House  of  Commons  on  October  29,  2013  with  respect  to  the  REBgold  Shares.    This  summary  is  also  not 
applicable to a REBgold Shareholder that is a corporation resident in Canada, and is, or becomes, controlled by a 
non-resident corporation for the purposes of the “foreign affiliate dumping” rules in section 212.3 of the Tax Act.  
Any such REBgold Shareholders should consult their own tax advisor with respect to the tax consequences of the 
Arrangement.
This  summary  does  not  address  the  consequences  of  the  Arrangement  to  holders  of  REBgold  Convertible 
Debentures, REBgold Options, REBgold RSUs and REBgold Warrants.  All such holders should consult with their 
own tax advisors.
Residents of Canada
The following portion of this summary is applicable to REBgold Shareholders that are, for the purposes of the Tax 
Act  and  at  all  relevant  times,  resident  in  Canada  or  deemed  to  be  resident  in  Canada  (each,  a  “Canadian 
Shareholder”).  Certain  Canadian  Shareholders  whose  REBgold  Shares  or  Aquila  Shares  might  not  otherwise 
qualify  as  capital  property  may  be  entitled  to  obtain  such  qualification  by  making  an  irrevocable  election  in 
accordance with subsection 39(4) of the Tax Act to deem such shares and every “Canadian security” (as defined in 
the Tax Act) owned by such Canadian Shareholders to be capital property in the taxation year of the election and in 
all subsequent taxation years. Canadian Shareholders should consult their own tax advisors in respect of making this 
election.
The Arrangement
Rollover
In general, the exchange of REBgold Shares for Aquila Shares under the Arrangement will not give rise to a capital 
gain (or capital loss) to a Canadian Shareholder unless such shareholder elects to report such capital gain or capital 
loss in its income tax return for the year in which the exchange occurs.
Except where a particular Canadian Shareholder chooses to recognize a capital gain (or capital loss) on the exchange 
of  REBgold  Shares  for  Aquila  Shares  (as  discussed  below),  Canadian  Shareholders  shall  be  deemed  to  have 
disposed  of  their  REBgold  Shares  for  proceeds  of  disposition  equal  to  the  adjusted  cost  base  of  such  shares 
immediately before the exchange and to have acquired their Aquila Shares at a cost equal to that same amount. The 
cost of such Aquila Shares must be averaged with the adjusted cost base of all Aquila Shares held by such Canadian 
Shareholder as capital property immediately before the exchange to determine the adjusted cost base of each Aquila 
Share to the holder.
No Rollover
A Canadian Shareholder may choose to recognize a capital gain (or capital loss) on the exchange of REBgold Shares 
for Aquila Shares by including the capital gain (or capital loss) in such Canadian Shareholder’s tax return for the 
taxation year in which the exchange occurs. In those circumstances, the Canadian Shareholder will realize a capital 
gain  (or  capital  loss)  equal  to  the  amount  by  which  the  fair  market  value  of  the  Aquila  Shares  received  on  the 
exchange exceeds (or is exceeded by) the adjusted cost base of the REBgold Shares exchanged therefor and any
- 69 -
costs associated with the disposition and will acquire the Aquila Shares at a cost equal to the fair market value of the 
Aquila  Shares  determined  at  that  time.  Such  capital  gains  (or  capital  losses)  will  be  subject  to  the  tax  treatment 
described below under “Residents of Canada – Taxation of Capital Gains and Capital Losses”. The cost of such 
Aquila  Shares  must  be  averaged  with  the  adjusted  cost  base  of  all  other  Aquila  Shares  held  by  such  Canadian 
Shareholder immediately before the exchange as capital property to determine the adjusted cost base of each Aquila 
Share to the holder.
Receipt of Dividends on Aquila Shares
A Canadian Shareholder who is an individual (other than certain trusts) will be required to include in income any 
dividends received or deemed to be received on the Canadian Shareholder’s Aquila Shares, and will be subject to the 
gross-up and dividend tax credit rules applicable to taxable dividends received from taxable Canadian corporations, 
including the enhanced gross-up and dividend tax credit rules applicable to any dividends designated by New Aquila 
as “eligible dividends” (as defined in the Tax Act).
A Canadian Shareholder that is a corporation will be required to include in income any dividend received or deemed 
to be received on the Canadian Shareholder’s Aquila Shares, but generally will be entitled to deduct an equivalent 
amount in computing its taxable income.
A “private corporation” or a “subject corporation” (as defined in the Tax Act) may be liable under Part IV of the Tax 
Act to pay a refundable tax of 33⅓% on any dividend that it receives or is deemed to receive on its Aquila Shares to 
the extent that the dividend is deductible in computing the corporation’s taxable income.
Taxable dividends received by an individual or trust, other than certain specified trusts, may give rise to alternative 
minimum tax under the Tax Act.
Disposition of Aquila Shares Acquired on the Arrangement
A Canadian Shareholder that disposes or is deemed to dispose of an Aquila Share (other than to New Aquila, unless 
purchased by New Aquila in the open market in the manner in which shares are normally purchased by any member 
of the public in the open market) in a taxation year generally will realize a capital gain (or capital loss) equal to the 
amount  by  which  the  proceeds  of  disposition  of  the  Aquila  Share  exceed  (or  are  exceeded  by)  the  sum  of  the 
Canadian Shareholder’s adjusted cost base of such Aquila Shares, determined immediately before the disposition, 
and any reasonable costs of disposition. A Canadian Shareholder will be required to include any resulting taxable 
capital gain in income, or be entitled to deduct any resulting allowable capital loss, in accordance with the usual 
rules  applicable  to  capital  gains  and  capital  losses.  (See  “Residents  of  Canada  –  Taxation  of  Capital  Gains  and 
Capital Losses” below.)
Taxation of Capital Gains and Capital Losses
Generally, a Canadian Shareholder will be required to include in computing its income for a taxation year one-half 
of the amount of any capital gain (a “taxable capital gain”) realized by it in that year.  One-half of any capital loss 
(an “allowable capital loss”) realized by a Canadian Shareholder in a taxation year must be deducted from taxable 
capital gains realized by the Canadian Shareholder in that year.
Allowable capital losses in excess of taxable capital gains for a taxation year may be carried back to any of the three 
preceding taxation years or carried forward to any subsequent taxation year and deducted against net taxable capital 
gains realized in such years to the extent and under the circumstances specified in the Tax Act.
Where a Canadian Shareholder is a corporation, the amount of any capital loss arising on a disposition or deemed 
disposition of any share may be reduced by the amount of dividends received or deemed to have been received by it 
on such share (or on a share for which the share has been substituted) to the extent and under the circumstances 
described in the Tax Act.  Similar rules may apply where a corporation is a member of a partnership or a beneficiary 
of a trust that owns shares, or where a trust or partnership of which a corporation is a beneficiary or a member is a 
member of a partnership or a beneficiary of a trust that owns any shares.
- 70 -
A  Canadian  Shareholder  that  is  a  “Canadian-controlled  private  corporation”  (as  defined  in  the  Tax  Act)  may  be 
required  to  pay  an  additional  6⅔%  refundable  tax  on  certain  investment  income,  which  includes  taxable  capital 
gains.
Capital  gains  realized  by  an  individual  or  trust,  other  than  certain  specified  trusts,  may  give  rise  to  alternative 
minimum tax under the Tax Act.
Dissenting REBgold Shareholders
Canadian  Shareholders  who  intend  to  dissent  (each,  a  “Resident  Dissenting  Shareholder”)  should  consult  their 
own tax advisors with respect to the tax treatment of payments received as a result of the exercise of Dissent Rights 
described under “Dissent Rights”.
A  Resident  Dissenting  Shareholder  that  validly  exercises  the  Dissent  Rights  and  consequently  receives  a  cash 
payment (other than the portion of such proceeds attributable to interest) in respect of the fair market value of the 
Resident Dissenting Shareholder’s REBgold Shares from New Aquila will be considered to have disposed of the 
REBgold Shares for proceeds of disposition equal to the amount paid to such Resident Dissenting Shareholder, less 
an amount in respect of interest, if any, awarded by the Court. Such Resident Dissenting Shareholder will realize a 
capital gain (or a capital loss) to the extent that such proceeds of disposition exceed (or are less than) the aggregate 
of the Resident Dissenting Shareholder’s adjusted cost base of the REBgold Shares immediately before the Effective 
Time and any reasonable costs of disposition. The tax treatment of capital gains and capital losses realized by a 
Resident Dissenting Shareholder generally will be as described above under the heading “Residents of Canada – 
Taxation of Capital Gains and Capital Losses”.
Any interest awarded to a Resident Dissenting Shareholder by the Court will be included in the Resident Dissenting 
Shareholder’s  income  and,  where  the  Resident  Dissenting  Shareholder  is  a  “Canadian-controlled  private 
corporation”, the Resident Dissenting Shareholder may be liable for an additional refundable tax of 6⅔% in respect 
of any such interest.
Eligibility for Investment
Provided  the  Aquila  Shares  are  listed  on  a  designated  stock  exchange  (which  includes  the  TSX)  at  the  time  of 
issuance pursuant to the Arrangement, the Aquila Shares will be qualified investments under the Tax Act for trusts 
governed  by  a  registered  retirement  savings  plan  (a  “RRSP”),  a  registered  retirement  income  fund  (“RRIF”),  a 
registered education savings plan, a deferred profit sharing plan, a registered disability savings plan and a tax-free 
savings account (“TFSA”).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Aquila Shares are a “prohibited investment” for a TFSA, RRSP or RRIF, the 
holder of the TFSA or the annuitant of the RRSP or RRIF, as the case may be, will be subject to a penalty tax as set 
out in the Tax Act.  Aquila Shares generally will be a “prohibited investment” for a TFSA, RRSP or RRIF if the 
holder of a TFSA or the annuitant of a RRSP or RRIF, as the case may be, (i) does not deal at arm’s length with 
New Aquila for purposes of the Tax Act, (ii) has a “significant interest” (within the meaning of the Tax Act) in New 
Aquila, or (iii) has a “significant interest” (within the meaning of the Tax Act) in a corporation, partnership or trust 
with which New Aquila does not deal at arm’s length for purposes of the Tax Act.  Bill C-4 proposes to delete the 
condition in (iii) above.  In addition, pursuant to Bill C-4, the Aquila Shares will not be a “prohibited investment” if 
the  Shares  are  “excluded  property”  as  defined  in  Bill  C-4  for  trusts  governed  by  a  TFSA,  RRSP  and  RRIF.  
Shareholders should consult their own tax advisors as to whether the Aquila Shares will be a prohibited investment 
in their particular circumstances, including with respect to whether the Aquila Shares would be “excluded property” 
as defined in Bill C-4.
Non-Residents of Canada
The following portion of the summary is applicable to REBgold Shareholders who, for purposes of the Tax Act, 
have not been and will not be resident or deemed to be resident in Canada at any time while they have held REBgold 
Shares and who, at all relevant times, do not use or hold and are not deemed to use or hold their REBgold Shares in 
carrying on a business in Canada (each, a “Non-Resident Shareholder”). Special rules, which are not discussed in
- 71 -
this  summary,  may  apply  to  a  Non-Resident  Shareholder  that  is  an  insurer  carrying  on  business  in  Canada  and 
elsewhere.
The tax treatment of non-residents of Canada under the Tax Act and the following discussion can be affected by the 
provisions  of  an  applicable  income  tax  treaty.    Non-Resident  Shareholders  are  advised  to  consult  their  own  tax 
advisers  with  regard  to  the  availability  of  relief  under  an  applicable  income  tax  treaty  or  convention  in  their 
particular circumstances.
The Arrangement
A Non-Resident Shareholder that participates in the Arrangement will also not be subject to tax under the Tax Act 
on any capital gain realized on the exchange of REBgold Shares for Aquila Shares provided that the shares disposed 
of are not “taxable Canadian property” of the Non-Resident Shareholder at the time of the exchange.  In the event 
that  a Non-Resident Shareholder’s  Shares constitute  or  are deemed  to constitute  “taxable  Canadian  property”,  as 
discussed below under the heading “Taxable Canadian Property”, the disposition thereof generally will not give rise 
to a capital gain (or capital loss) provided the Non-Resident Shareholder chooses not to recognize a capital gain (or 
capital  loss)  on  the  exchange  as  described  above  under  the  heading  “Residents  of  Canada  -  The  Arrangement  - 
Rollover”.  In the event the REBgold Shares are “taxable Canadian property” to the Non-Resident Shareholder and 
the Non-Resident Shareholder chooses to recognize a capital gain (or capital loss) and that gain is not exempt from 
tax in Canada under any applicable income tax treaty or convention between Canada and the country in which the 
Non-Resident  Shareholder  resides,  the  consequences  to  such  Non-Resident  Shareholder  will  be  the  same  as 
described above under the heading “Residents of Canada – The Arrangement - No Rollover”.  In such case, a Non-
Resident Shareholder will be required to file a Canadian tax return.
Disposition of Aquila Shares Acquired on the Arrangement
Any capital gain realized by a Non-Resident Shareholder on a disposition or deemed disposition of Aquila Shares 
will only be taxable under the Tax Act if such shares are “taxable Canadian property”, as discussed below under the 
heading “Taxable Canadian Property”, and the gain is not exempt from tax in Canada under any applicable income 
tax treaty or convention between Canada and the country in which the Non-Resident Shareholder resides.  The tax 
treatment of a capital gain realized by a Non-Resident Shareholder that is not exempt under an applicable income 
tax treaty generally will be as described above under the headings “Residents of Canada – Disposition of Aquila 
Shares Acquired on the Arrangement” and “Residents of Canada – Taxation of Capital Gains and Capital Losses.” 
In such case, a Non-Resident Shareholder will be required to file a Canadian tax return.
Taxable Canadian Property
Shares that are listed on a designated stock exchange (which includes the TSX and the TSXV) generally will not 
constitute taxable Canadian property of a Non-Resident Shareholder unless at any time during the 60-month period 
immediately  preceding  the  disposition  (i) the  Non-Resident  Shareholder,  persons  with  whom  the  Non-Resident 
Shareholder did not deal at arm’s length, or the Non-Resident Shareholder together with all such persons, owned or 
was considered to own 25% or more of the issued shares of any class or series of shares of the capital stock of New 
Aquila, and (ii) more than 50% of the fair market value of the shares was derived directly or indirectly from one or 
any combination of real or immovable property situated in Canada, “Canadian resource properties” (as defined in 
the Tax Act), “timber resource properties” (as defined in the Tax Act), and options in respect of, or interests in, or 
for civil law rights in, any such properties (whether or not such property exists).  Shares may also be deemed to be 
taxable  Canadian  property  in  certain  circumstances  as  set  out  in  the  Tax  Act.    Aquila  Shares  received  by  a 
Non-Resident Shareholder in exchange for REBgold Shares that are, or are deemed to be, taxable Canadian property 
at the time of the exchange will be deemed to be taxable Canadian property for 60 months from the time of the 
exchange if the Non-Resident Shareholder chooses not to recognize a gain (or loss) on the exchange.
Receipt of Dividends on Aquila Shares
Dividends paid or credited on Aquila Shares to a Non-Resident Shareholder generally will be subject to Canadian 
withholding tax at a rate of 25% of the gross amount of the dividend, unless the rate is reduced under the provisions 
of an applicable income tax treaty or convention between Canada and the Non-Resident Shareholder’s country of 
residence.
- 72 -
Dissenting REBgold Non-Resident Shareholders
Non-Resident Shareholders that intend to dissent (each, a “Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder”) should consult 
their  own  tax  advisors  with  respect  to  their  compliance  obligations  under  the  Tax  Act  and  the  tax  treatment  of 
payments received as a result of the exercise of Dissent Rights described under “Dissent Rights”.
A  Non-Resident  Dissenting  Shareholder  that  validly  exercises  Dissent  Rights  and  consequently  receives  a  cash 
payment (other than the portion of such proceeds attributable to interest) from New Aquila will be considered to 
have disposed of its REBgold Shares for proceeds of disposition equal to the amount paid to such Non-Resident 
Dissenting Shareholder less an amount in respect of interest, if any, awarded by the Court.  Any capital gain so 
realized  by  a  Non-Resident  Dissenting  Shareholder  will  only  be  taxable  under  the  Tax  Act  if  such  shares  are 
“taxable Canadian property”, as discussed above under the heading “Taxable Canadian Property”, and the gain is 
not  exempt  from  tax  in  Canada  under  any  applicable  income  tax  treaty  or  convention  between  Canada  and  the 
country in which the Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder resides.  The tax treatment of a capital gain realized by a 
Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder that is not exempt under an applicable income tax treaty generally will be as 
described above under the headings “Residents of Canada – Dissenting REBgold Shareholders” and “Residents of 
Canada – Taxation of Capital Gains and Capital Losses”.  In such case, a Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder 
will be required to file a Canadian tax return.
A Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder who receives interest consequent upon the exercise of Dissent Rights will 
not  be  subject  to  Canadian  withholding  tax  except  to  the  extent  such  interest  is  “participating  debt  interest”  as 
defined in the Tax Act.  In such case, such amount will be subject to Canadian withholding tax at the rate of 25% 
except  to  the  extent  that  the  rate  is  reduced  under  provisions  of  an  applicable  income  tax  treaty  or  convention 
between Canada and the Non-Resident Dissenting Shareholder’s country of residence.
RISK FACTORS RELATING TO THE TRANSACTIONS
Uncertainties associated with the Arrangement
The Arrangement will involve the integration of companies that previously operated independently.  A factor in the 
success  of  the  Arrangement  will  be  the  ability  of  the  management  of  New  Aquila  to  integrate  all  or  part  of  the 
operations of REBgold into its business following completion of the Arrangement.  The Arrangement and/or the 
integration of the two businesses can result in unanticipated operational problems and interruptions, expenses and 
liabilities, the diversion of management attention and the loss of key employees.  There can be no assurance that the 
Arrangement  and  business  integration  will  be  successful  or  that  the  combination  will  not  adversely  affect  the 
business, financial condition or operating results of Aquila or REBgold.  In addition, Aquila or REBgold may incur 
costs  related  to  the  Arrangement  and  related  to  integrating  the  two  companies.    There  can  be  no  assurance  that 
Aquila  or  REBgold  will  not  incur  additional  material  costs  in  subsequent  quarters  to  reflect  additional  costs 
associated with the Arrangement or that that the benefits expected from the Arrangement will be realized.
Aquila and REBgold expect to incur significant costs associated with the Transactions
Aquila and REBgold will collectively incur significant direct transaction costs in connection with the Transactions. 
Actual  direct  transaction  costs  incurred  in  connection  with  the  Transactions  may  be  higher  than  expected.    In 
addition, further costs may be incurred to the extent that any REBgold Shareholders exercise their Dissent Rights 
and  receive  the  payout  value  of  their  REBgold  Shares.    Moreover,  Aquila’s  and  REBgold’s  costs  related  to  the 
Transactions, including legal, financial advisory services, accounting, printing and mailing costs, must be paid even 
if the Transactions are not completed.  There are also opportunity costs associated with the diversion of management 
attention away from the conduct of Aquila’s business and REBgold’s business in the ordinary course.
The Aquila Shares issued in connection with the Arrangement may have a market value different than expected
Pursuant to the Arrangement Agreement, REBgold Shareholders will receive Aquila Shares in proportion to their 
respective holdings on a one for one basis.  The exchange ratio will not be adjusted to reflect any changes in the 
market value of Aquila Shares or REBgold Shares at the Effective Time.
- 73 -
In addition, a significant number of additional Aquila Shares will be issued pursuant to the Transactions and will 
become available for trading in the public market.  The increase in the number of Aquila Shares may lead to sales of 
such shares or the perception that such sales may occur, either of which may adversely affect the market for, and the 
market price of, the Aquila Shares.
REBgold has not  verified  the  reliability  of  the  information  regarding Aquila, HMI or  the  Back  Forty  Project 
included in, or which may have been omitted from, this Circular
All  historical  information  regarding  Aquila,  HMI  or  the  Back  Forty  Project  contained  in  or  incorporated  by 
reference into this Circular, including all Aquila and HMI financial information, has been provided by Aquila or 
HudBay.    Although  REBgold  has  no  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  or  completeness  of  such  information,  any 
inaccuracy  or  material  omission  in  the  information  about  or  relating  to  Aquila,  HMI  or  the  Back  Forty  Project 
contained  in  the  Circular  could result  in unanticipated  liabilities  or  expenses,  increase  the  cost  of  integrating  the 
companies  or  adversely  affect  the  operational  plans  of  New  Aquila  and  its  results  of  operations  and  financial 
condition.
Aquila has not verified the reliability of the information regarding REBgold or HMI included in, or which may 
have been omitted from, this Circular
All historical information regarding REBgold and HMI contained in this Circular, including all REBgold and HMI 
financial  information,  has  been  provided  by  REBgold  or  HudBay.    Although  Aquila  has  no  reason  to  doubt  the 
accuracy  or  completeness  of  such  information,  any  inaccuracy  or  material  omission  in  the  information  about  or 
relating to REBgold or HMI contained in the Circular could result in unanticipated liabilities or expenses, increase 
the  cost  of  integrating  the  companies  or  adversely  affect  the  operational  plans  of  New  Aquila  and  its  results  of 
operations and financial condition.
The Arrangement Agreement and the HMI Acquisition Agreement may be terminated in certain circumstances
Each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold,  as  applicable,  has  the  right  to  terminate  the  Arrangement  Agreement  in  certain 
circumstances,  including  following  the  occurrence  of  a  Material  Adverse  Effect.    Each  of  Aquila,  REBgold  and 
HudBay,  as  applicable,  has  the  right  to  terminate  the  HMI  Acquisition  Agreement  in  certain  circumstances, 
including non-completion of the Arrangement.  Accordingly, there is no certainty, nor can either of REBgold or 
Aquila provide any assurance, that the Arrangement will not be terminated by either REBgold or Aquila before the 
completion of the Arrangement or that the HMI Acquisition Agreement will not be terminated by HudBay, Aquila 
or REBgold before the completion of the HMI Acquisition.
In some circumstances, Aquila or REBgold may be required to pay the Termination Payment to the other Party or to 
reimburse the transaction expenses of the other Party following a termination of the Arrangement Agreement.  Any 
such payment could have a Material Adverse Effect on the financial condition of the Party required to make such 
payment.    In  addition,  certain  costs  related  to  the  Transactions,  such  as  legal,  accounting  and  certain  financial 
advisor fees, must be paid by Aquila and REBgold even if the Transactions are not completed.
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  all  conditions  precedent  to  the  Transactions  or  the  HMI  Acquisition  will  be 
satisfied
The completion of each of the Transactions is subject to a number of conditions precedent, certain of which are 
outside  the  control  of  Aquila  and  REBgold,  including  obtaining  the  requisite  approvals  from  shareholders,  the 
approval  of  the  Court  and  certain  regulatory  approvals.    There  is  no  certainty,  nor  can  REBgold  and/or  Aquila 
provide  any  assurance,  that  these  conditions  will  be  satisfied  or,  if  satisfied,  when  they  will  be  satisfied.    The 
requirement to take certain actions or to agree to certain conditions to satisfy such requirements or obtain any such 
approvals may have a Material Adverse Effect on the business and affairs of Aquila or REBgold or the trading price 
of the Aquila Shares or the REBgold Shares.  If for any reason the Transactions are not completed, the market price 
of the REBgold Shares and the Aquila Shares may be adversely affected.  Moreover, if the Arrangement Agreement 
is terminated, there is no assurance that the REBgold Board and/or the Aquila Board will be able to find another 
similar transaction to pursue.
- 74 -
Income Tax Laws
There can be no assurance that the Canada Revenue Agency or other applicable taxing authorities will agree with 
the Canadian income tax consequences of the Arrangement, as applicable, as set forth in this Circular.  Furthermore, 
there can be no assurance that applicable Canadian income tax laws, regulations or tax treaties will not be changed 
or  interpreted  in  a  manner,  or  that  applicable  taxing  authorities  will  not  take  administrative  positions,  that  are 
adverse to New Aquila and its securityholders following completion of the Arrangement.  Such taxation authorities 
may also disagree with how New Aquila or its predecessors, including Aquila and REBgold, calculate or have in the 
past calculated their income for income tax purposes.  Any such events could adversely affect New Aquila or its 
share price following completion of the Arrangement.
If the Transactions are not completed, Aquila and REBgold’s future business and operations could be harmed
If  the  Transactions  are  not  completed,  each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  may  be  subject  to  a  number  of  additional 
material risks, including the following:


each of Aquila and REBgold may have lost opportunities that would have otherwise been available had 
the  Arrangement  Agreement  not  been  executed,  including,  without  limitation,  opportunities  not 
pursued as a result of affirmative and negative covenants made by it in the Arrangement Agreement, 
such as covenants affecting the conduct of its business outside the ordinary course of business; and
each  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  may  be  unable  to  obtain  additional  sources  of  financing  or  conclude 
another sale, merger or amalgamation on terms as favourable as those of the Transactions, in a timely 
manner, or at all.
GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE REBGOLD MEETING AND VOTING
Time, Date and Place
The REBgold Meeting will be held at 10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 30, 2013 at 333 Bay Street, Suite 
3400, Toronto, Ontario M5H 2S7.
Record Date
The record date for the determination of REBgold Shareholders entitled to receive notice of and vote at the REBgold 
Meeting  is  the  close  of  business  on  November  29,  2013.    Only  REBgold  Shareholders  whose  names  have  been 
entered  in  the  register  of  REBgold  Shareholders  at  the  close  of  business  on  the  Record  Date  will  be  entitled  to 
receive notice of and to vote at the REBgold Meeting.
Solicitation of Proxies
The solicitation of proxies will be primarily by mail, but proxies may also be solicited in person, by telephone or 
other  form  of  correspondence.  The  cost  of  preparing  and  mailing  this  Circular  and  other  material  relating  to  the 
Meeting and the cost of soliciting proxies has been or will be borne by REBgold.
Voting by Proxies
A  proxyholder  is  the  person  you  appoint  to  act  on  your  behalf  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  (including  any 
postponement of the REBgold Meeting or continuation after an adjournment of the REBgold Meeting) and to 
vote your REBgold Shares. An REBgold Shareholder has the right to appoint one or more (but no more than five) 
proxyholders  other  than  the  representatives  named  on  the  REBgold  Proxy,  to  attend  and  act  on  such  REBgold 
Shareholder’s  behalf  at  the  REBgold  Meeting.  Such  person  or  persons  appointed  as  proxyholder  must  be  an 
REBgold Shareholder, unless the person appointing the proxyholder is a company or a representative of a company. 
You may exercise this right by striking out those names appearing on the REBgold Proxy and inserting in the 
space provided the name of the person or company you desire to designate as proxyholder. If you leave the
- 75 -
space  in  the  REBgold  Proxy  blank,  the  persons  designated  in  the  form,  who  are  officers  and  directors  of 
REBgold, are appointed to act as your proxyholder.
A proxy will not be valid for use at the REBgold Meeting unless the completed form of proxy is deposited at the 
offices of Computershare Investor Services Inc. at 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1 or 
the proxy vote is otherwise registered in accordance with the instructions thereon, not later than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto 
time) on December 24, 2013, or if the REBgold Meeting is adjourned, not later than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays and holidays) before the time for holding the adjourned meeting.  Late proxies may be accepted or rejected 
by the Chair of the REBgold Meeting in his discretion, and the Chair is under no obligation to accept or reject any 
particular late proxy.
Revocability of Proxies
An REBgold Shareholder that submits an REBgold Proxy may revoke it at any time before it is used by doing any 
one of the following:


sending another form of proxy with a later date to the offices of Computershare Investor Services Inc. 
at 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1 not later than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto 
time) on December 24, 2013 or not less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) 
prior to any adjournment of the REBgold Meeting;
depositing  an  instrument  in  writing  executed  by  the  shareholder  or  the  shareholder’s  legal 
representative, and if the shareholder is a company, the instrument must be signed by the company or 
by  a  representative  appointed  for  the  company  to  either  (i) the  offices  of  Computershare  Investor 
Services Inc. at 100 University Avenue, 9th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5J 2Y1 at any time up to and 
including the last business day before the day set for holding the REBgold Meeting at which the proxy 
is to be used; or (ii) with the chair of the REBgold Meeting, at the REBgold Meeting; or

in any other manner permitted by-law.
Late proxies may be accepted or rejected by the Chairperson of the REBgold Meeting in his or her own discretion, 
and the Chairperson of the REBgold Meeting is under no obligation to accept or reject any particular late proxy.
Voting by Non-Registered (“Beneficial”) REBgold Shareholders
The  information  set  out  in  this  section  is  important  to  many  REBgold  Shareholders  as  a  substantial  number  of 
REBgold Shareholders do not hold their REBgold Shares in their own name.
This  Circular  and  the  accompanying  materials  are  being  sent  to  REBgold’s  registered  shareholders  and 
non-registered shareholders, that is shareholders who hold REBgold Shares through a broker, investment dealer or 
other intermediary (collectively, called “Beneficial Shareholders”). Beneficial Shareholders should note that only 
proxies deposited by REBgold Shareholders whose names appear on the share register will be recognized and acted 
upon at the REBgold Meeting.  If REBgold Shares are shown on an account statement that a broker, investment 
dealer or other intermediary provides to a Beneficial Shareholder, then in almost all cases the name of the Beneficial 
Shareholder will not appear on the share register.  Such REBgold Shares will most likely be registered in the name 
of the broker or an agent of the broker.  In Canada, the vast majority of such REBgold Shares will be registered in 
the name of “CDS & Co.”, the registration name of CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc., which company 
acts as a nominee for many Canadian brokerage firms. REBgold Shares held by an Intermediary may only be voted 
by  such  Intermediary  in  accordance  with  instructions  received  from  Beneficial  Shareholders.    Without  specific 
instructions, brokers and their agents and nominees are prohibited from voting shares for Beneficial Shareholders.
Additional Information for Beneficial Shareholders
Beneficial Shareholders fall into two categories: (i) those who object to their name being made known to REBgold 
(“Objecting Beneficial Owner” or “OBO”); and (ii) those who do not object to REBgold knowing their identity 
(“Non-Objecting  Beneficial  Owner”  or  “NOBO”).    If  you  are  a  non-registered  Beneficial  Shareholder,  and 
REBgold  or  its  agents  have  sent  the  materials  for  the  Meeting  directly  to  you,  your  name  and  address  and  the
- 76 -
information pertaining to the shares that you beneficially hold have been obtained in accordance with the applicable 
securities legislation from the broker, investment dealer or other intermediary who holds the REBgold Shares on 
your  behalf.    By  choosing  to  send  these  materials  directly  to  you,  REBgold  has  assumed  responsibility  for 
(i) delivering  these  materials  to  you;  and  (ii) executing  the  instructions  that  you  provide  by  means  of  the  voting 
instruction form (“VIF”).
Securities regulatory policies require brokers and other intermediaries to seek voting instructions from Beneficial 
Shareholders in advance of shareholders’ meetings.  Each broker, investment dealer or other intermediary has its 
own mailing procedures and provides its own return instructions to clients, which should be carefully followed by 
Beneficial Shareholders to ensure that their REBgold Shares are voted at the REBgold Meeting.
However, as authorized by National Instrument 54-101 – Communication with Beneficial Owners of Securities of a 
Reporting Issuer, REBgold has engaged its registrar and transfer agent, Computershare Investor Services Inc., to 
deliver the materials for the REBgold Meeting directly to the majority of REBgold’s NOBOs.  This Circular and 
accompanying  materials  will  be  provided  to  the  remainder  of  REBgold’s  NOBOs  by  Broadridge  Financial 
Solutions, Inc. (“Broadridge”).
In  both  cases,  each  NOBO  will  receive  a  scannable  VIF  to  be  completed  and  returned  by  mail  in  the  envelope 
provided  to  Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  or  Broadridge,  as  applicable.  In  addition,  by  following  the 
instructions provided in the VIF by Computershare Investor Services Inc. or Broadridge, the NOBO will be able to 
provide  his  or  her  voting  instructions  by  telephone  or  through  the  Internet.    In  each  of  these  cases,  the  voting 
instructions of the NOBOs will be tabulated so that the REBgold Shares beneficially owned by the NOBO are voted 
at the REBgold Meeting in accordance with those instructions.
The purpose of the VIF is to provide a means for the Beneficial Shareholder to provide instructions as to how the 
REBgold  Shares  of  the  Beneficial  Shareholder  are  to  be  voted  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  on  the  Beneficial 
Shareholder’s behalf.  Beneficial Shareholders should therefore carefully follow the procedures that accompany the 
VIF  to  ensure  that  their  REBgold  Shares  are  to  be  voted  at  the  REBgold  Meeting  in  accordance  with  their 
instructions.
Accordingly, each Beneficial Shareholder should:
(a)
(b)
carefully review the VIF and the voting procedures provided with, or as part of, the VIF; and
provide  instructions  as  to  the  voting  of  the  Beneficial  Shareholder’s  REBgold  Shares  in 
accordance with those voting procedures.
For  greater  certainty,  Beneficial  Shareholders  should  note  that  they  are  not  entitled  to  use  a  VIF  received  from 
Computershare  Investor  Services  Inc.  or  Broadridge  to  vote  REBgold  Shares  directly  at  the  REBgold  Meeting.  
Instead, the Beneficial Shareholder must complete the VIF and return it by mail to Computershare Investor Services 
Inc. or Broadridge, as applicable, or follow the alternate telephone or internet voting procedures outlined therein.  
The Beneficial Shareholder must complete these steps well in advance of the REBgold Meeting in order to ensure 
such REBgold Shares are voted.
In the alternative, by following the alternate procedures described in the VIF, the Beneficial Shareholder may attend 
the REBgold Meeting in person or designate another person to attend the REBgold Meeting on his or her behalf and 
vote the REBgold Shares of the Beneficial Shareholder.  As set out in the VIF, there are two such procedures:
(a)
The  Beneficial  Shareholder  can  appoint  himself  or  herself,  or  designate  another  individual,  to 
attend  and  vote  the  shares  by  (i) entering  the  appropriate  information  under  the  heading 
“Appointee” in the VIF; or (ii) providing this information through the Internet.  If this is done, the 
Beneficial Shareholder or his or her designate will be entitled to attend the REBgold Meeting and 
vote in person.  However, when the Beneficial Shareholder or designate arrives at the REBgold 
Meeting, he or she must register with the scrutineer.
(b)
If the Beneficial Shareholder enters his or her name, or that of a designate, in the “Appointee” 
section  of  the  VIF,  he  or  she  need  not  obtain  a  legal  proxy  to  attend  and  vote  at  the  Meeting.
- 77 -
However,  securities  legislation  provides  that  a  Beneficial  Shareholder  may  request  that  a  legal 
proxy  be  issued  to  enable  the  Beneficial  Shareholder  or  designate  to  attend  and  vote  at  the 
REBgold Meeting.  A Beneficial Shareholder who wishes to utilize this alternative should (i) enter 
his or her name or that of a designate in the “Appointee” section of the VIF; and (ii) check the 
appropriate  box  on  the  VIF.    A  legal  proxy  that  will  then  be  issued  will  entitle  the  Beneficial 
Shareholder or designate to attend the REBgold Meeting and vote.  However, for this procedure to 
be  effective,  the  proxy  must  be  submitted  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  applicable  to 
proxies, including the deadline for receipt of proxies, set out in this Circular.
Beneficial Shareholders who have questions or concerns regarding any of these procedures may also contact their 
broker,  investment  dealer  or  other  intermediary.    It  is  recommended  that  inquiries  of  this  kind  be  made  well  in 
advance of the REBgold Meeting.
Quorum
The quorum for the transaction of business at a meeting of REBgold Shareholders is two persons who are, or who 
represent by proxy, REBgold Shareholders.
Principal Holders of REBgold Shares
As of December 2, 2013,  27,525,188 REBgold Shares were issued and outstanding.
To the knowledge of the directors and executive officers of REBgold, no person beneficially owned, or controlled or 
directed,  directly  or  indirectly,  voting  securities  carrying  more  than  10%  of  the  voting  rights  attached  to  the 
REBgold Shares other than as follows:
Name 
Baker Steel Capital Managers LLP 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Comprised of REBgold Shares registered in the name of Baker Steel Resources Trust Fund, Genus Natural Resources Fund, CF Ruffer
Number of Shares Owned or Controlled
10,868,501(1)
Percentage of Shares
39.5%
Bakersteel Gold Fund, Genus Dynamic Gold Fund, Rothchild Investment Trust and Baker Steel Alpha Gold Fund.
GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE AQUILA MEETING AND VOTING
Time, Date and Place
The  Aquila  Meeting  will  be  held  at  11:00  a.m.  on  December  30,  2013  at  333  Bay  Street,  Suite  3400,  Toronto, 
Ontario, M5H 2S7.
Record Date
The record date for determining Aquila Shareholders entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Aquila Meeting 
is the close of business on November 29, 2013.  Only Aquila Shareholders of record at the close of business on the 
Record Date will be entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the Aquila Meeting.
Solicitation of Proxies
This Circular is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the management of Aquila for use 
at  the  Aquila  Meeting  and  any  adjournment  thereof  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in  the  Aquila  Notice  of 
Meeting.    The  solicitation  of  proxies  will  be  primarily  by  mail,  but  proxies  may  also  be  solicited  in  person,  by 
telephone  or  other  form  of  correspondence.    The  cost  of  preparing  and  mailing  this  Circular  and  other  material 
relating to the Meeting and the cost of soliciting proxies has been or will be borne by Aquila.
- 78 -
Voting by Proxies
The Aquila Proxy accompanying this Circular confers discretionary authority upon the proxy nominee with respect 
to any amendments or variations to matters identified in the Aquila Notice of Meeting and any other matters that 
may properly come before the Aquila Meeting.  As at the date of this Circular, Aquila’s management is not aware of 
any such amendments or variations, or of other matters to be presented for action at the Aquila Meeting.
If the instructions in a proxy given to Aquila’s management are certain, the Aquila Shares represented by proxy will 
be  voted  or  withheld  from  voting  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  of  the  Aquila  Shareholder  on  any  poll  as 
specified in the proxy with respect to the matter to be acted on.  If a choice is not so specified with respect to any 
such matter, the Aquila Shares represented by a proxy given to Aquila’s management will be voted FOR the 
approval of each of the matters described in the Aquila Notice of Meeting.  A Aquila Shareholder has the 
right to appoint a person (who need not be a Aquila Shareholder) to attend and act for him, her or it and on 
his, her or its behalf at the Aquila Meeting other than the persons designated in the Aquila Proxy and may 
exercise  such  right  by  inserting  the  name  in  full  of  the  desired  person  in  the  blank  space  provided  in  the 
Aquila Proxy and striking out the names now designated.
Aquila Shareholders who are unable to attend the Meeting or any adjournment thereof in person are encouraged to 
vote by completing the Aquila Proxy or, alternatively, by telephone, or over the Internet, in each case in accordance 
with the enclosed instructions.  A proxy will not be valid for use at the Aquila Meeting unless the completed form of 
proxy  is  deposited  at  the offices  of  Trans Canada  Transfer  Inc.  at 25 Adelaide  Street  East,  Suite  1301,  Toronto, 
Ontario, M5C 3A1 or the proxy vote is otherwise registered in accordance with the instructions thereon, not later 
than 10:00 a.m. (Toronto time) on December 24, 2013, or if the Aquila Meeting is adjourned, not later than 48 hours 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) before the time for holding the adjourned meeting. Late proxies may 
be accepted or rejected by the Chair of the Aquila Meeting in his discretion, and the Chair is under no obligation to 
accept or reject any particular late proxy.
Revocability of Proxies
In addition to revocation in any other manner permitted by-law, a Aquila Shareholder executing the Aquila Proxy 
has  the  power  to  revoke  it  by  instrument  in  writing  executed  by  the  Aquila  Shareholder  or  his  or  her  attorney 
authorized in writing or, where the Aquila Shareholder is a corporation, by a duly authorized officer or attorney of 
the corporation. To be valid, an instrument of revocation must be received at Aquila’s registered office by fax at 
(416) 955-4771, or by mail or by hand at 65 Queen Street, Suite 530, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2M5 at any time up to 
and  including  the  last  business  day  preceding  the  day  of  the  Aquila  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  thereof,  or 
delivered to the Chair of the Aquila Meeting on the day fixed for the Aquila Meeting or any adjournment thereof by 
not  later  than  the  time  fixed  for  commencement  of  such  Aquila  Meeting  or  such  adjourned  Aquila  Meeting.  A 
revocation of a proxy does not affect any manner on which a vote has been taken prior to the revocation.
Voting by Non-Registered (“Beneficial”) Aquila Shareholders
The information set out in this section is important to many Aquila Shareholders as a substantial number of Aquila 
Shareholders do not hold their Aquila Shares in their own name.
This Circular and the accompanying materials are being sent to Aquila’s registered shareholders and non-registered 
shareholders, that is shareholders who hold Aquila Shares through a broker, investment dealer or other intermediary 
(collectively, called “Beneficial Shareholders”). Beneficial Shareholders should note that only proxies deposited by 
Aquila  Shareholders  whose  names  appear  on  the  share  register  will  be  recognized  and  acted  upon  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting. If Aquila Shares are shown on an account statement that a broker, investment dealer or other intermediary 
provides to a Beneficial Shareholder, then in almost all cases the name of the Beneficial Shareholder will not appear 
on the share register. Such Aquila Shares will most likely be registered in the name of the broker or an agent of the 
broker.  In  Canada,  the vast majority  of  such Aquila  Shares will  be  registered  in  the name  of  “CDS  &  Co.”,  the 
registration  name  of  CDS  Clearing  and  Depository  Services  Inc.,  which  company  acts  as  a  nominee  for  many 
Canadian  brokerage  firms.  Aquila  Shares  held  by  an  Intermediary  may  only  be  voted  by  such  Intermediary  in 
accordance with instructions received from Beneficial Shareholders. Without specific instructions, brokers and their 
agents and nominees are prohibited from voting shares for Beneficial Shareholders.
- 79 -
Additional Information for Beneficial Shareholders
Beneficial Shareholders fall into two categories: (i) those who object to their name being made known to Aquila 
(“Objecting  Beneficial  Owner”  or  “OBO”);  and  (ii) those  who  do  not  object  to  Aquila  knowing  their  identity 
(“Non-Objecting Beneficial Owner” or “NOBO”).  If you are a non-registered Beneficial Shareholder, and Aquila 
or its agents have sent the materials for the Meeting directly to you, your name and address and the information 
pertaining to the shares that you beneficially hold have been obtained in accordance with the applicable securities 
legislation from the broker, investment dealer or other intermediary who holds the Aquila Shares on your behalf. By 
choosing to send these materials directly to you, Aquila has assumed responsibility for (i) delivering these materials 
to you; and (ii) executing the instructions that you provide by means of the voting instruction form (“VIF”).
Securities regulatory policies require brokers and other intermediaries to seek voting instructions from Beneficial 
Shareholders in advance of shareholders’ meetings. Each broker, investment dealer or other intermediary has its own 
mailing  procedures  and  provides  its  own  return  instructions  to  clients,  which  should  be  carefully  followed  by 
Beneficial Shareholders to ensure that their Aquila Shares are voted at the Aquila Meeting.
However, as authorized by National Instrument 54-101 – Communication with Beneficial Owners of Securities of a 
Reporting  Issuer,  Aquila  has  engaged  its  registrar  and  transfer  agent,  Trans  Canada  Transfer  Inc.,  to  deliver  the 
materials  for  the  Aquila  Meeting  directly  to  the  majority  of  Aquila’s  NOBOs.    This  Circular  and  accompanying 
materials  will  be  provided  to  the  remainder  of  Aquila’s  NOBOs  by  Broadridge  Financial  Solutions,  Inc. 
(“Broadridge”).
In  both  cases,  each  NOBO  will  receive  a  scannable  VIF  to  be  completed  and  returned  by  mail  in  the  envelope 
provided  to  Trans  Canada  Transfer  Inc.  or  Broadridge,  as  applicable.  In  addition,  by  following  the  instructions 
provided in the VIF by Trans Canada Transfer Inc. or  Broadridge, the NOBO will be able to provide his or her 
voting instructions by telephone or through the Internet. In each of these cases, the voting instructions of the NOBOs 
will be tabulated so that the Aquila Shares beneficially owned by the NOBO are voted at the Aquila Meeting in 
accordance with those instructions.
The purpose of the VIF is to provide a means for the Beneficial Shareholder to provide instructions as to how the 
Aquila Shares of the Beneficial Shareholder are to be voted at the Aquila Meeting on the Beneficial Shareholder’s 
behalf. Beneficial Shareholders should therefore carefully follow the procedures that accompany the VIF to ensure 
that their Aquila Shares are to be voted at the Aquila Meeting in accordance with their instructions.
Accordingly, each Beneficial Shareholder should:
(c)
(d)
carefully review the VIF and the voting procedures provided with, or as part of, the VIF; and
provide instructions as to the voting of the Beneficial Shareholder’s Aquila Shares in accordance 
with those voting procedures.
For greater certainty, Beneficial Shareholders should note that they are not entitled to use a VIF received from Trans 
Canada Transfer Inc. or Broadridge to vote Aquila Shares directly at the Aquila Meeting. Instead, the Beneficial 
Shareholder must complete the VIF and return it by mail to Trans Canada Transfer Inc. or Broadridge, as applicable, 
or follow the alternate telephone or internet voting procedures outlined therein. The Beneficial Shareholder must 
complete these steps well in advance of the Aquila Meeting in order to ensure such Aquila Shares are voted.
In the alternative, by following the alternate procedures described in the VIF, the Beneficial Shareholder may attend 
the Aquila Meeting in person or designate another person to attend the Aquila Meeting on his or her behalf and vote 
the Aquila Shares of the Beneficial Shareholder. As set out in the VIF, there are two such procedures:
(c)
The  Beneficial  Shareholder  can  appoint  himself  or  herself,  or  designate  another  individual,  to 
attend  and  vote  the  shares  by  (i) entering  the  appropriate  information  under  the  heading 
“Appointee” in the VIF; or (ii) providing this information through the Internet. If this is done, the 
Beneficial Shareholder or his or her designate will be entitled to attend the Aquila Meeting and 
vote  in  person.  However,  when  the  Beneficial  Shareholder  or  designate  arrives  at  the  Aquila 
Meeting, he or she must register with the scrutineer.
- 80 -
(d)
If the Beneficial Shareholder enters his or her name, or that of a designate, in the “Appointee” 
section  of  the  VIF,  he  or  she  need  not  obtain  a  legal  proxy  to  attend  and  vote  at  the  Meeting. 
However,  securities  legislation  provides  that  a  Beneficial  Shareholder  may  request  that  a  legal 
proxy be issued to enable the Beneficial Shareholder or designate to attend and vote at the Aquila 
Meeting.  A Beneficial Shareholder who wishes to utilize this alternative should (i) enter his or her 
name or that of a designate in the “Appointee” section of the VIF; and (ii) check the appropriate 
box on the VIF. A legal proxy that will then be issued will entitle the Beneficial Shareholder or 
designate to attend the Aquila Meeting and vote.  However, for this procedure to be effective, the 
proxy must be submitted in accordance with the requirements applicable to proxies, including the 
deadline for receipt of proxies, set out in this Circular.
Beneficial Shareholders who have questions or concerns regarding any of these procedures may also contact their 
broker,  investment  dealer  or  other  intermediary.    It  is  recommended  that  inquiries  of  this  kind  be  made  well  in 
advance of the Aquila Meeting.
Quorum
At least two persons present in person, each being a shareholder entitled to vote at the Aquila Meeting or a duly 
appointed proxyholder for an absent shareholder entitled to vote at the Aquila Meeting, is necessary for a quorum at 
the Aquila Meeting.
Principal Holders of Aquila Shares
As of December 2, 2013, 98,099,896 Aquila Shares were issued and outstanding.
To  the  knowledge  of  the  directors  and  executive  officers  of  Aquila,  based  upon  filings  made  with  Canadian 
securities  regulators,  as  at  the  Record  Date,  no  person  beneficially  owned,  or  controlled  or  directed,  directly  or 
indirectly, voting securities carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached to any class of our voting securities 
other than as follows:
Name 
HudBay Minerals Inc.
Number of Aquila Shares Owned or
Controlled 
14,367,565
Percentage of Aquila Shares
14.6%
INTERESTS OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
Other than as disclosed in this Circular or the documents incorporated by reference herein, within the three years 
prior  to  the  date  of  this  Circular,  no  informed  person  of  Aquila  or  REBgold  or  any  associate  or  affiliate  of  an 
informed person of Aquila or REBgold, has or had any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction or any 
proposed  transaction  which  has  materially  affected  or  will  materially  affect  Aquila,  REBgold  or  their  respective 
Subsidiaries.
Experts
GENERAL MATTERS
To  Aquila  or  REBgold’s  knowledge,  no  person  or  company  whose  profession  or  business  gives  authority  to  a 
statement made by the person or company and who is named as having prepared or certified a part of this Circular or 
as  having  prepared  or  certified  a  report  or  valuation  described  or  included  in  this  Circular  holds  any  beneficial 
interest,  direct  or  indirect,  in  any  securities  or  property  of  Aquila  or  REBgold  or  an  associate  or  affiliate  of  the 
foregoing.
- 81 -
Other Material Facts
There  are  no  other  material  facts  about  Aquila,  REBgold,  New  Aquila  or  the  Transactions  that  have  not  been 
disclosed in this Circular.
BOARD APPROVALS
The contents and the sending of this Circular have been approved by the Aquila Board and the REBgold Board. 
Where information contained in this Circular rests particularly within the knowledge of a person or company other 
than the REBgold or Aquila, REBgold and/or Aquila, as the case may be, has relied upon information furnished by 
such person or company.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Additional  information  relating  to  Aquila  and  REBgold  is  available  on  the  SEDAR  website  at  www.sedar.com.  
Financial  information  is  provided  in  the  Aquila’s  and  REBgold’s  comparative  financial  statements  and 
management’s discussion and analysis for its most recently completed financial year, which is available online at 
www.sedar.com.  Aquila Shareholders may request additional copies by (i) mail to the Secretary of Aquila at 65 
Queen  Street  West,  Suite  530,  Toronto,  Ontario,  M5H  2M5;  or  (ii) telephone  to:  (416)  203-1404.    REBgold 
Shareholders may request additional copies by (i) mail to the Secretary of REBgold at 50 Richmond Street East, 
Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 1N7 or (ii) telephone to: (416) 646-1850.
- 82 -
Dated:  December 2, 2013
CERTIFICATE OF REBGOLD
The foregoing document constitutes full, true and plain disclosure of all material facts relating to the securities of 
REBgold assuming completion of the Transaction.
(SIGNED) MARK A. BURRIDGE
Chief Executive Officer
(SIGNED) LOUIS R. NAGY
Chief Financial Officer
On behalf of the Board of Directors
(SIGNED) STEPHEN FABIAN
Director
(SIGNED) PETER SECKER
Director
- 83 -
Dated:  December 2, 2013
CERTIFICATE OF AQUILA
The foregoing document constitutes full, true and plain disclosure of all material facts relating to the securities of 
Aquila assuming completion of the Transaction.
(SIGNED) BARRY HILDRED
Chief Executive Officer
(SIGNED) ROBIN DUNBAR
Chief Financial Officer
On behalf of the Board of Directors
(SIGNED) EDWARD MUNDEN
Director
(SIGNED) PETER BRADSHAW
Director
- 84 -
CONSENT OF JENNINGS CAPITAL INC.
- 85 -
CONSENT OF CLARUS SECURITIES INC.
- 86 -
INFORMATION CONCERNING NEW AQUILA
APPENDIX A
The following describes the proposed business of the resulting issuer from the transaction between REBgold and 
Aquila  and  should  be  read  together  with  the  unaudited pro  forma  financial  statements  of  New  Aquila  set  out  at 
Schedule 1 to Appendix A. All capitalized terms not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the 
Circular.
Name and Incorporation
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
New Aquila will be a publicly traded company listed on the TSX existing under the OBCA.
The head office of New Aquila will be 50 Richmond Street East, Suite 300, Toronto, Ontario M5C 1N7 and the 
registered and records office of New Aquila will both be located at 50 Richmond Street East, Suite 300, Toronto, 
Ontario, M5C 1N7.  New Aquila will be a reporting issuer in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and 
Nova Scotia.
Intercorporate Relationships
Aquila Resources Inc.
(Ontario)
100%
Aquila
Resources Corp.
(Canada)
100% 
REBgold
Corporation 
(Canada)
100%
Aquila Gold
Inc.
(Michigan)
100%
HudBay 
Michigan
Inc.
(Michigan)
51%
100%
Aquila
Resources 
USA Inc. 
(Michigan)
100%
Aquila
Alliance Inc. 
(Michigan)
100%
100%
100%
100%
REBgold 
Finland Oy 
(Finland)
BacTech 
Nevada
Corporation 
(Nevada)
BacTech 
(Barbados) 
Limited 
(Barbados)
100%
BacTech
Gold
Corporation 
(Canada)
49%
BacTech 
(Australia) 
Pty Ltd. 
(Australia)
Back Forty
Joint 
Venture
LLC
(Michigan)
New Aquila will also have the following dormant, wholly-owned subsidiary that is expected to remain dormant or 
be wound-up in the future: 2079537 Ontario Ltd.
A-1
The rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attached to the Aquila Shares are as follows:
DESCRIPTION OF THE SECURITIES
(a)
(b)
the  holders of  Aquila  Shares  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  notice of  and  to  attend  and  vote  at  all 
meetings of shareholders of New Aquila; and
each Aquila Share shall entitle the holder thereof to one vote.
PRO FORMA CAPITALIZATION
Outstanding Securities
Other than the first row, the following table summarizes the number and percentage of securities of New Aquila 
proposed to be outstanding after giving effect to the Transactions:
Category of Securities 
Aquila Shares outstanding prior to the Transactions(1) 
Aquila Shares issued pursuant to the Arrangement(2) 
Aquila Shares issued pursuant to the HMI Acquisition Agreement(3) 
Aquila Shares issued to Aquila and REBgold directors, officers, 
employees and service providers(4) 
Existing Aquila Options(5) 
Existing Aquila Warrants 
New Aquila Options(6) 
REBgold Warrants 
REBgold Convertible Debentures
Total:
Number of Securities
Percentage of Securities
98,253,742 
73,679,034 
19,230,769 
1,435,000
785,000 
3,328,750 
13,525,000 
6,061,500 
3,810,000 
220,108,795
44.6% 
33.5% 
8.7% 
0.7%
0.4% 
1.5% 
6.1% 
2.8% 
1.7% 
100%
Notes: 
(1)
Includes 98,001,545 Aquila Shares issued and outstanding, and to be issued, as of September 30, 2013 plus 252,197 Aquila Shares issued or 
expected to be issued after that date to the Chief Executive Officer of Aquila as compensation for his services in accordance with the terms 
of his existing contract with Aquila. 
Includes  REBgold  Shares  to  be  issued  pursuant  to  the  REBgold  Financing  and  assumes  (i) 27,525,183  REBgold  Shares  issued  and 
outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time, not including REBgold Shares issued pursuant to the REBgold Financing and (ii) the 
REBgold Financing is fully subscribed for an aggregate of $6 million at $0.13 per share.
(2)
(3)  Assumes the Aquila Shares issued to HudBay as payment of the initial purchase price pursuant to the HMI Acquisition Agreement will have 
a value of $2,500,000 (based on an Aquila Share price of $0.13 per Share) and the REBgold Financing will be completed at a price of $0.13 
per share.
(4)  Represents  Aquila  Shares  to  be  issued  to  certain  Aquila  and  REBgold  directors,  officers,  employees  and  service  providers  in  partial 
satisfaction  of  the  REBgold  RSUs  as  well  as  in  satisfaction  of  deferred  salary  obligations  and  fees  payable  to  such  directors,  officers, 
employees and service providers.
(5)  Excludes 4,615,000 Aquila Options to be cancelled and replaced upon completion of the Transactions. 
(6)
Includes 7,200,000 Aquila Options to be granted to Aquila directors, officers and service providers who will be continuing as directors, 
officers  and  service  providers  of  New  Aquila,  3,986,250  Aquila  Options  to  be  granted  to  REBgold  directors,  officers,  employees  and 
service providers in partial satisfaction of the REBgold RSUs as well as in satisfaction of deferred salary obligations and fees payable to 
such  directors,  officers,  employees  and  service  providers  and  2,338,750  Aquila  Options  to  be  granted  to  certain  of  REBgold’s  existing 
directors,  officers  and  service  providers  who  will  become  directors,  officers  and  service  providers  of  New  Aquila  and  to  the  new 
independent director of New Aquila. Assumes all REBgold Options are cancelled on or before the Effective Time and no Replacement 
Options will be issued.
Baker Steel is currently the largest shareholder of REBgold and upon completion of the Transactions will become 
the largest shareholder and a control block holder of New Aquila.  The current shareholders of Aquila will own 
approximately 61% of the New Aquila and current shareholders of REBgold will own approximately 39% of New 
Aquila.
A-2
Consolidated Capitalization
The following table sets forth New Aquila’s consolidated capitalization as at September 30, 2013 on a pro forma 
basis, both before and after giving effect to the Transactions:
Aquila
as at September 30, 2013
Description 
Long-term Debt 
Net  income  (loss)  and  comprehensive  income 
(loss) for the period 
Retained earnings (deficit) 
 
Closing Payments to REBgold and Aquila Insiders
$0 
($1,288,713)
($18,180,225)
As at September 30, 2013 (after 
giving effect to the Transactions)
$11,917,388 
$8,542,342
($4,484,293)
Upon completion of the Transactions, Aquila expects to pay an aggregate of $303,000 and issue an aggregate of 
1,435,000  Aquila  Shares  and  13,525,000  Aquila  Options  to  the  holders  of  REBgold  RSUs  and  certain  directors, 
officers and service providers of Aquila and REBgold for the following purposes:




satisfaction of all entitlements under the REBgold RSUs;
satisfaction  of  accrued  and  unpaid  fees  and  salary  owing  to  REBgold  directors,  officers  and  service 
providers;
compensation to certain Aquila directors and officers for their services in connection with the Transactions;
retention  and  incentive  of  Aquila  and  REBgold  directors,  officers  and  service  providers  who  will  be 
continuing with New Aquila.
In connection with these payments, certain of the Aquila and REBgold directors, officers and service providers will 
be surrendering 4,615,000 Aquila Options and 2,002,500 REBgold Options that they currently hold.
See “Aquila Special Business - Aquila Share Issuance”, “- Grant of Stock Options” and “Aquila Special Business- 
Debt Satisfaction and Compensation Share Issuance”.
The following chart summarizes the details of these payments and issuances:
Name and Position 
with REBgold or
Aquila
Accrued and 
Unpaid Salary
/ Fees
Surrendered
REBgold Options 
or Aquila Options
REBgold RSUs
Aquila
Closing Payment
(Cash / Aquila Shares
/ Aquila Options)
Barry Hildred 
Director and Chief 
Executive Officer 
Peter Bradshaw 
Chairman 
Edward Munden 
Director 
Thomas Quigley 
President and Director 
Robin Dunbar 
Director and Chief 
Financial Officer
-
-
-
-
-
1,000,000
700,000
650,000
1,200,000
725,000
$50,000 / 400,000 /
5,000,000
$- / - / 400,000
$- / - / 400,000
$10,000 / 100,000 /
800,000
$10,000 / 100,000 /
400,000
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
A-3
Accrued and 
Unpaid Salary
/ Fees
REBgold RSUs
Surrendered
REBgold Options 
or Aquila Options
Closing Payment
(Cash / Aquila Shares
/ Aquila Options)
280,000
$- / - / 100,000
N/A
N/A
REBgold
2,500,000
60,000
4,615,000
425,000
500,000
305,000
500,000
100,000
225,000
225,000
150,000
150,000
150,000
255,000
212,500
155,000
185,000
100,000
75,000
55,000
-
-
215,000
210,000
$- / - / 100,000
$70,000 / 600,000 /
7,200,000
$131,000 / 400,000 /
2,500,000
$10,000 / 100,000 /
400,000
$10,000 / 100,000 /
1,000,000
$20,000 / 50,000 /
227,500
$5,000 / 100,000 /
400,000
$15,000 / 20,000 /
400,000
$15,000 / 20,000 /
400,000
$15,000 / 20,000 /
137,500
$3,000 / 15,000 /
77,500
$- / - / 500,000
$9,000 / 10,000 /
282,500
$233,000 / 835,000 /
6,325,000
$303,000 / 1,435,000 /
13,525,000
Name and Position 
with REBgold or
Aquila 
Robin Quigley 
Assistant Corporate 
Secretary 
Office and Support Staff
Aquila Total
Mark Burridge 
Executive Chairman 
Paul Miller 
Vice President, Minerals 
Engineering 
Coen Louwarts 
Senior Advisor Business 
Development 
Ross Orr 
Director 
Louis Nagy 
Chief Financial Officer 
Stephen Fabian 
Director 
Peter Secker 
Director 
Luke Leslie 
Director 
Gary Williams 
Senior Advisor Geology 
and Environmental 
Ed Guimaraes 
New Director 
Other Employees and 
Consultants
-
-
-
$301,000
-
-
$95,000
-
$42,000
$42,000
$32,000
-
-
-
REBgold Total
$512,000
4,690,000
Aquila + REBgold 
Total
$512,000
4,690,000
2,002,500
6,617,500
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The  following  selected  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  financial  information  for  New  Aquila  is  based  on  the 
assumptions  described  in  the  respective  notes  to  the  New  Aquila  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  financial 
statements as at September 30, 2013 attached as Appendix A to this Circular.  The unaudited pro forma consolidated 
statement  of  financial  positions  has  been  prepared  based  on  the  assumption  that,  among  other  things,  the 
Transactions  had  occurred  on  January  1,  2013.    The  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statements  of  loss  and 
comprehensive  loss  have  been  prepared  based  on  the  assumption  that,  among  other  things,  the  Transactions  had 
occurred  on  January  1,  2013.    The  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  financial  statements  are  not  necessarily 
indicative of New Aquila’s consolidated financial position and results from operations if the events reflected therein
A-4
were in effect for the periods presented, nor do they purport to project New Aquila’s consolidated financial position 
or results from operations for any future period.
The unaudited pro forma consolidated financial statements are based on certain assumptions and adjustments.  The 
selected unaudited pro forma consolidated financial information given below should be read in conjunction with the 
description of the Transactions contained in this Circular, the unaudited pro forma consolidated financial statements 
attached as Appendix A to this Circular and the audited and unaudited consolidated financial statements of Aquila, 
REBgold and HMI included or incorporated by reference in this Circular.
As at and for the year ended December 31, 2012:
Depreciation 
Consulting Fees 
Director’s Fees 
Filing and Regulatory Fees 
Foreign Exchange (Gain) Loss 
Interest and Bank Charges 
Mineral Property Write-Off 
Management Fees 
Office, General and Administration 
Professional Fees 
Rent 
Salaries and Benefits 
Share-Based Compensation 
Restricted Stock Units 
Travel and Promotion 
Finance Charges 
Net Income
As at and for the nine months ended September 30, 2013:
Depreciation 
Consulting Fees 
Filing and Regulatory Fees 
Foreign Exchange Loss 
Interest and Bank Charges 
Impairment Loss 
Management Fees 
Office, General and Administration 
Professional Fees 
Forgiveness of Director and Management Fees 
Rent 
Salaries and Benefits 
Share-Based Compensation 
Travel and Promotion 
Finance Charges 
Net Loss
A-5
$ 
19,106 
$ 
42,048 
$ 
45,385 
$  205,193 
(15,170) 
$ 
$ 
8,292 
$  1,742,217 
$ 
57,890 
$  177,395 
$  331,420 
$ 
27,381 
$  831,661 
$  1,303,569 
$ 
-- 
$  188,079 
$ 
91,040 
$  9,883,411
$ 
9,330 
$  200,342 
74,486 
$ 
10,708 
$ 
$ 
10,883 
$  3,754,821 
$ 
22,673 
$  144,342 
$  377,100 
($  339,019) 
$ 
24,257 
$  639,250 
$  957,346 
$  136,025 
$  112,899 
$  8,542,342
Cash and cash equivalents 
Total assets 
Total liabilities 
Share capital 
Accumulated deficit 
Total Shareholders’ Equity
$  5,889,018 
$69,614,805 
$13,018,541 
$54,744,080 
$ (4,484,293) 
$56,596,265
DIVIDENDS
New Aquila will not have a dividend policy in place. The holders of Aquila Shares shall be entitled to receive such 
dividends as may be declared by the New Aquila Board from time to time.
PRINCIPAL SECURITY HOLDERS
To the knowledge of Aquila and REBgold, after the completion of the Transactions, no person or company will 
beneficially  own,  directly  or  indirectly,  or  exercise  control  or  direction  over,  more  than  10%  of  the  issued  and 
outstanding Aquila Shares, other than as disclosed below.
Number of Shares Owned or
Controlled 
45,483,886 
33,598,334
Percentage of Shares(1)
20.7% 
17.5%
Name 
Baker Steel Capital Managers LLC 
HudBay Minerals Inc.
Notes: 
(1)  Assumes  192,598,545  Aquila  Shares  outstanding and  that  the  Aquila  Shares  issued  to  HudBay  as  payment  of  the  initial purchase  price 
pursuant to the HMI Acquisition Agreement will have a value of $2,500,000 (based on an Aquila Share price of $0.13 per Share) and the 
REBgold Financing will be completed at a price of $0.13 per share.
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The following table sets forth the proposed names and residencies of all directors and executive officers of New 
Aquila, the positions and offices held with New Aquila by such persons, their principal occupations and the number 
of New Aquila Shares that such persons will beneficially own (after giving effect to the Arrangement and the HMI 
Acquisition).
Name, office held and  
Municipality of Residence 
Mark Burridge 
Barry Hildred 
Louis Nagy
Thomas Quigley
Coen Louwarts
Paul Miller 
Edward Munden 
Peter Bradshaw 
Peter Secker
Position with New Aquila 
Executive Chairman and Director 
Chief Executive Officer and Director 
Chief Financial Officer and Corporate 
Secretary 
Vice-President, Exploration and 
Senior Technical Advisor to the Back 
Forty Project 
Vice-President, Corporate 
Development 
Vice-President, Metallurgy 
Director 
Director 
Director
A-6
Aquila Shares Held
722,000 
1,758,693 
188,700
1,234,507
100,000
138,432 
516,612 
500,000 
20,000
Name, office held and  
Municipality of Residence 
Stephen Fabian 
Ed Guimaraes 
 
On closing of the Arrangement, the directors and executive officers, as a group, will beneficially own, directly or 
indirectly, or exercise control or direction over, a total of 5,644,655 Aquila Shares, representing approximately 3.0% 
of the issued and outstanding Aquila Shares.
Position with New Aquila 
Director 
Director
Aquila Shares Held
504,143
Nil
Directors and Executive Officers
The following are brief biographies of the directors, executive officers and senior management of New Aquila:
Mark Burridge
Mr. Burridge was CEO of Cambridge Mining Plc from July 2007 until its acquisition by Western Canadian Coal in 
July 2009.  Prior to that, he was Managing Director at Hatch Corporate Finance, a corporate finance advisory firm 
from April 2003 to June 2007.  Earlier experience includes positions with Merrill Lynch, where he was a ranked 
Analyst, and with Barrick Gold Corporation, as a Geological Engineer.  He has a degree in Mining Geology and is a 
Chartered Financial Analyst.
Barry Hildred
Mr. Hildred  is  a  seasoned  executive  and  successful  entrepreneur  with  varied  business  leadership  experience.  
Previously,  Mr. Hildred  was  founder  of  The  Equicom  Group,  a  company  specializing  in  strategic  financial  and 
investor relations services for Canadian public companies.  In 2007, The Equicom Group was acquired by the TMX 
Group, owner and operator of the Toronto Stock Exchange and TSX Venture Exchange.  Mr. Hildred is currently 
Chairman of Aldridge Minerals Inc., a development stage mining company focused on advancing its Yenipazar gold 
and polymetallic VMS deposit in Turkey.  He is also the Treasurer and a Director of The Children’s Aid Foundation.
Edward Munden
Mr. Munden has been a director of Aquila since October 2001.  Since 1989 he has been a director and co-founder of 
a private investment company that has provided and/or arranged financing and hands-on managerial assistance to a 
portfolio of energy, mining and technology software companies.  From 2001 to present, Mr. Munden has focused on 
development and financing of energy companies and of oil and gas leasing and drilling projects, primarily in Texas.  
From 2003 to 2007, Mr. Munden held senior positions, including Chairman and CEO, of an Ottawa based OTCBB 
traded technology company that provided business intelligence software.  In 1994, Mr. Munden co-founded a Dallas 
based NASDAQ traded energy company engaged in the exploration, development and acquisition of oil and natural 
gas properties and held senior level positions including Director, Chairman, President and CEO until it was sold in 
December 2001.  From 1999 to present, Mr. Munden has been a director of Mustang Minerals Corp., a Toronto 
based  TSXV  traded  mineral exploration  company.    Mr. Munden has held  various  positions  in public  and private 
energy, mining and technology companies for more than 35 years.  He is a professional geological engineer and 
holds  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  Engineering  and  a  Masters  of  Business  Administration  from  Queen’s 
University in Kingston, Canada.
Peter M. D. Bradshaw
Mr. Bradshaw  is  a  professional  geologist  with  45  years  international  mineral  exploration  experience  in  over  30 
countries with Barringer Research, Placer Dome and Orvana Minerals.  He has been directly involved with several 
key discoveries and projects including: Porgera Gold Mine, Papua New Guinea; Kidston Gold Mine, Queensland, 
Australia;  Misima  Gold  Mine,  Papua  New  Guinea;  Big  Bell  Gold  Mine,  Western  Australia;  Omai  Gold  Mine, 
Guyana; and the Decar Nickel Project, British Columbia, Canada.  Mr. Bradshaw is currently the Chairman and a 
director of Aquila and is also the Chairman and a director of First Point Minerals Corp., a TSX listed company.  
Mr. Bradshaw  is  the  Cofounder  and  first  Chairman  of  the  Mineral  Deposit  Research  Unit,  University  of  British 
Columbia.
A-7
Peter A. Secker
Mr. Secker is currently the President and CEO of Canada Lithium Corp.  Previous to that he was Chief Executive 
Officer of JMS Civil and Mining in Australia, a civil and mining engineering firm with annual turnover of $300M.  
Previous  to  that  he  was  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Michelago  Ltd.,  which  was  acquired  by  Sino  Gold  (now 
Eldorado)  in  2008.    Mr. Secker  has  an  extensive  background  in  bioleaching  haven  overseen  the  development, 
construction  and  operations  for  2  of  BacTech’s  plants,  firstly  the  Youanmi  gold  plant  in  Australia  in  1994  and 
subsequently the BioGold plant in Shandong, China in 2003.
Stephen Fabian
Mr. Fabian graduated in Mining Engineering (B.E. Min) from the University Of South Wales School Of Mines in 
1981.    He  has  worked  in  both  underground  base  mental  operations  and  in  open  pit  coal  mining  in  Australia.  
Between 1985 and 1988 he was employed by Bankers Trust Australia Limited as a mining analyst and later as a 
portfolio manager specializing in the resources sector.  From 1988 to 1993 he was employed by County NatWest 
Australia as a specialist mining analyst.  In 1993 he was transferred to NatWest Markets’ London operations to lead 
the Australian mining finance department.  From March 1999 to March 2007, Mr. Fabian was the President and 
CEO of Brazilian Diamonds Limited, during which time  he changed the focus of that company’s activities from 
gold  exploration  to  diamond  exploration  and  development.    He  resigned  as  President  of  Brazilian  Diamonds  in 
March 2007 in order to focus on creating a new mining company, Ferrous Resources Limited, which is developing 
iron ore properties in Minas Gerais State, Brazil.  He was acting CEO of Ferrous until December 2007.  In 2008, he 
returned as CEO of Brazilian Diamonds and also launched another iron ore company, South American Ferro Metals, 
which is currently listing on the Australian Stock Exchange.  Mr. Fabian is also a principal and director of the Genus 
Capital  Fund,  a  specialist  venture  capital  investment  fund  focussed  on  early  stage  opportunities  in  the  resources 
sector which has now listed on the London Stock Exchange as the Baker Steel Resources Trust.
Ed Guimaraes
Mr.  Guimaraes  held  senior  management  positions  with  Aur  Resources  Inc.  (“Aur”)  between  1995  and  2007, 
ultimately serving as Executive Vice-President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer of the Company until Aur was 
acquired  by  Teck  Resources  Limited  in  a  takeover  valued  at  $4.1 Billion.    Mr. Guimaraes  is  currently  an 
independent business consultant and is a director of Orvana Minerals Corp., Nuinsco Resources Limited, Aldridge 
Minerals Inc., Giyani Gold Corp. and Karmin Exploration Inc.  He is a Chartered Accountant and has a Bachelor of 
Arts in Administrative and Commercial Studies from the University of Western Ontario.
Louis R. Nagy
Mr. Nagy has more than 21 years of professional experience as a chartered accountant.  During this time he has held 
several senior financial positions in the resources, consumer goods and high tech industries.
Thomas Quigley
Mr. Quigley  is  a  Professional  Geologist,  has  extensive  exploration  experience  as  an  industry  and  consulting 
geologist throughout North America.  He has been President of Minerals Processing Corporation since 1995, and 
President of Aquila Resources Inc. since 2004.  Mr. Quigley is the Qualified Person for Aquila.
Coen Louwarts
Mr. Louwarts has over 15 years’ experience in the mining industry where he has worked in operations, investment 
evaluations and business development.  He started his career as a mining engineer with BHP Billiton, which was 
followed by management roles in infrastructure and construction.  More recently, he worked for Rio Tinto where he 
was also on the Technical Committees for the Escondida mine and the Grasberg Joint Venture and was a member of 
the Board of Directors of Palabora Mining Company.
A-8
Dr. Paul Miller, Ph.D
Dr. Miller has over 25 years’ industrial experience in minerals processing.  He commenced his career working for 
Mintek  in  South  Africa  in 1981  and  in 1986,  joined Davy  McKee  in the  U.K.  as  a group  leader responsible  for 
development of process technology in support of worldwide contracting activities.  He joined the Company in 1996 
and  has  been  responsible  for  all  technical  aspects  of  projects,  from  initial  test  work  and  management  of  studies 
through to project design and execution.
Independent Directors
The  proposed  Board  of  Directors  of  New  Aquila  will  have  five  members  who  are  “independent”  as  defined  by 
National Instrument 52-110; that is, who do not have any direct or indirect material relationship with New Aquila.  
A material relationship is defined as a relationship which could, in the view of the Board of Directors, be reasonably 
expected to interfere with the exercise of a director’s independent judgement.  Of the seven members of the Board of 
New Aquila, five of the Directors, Mr. Munden, Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Secker, Mr. Fabian and Mr. Guimaraes will be 
independent.
Management
Proposed members of management of New Aquila will be the same as the directors and officers described in this 
appendix above under “Directors and Executive Officers.”
Corporate Cease Trade Orders or Bankruptcies
Except as disclosed below, no proposed director or officer of New Aquila or a securityholder anticipated to hold a 
sufficient number of securities of New Aquila to affect materially the control of New Aquila, within ten years before 
the date of this Circular, has been, a director, officer or promoter of any person or company that, while that person 
was acting in that capacity,
(a)
(b)
was the subject of a cease trade or similar order, or an order that denied the other issuer access to 
any exemptions under applicable securities law, for a period of more than 30 consecutive days; or
became bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency or 
was subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise with creditors or had a 
receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold its assets.
Penalties or Sanctions
No proposed director or officer of New Aquila, or a securityholder anticipated to hold sufficient securities of New 
Aquila to affect materially the control of New Aquila, has
(a)
(b)
been subject to any penalties or sanctions imposed by a court relating to securities legislation or by 
a  securities  regulatory  authority  or  has  entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  with  a  securities 
regulatory authority; or
been subject to any other penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body, including a 
self-regulatory  body,  that  would  be  likely  to  be  considered  important  to  a  reasonable 
securityholder making a decision about the Arrangement;
Personal Bankruptcies
No  proposed  director  or  officer  of  New  Aquila  or  a  securityholder  anticipated  to  hold  a  sufficient  number  of 
securities of New Aquila to affect materially the control of New Aquila, or a personal holding company of any such 
persons  has,  within  the  10  years  before  the  date  of  this  Circular,  become  bankrupt,  made  a  proposal  under  any 
legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or been subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or 
compromise with creditors, or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold the assets of the director 
or officer.
A-9
Conflicts of Interest
To  the  knowledge  of  Aquila  and  REBgold,  and  other  than  as  disclosed  herein,  there  are  no  known  existing  or 
potential conflicts of interest among New Aquila, its proposed directors and executive officers, or other proposed 
members of management as a result of their outside business interests, except that certain of the proposed directors 
or officers may serve as directors and officers of other companies, and therefore it is possible that a conflict may 
arise between their duties to New Aquila and their duties as a director or officer of such other companies.
The  directors  of  New  Aquila  will  be  required  by-law  to  act  honestly  and  in  good  faith  with  a  view  to  the  best 
interests  of  New  Aquila  and  to  disclose  any  interests  that  they  may  have  in  any  material  contract  or  material 
transaction. If a conflict of interest arises at a meeting of the New Aquila Board, any director in a conflict is required 
to disclose his or her interest and abstain from voting on such matter. The proposed directors and officers of New 
Aquila  are  aware  of  the  existence  of  laws  governing  accountability  of  directors  and  officers  for  corporate 
opportunity and requiring disclosures by directors of conflicts of interest in respect of New Aquila and are required 
to comply with such laws in respect of any directors’ and officers’ conflicts of interest or in respect of any breaches 
of duty by any of its directors or officers.
INDEBTEDNESS OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
As  of  the  date  of  this  Circular,  there  has  been  no  indebtedness  to  New  Aquila  by  any  proposed  director,  senior 
officer or associate of any such person.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Upon the completion of the Arrangement, New Aquila will inherit the claims, actions, proceedings or investigations 
pending or threatened against Aquila (see “Aquila Resources Inc.”) and REBgold (see “REBgold Corporation”).
RISKS RELATED TO NEW AQUILA
Aquila Shareholders and REBgold Shareholders should consider a number of risk factors in evaluating whether to 
approve the Aquila Resolutions and the REBgold Resolutions, as the case may be. These risks include certain risks 
related to the Arrangement and were discussed in greater detail under “Risk Factors Relating to the Transactions” 
and the risks related to the businesses of Aquila and REBgold which are described in “Aquila Resources Inc.” and 
“REBgold Corporation”, respectively.
Fluctuation in Market Value of Aquila Shares
The market price of Aquila Shares, as a publicly traded stock, can be affected by many variables not directly related 
to the corporate performance of New Aquila, including the market in which it is traded, the strength of the economy 
generally, the availability and attractiveness of alternative investments, and the breadth of the public market for the 
stock.  The effect of these and other factors on the market price of Aquila Shares in the future cannot be predicted. 
The lack of an active public market could have a material adverse effect on the price of Aquila Shares.
The business of New Aquila will be that of REBgold.  As a result, for a discussion of additional risks related to the 
business of New Aquila, see “Risk Factors Relating to the Transactions”, “Aquila Resources Inc.” and “REBgold 
Corporation”.
MATERIAL CONTRACTS
New  Aquila  will  assume  all  material  contracts  of  Aquila  (see  “Aquila  Resources  Inc.”)  and  of  REBgold  (see 
“REBgold Corporation”).
Copies of New Aquila’s material agreements, other than those entered into in the ordinary course of business and 
not required to be filed by NI 51-102, will be available on SEDAR following the completion of the Arrangement.
A-10
Auditor
AUDITOR(S), TRANSFER AGENT(S) AND REGISTRAR(S)
The auditor of New Aquila will be Collins Barrow LLP of Toronto, Ontario.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
New Aquila’s transfer agent and registrar will be Trans Canada Transfer Inc., the current transfer agent and registrar 
of Aquila.
A-11
SCHEDULE 1
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL INFORMATION
A-12
A-13
A-14
A-15
A-16
A-17
A-18
A-19
A-20
A-21
APPENDIX B
PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT
PLAN OF ARRANGEMENT UNDER SECTION 192 OF
THE CANADA BUSINESS CORPORATIONS ACT
ARTICLE 1
INTERPRETATION
1.1
Definitions
In this Plan of Arrangement, unless something in the subject matter or context is inconsistent therewith, the 
following  terms  will  have  the  respective  meanings  set  out  below,  and  grammatical  variations  will  have  the 
corresponding meanings:
“Arrangement” means the proposed arrangement under the provisions of Section 192 of the CBCA on the 
terms and conditions set forth in this Plan of Arrangement, subject to any amendments or variations thereto 
made in accordance with the Arrangement Agreement or this Plan of Arrangement or at the direction of the 
Court in the Final Order with the consent of the Corporation and the Offeror, each acting reasonably;
“Arrangement Agreement” means the Arrangement Agreement made as of November 7, 2013 between 
the  Offeror  and  the  Corporation  (including  the  Schedules  thereto)  as  it  may  be  amended,  modified  or 
supplemented from time to time in accordance with its terms;
“Arrangement Resolution” means the special resolution of the Corporation Shareholders approving this 
Plan of Arrangement at the Meeting;
“Business Day” means a day, other than a Saturday or a Sunday, on which the principal commercial banks 
located in Toronto, Ontario are open for the conduct of business;
“CBCA” means the Canada Business Corporations Act, as amended;
“Certificate of Arrangement” means the certificate giving effect to the Arrangement issued pursuant to 
Section 192(7) of the CBCA;
“Corporation” means REBgold Corporation, a corporation incorporated under the laws of Canada;
“Corporation Common Share” means a common share in the capital of the Corporation;
“Court” means the Ontario Superior Court of Justice (Commercial List) in the City of Toronto;
“Depositary” means Trans Canada Transfer Inc., or any successor thereto;
“Director” means the Director appointed pursuant to Section 260 of the CBCA;
“Dissent Rights” has the meaning set out in Section 3.1;
“Dissenting  Shareholder”  means  a  registered  holder  of  Corporation  Common  Shares  that  has  validly 
exercised its Dissent Rights and has not withdrawn or been deemed to have withdrawn such exercise of 
Dissent Rights, but only in respect of the Corporation Common Shares in respect of which Dissent Rights 
are validly exercised by such holder;
“Effective Date” means the date shown on the Certificate of Arrangement;
“Effective  Time”  means  12:01  a.m.  (Toronto  time)  on  the  Effective  Date,  or  such  other  time  on  the 
Effective Date as may be specified in writing by the Corporation with the consent of the Offeror;
B-1
“Final  Order”  means  the  final  order  of  the  Court  approving  the  Arrangement,  as  such  order  may  be 
amended or modified, with the mutual written consent of the Offeror and the Corporation, at any time prior 
to the Effective Time or, if appealed, then unless such appeal is withdrawn or denied, as affirmed, amended 
or modified on appeal (provided that any such amendment or modification is acceptable to the Corporation 
and the Offeror, each acting reasonably;
“holders” means, when used with reference to the Corporation Common Shares or the Options, the holders 
of Corporation Common Shares or Options, as the case may be, shown from time to time on the registers 
thereof maintained by or on behalf of the Corporation;
“Interim Order” means the interim order of the Court contemplated by Section 2.02 of the Arrangement 
Agreement, as the same may be amended or modified, with the mutual written consent of the Offeror and 
the Corporation, providing for, among other things, the calling and holding of the Meeting;
“Letter  of  Transmittal”  means  the  letter  of  transmittal  sent  to  holders  of  REBgold  Shares  for  use  in 
connection with the Arrangement;
“Lien” means, with respect to any property or asset, any security interest, mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, 
usufruct, prohibition, condition, injunction, restriction, lien, charge, assignment, option, claim, promise to 
contract, compromise, title defect or other encumbrance or interest of any kind upon such property or asset 
or upon the income, revenue or profits therefrom, including (a) any right to participate in revenues, profits, 
royalties, rents or other income in any way derived from or attributable to such property or asset or any 
rights arising therefrom; (b) any option to acquire such property or asset upon conditional sale or other title 
retention agreement, device or arrangement (including any capital lease); (c) any sale, assignment, pledge 
or  other  transfer  for  security  of  any  accounts,  intangibles  or  chattel  paper,  with  or  without  recourse,  or 
(d) any agreement to create or grant any of the foregoing;
“Meeting”  means  the  special  meeting  of  Corporation  Shareholders  (including  any  adjournments  or 
postponements thereof) called and held in accordance with the Interim Order to consider and to vote on the 
Arrangement Resolution;
“OBCA” means the Business Corporations Act (Ontario) as amended;
“Offeror Common Share” means a common share in the capital of the Offeror;
“Offeror” means Aquila Resources Inc., a company incorporated under the OBCA;
“Option Plan” means the amended and restated incentive stock option plan of the Corporation dated as of 
December 4, 2003, as it may be further amended from time to time;
“Optionholders” means holders of Options;
“Options” means the options issued pursuant to the Option Plan that are outstanding and unexercised;
“person”  includes  an  individual,  general  partnership,  limited  partnership,  corporation,  company,  limited 
liability company, unincorporated association, unincorporated syndicate, unincorporated organization, joint 
venture, governmental authority, trust, trustee, executor, administrator or other legal representative;
“Plan of Arrangement” means this plan of arrangement and any amendment or variation thereto made in 
accordance with the Arrangement Agreement or at the direction of the Court in the Final Order;
“Shareholders” means holders of the Corporation Common Shares;
“Tax”  or  “Taxes”  means  all  taxes,  surtaxes,  duties,  levies,  imposts,  tariffs,  fees,  assessments, 
reassessments,  withholdings,  dues  and  other  charges  of  any  nature  imposed  or  collected  by  any 
Governmental Authority, whether disputed or not, and instalments in respect thereof, including Canadian 
federal, provincial, territorial, municipal, community and local income, franchise, capital, capital gain, real
B-2
property, personal property, withholding, non-resident, payroll, health, employer health, transfer, goods and 
services,  harmonized  sales,  other  value  added,  sales,  social  security,  use,  consumption,  land  transfer, 
excise,  customs,  anti-dumping,  countervail,  net  worth,  stamp,  registration,  employment,  education, 
business, school, local improvement, development and occupation taxes, surtaxes, duties, levies, imposts, 
tariffs,  fees,  assessments,  reassessments,  withholdings,  dues  or  charges  of  any  nature,  pension  plan 
contributions,  employment  insurance  and  workers’  compensation  insurance  premiums,  and  any  payment 
obligations under any net lease in respect of taxes of any kind in relation to the leased property; and
“Tax Act” means the Income Tax Act (Canada), as amended.
1.2
Construction
In this Plan of Arrangement, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context otherwise requires:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
references to “herein”, “hereby”, “hereunder”, “hereof” and similar expressions are references to 
this Plan of Arrangement and not to any particular Section or clause of this Plan of Arrangement;
references  to  a  “Section”  or  “clause”  are  references  to  a  Section  or  clause  of  this  Plan  of 
Arrangement;
words importing the singular will include the plural and vice versa, and words importing gender 
will include the masculine, feminine and neuter genders;
the use of headings is for convenience of reference only and will not affect the construction or 
interpretation hereof;
if the date on which any action is required to be taken hereunder by any of the Parties is not a 
Business  Day,  such  action  will  be  required  to  be  taken  on  the  next  succeeding  day  that  is  a 
Business Day;
a  period  of  Business Days  is  to  be  computed  as  beginning on  the  day  following  the  event  that 
began the period and ending at 4:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on the last day of the period if the period 
is a Business Day or at 4:00 p.m. on the next Business Day if the last day of the period does not 
fall on a Business Day;
references to any legislation or to any provision of any legislation will include any amendment, 
modification  or  re-enactment  thereof,  any  legislation  provision  substituted  therefor  and  all 
regulations, rules and interpretations issued thereunder or pursuant thereto;
references to any agreement or document will be to such agreement or document (together with 
any schedules and exhibits attached thereto), as it may have been or may hereafter be amended, 
modified, supplemented or restated from time to time; and
wherever the term “includes” or “including” is used, it will be deemed to mean “includes, without 
limitation” or “including, without limitation,” respectively.
1.3
Currency
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  all  dollar  amounts  referred  to  in  this  Plan  of  Arrangement  are  expressed  in
Canadian dollars.
1.4
Time
Time will be of the essence in every matter or action contemplated hereunder.  All times expressed herein
are local time (Toronto, Ontario) unless otherwise stipulated herein.
B-3
2.1
Arrangement Agreement
ARTICLE 2
THE ARRANGEMENT
This  Plan  of  Arrangement  is  made  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  the  Arrangement  Agreement  and 
constitutes  an  arrangement  as  referred  to  in  Section  192  of  the  CBCA.    This  Plan  of  Arrangement  will  become 
effective as at the Effective Time and will be binding without any further authorization, act or formality on the part 
of  the  Court,  or  the  Director,  on  the  Offeror,  the  Corporation,  the  Depositary  and  the  Corporation  Shareholders 
(including all Dissenting Shareholders), the holders of Options from and after the Effective Time.
2.2
The Arrangement
Commencing at the Effective Time, subject to the Dissent Rights referred to in Section 3.1, the following 
will occur and be deemed to occur in the following order without any further act or formality, with each transaction 
or event being deemed to occur immediately after the occurrence of the transaction or event immediately preceding 
it:
(a)
(b)
each  Corporation  Common  Share  issued  and  outstanding  at  the  Effective  Time  (other  than  any 
Corporation  Common  Shares  held  by  Dissenting  Shareholders  to  whom  Section  3.1(a)  applies) 
will be transferred to and acquired by the Offeror in exchange for one (1) Offeror Common Share;
simultaneously with the exchange in Section 2.2(a), each outstanding Option shall be exchanged 
with the Offeror for a fully-vested and immediately exercisable option (a “Replacement Option”) 
to  purchase  from  the  Offeror  that  number  of  Offeror  Common  Shares  equal  to  the  number  of 
Corporation Common Shares subject to such Option. Such Replacement Option shall provide for 
an exercise price per Offeror Common Share equal to the exercise price per Corporation Common 
Share under the exchanged Option.  Except as otherwise provided in this Section 2.2(b), the term 
to  expiry,  conditions  to  and  manner  of  exercising,  and  all  other  terms  and  conditions  of  a 
Replacement Option will be the same as the Option for which it is exchanged, and any document 
or  agreement  previously  evidencing  an  Option  shall  thereafter  evidence  and  be  deemed  to 
evidence such Replacement Option. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if required, the exercise price 
of each Replacement Option will be increased such that (i) the excess (if any) of the aggregate fair 
market value of the Corporation Common Shares underlying such holder’s Replacement Option 
immediately following the exchange over (ii) the aggregate exercise price of such Replacement 
Option otherwise determined does not exceed (iii) the excess (if any) of the aggregate fair market 
value of the Corporation Common Shares underlying the holder’s Option immediately before the 
exchange over (iv) the aggregate exercise price of such Replacement Option; and
(c)
the name of each Shareholder will be removed from the register of Shareholders, the Offeror will 
be deemed to be holder of all of the Corporation Common Shares (free and clean of all Liens) and 
the  Offeror  will  be  added  to  the  register  of  Shareholders  as  the  sole  shareholder  of  the 
Corporation.
3.1
Rights of Dissent
ARTICLE 3
RIGHTS OF DISSENT
Pursuant  to  the  Interim  Order,  registered  holders  of  Corporation  Common  Shares  may  exercise  dissent 
rights in connection with the Arrangement Resolution (“Dissent Rights”) pursuant to and in the manner set forth in 
Section 190 of the CBCA and this Section 3.1, as such rights may be modified by the Interim Order; provided that, 
notwithstanding  Section  190  of  the  CBCA,  the  notice  of  dissent  to  the  Arrangement  Resolution  referred  to  in 
Section 190 of the CBCA must be received by Corporation before 5:00 p.m. (Toronto time) on the Business Day 
immediately preceding the Meeting.  Registered holders of Corporation Common Shares who duly exercise such 
Dissent Rights and who:
B-4
(a)
(b)
are ultimately  determined to be entitled to be paid the fair value of their Corporation Common 
Shares, will be deemed to have transferred such Corporation Common Shares to the Offeror at the 
Effective Time (contemporaneously with the step of this Plan of Arrangement set out in Section 
2.2(a) being effective), in consideration of a debt claim against the Offeror to be paid the fair value 
of such Corporation Common Shares, without any further act or formality and free and clear of all 
Liens; or
are  ultimately  determined  not  to  be  entitled,  for  any  reason,  to  be  paid  the  fair  value  for  their 
Corporation Common Shares, will be deemed to have participated in the Arrangement on the same 
basis as holders of Corporation Common Shares who did not exercise Dissent Rights;
but in no case will the Corporation, the Offeror, the Depositary or any other person be required to recognize any 
such holder as a holder of Corporation Common Shares after the Effective Time, and the names of such holders will 
be  deleted  from  the  register  of  Shareholders  at  the  Effective  Time.    In  addition  to  any  other  restrictions  under 
Section 192 of the CBCA, no Shareholder who votes (or instructs a proxyholder to vote) any of its Corporation 
Common Shares in favour of the Arrangement Resolution, will be entitled to exercise Dissent Rights.
ARTICLE 4
CERTIFICATES AND PAYMENTS
4.1
Delivery of Certificates and Offeror Common Shares
(a)
(b)
(c)
On or prior to the Effective Date, the Offeror shall deposit with the Depositary, for the benefit of 
the  Shareholders,  a  certificate  or  certificates  representing  the  aggregate  number  of  Offeror 
Common Shares that the Corporation Shareholders are entitled to receive hereunder (calculated 
without reference to whether any Shareholders have exercised or may exercise Dissent Rights).
Upon surrender to the Depositary for cancellation of a certificate which immediately prior to the 
Effective  Time  represented  one  or  more  outstanding  Corporation  Common  Shares  which  were 
exchanged for Offeror Common Shares in accordance with Section 2.2 hereof, together with such 
other  documents  and  instruments  as  would  have  been  required  to  effect  the  transfer  of  the 
Corporation Common Shares formerly represented by such certificate under the CBCA and the 
articles  of  Corporation  and  such  additional  documents  and  instruments  as  the  Depositary  may 
reasonably  require,  the  holder  of  such  surrendered  certificate  will  be  entitled  to  receive  in 
exchange therefor, and the Depositary will deliver to such holder following the Effective Time, a 
certificate representing the Offeror Common Shares to which such holder is entitled to receive in 
accordance with Section 2.2 hereof.
After  the  Effective  Time  and  until  surrendered  for  cancellation  as  contemplated  by  Section 4.1 
hereof, each certificate which immediately prior to the Effective Time represented one or more 
Corporation Common Shares will be deemed at all times to represent only the right to receive in 
exchange  therefor  the  entitlements  which  the  holder  of  such  certificate  is  entitled  to  receive  in 
accordance with Section 2.2 hereof.
4.2
Lost Certificates
In the event that any certificate which immediately prior to the Effective Time represented one or more 
outstanding  Corporation  Common  Shares  transferred  pursuant  to  Section 2.2  will  have  been  lost,  stolen  or 
destroyed, upon the making of an affidavit of that fact by the person claiming such certificate to have been lost, 
stolen or destroyed, the Depositary will pay in exchange for such lost, stolen or destroyed certificate, a certificate 
representing the Offeror Common Shares to which such holder is entitled to receive in accordance with Section 2.2 
hereof.  When authorizing such payment and delivery in exchange for such lost, stolen or destroyed certificate, the 
person to whom such Offeror Common Shares are to be delivered will, as a condition precedent to the delivery of 
such cash payment, give a bond satisfactory to the Offeror and the Depositary in such sum as the Offeror may direct, 
or otherwise indemnify the Offeror in a manner satisfactory to the Offeror, against any claim that  may be  made 
against the Offeror in respect of the certificate alleged to have been lost, stolen or destroyed.
B-5
4.3
Extinction of Rights
If  any  Shareholder  fails  for  any  reason  to  deliver  to  the  Depositary  for  cancellation  certificates  which 
immediately prior to the Effective Time represented Corporation Common Shares (or an affidavit of loss and bond 
or other indemnity pursuant to Section 4.2), together with a duly completed and executed Letter of Transmittal and 
such additional documents and instruments as the Depositary may reasonably require to effect the transfer of such 
Corporation Common Shares, on or before the sixth anniversary of the Effective Date, then on such date (i) any such 
certificate will cease to represent a claim or interest of any kind or nature as a Shareholder or former Shareholder 
against  the  Corporation,  the  Offeror  or  the  Depositary  and  will  be  cancelled,  and  (ii) such  Shareholder  will  be 
deemed  to have  surrendered and  forfeited  to  the Offeror any  Offeror  Common  Shares  held by  the Depositary  to 
which such Shareholder was entitled.
4.4
Withholding Rights
The Corporation, the Offeror and the Depositary will be entitled to deduct and withhold from any amount 
otherwise payable to any holder of Corporation Common Shares or Options (including any Dissenting Shareholder) 
such amounts as the Corporation, the Offeror or the Depositary is required or permitted to deduct and withhold with 
respect to such payment under the Tax Act, the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or any provision of 
applicable  federal,  provincial,  state,  local  or  foreign  Tax  law.    To  the  extent  that  amounts  are  so  withheld,  such 
withheld  amounts  will  be  treated  for  all  purposes  hereof  as  having  been  paid  to  the  holder  of  the  Corporation 
Common Shares or Options, as the case may be, in respect of which such deduction and withholding was made, 
provided that such withheld amounts are actually remitted to the appropriate taxing authority.
5.1
Amendments to Plan of Arrangement
ARTICLE 5
AMENDMENTS
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The  Corporation  may,  with  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Offeror,  amend,  modify  and/or 
supplement this Plan of Arrangement at any time and from time to time prior to the Effective Date, 
provided  that  each  such  amendment,  modification  and/or  supplement  must  be  in  a  written 
document that is filed with the Court (and, if made following the Meeting, approved by the Court) 
and communicated to the Corporation Shareholders if and as required by the Court.
Any amendment, modification or supplement to this Plan of Arrangement may be proposed by the 
Corporation, with the prior written consent of the Offeror, at any time prior to or at the Meeting 
with or without any other prior notice or communication, and if so proposed and accepted by the 
persons voting at the Meeting in the manner required under the Interim Order, will become part of 
this Plan of Arrangement for all purposes.
Any  amendment,  modification  or  supplement  to  this  Plan  of  Arrangement  that  is  approved  or 
directed  by  the  Court  following  the  Meeting  will  be  effective  only  if  (i) it  is  consented  to  in 
writing by each of the Offeror and the Corporation and (ii) if required by the Court, it is consented 
to by the Corporation Shareholders voting in the manner directed by the Court.
Any amendment, modification or supplement to this Plan of Arrangement may be made prior to or 
following the Effective Date unilaterally by the Offeror, provided that it concerns a matter which, 
in  the  reasonable  opinion  of  the  Offeror,  is  of  an  administrative  nature  required  to  better  give 
effect  to  the  implementation  of  this Plan of  Arrangement  and  is not  adverse  to  the financial or 
economic interests of any former Securityholder.
B-6
6.1
Further Assurances
ARTICLE 6
FURTHER ASSURANCES
Notwithstanding that the transactions and events set out herein will occur and will be deemed to occur in 
the  order  set  out  in  this  Plan  of  Arrangement  without  any  further  act  or  formality,  each  of  the  parties  to  the 
Arrangement Agreement will make, do and execute, or cause to be made, done and executed, all such further acts, 
deeds, agreements, transfers, assurances, instruments or documents as may reasonably be required by either of them 
in order to further document or evidence any of the transactions or events set out herein.
B-7
FORM OF REBGOLD ARRANGEMENT RESOLUTION
APPENDIX C
BE IT RESOLVED AS A SPECIAL RESOLUTION THAT:
The arrangement (the “Arrangement”) under Section 192 of the Canada Business Corporations Act, as 
amended  (the  “CBCA”)  involving  REBgold  Corporation  (the  “Corporation”),  as  more  particularly 
described and set out in the management proxy circular (the “Circular”) of the Corporation accompanying 
the  notice  of  this  meeting  (as  the  Arrangement  may  be  or  may  have  been  modified  or  amended  in 
accordance with its terms) is hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
The plan of arrangement (the “Plan of Arrangement”) involving the Corporation, the full text of which is 
set out as Exhibit A to the Circular (as the Plan of Arrangement may be or may have been modified or 
amended in accordance with its terms) is hereby authorized, approved and adopted.
Notwithstanding  that  this  resolution  has  been  passed  (and  the  Plan  of  Arrangement  adopted)  by  the 
shareholders  of  the  Corporation  or  that  the  Arrangement  has  been  approved  by  the  Superior  Court  of 
Ontario, the directors of the Corporation are hereby authorized and empowered without further notice to or 
approval of the shareholders of the Corporation (i) to amend the Arrangement Agreement or the Plan of 
Arrangement to the extent permitted by the Arrangement Agreement, and (ii) subject to the terms of the 
Arrangement Agreement, to cause the Corporation not to proceed with the Arrangement.
Any  officer  or  director  of  the  Corporation  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed  for  and  on  behalf  of  the 
Corporation to execute, under the seal of the Corporation or otherwise, and to deliver to the Director under 
the CBCA for filing any such documents as are necessary or desirable to give effect to the Arrangement 
and the Plan of Arrangement in accordance with the Arrangement Agreement.
Any  officer  or  director  of  the  Corporation  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed  for  and  on  behalf  of  the 
Corporation  to  execute  or  cause  to  be  executed,  under  the  seal  of  the  Corporation  or  otherwise,  and  to 
deliver or cause to be delivered, all such other documents and instruments and to perform or cause to be 
performed all such other acts and things as may be necessary or desirable to give full effect to the foregoing 
resolutions  and  the  matters  authorized  hereby,  such  determination  to  be  conclusively  evidenced  by  the 
execution and delivery of such document or instrument and the doing of such act or thing.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
C-1
APPENDIX D
INTERIM ORDER
D-1
D-2
D-3
D-4
D-5
D-6
D-7
D-8
D-9
D-10
D-11
D-12
D-13
D-14
D-15
D-16
NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR FINAL ORDER
APPENDIX E
E-1
E-2
E-3
E-4
E-5
E-6
E-7
FAIRNESS OPINION OF CLARUS SECURITIES INC.
APPENDIX F
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
FORMAL VALUATION AND FAIRNESS OPINION OF JENNINGS CAPITAL INC.
APPENDIX G
G-1
G-2
G-3
G-4
G-5
G-6
G-7
G-8
G-9
G-10
G-11
G-12
G-13
G-14
G-15
G-16
G-17
G-18
G-19
G-20
G-21
SECTIONS 190-192 OF THE CANADA BUSINESS CORPORATIONS ACT
APPENDIX H
Right to dissent 
190.  (1)  Subject  to  sections  191  and  241,  a  holder  of  shares  of  any  class  of  a  corporation  may  dissent  if  the 
corporation is subject to an order under paragraph 192(4)(d) that affects the holder or if the corporation resolves to 
(a)  amend its articles under section 173 or 174 to add, change or remove any provisions restricting or constraining
the issue, transfer or ownership of shares of that class;
(b)  amend its articles under section 173 to add, change or remove any restriction on the business or businesses that
the corporation may carry on;
(c)  amalgamate otherwise than under section 184; 
(d)  be continued under section 188; 
(e)  sell, lease or exchange all or substantially all its property under subsection 189(3); or 
(f)  carry out a going-private transaction or a squeeze-out transaction. 
Further right 
(2)  A  holder  of  shares  of  any  class  or  series  of  shares  entitled  to  vote  under  section  176  may  dissent  if  the 
corporation resolves to amend its articles in a manner described in that section. 
If one class of shares 
(2.1) The right to dissent described in subsection (2) applies even if there is only one class of shares. 
Payment for shares 
(3)  In  addition  to  any  other  right  the  shareholder  may  have,  but  subject  to  subsection  (26),  a  shareholder  who 
complies  with  this  section  is  entitled,  when  the  action  approved  by  the  resolution  from  which  the  shareholder 
dissents or an order made under subsection 192(4) becomes effective, to be paid by the corporation the fair value of 
the shares in respect of which the shareholder dissents, determined as of the close of business on the day before the 
resolution was adopted or the order was made. 
No partial dissent 
(4) A dissenting shareholder may only claim under this section with respect to all the shares of a class held on behalf 
of any one beneficial owner and registered in the name of the dissenting shareholder. 
Objection 
(5)  A  dissenting  shareholder  shall  send  to  the  corporation,  at  or  before  any  meeting  of  shareholders  at  which  a 
resolution  referred  to  in  subsection  (1)  or  (2)  is  to  be  voted  on,  a  written  objection  to  the  resolution,  unless  the 
corporation did not give notice to the shareholder of the purpose of the meeting and of their right to dissent. 
Notice of resolution 
(6) The corporation shall, within ten days after the shareholders adopt the resolution, send to each shareholder who 
has filed the objection referred to in subsection (5) notice that the resolution has been adopted, but such notice is not 
required to be sent to any shareholder who voted for the resolution or who has withdrawn their objection. 
Demand for payment 
(7)  A  dissenting  shareholder  shall,  within  twenty  days  after  receiving  a  notice  under  subsection  (6)  or,  if  the 
shareholder does not receive such notice, within twenty days after learning that the resolution has been adopted, 
send to the corporation a written notice containing 
(a)  the shareholder’s name and address; 
(b)  the number and class of shares in respect of which the shareholder dissents; and 
(c)  a demand for payment of the fair value of such shares. 
Share certificate 
(8) A dissenting shareholder shall, within thirty days after sending a notice under subsection (7), send the certificates 
representing the shares in respect of which the shareholder dissents to the corporation or its transfer agent.
H-1
Forfeiture 
(9) A dissenting shareholder who fails to comply with subsection (8) has no right to make a claim under this section. 
Endorsing certificate 
(10) A corporation or its transfer agent shall endorse on any share certificate received under subsection (8) a notice 
that the holder is a dissenting shareholder under this section and shall forthwith return the share certificates to the 
dissenting shareholder. 
Suspension of rights 
(11) On sending a notice under subsection (7), a dissenting shareholder ceases to have any rights as a shareholder 
other than to be paid the fair value of their shares as determined under this section except where 
(a)  the shareholder withdraws that notice before the corporation makes an offer under subsection (12), 
(b)  the corporation fails to make an offer in accordance with subsection (12) and the shareholder withdraws the
(c)  the  directors  revoke  a  resolution  to  amend  the  articles  under  subsection  173(2)  or  174(5),  terminate  an 
amalgamation agreement under subsection 183(6) or an application for continuance under subsection 188(6), or 
abandon a sale, lease or exchange under subsection 189(9),
notice, or
in which case the shareholder’s rights are reinstated as of the date the notice was sent. 
Offer to pay 
(12) A corporation shall, not later than seven days after the later of the day on which the action approved by the 
resolution  is  effective  or  the  day  the  corporation  received  the  notice  referred  to  in  subsection  (7),  send  to  each 
dissenting shareholder who has sent such notice 
(a)  a written offer to pay for their shares in an amount considered by the directors of the corporation to be the fair
value, accompanied by a statement showing how the fair value was determined; or
(b)  if subsection (26) applies, a notification that it is unable lawfully to pay dissenting shareholders for their shares. 
Same terms 
(13) Every offer made under subsection (12) for shares of the same class or series shall be on the same terms. 
Payment 
(14) Subject to subsection (26), a corporation shall pay for the shares of a dissenting shareholder within ten days 
after an offer made under subsection (12) has been accepted, but any such offer lapses if the corporation does not 
receive an acceptance thereof within thirty days after the offer has been made. 
Corporation may apply to court 
(15) Where a corporation fails to make an offer under subsection (12), or if a dissenting shareholder fails to accept 
an offer, the corporation may, within fifty days after the action approved by the resolution is effective or within such 
further period as a court may allow, apply to a court to fix a fair value for the shares of any dissenting shareholder. 
Shareholder application to court 
(16) If a corporation fails to apply to a court under subsection (15), a dissenting shareholder may apply to a court for 
the same purpose within a further period of twenty days or within such further period as a court may allow. 
Venue 
(17) An application under subsection (15) or (16) shall be made to a court having jurisdiction in the place where the 
corporation has its registered office or in the province where the dissenting shareholder resides if the corporation 
carries on business in that province. 
No security for costs 
(18) A dissenting shareholder is not required to give security for costs in an application made under subsection (15) 
or (16). 
Parties 
(19) On an application to a court under subsection (15) or (16),
H-2
(a)  all dissenting shareholders whose shares have not been purchased by the corporation shall be joined as parties
and are bound by the decision of the court; and
(b)  the  corporation  shall  notify  each  affected  dissenting  shareholder  of  the  date,  place  and  consequences  of  the
application and of their right to appear and be heard in person or by counsel.
Powers of court 
(20) On an application to a court under subsection (15) or (16), the court may determine whether any other person is 
a dissenting shareholder who should be joined as a party, and the court shall then fix a fair value for the shares of all 
dissenting shareholders. 
Appraisers 
(21) A court may in its discretion appoint one or more appraisers to assist the court to fix a fair value for the shares 
of the dissenting shareholders. 
Final order 
(22) The final order of a court shall be rendered against the corporation in favour of each dissenting shareholder and 
for the amount of the shares as fixed by the court. 
Interest 
(23)  A  court  may  in  its  discretion  allow  a  reasonable  rate  of  interest  on  the  amount  payable  to  each  dissenting 
shareholder from the date the action approved by the resolution is effective until the date of payment. 
Notice that subsection (26) applies 
(24)  If  subsection  (26)  applies,  the  corporation  shall, within  ten days  after  the pronouncement  of  an order under 
subsection (22), notify each dissenting shareholder that it is unable lawfully to pay dissenting shareholders for their 
shares. 
Effect where subsection (26) applies 
(25) If subsection (26) applies, a dissenting shareholder, by written notice delivered to the corporation within thirty 
days after receiving a notice under subsection (24), may 
(a)  withdraw their notice of dissent, in which case the corporation is deemed to consent to the withdrawal and the
shareholder is reinstated to their full rights as a shareholder; or
(b)  retain a status as a claimant against the corporation, to be paid as soon as the corporation is lawfully able to do 
so or, in a liquidation, to be ranked subordinate to the rights of creditors of the corporation but in priority to its 
shareholders.
Limitation 
(26) A corporation shall not make a payment to a dissenting shareholder under this section if there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that 
(a)  the corporation is or would after the payment be unable to pay its liabilities as they become due; or 
(b)  the realizable value of the corporation’s assets would thereby be less than the aggregate of its liabilities. 
Definition of “reorganization” 
191. (1) In this section, “reorganization” means a court order made under 
(a)  section 241; 
(b)  the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act, as amended, approving a proposal; or 
(c)  any other Act of Parliament that affects the rights among the corporation, its shareholders and creditors. 
Powers of court 
(2) If a corporation is subject to an order referred to in subsection (1), its articles may be amended by such order to 
effect any change that might lawfully be made by an amendment under section 173. 
Further powers 
(3) If a court makes an order referred to in subsection (1), the court may also
H-3
(a)  authorize the issue of debt obligations of the corporation, whether or not convertible into shares of any class or
having attached any rights or options to acquire shares of any class, and fix the terms thereof; and
(b)  appoint directors in place of or in addition to all or any of the directors then in office. 
Articles of reorganization 
(4) After an order referred to in subsection (1) has been made, articles of reorganization in the form that the Director 
fixes shall be sent to the Director together with the documents required by sections 19 and 113, if applicable. 
Certificate of reorganization 
(5) On receipt of articles of reorganization, the Director shall issue a certificate of amendment in accordance with 
section 262. 
Effect of certificate 
(6)  A  reorganization  becomes  effective  on  the  date  shown  in  the  certificate  of  amendment  and  the  articles  of 
incorporation are amended accordingly. 
No dissent 
(7) A shareholder is not entitled to dissent under section 190 if an amendment to the articles of incorporation is 
effected under this section. 
Definition of “arrangement” 
192. (1) In this section, “arrangement” includes 
(a)  an amendment to the articles of a corporation; 
(b)  an amalgamation of two or more corporations; 
(c)  an amalgamation of a body corporate with a corporation that results in an amalgamated corporation subject to
(d)  a division of the business carried on by a corporation; 
(e)  a  transfer  of  all  or  substantially  all  the  property  of  a  corporation  to  another  body  corporate  in  exchange  for
(f)  an exchange of securities of a corporation for property, money or other securities of the corporation or property,
property, money or securities of the body corporate;
money or securities of another body corporate;
this Act;
(f.1) a going-private transaction or a squeeze-out transaction in relation to a corporation; 
(g)  a liquidation and dissolution of a corporation; and 
(h)  any combination of the foregoing. 
Where corporation insolvent 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a corporation is insolvent 
(a)  where it is unable to pay its liabilities as they become due; or 
(b)  where the realizable value of the assets of the corporation are less than the aggregate of its liabilities and stated
capital of all classes.
Application to court for approval of arrangement 
(3) Where it is not practicable for a corporation that is not insolvent to effect a fundamental change in the nature of 
an arrangement under any other provision of this Act, the corporation may apply to a court for an order approving an 
arrangement proposed by the corporation. 
Powers of court 
(4) In connection with an application under this section, the court may make any interim or final order it thinks fit 
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, 
(a)  an order determining the notice to be given to any interested person or dispensing with notice to any person
other than the Director;
(b)  an order appointing counsel, at the expense of the corporation, to represent the interests of the shareholders; 
(c)  an order requiring a corporation to call, hold and conduct a meeting of holders of securities or options or rights
to acquire securities in such manner as the court directs;
(d)  an order permitting a shareholder to dissent under section 190; and
H-4
(e)  an order approving an arrangement as proposed by the corporation or as amended in any manner the court may
direct.
Notice to Director 
(5) An applicant for any interim or final order under this section shall give the Director notice of the application and 
the Director is entitled to appear and be heard in person or by counsel. 
Articles of arrangement 
(6) After an order referred to in paragraph (4)(e) has been made, articles of arrangement in the form that the Director 
fixes shall be sent to the Director together with the documents required by sections 19 and 113, if applicable. 
Certificate of arrangement 
(7) On receipt of articles of arrangement, the Director shall issue a certificate of arrangement in accordance with 
section 262. 
Effect of certificate 
(8) An arrangement becomes effective on the date shown in the certificate of arrangement.
H-5
COMPARISON OF SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS BETWEEN THE CBCA AND THE OBCA
APPENDIX I
The  OBCA  provides  shareholders  substantially  the  same  rights  available  under  the  CBCA,  including  rights  of 
dissent  and  to  bring  derivative  and  oppression  actions.    There  are  differences  between  the  two  statutes  and  the 
regulations.  The following is a summary of material differences.
This summary is not an exhaustive review of the two statutes. Reference should be made to the full text of both 
statutes and the regulations made or laws developed thereunder for particulars of any differences between them, and 
Shareholders  should  consult  their  legal  or  other  professional  advisors  with  regard  to  the  implications  of  the 
Arrangement which may be of importance to them.
Independent Directors.  Under the CBCA, the requirement is that at least two of the directors of a corporation not be 
officers or employees of a corporation or its affiliates.  Under the OBCA, at least one-third of the members of the 
board of directors cannot be officers or employees of a corporation or its affiliates.
Quorum  –  Directors’  Meetings.  Both  CBCA  and  OBCA  state  that  quorum  of  directors  meetings  consists  of  a 
majority of directors or the minimum number of directors required by the articles.  The OBCA also states that a 
quorum may not be less than two-fifths of the number of directors or the minimum number of directors.
Place  of  Shareholders’  Meetings.    Under  the  CBCA,  a  shareholders’  meeting  may  be  held  any  place  in  Canada 
provided  in  the  by-laws  or,  in  the  absence  of  such  provision,  at  a  place  in  Canada  that  the  directors  determine. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a meeting of shareholders of a CBCA corporation may be held at a place outside 
Canada if such place is specified in the articles or all the shareholders entitled to vote at the meeting agree that the 
meeting is to be held at that place.  Under the OBCA, a shareholders’ meeting may be held in or outside Ontario 
(including outside Canada) as the directors determine or, in the absence of such a determination, at the place where 
the registered office of a corporation is located.
Notice of Shareholders’ Meetings.  Under the CBCA, the notice of shareholders’ meetings must be provided not less 
than 21 days and not more than 60 days before the meeting. Under the OBCA, a public corporation must give notice 
not  less  than  21  days  and  not  more  than  50  days  before  the  meeting.  Public  companies  are  also  subject  to  the 
requirements of National Instrument 54-101 – Communication with Beneficial Owners of Securities of a Reporting 
Issuer which provides for minimum notice periods of greater than the minimum 21 day period in either statute.
Telephonic or Electronic Meetings. Under the CBCA, unless the articles or by-laws state otherwise,  meetings of 
shareholders may  be  held  by  telephonic  or  electronic  means  and  shareholders  may  participate  in  and vote  at  the 
meeting  by  such  means.  The  CBCA  also  requires  a  corporation  to  provide  shareholders  with  a  means  of 
communication  that  permits  all  participants  to  communicate  adequately  with  each  other  during  the  meeting.  In 
addition,  if  a corporation’s by-laws  so provide,  a  meeting of shareholders  may  be  held  entirely  by  telephonic  or 
electronic means. Under the OBCA, unless the articles or by-laws state otherwise, meetings of shareholders may be 
held by telephonic or electronic means and shareholders may participate in and vote at the meeting by such means.
Shareholder Proposals. Under the CBCA, shareholder proposals may be submitted by both registered and beneficial 
owners of shares entitled to be voted at an annual meeting of shareholders, provided that (a) the shareholder was a 
registered or beneficial owner, for at least six months prior to sending the proposal, of voting shares at least equal to 
1% of the total outstanding voting shares or whose fair market value is at least $2,000, or (b) the proposal must have 
the support of persons who in the aggregate have been the registered or beneficial owner of such number of voting 
shares for such period.  Under the OBCA, a shareholder entitled to vote at a meeting of shareholders may submit to 
a corporation a notice of a proposal and discuss at the meeting any matter in respect of which the shareholder would 
have been titled to submit a proposal.
Registered Office.  Under the CBCA, the registered office must be in the province specified in the articles and may 
be relocated within a province by directors’ approval.  Under the OBCA, the registered office must be in Ontario 
and may be relocated to a different municipality with shareholder approval.
Corporate  Records.    The  CBCA  permits  corporate  and  accounting  records  to  be  kept  outside  of  Canada,  with 
requirements  to  keep  them  within  Canada  under  the  Tax  Act  and  other  statutes  administered  by  the  Minister  of
I-1
National  Revenue (such  as  the  Excise  Tax  Act).   Companies  are  also required  to provide  access  to  records  kept 
outside Canada at a location in Canada, by computer terminal or other technology.  The OBCA and related Ontario 
statutes require records to be kept in Ontario.
Short  Selling.    Under  the  CBCA,  insiders  of  a  corporation  are  prohibited  from  short  selling  any  securities  of  a 
corporation unless the insider selling the securities owns or has fully paid for the securities being sold.  The OBCA 
contains no such prohibition.
Notice  of  a  Derivative  Action.    Under  the  CBCA,  a  condition  precedent  to  a  complainant  bringing  a  derivative 
action is that the complainant has given at least 14 days’ notice to the directors of a corporation of the complainant’s 
intention to make an application to the court to bring such a derivative action. Under the OBCA, a complainant is 
not required to give notice to the directors of a corporation of the complainant’s intention to make an application to 
the court to bring a derivative action if all of the directors of a corporation are defendants in the action.
Oppression Remedy.  The CBCA allows a court to grant relief where a prejudicial effect to a shareholder actually 
exists (that is, it must be more than merely threatened).  The OBCA allows a court to grant relief where a prejudicial 
effect to a shareholder is merely threatened.
I-2
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC.
APPENDIX J
J-1
J-2
J-3
J-4
J-5
J-6
J-7
J-8
J-9
J-10
J-11
J-12
J-13
J-14
J-15
J-16
J-17
J-18
J-19
J-20
J-21
DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF HUDBAY MICHIGAN INC.
APPENDIX K
K-1
K-2
K-3
K-4
K-5
K-6
K-7