
KBiI-X‘PBS Ezra AGREEMENT FOR SALE AND PURCHASE
Azarbaycamn Balm OF NATURAL GAS
daniz yatagmdan gmnlan from
raw QAZIN SATXSI v3 ALIS! Bahar Field
4 ERDPSA
haqqmda Offshore Azerbaijan
AzaRBAYCAN RESPUBLiKASLNH‘T between
DOVLGT NEFT STRKGTI
(“Abel”) THE STATE OIL COMPANY
OF THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
vs ("Buyer")
BAHAR ENERGY OPERATING COMIANY LIMITED ’ and
(“Sahel”)
BAHAR ENERGY OPERATING COMPANY LIMITED
' arasmda ("Szllcr")
SAzis


- Mﬁnﬁaricat Table of Contemx

Madda 1 —- Teriﬂar , Article 1 - Deﬁnitions
Madda 2 — Qazn “1151 Va 31131 Article 2 — Sale and Purchase :3me
Madds 3 H Baﬁlama :3:in v: Mﬁqavile mﬁddsti Article 3 7 Commencement Date and Qumran Period
Madda 4 ~ Caldmlma maanaleri Va mﬁlldyyot hﬁququnun éﬁrﬁlmasi Article 4 — Delivezy Points and mnsfer of ﬁtle ’
Mada: 5 — Catduﬂma 59:11:11 Article 5 — Delivery Conditions

Maddz 6 — (319m; Arﬁcle 6 - Measurement

Madds 7— Q1212: hacmleri Article 7 — Quantities of Gas

Madda 8 — Esyan edilmi$ hmnlar Article 8 ~Naminaﬁous

Madda 9 ~Texniki Xidmet Article 9 #Maintcnance

Madda 10 — Qiqut Article 10 v Price

Madda 11 — Drink sardm' Article ll —Paym¢ni Terms

Mada: 12 w Qazdm isﬁfada Article 12 —Uss of Gas

Madd: 13 — Furs majorhallan Arﬂcle 13 w Force Majeure

Madda 14 — Ekspm Article 14 — Expert

Madda 15 — Mﬁbahisalarin halli Article 15 — Dispute Resolutién

Madds 16 — bmamtlar V3 tadbirlsr Article 16 — Warranties and Undertakings

Madds l7 — Hﬁquqi Mﬁdaﬁa Vasitslan’ Article 17 — Remedies

Madda 13 — Sazién xitaml Article 18 a Termination

Madda 19 -— Bildﬁylar Article 19 — Notices

Madda 20 — Masuliyyatfn mahdudla;dmlmasx male 20 — Limitation Of Liabilities

Madda 21 —Hﬁquqlann :3me Article 21 — Assignment

Mathis 22 — Konﬁdcnsialhq Article 22 — Conﬁdentiality

Madda 23 — Diga‘r 591.119! Article 23 — Miscellaneous

Qomm “A” Appendix “A”

2


QAZH‘I SATISI HAQQINDA SAZiS GAS SALES AGREEMENT
HAZIRKI QAZIN SATISI HAQQWDA SAZTS (“Sazii”) Azarbaycan THIS GAS SALES AGREEMENT (“Agreement”) made and entered into
Respublikamnm Eakl gaharinds, “3—1” m 2010£uiltarixr19 asagidaki in Baku, Reyublic of Azerbaijan, this Z’/ day of W010, by and
tanﬂer arasmda baglanmisdm between:
Bir tamfdan Azqrbaycan Respubljkzm Dﬁvlat Ncﬁ Sirkati (“ARDNS”), The State Oil Company of the Republic of Azerbaijan (“SOCAR”) as
qazin 8110151 (“A1121”) qisminda, the buyer of the (“ms (“Buyel”);
v2 digs: brafdsn and
B86, Dubay, label All Azad amusinds qcydiyyata alimms Balm; Energy Bahzr Energy Operating Company Limited (“EEOC”) a company
Operating Campany Limited (“EEOC”); qazm sang iier KBIHPBS—in incorporated in label Ali Free Zone, Dubai, UAE; acting as agmt for the
Toraﬂarinin agenﬁ qisminda 5:13:13 669:: (bundan sonra “Sana” adlamr). ERDPSA Parties for the sale of 11:: Gas (referred tn as “Seller’ﬁl
A1101 va Sane-1 bundan 50m birlikde “Tammi: aynlquaiss ‘Taref’ adlamr‘ Buyq and Seller are hereinafter referred to collectively as ‘Taxﬁes” and
mdividually as “Party”.
Nazaka ALARAQ Id, WITNESSETH
Azarbaycan Respublkasimn Hﬁkumati Azerbaycan Respublikasmda qazm allSl WHEREAS, The Govmmmt of the RCPUleC of Azerbaijan has assigned
v: sansma gar: vazif'as'mi ARDNS‘Q bevel: elmisdh'; the responsibility for buying and selling gas in the Republic of Azerbaijan
to the SOCAR;
Bea, Dubay, label Ali Azad erazisinde qcydiyyata almmxs Bahar Energy WHEREAS, Bahar Energy Limited (“BE”), 21 company incawomted in
Limited (“BE”) sirlcalimn; vs ARDNS taraﬁndan yamdihm§ Va 0mm tam label All Free long Dubai, UAE; and SOCAR Oil Afﬁliate (“80A”), :1
mﬁlh'yyaﬁnd: clan ARDNS Omaq Neft Sirkaﬁnin (“0N3”); v9 ARDNS-m company to be fully owned and formed by SOCAR; and SOCAR
ix‘liymmla 22 dckabr 2009~m1 ilda ARDNS, CNS Va BE azasmdu baglanmxg (collectively Isfde to as “ERDPSA Parties”) have Gas available under
v9 27 aprel 2010—cu i1 larbddua Azarbaycan Respublikasi Milli Maclisi 1h: Expluraﬁon, Rehabilitation, Development and Production Sharing
mﬁndan ratiﬁkuiya edilmis Kasﬁyyat, B21133, Blame vs Hasilatm Fay Agreement executed the 22nd ofDecembar) 2009,192an SOCAR7 SOA,
Bﬁlgﬁs’ﬁ haqqmda Saris (“KBﬂ-IPHS”) i321: Azerbaycan Respublikasmds and BE and which was uniﬁed by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of
salmaq vs ya hat hansx bit yer: ixxac ctran ﬁgﬁn qaz vardu’: v2 Azmbaijau on April 27, 2010 (“ERDPSA”) for sale in the Republic of
3
w w


Azerbaijan and for export elsewhere; and
Santa vs Babax Energy Operating Company Limited Neﬁin Birg-e Satisi WHEREAS, ERDPSA Parties and Balm Energy Operating Campany
haqmda Sazis ("Neﬂin Birgs Sangi haqmda Sazis") baglamislar va bu sazrisa Limited have entered into 2: Join: Lifting Agreement (“Joint Lifting
367:: BB, ONS Va ARDNS (KBIHPBS Taraﬂsri) KBH-LPBS asasmda basil Agnement") pursuant to which BE, SOA and SOCAR (ERDPSA Parties)
edﬂmis neﬁi birg: yiiklenilmasina Va satilmasma dair maliq old: 6m” cyni have agreed to jointly liﬁ and sell the Petroleum produced under the
zamanda bu Suzisin msqsedlari ﬁvﬁn qazm saulmam v9 onlann inﬁbati v: ERDPSA, and have desigmted BBOC as their agent to act on their behalf
amnliyyax éhdaliklaxinin bayzta kegirilmasi, elocz da bu Snzis asasmda for the purposes 0f this Agcemem m sell the Ges and to handle their
5511de 9141: alumnus he: bansi gelirlorin toplamlmas: Va ballisdurﬁlmasi ﬁeun administrative and operational obligatitms, and be collect and distribute the
EEOC sirkeﬁni 52 admdan agent qisminda guns etmsk ugﬁn mﬁvakkil proceeds ﬁ‘om any sale received hereundetx
emislars
ARDNS KBIH'PBS gergivasindz basil edilen qam Azerbaycan WHEREAS, SOCAR desires m purchase the Gas produced under the
Respublilcasmda w ya ha: hansi lair yerde sonradan istﬁfadsm‘, saftsi v9 ERDPSA for its further use, marketing and distribution and in the Republic
paylznmnsi ﬁqﬁn qazi almaq amisxmdadir; of Azerbaijan and elsewhuc;
Sana, KBlHPBS—in Tanﬂerinin admdan razﬂasn’ ki, A1101 bu Sazisdaki WHEREAS, Seller, on behalf of the ERDPSA Parties, has agreed that
sealer; ve miiddaalm asasm qazl satava ya ala. bilar, Buyer may purchase the Gas upon and subject to the terms and conditions
contained herein;
BUNUNLA TQSDlQ BDlLlR Kl, “retailer, bumda eksini tapmts qarslliqli NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration oftlte mutual agreements contained
malasmam mm alaraq, asagidakilar band: realign galdilsr. herein, the Parties hereby agree as fellows:
Madde 1 v Tariﬂar Article 1 - Deﬁnitions
Bu Sazisds xiisusi olaraq basqa cﬁr nazarda tutulmus hallar istisna olmaqla, Except Where otherwise expressly stated in this Agreement, the leans,
asaglda mﬁayyau edilmis feminist, ifadelsr v: ya qisaltmalar bu Sazisda expressions, or abbreviations set forth below shall have the following
isn'fada olxmduqda asagidak: manalan dasiyzr v: kmtdcstin talebins gin-2 tsk meanings when used in this Agreement, and where the context requires the
bah bildirsn sazlar com hall V: aksini ehu'va edit singular shall include the plural and vice versa:
9% 4


“Onaq sirkat” “Afﬁliate” shall mean
(a) ha): ham Tamfs mﬁnasibatdo: (a) in {Elation 10 any PW, Either
(i) 212 sirkct. korporzsiya v9 ya ha: hansx digsr hﬁquqi saxsdir 1d, bela (i) a 00173me Corporation 0‘ 0633713331 may in “415011 313511 Party
Tamf hsmin sirkalin, koxpomsiyamn vs ya digar hﬁquqi gaxsin ﬁmumi 11°de dif‘mﬂy 0r mdimﬂy Sham? carrying it 1033‘- 533’ 115117831t (50%)
yxgmcagmda saslarin an an an; (50%) {mini mum gag“ 59mm“ of the votes at a general meeting of such company, corporation or other
bilavasitn v3 ya (Inlay: sahibidir; yaxud legal 51mm 0!
(ii) 51:: sirkot, korpomsiya vs yath hens! digar hﬁquqi saxsdir 1d, 0, hemin  *1 mPan)’: WFPWﬂiOﬂ 01' Other legal entity homing directly 0"
Tamﬁn ﬁmumi yxgmcagmda saslarin an 321 911i (50%) faizini cal-mu edzn Indirectly shares carrying at least ﬁﬁy pewmt (50%) of the votes at a
sahmlaﬁn bilavasita v: ya (inlay: sahﬂaidir; anUd Emmi] “1031313 Of SUOh Party; 01'
(iii) 31: 5kkst, korporasiya v: ya bar hansx digsr hﬁquqi $9Xsdir ki, 0mm (iii) 3 company, Corporation 01’ 0313? 19331 5‘1th 0f WhiCh Shams
hzmin yirkatin, koxpmasiyamn v: ya bar hansx digzr hﬁquqi 53m ﬁmumi carrying 311935: 533’ Percent (50%) Ofﬂlc V01“ at 3 3mm mating 0f
yxgmcagmda saslan'n an azt 911i (50%)  tamin edan sahmbri SUCh company) corporation 0? 0‘11“ legﬂ 535W “18 bald difﬁcﬂy or
bilavasim Va ya delay) :19 bit silicate> korporasiyaya Va yahsr harm digwr imitch by 5 00mpva Fomomfian 01' Other 13381 Crlm)’ WhiCh also
hﬁquqi $9XS€ maxsusdur 1d, 0 ham d: bﬂzvnsita VP ya dohyx olamq hamin 110155 dimch 01’ immde Shares naming 5‘ X335: ﬁﬁy 13'meant (50%) 0‘5
Taraﬁn ﬁmumi yxgmcagmda 5951mm Gui faizindan (50%) Qoxunu (9min ﬁle votes at a general meeting of such Party;
edan sakmlm‘in sahibidir.
CD) V9 bundan I)an Almya mﬁnasibetda — Ahcmm pay1 cldug-u v9 0:) and, ﬁlrthu-more, in relation m Buyer, any venture or enterprise in
fzaliyyatina mam cumk, rshbarlﬂc cunak va ya faaliyystini which Buyer has an interest and the right to camel (as deﬁned below),
isﬁqamatlsndirmak (35323321 gﬁstsrildiy'i kimi) bﬁququ oldugu her hams; managcmdifeﬂ the 3mm them“?
birga mﬁassisa v9 yamﬁassisa demakziir.
(c) v; bundan baSqa, EEOC-a mﬁnasibatda - Bahax Energy Limited (0) and, Marinate, 311 {51393911 ‘0 EEOC» Bah“ Energy Limi‘ed
(“BB”) v: BE—niu sahmdm oldugu mﬁddat minds: m on FZE) (“BE’W and me following for so long as such company is a shareholder
Baghlan Group FZCO vs Greenﬁelds Petrolemn International Company in BE: Raﬁ 0“ FZE) Baghlan GTOUP FZCO and Gimﬁﬂds Petmleum
Ltd., v; calm-m hﬁquqi varislgﬁ v; mmakﬁum dgmgkdir_ Intmnaﬁoual Company Ltd, and their successors and assigns.
Bu Sazigin maqsadhri bammmdan, ‘hazarat” dcdikda mean, mﬁassisain As uscd herein» "camel" shall mean the ownership of more than my
V3 ya taskilaun sahmdarlanmn ﬁmumi yxgxnmgmda $95va hﬁququ 01m PC1057”- (50%) 9f the Shares authorized ‘0 V033 3‘ 3 germ?! meeting 0f
5
5m V”


schmlerin elii (50) faizindsn gamma sahib olmaq, v; w sahmdarlann shareholders, or the ability to pass or procure the passing of a decision
ﬁmumi yigmcag-mda va ya icrag yaxud idmnetma orqanmm hat hans1 (Whether by casting of votes or otherwise) at a general meeting of
iclasmda qarar gxaxtmaq v: ya qsm Qixanlmnsmi tamin ma}: (saslarin shareholders, or at any meeting of the executive 01’ management body,
vmlmasi yolu ils v9 ya basqa sakilda) salahiyyaﬁ balsa dﬁsﬁlﬁr. of ﬁle company, venture or enterprise,
“Raszde faiz danmsi” “Wall Street Journal" tamﬁndan dare edilmis, “Agreed Interest Rate” shall mean interest compounded on a monthly
v9 ya dare edilmzrnisss, ‘Tinancial Times of London” tmﬁndan dare edilmis basis, at the rate per annum equal In the three (3) month term Lender)
AB$ dollannda clan depozitlar Ezra Landon Bankiararasi Teklif Darmsi Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) for US dollar deposits, as published by
(LlBOR) asasmdn ﬁg; (3) uylxq inﬁdde hamber llllk demo: ile nyliq olaraq the Wall Street Journal or if not published, Then by the Financial Times of
ﬁnmmilasdirilmis faiz ﬁstegal layin edilmis Edam: tarixindn tstbiq edilsu v2 London. plus two percentage poinis (2%), applicable on the due date of
tayin edilmis Edema taxixindsn baslayaraq faktiki édanis tarjxinsdak iki fail paymeng fmm the due date of payment until the date of payment.
bandi (2%) demskdiri
“Salts” hmlu Qazm Satl§l Haqqmda Saris v: ouun hﬁtﬁn elevalari, “Agreement” shall mean this Gas Sales Agreement inclusive of all its
qnsmalm, csdvallari, V; cm cdilan biitﬁn diizalislar demakdir. attachments, appendices and schedules, and any mendmmts thereto.
“11m; Miiqavﬂa Kauai” Madda 7V2-d3 Verilmis manan) daslyir. “Annual Contract Quantity” shall have the meaning set forth in Am'cle
7.7..
“illik aqu-saqu hesabau” Maddie 11.5—d3 verilmis manam dasiyir. “Annual Purchase Report" has the meaning set forth in Article 1 1‘5.
“Gﬁtﬁrﬁlmiis illik Hacm” Madde ll.5(h)-de Vetilmis menam dasiym "Annual Taken Volume" shall have the meaning set forth in Article 115
(b)
“EEOC” Babe: Energy Operating Company Limited demakdir. “EEOC” means Baha: Energy Operating Company Limited
“310k” X322: danizinin Azsrbaycan sektonmda Bahar v9 Qum-Daniz “Block” shall have the meaning g'ven to it in the ERDPSA with regard to
yamqlanndan ibatat blokla bagh KBlEEPBS~d9 vea‘ilmis martian! dasxyir. the block including the Bahar Field and Gum—Deniz Field in the
Azerbaijan Sector of the Caspian Sea
“is giinﬁ” - Azarbaycan Respublikasimn Mgrkazi Banlomn is mliyyatlan “Business Day” shall mean cach day on which the Cmtml Bank of the
aparmaq twin aqu oldugu 1131' giin dcmokdir. Republic of Azerbaijan is cyan for business.
WV 6 ,
5M


“Hasﬂat 3mm: dﬁvn'i” Maddg 7l2-da gﬁsmrildiyi ldmi bu Sazisin Birinci “Build-Up Period” shall mean the term beginning with the First Contact
Mﬁqavils Ilinda baglayan v9 Ueﬁucﬁ Mﬁqavile Hinds [3353. (Lawn mﬁdda't Year and ending with the end ofthe Third Contract Year ofthis Agreement
demakdir. as set forth in Article 7.7..
"Taqvim rﬁbi‘l" - her hans1 quvim ilinda yanvann l-de, aprelin 1-d2, iyulun “Calendar Quarier” means a period of ilnee (3) consecutive months
1432 Va olctyabnn l—da ba§lamm ﬁg: (3) ardme aydan ibamt dﬁv: demekdirl eommencing on the lat of January, the 1“ of April, the ls: of July, or the
Ist of October in any Calendar Year.
“Buglxma mrixi” Madde 3.1 412 Verilmi$ mannm daglyxr, “Commencement Date” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 1L
“Mﬁqavila madam” Madda 33~da Verilmi$ manam d351er “Contract Period” shall have the meaning set fmﬂl in Article 3.3.
“Miqavila qiyxneff’ Madda 10.14:) verilmis manam dasiyxr, “Contract Price” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 10.1.
“Mﬁqavila Eli” bu Sazis mﬁddatinda, Baelama tanxinda Bale vaxtila saat “Contract Year” shall mean each cunsccutive period of twelve (12)
00:00-da baelayan Va bi: ll sonm Bach vaxn ila seat 001004.11 been catan on iki Months during the term ofmis Agreemeng commencing at 00:00 am Baku
(12) archcll aydzm ibamt dévr demakdil. me on the Commencement Pale and ending at 00:00 am Baku time one
year laﬁer.
“Podratcl Taraﬂar” BE v2 ONS olmqua KBlHPBS—ds gﬁsbﬁlmﬁ Podratel “Ccnn’actur Parties” means the Connector Parties as deﬁned in me
Tamﬂsr demekdir. ERDPSA7 those being BE and SOA
“Gi'uldalilz Mﬁqaviia Hacmi” v9 ya “GMH.” Madds 7.2419 Verilmis manam “Daily Conu’act Quantity” 01’ “DCQ” shall have the meaning set fnrtl: in
dnsxyu'. Article 72.
“Gfmdalik qaz sauglan” S-ci Maddaya uygun clamq SSUCI mmﬁndau “Daily Gas Sales” means all dain gas Volumes properly nominaled by the
mﬁvaﬁq sakildn beyan edilmi§ w, Alim taraﬁndsn radd edilmi; Keyﬁyyat Seller in man-dance with Arﬁele 8 up to me DCQ, and made available to
mlablarina cavab vermayan qaz istinsa olmaqla, Aliclnm ixtiyanna ven'lmis Buyer, with the exception of Buyer-rejected Off—Spec gas,
bﬁtﬁn gﬁndolik qaz haemlari demskdir.
“Gin” Balm vaxtilc her hansx gfmda gees yams; saat 00.00419 baslayan vs “Day” shall mam a period of twenty four (7,4) consecutive hours
névbati giin Bela mt] ila geca yansi (00:00) baea (33th 24 amicil saatdan beginning at midnight (0:00 am) Baku time on any day and ending at
ibatet dew demakdir. midnight (0:00 am) Baku time on the next succeeding day.
4/ 7
WV


“Camrﬂma Mantaqasi Cori)” Maddc 4.1412) verilmi§ manam dnsiyu‘. “Delivery Point(s)” shall have the meaning so forth in Article 41.
“KBiHPBS” 22 dskabr 2009-cu lids ARDNS, ONS V: BE arosmda baglanmxs “ERDPSA” shall moon the Brplomﬁon, Rehabilitation, Developmcm and
Kssﬁyyat, Barpa, Islanma vs Hasilatm Ray Bﬁlgﬁsﬁ haqqmda Sazis demqkdir. Production Sharing Amemmt executod the 22nd of December, 2009,
betWeen SOCAR, 80A, and BE.
“KBiHPBS-nin Qﬁvvayaminma mixi” KBTHPBS-nm hamin sazisda “ERDPSA Effective Date” shall mean the effective date of the ERDPSA
gﬁstorilmis quvvayz miqu mrixi demekdir. as deﬁned morein.
“alava qaz” Madda 7.5—da VCIﬂan$ monam dasiyu‘. “Excess Gas” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 7.5.
“Ekspert” Madda 14.3(a)-da verilmis mcnml duly“. “Expert” shall have the meaning so! forth in Article 143(21).
“Uzadﬂma miiddcti” Mada: 18.5419 vexilmis monam dasiyir. “Extension Period” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 185‘
“83bit dﬁvr” Madda 7.2rd9 géstarildiyi kimi l'zu Sazis‘m Dérdﬁncil Mﬁqavilo “Finn Period” Ina-ms the mm bogjnning with the Fourth Contract Year
iliudc baslayan Va Besinci Mikqavil: ilind: bﬂ§3 gatan mﬁddat downhill, and ending with the end ofthc Fifth Contract Year of this Agreth as set
forth in Article 7.2.
“Birinci Mﬁqavila Ki” Easlarna tarixindcn Muqayils 11min sonuna gods: ohm “First Comma: Ycar” means the period {from the Cmmenoe‘mem Date to
dﬁvr danekdir. ﬂu: and of the Contract Year.
“For: major” Madds 13.1419 verilmis manam dasiyu. “Force Majeurc” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 13.1V
“Qaz” KBlHPBS asasmdn basil edilen asasan mmn tarkibli, o cilmbdcn “Gas” shall mum any hydrombon or mixture of hydrocarbons consisting
qazaoxsar halda clan digar karbohidrogmlordan vs yammagmn qazlardan ibarst predominantly of methane, and including othcr hydrocarbons and non-
har hanSi karbohidrogcn v3 ya karbohidrogenlarin qansigi dernckdin combustible gases in a gaseous slaw produced under the ERDPSA.
“Yuxan isﬁliktérstma qabiiiyyeti” vs yu “YlQ” bir standan kub met: "Gross Caloriﬂc Value“ or “GCV’ means the gas: heating value of 11):;
hzcmmds qazm hava ila birlikds 20 damn selsido (20°C) vs 101525 kPa Gas expressed in kilocal/Scm produced by the complete combustion of one
mﬁtlaq (czyiqda, tzrkib'mda hm; bit so buxarl clmayan qazla tam yanmasx Standard cubic Meter of Gas with air at a tempcmtura of Meaty Degrees
naﬁcasinda basil edilcn kkaL’strnS ilo ifada climax: qazm yuxan isﬁlilctorstma Celsius (20 C) and at an absolute pressure of 101.325 kPa With the Gas
qabiliyyoti dcrnakdirv Bu man yanma mahsullan 20 dame: sclsiyo (20°C) ﬁes of all water vapour, the products of combustion cooled to a
8
if”! q?


qadar soyudulur v9 yanma neticasinda male galan su may: vaziyyatina temperature of twenty Degrees Celsius (20°C) and the water formed by the

wvxilaua qadar soyudulur. combustion cooled to a liquid state.

"Dﬁvlat orqam" - Azarbaycan Respubljkasmm Hékumoﬁ v: 0mm her hausi “Governme Aul‘hority” means the goverrment of the Republic cf

siyasi Va ya basqz balmssl, o cﬁxnlsden hat hansi ycrli kahuna orqzmIan, v: Azerbaijan and any political or other subdivision thereof, including any

y-a digor nﬂmayanda, agenllik v9 ya orqan V2 ya Edam enngk, qanunlar qebul local govermnenn or other representative, agency or authority, which has

musk, nizsmlamaq, Vergllam call) etmskvza Vergilaxi tutmaq, lisenziyaleu vs the authority to govern, legislate, regulate, levy or collect Taxes, yam

hamlet Vern-wk> bu Sazisla slaqadar Sanctum w ya Alxcmm her hansi licenses and permits, approve or otherwise imyact (whether ﬁnancially or

hﬁquqlanm, 6hdaliklsrini V? ya  bsdiq (amok, yaxud bunlm otherwise), directly or indirectly, any of Seller’s or Buyer's rights,

birbasa v9 ya dolayisi £19 basqa. $161113 tesir etmak (maliyy: whatdzn v9 ya obligations or activities under the Agreemmt.

basqa Sahads) salahiyyetlem malik haldmiyyet orqanlan demskdir.

“150” Beynalxalq Standartlasdirma Taslcilatl demakdirv “ISO” shall mean International Organization for Standardization.

“Gaul” XSO 80000-l:2009—da verilmis manam deny-113v: “Mcqacoul” v9 ya “Joule” shall have the meaning sm forth in ISO 80000-112009, and

“MC” bir milyon (1 000 000)oou1 demekdjx, “Megajoule” or “MJ” shall mean one million (1,000,000) Joules.

“Kllopaskxl” vaya“l<Pa" lSO 80000»l:2009vda verilmis manam daeiym “Kilopasml” or “kPa” shall have the meaming set forth in ISO 80000-
1:2009.

“Kompensasiya qm” Madda 7.8-da verihm‘s manam dwyir. “Make-Up Gas” shall have the meaning set forlh in Article 7.8.

“Kompensesiya qaZI diivrﬁ” Madda 7.8-de verilmis menam daswu'. “MakeUp Gas Period” shall have the meaning set foth in Article 7.8.

“Minimuml'llik Hacm (Mil-I)” Madde 7.4419 Verﬂmis manam dasiyir. “Minimum Annual Qumm‘ty (MAQ)” shall have the meaning set forthin
Article 7.4.

“Olqii avadanhgl” Maids 6.1—ds miiayyau edildiyi kin-ii Sahel taraﬁnden “Measurement Equipment” means all measuring and testing

Qatdmlma Mantaqalaﬁna gatdmlmis Qazm myiqini, miqdmm V: equipment, such as volumetric meters, calorimeters and chromatographs,

keyﬁyyatiui 51911;}; V1: 81118111211 ﬁgﬁn tslsb olunan bﬁtﬁn 51cm; Va smaq housing devices ands-materials together with all related appliances which

avadauhgi, masalan sayéag kalorimetrlar v9 xromatoqraﬂar, yerlasdirma are required to measure and test the pressure, quantity and quality of any

cihzzlarl Va materiallar, babel: bﬁtﬁn slaqadm' qurgula: demakdir Gas made available at the Delivery Paints by Seller as set fonh in Aﬂicle
Gill

5&3? 4/ 9


“Ay” Bale vanilla tsqvim aymm bir'mci gxlnﬁ saat 00100413 baslayan v2 “Month” shall mean the pericd beginning at 00:00 am Baku time on the
névlssti taqvim aymm bin-incl gﬁnﬁ Balm vaxt: ila saat OOIOO-dn baﬁa gates d5vr ﬁrst day ofa calendar month and ending at 00:00 am Baku time on the ﬁrst
dcmakdir. ‘ day of the next succeeding calendar month
“Taqdim olunan AyIJq Hecm” Madda ll.l(a)-d: verilmig mam dwym “Monthly Available Quantity” shall have the meaning se! fmth in Article
In (a)
“Qabul olunan Ath Hacm” (GAB) Mada; ll.1(l:)-de verilmi; monam “1‘40"le Take“ Q‘W‘j‘y” (MTQ) 5113“ have Th“ meaning 56‘ forth ‘“
Gwyn: Article 11.1 (b).
“A 11 h b-fktu “Maids 11.1-d til ’ d .
y q a“ a m 3 W m? mam my“ “Monthly Invoice” shall have duemeaning set forth in Anicle 11.1.
“S 11cm :1 l: ‘ h "’Madde 7.5 -ds crilmi d .
a ﬂy q but am“ (6) V gmam my“ Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity” shall have the meaning set forth in
Anicls 7.5(0)

“ KNP’b‘ ‘l 10 0 standartkub trdemkd’.

MS “m1 y” ( 00 00 ) m 3 1‘ "MSCM" shall mean onemilllon (1,000,000) Standzxd Cubic Meters.

“"d ' mm 11 9d bild"” addsllA’ds ‘1' c1 .

0 “we ma " a "L5 M vs“ ml? menu 351),“ “Notice of Non - Payment” shall have tbs meaning set forth in Article
“Keyﬁyyat hlablarina cavab vennayan qaz” Madds SAZ—ds verilmis mmam “'4'

d .

aw“ “emsch Gas” shall have the meaning set fonh in Article 5.2.

“K E t l bl ’ b ’ ti" M dd 10.6-d

vmz‘ggzwa: (15:3: can “may” gm qwma a a a “OK-Spec Gas Price” shall have the meaning set forth in Anicle l0.6
«Mﬁvaﬁq “was My“ Emmi; hacmlarw Mama 8‘34? vernmis mam“ “Properly Nominated Quantities” shall have the meaning set forth in
dawn. Article 8,1

“Ehﬁy’m W tadbiﬂi $95” az magmas abdﬂiklmni Vicdanla wring f‘Reasonalﬂe and Prudent Person” shall Inean a person or endly seeking
yen-may; can am V; bummla’ v9 az éhdaﬁklmnm Mums“ my,” 111 good faith to perfome contractunl obhgan'onS andm so domg and'm
kegimmasi mm), gym; cm. ahalilds v3 eyni ym 0x31 haﬂarda VS In; geneml conduct of Is undemhng exercxsmg that dcgrec‘ of 'Sklll,
sarllarda call: edilmis bananqu V9 tsaibsli operatordan adetan v9 asash olaraq d‘l‘gemeo Prudence: 341d fm'wghi that would reasonably and ordmanly be

m w“ 1°


gﬁzlom'lon bamnq, callsqanltq, todbirlﬂik vo ehtiyathhq saviyyse'mi nﬁmaylg expected From a skilled and experienced operator engaged in the same type
etdiron ﬁziki vs ya hijquqi 53x5 demokdir. Ehtiyatli v: tad‘birli §oxsin of undertaldng and under the same or similar circumstances and
standamna her hast isﬁnad yuxarida gdstorilmizi bela bacanq, oalieqanliq, conditions, and any reference to the standard of :L Reasonable and Prudent
tadbirlilfk vo ehtiyoﬂiliga istiuad ldmi qahul edih'r. Person shall be a reference to such degree ofskill, diligence, prudence, and
foresight as aforesaid
“171111135qu texniki qulluq” Madde 9.1-da Verilcni$ manam dam/1r. “Scheduled Mnintenanoe” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 9.l.
“Sana” Birgp hasilat haqqmdo Sazisn asasan KBIHPBS~in Toraﬂqn' ﬁgzﬁn “Seller” means BEOC as agent for the ERDPSA Ponies under the Joint
agent qisminde ems edon BEOC ekkoti demokdirl Liﬁing Agreement
“Sancmm avadanhqlan” bu Sam's asasmda saucmm ﬁz éhdaliklarinin yerine “Seller’s Facilities” shall mean the wells, installations, yipelines, and
yelimnosi ﬁcﬁn sahib oldugu ya ya nozamt etdiyi quyulnr, gurgular, born xodoti equipment upstream of the Delivery Poinds) which Seller owns or controls
v9 Catdmlmz Montaqasina (lsrino) qodnr clan ovarianqu demokdjr. to perform its obligah'ons under this Agreement.

“Kasil' qazmm qiymaﬁ” Maddo lO.5-d.o Verilmio manam dagiyir, “Shortfall Gas Price” shall have the meaning set forth in Article 105.
“Keyﬁyyat giistorieilari” QOST 5542-87-3 uygun gals}: keyﬁyyat ‘Specﬁimﬁons” shall mean the speciﬁcations corresponding to GOST
gﬁstoricilori demokdirt 5542—87.

“Standart 531113” 20 den-:6: sels‘i (20°C) temperatur w 101.325 kl‘a mixqu “Standard Conditions” shall mean the conditions determined by a
tszyiqla mﬁayyan edilon settler demakdjr. temperature of twenty Degrees Celsius (20°C) and on absolute pressure of

10l.325 de

“Standm kub metr” ya ya “SW” qaza aid olduqda, Standart esrtlardo bi: “Standard Cubic Meter“ er “SCM” shall mean when applied to Gas that
(1) kub men— qazt Sigdiran been; demakdir. quantity of Gas which at Standard Conditions occupies one (1) cubic

meter.

“Yay Dijvrﬁ” — he: toqvim ilinin l oped—30 sentyabr dévrﬁ demskdir. “Summer Period” shall mean a period from Ayn] l“ to September 30‘1‘,

each calendar year

“Verg‘ yaxud Vorgilar” federal, Stat, yerli Va ya ba§qa ulmasmdan 3511: “Tax nr Taxes” means any tax, charge, fee, levy, royalty, or other

011113qu her bans: hokﬁmot 01-qu, karoﬁndon toyin edilmis her hams: Vergi¢ assessment imposed by any Governmental Authority, whether federal,

M M ‘l ‘l


n‘is‘um, édauis) yignn, reyalti Va ya. basqz haqq demekdir, o cilmlsdan bﬁtﬁn state. local or otherwise; including all income, withholding. windfall
gelir, menbsdsn tutulan, gﬁzlsnilmeysn manifest, ﬁmumi medaxil, sahibkarhq, proﬁts, gross receipts, business, environmental, value added, cayital gain1
atraf mﬁlﬁt, slave (layer, kapital snug, nisurn, sshde kapitali, qeydiyyat, duties, cagital steak, regisu'ation, excise, ad valorcrn, real pmperty,
almiz, dayar, dasmmaz emlak, saxsi amlak, torpaq, yerli inldsaf, liscnziya, personal progeny, laud, local development, license, sales, production,
sans, istehsal, pass, istifade) xidmet, xidmat maqsedli istifmla, kﬁeﬁrmo, amak occupation, use, service, service use, transfer, payroll, employment, social
haqqi fendu, is; gistﬁm, sosial lsminat (v9 ya oxsar), issizlik, seyahat, security (or similar), unemployment, travel, ﬁnanchise, severaan bonus, or
franeayz, isdon and ems, bonus v: ya basqa néiv vergi, babel: her harm other tax of any kind, as well as any charges and assessments (including
yigimlarva haqlar (o cumladan hat hansi ‘rmqlara aid edilau vs yamyin edilen any imaesf, penalties or additions to tax amibumhle to or imposed on. or
yaxud unlarla elaqsdar, mﬁbahimli club olmadagmdan 35111 olmayaraq, her with respect to any such assessment, whether disputed or my and all stamp
bans: faiz, czrima v9 ya verg' alavasi, also: de hﬁtﬁn mﬁhﬁrlﬁ v: ya or doomentary taxes and fees.
ssnsdlasdlrilmis vergilar w; ademclsr)
“Technical Operations Agreement” shall have the meaning set forth in
“Temiki Bmaliyyatlar Sazigi” Maids 6.642 verilmjs menaui daslyir. Am'cle 6.6l
“Salish: xjtarm tax-ixi” Taraﬂar arasmda qarsxhqh magma Ezra “Termination Date” means the end of the ﬁfth Contract year unless
umdllmayaua qadsr, besinoi Mﬁqavils llinin son'u, v9 ya basqa bit saldlda extended by mutual agreement of the Parties or otherwise terminated
Madda 18~e uygim olarzq sazisin vaxtmdan qabaq xilzmi dcmakdirl earlier in accordnnce with Article 18‘
“Planlasdlnlmamls texniki xidmat” Madde 9‘2-de verilmis mam dX-Slyll’. “Unscheduled Maintenance” shall have the meaning set forth in Article
9.2
“le Dﬁvrﬁ” — her taqvim ilinin 1 oktyabri 31 max“: dévnl demakdir. “Winter Period” shall mean a period of October 1st to March 315', each
calendar yearl
Maﬁa: 2 — Qazm sails W 31151 Article 2 a Sale and Purchase of Gas
Satin bununla, Muqavils middsﬁ erzinds bu Sazisin sartlatins vs Seller hereby a.ng to deliver, or make available fer delivery, Gas to
mﬁddealanna uygun hacmlanla, qiymaula, vaxtda V9 qaydada, Qazl Buyer at the Delivery Points, and Buyer hereby agrees to receive and
‘ Catdmlma Mentaqasinda Aliciya gavdmnaga v9 ya eardrum: ﬁ¢ﬁn quim purchase (orpay forifmadc available for delivery but not taken) Gas atth
maya, v3 Ahci lmnvmla1 Qm Catdmlma Mmqalarinda qebul etnuya v9 Delivery Points in such quantities, a1 such price, a: such time and in such
almaga (vs ya agar Qatdmlmaq iian teqdim edilmis, laldn gﬁrﬁrﬁlmamisse manner in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this
, édanis eimayo) mules}; Agreement during the Contract Period.
12
1 7M 4/


Mid” 3 ” 3351mm mm W Mii‘lavm maddi’ﬁ Article 3 r Commencement Date and Contract Pericd

3‘1 331M ’ 3,1 Comm anme Date
Baslama tarixi, KBlEPBS-nin qiivvayo mix-m]: tarixi clan—11L Biriuci Mﬁqavila The Commencement Date will be the ERDPSA Effective Date which shall
Dinin baglangici sayxlacaqur. Bu Sazi$in gonlar‘m: v9 mﬁddzaalanna uygun be the beginning of the First Contract Yea; The respective duties and
claim; Tarsﬂsrin mﬁvaﬁq vazifa Va abdzliklsri Hagan; mixindan etime obligations of the Partics pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
baslaylri Agreement shall commence on the Commencement Date.
3-2 Mmhirﬂﬁilmﬁ 3.2 chcaﬁcn offacilitics
Tamﬂsr Baglama Wad; Sahcmm taqdi'm smack qabiliyyetinda olmasl Va The Parties shall fully co‘operw‘. with each ether to my oomnuﬁan of
Ahcmm qebul ct:an qabiliyyatjnd: olmasi maqsadila A11chn qurgulanmn Buyefs facilities to thc Delivery Points in order far Seller to be ablc to
Cakdmlma Mantzqalan'm birla$dixilmssini mkil etmak Grim tam gakilda make available, and Buyer being able to receive, Gas on khe
mgkdashq edixlar. Commencement Data _

343 Mﬁgavilc mﬁddeg‘ 3 .3 Contact Period

Bu Saris ﬂm Mﬂqavﬂa mﬁddati Baglama tarixindan cﬁbaran beginci The Conn-act Period for this Agreement shall be the Commencement Date
Mﬁqavila Eim'n sununa qedar mﬁayysn cdilir vs ya Madds 18.54 uygun “1151 “16 End Of the ﬁfth Contact Y3”, 0F 35 may 53‘ “(‘70de in
olaraq uzadlla yaxud Mada: 182 vs 183-: uygun olaraq Vaxtmdzn qahaq accordance with Article 18.5 or otherwise tminalad earlier in accordance
xstm ohma bilar (‘Mﬁqavils midda’d"). with Articles 182 and 183 (the "Contract Pcriod"),

Madda 4 — Catdmlma mantaqalari v9 mﬁlldyyet hiiququmm Etﬁrﬁlmasi Article 4 - Delivery Points and transfer of title

4.1 Warn—«12m 4.1 Delim Points

Bu Saziso 9585911 almacaq qaz bu Maddads mﬁayyan edilmis agagidaki Gas to be purchased hereunder shall be made availabl: for delivery by
Catdmlma maanalarinda ve/ya Tarsﬂarin vaxta$m mleagdna bilaceyi hm 5511C! and 511611136 takenby Buyer at lhe Delivery hints: 2‘5 GEE-Tea “1 fhis
ham! digs! Catdmlma manbeqelarinda Swot taraﬁndan caxduﬂma ﬁgﬁn Article, and/or any other Delivcry Points as may be ﬁo-m time ('0 time
quim edilir Va Alxcx tanﬁndsn Iahvil alum. Bu Satisds basqa cﬁrmﬁayyen mutually agreed by the Pmes‘ Ulik55 OChGTWlSB Spaiﬁw “1 Lhis

“1,7 1 3

“d/


edilmayan: qader, bumda gasrzdlmk bﬁtﬁn qaz hacmlari, hir neg: gardmlma Agreement, all quantitiﬁ chas referred to herein shall be the aggregate of
mamaqasindan imfada edildiyi taqdirds, hnr Catdxnlma mantaqasina the quanu'ﬁw delivered to each Delivery Poing in the ease of multiple
gatdmlxms hacmlarin mnumi hecmini tang edir. delivery poims:
Cal/dinlma mantaqasiaarl} (néqwlorl): Delivery point(s) shall mean the location(s) on the Caspian Sea was:
described as muldple Gas measuring unils installed by Seller at the:
0 “Bahaf’ Catdmlma mamaqasi  sarﬁilgma cihazt
- Flow meter for “Balm” delivery point
- “Bahar Maya” Catdmlma maquqsi Germ sax-Folan cihazx
- Flow meter for “Bahar Maya" delivery point

Sana tsraﬁndan qurasdmlml; mxsayh qaz (ileum vasilalarl kimi tasvir

olunan stsx dcnjzl sahilindsld 912211;: demakcli: v9 humda qaz Saucmm where Gas passes the Seller’s measuring equipment and when: custody to
élqﬁ cihazmdan liegir v3 qaza 1392sz Sweden: Almya keyir. Gas transfers from Seller to Buyer.

4‘2  4.2 Transfer of‘I‘itle

Aha) tanﬁndan Catdmlme mantaqalarinde qsbul edilmis gala bﬂtﬂn All T133115: We and WEISS“ in and W the Gas W by Buyer 3‘ Lb:
mﬁlkiyyet, istifado Va $99an vermok hﬁquqlm, babel: mﬂvaﬁq ltki v; ya Delivery Points, togeﬂ-ler with the risk of loss or damage theretu and
29m riski v9 bLmunla elaqsdar masullyyat, qaz lxmc mantaqesjna liability associated therewith, shall pass from the ERDPSA Parties to
gandmldqua, KBlHPBS-in Tamﬂarluden Almya kegﬁr. Buyer upon thc delivery of the Gas to 3 Delivery Point.

Marina 5 — Cstdmlma garthri Article 5 — Delivery Conditions

5.1 Kommersifg gazl 5.1 W

Satin raalasn' ki, bu Sam wasng Ahmya teqdim edilmls qaz, Tsmﬂgr Seller agrees that the Gas made available to Buyer underthis Agreement
msmda basqa car mlgdmlmayana qzdax, QOST 554287 11219 Keyﬁyyst Shim comply With {ht SPECiﬁCfitlUnS 35 Per 503T 5542-87, “111655

I géstaricilarina uygu-n gelmelldir. otherwise agreed between the Parka.
j% ’l 4
l


572 Offsm gigs
agar bu Sazis ssasmda caxdmlrms qaz Keyﬁyyst gés’cariCilerlm uygun deyilss, V
hamin qaz “Key'ﬁyyet talablorine cavab veu'osyan Qaz" hesab edilir, Satim If Gas delivered under this Agreement fails to conform to the
Keyﬁyyat telsblexins cavab vermsyan bar harm qazm gatdmlmasmx Speciﬁcations, it shall be considered as “Off-Spec Gas‘i Seller shall use
minimuma endirmak ﬁqﬁn bﬁtﬁn aglabatan saylari gostzxmalidir. all reasonable endeavors to minimize the delivery of any Off-Spec Gas.
53 Bilgﬁg's Va Keyﬁﬂot bleblarina cavah mam Egg .
53. Notice and Amharic: of Off—Spec Gas
Sahel qaz‘m Keyﬁyyat gastericilsrino uygun galmmasi vs ya uygun
galmeyacayinin gﬁzlenilmasl, also: do, bela uygunsuzlugun ssbcbloii Va bu 011: Seller shall notify Buyer immediately of any failure or anticipated failure
Kcyﬁyyat mlablarina camb vcnnaysn qazm catdmlmasmm taxmini mﬁddatina of C45 to conform to the Speciﬁcation, including details of Lhe cause of
dair ehﬁmallar band: Alxcun (lethal malomatlandirmahdxr. Bu ciir bildiris such failure and an estimate of the probable duration of delivery of such
verildikde, Alia: mfn—nkﬁn qader tez bir mﬁddatda Salim-u Oﬁ—Spec Gas In case of such notiﬁcation> Buyer as soon as possible shall
molumatlandumalidx k; Allci ya: uoﬁfy Seller that Buyer either:
(a) bﬁtﬁn bu Kcyﬁyyet tslsblarine cavab vermayan qsm qebul makdan
imtina cdir, bu halda Same: tonﬁndran bola bildirisdan sonra tadzrﬁk (a) refuses to accept all such Off—Spec Gas, in which event any such
edilmi§ bu eiir Kcyﬁyyat tslablen'm cavab vet-maan he: bans: qazsm OffvSpcc Gas supplied allow such notice from Seller shall be deemed
A1161 bmﬂndon qobul edilmzdiyi (Va Sahel tomﬁndau teqdim not accepted by Buyer (and not made available by Seller); or
cdilmsdiyi) basal) edilir, yaxud da
(b) bu maddeya uygun olaraq Alim tamﬁndan verilij bildirisda
gﬁsbtilmis zaman osrcivesinds bu Keyﬁyyat blablerim cavab (b) acceps such Off~Spec Gas for The Time frame speciﬁed in the notice
vermoyon c1321 qebul cdir, bu halda (i) toqdim milmis bu our Keyﬁyyat delivered by Buyer pursuant to dis Article, and in such even! (i) the
blablaxim cavab vermaysn qazm her min (1000) SIG/[min qiymati price per one thousand (1000) SCM for such Off-Spec Gas made
ldmi Madda 10.6—da géstarilmis Keyﬁyyat mlsblarina cavab Vermeyon available shall be the Off-Spec Gas Price as provided in Article 106,
qazm qiymati mﬁayyan :dilir, vs (ii) bu cur Kcyﬁyyat talsblarins wvab and (ii) such Off—Spec Gas shall be dmsd to be Gas made
vermayan qaz bu Sabin sartlm'm uygun olaraq teqdirn edilmis qaz availablein accordance with the terms ofﬁlis Agreement.
hesab ediIir.
5A agar Aliuya 0mm Keyﬁywt mleblarina oavab vermayan qazx ald® v: 5.4 if Buyer becomes aware that it is receiving Off-Spec Gas, and
Sanmmn Madda 5,3—3 uygun olmaq bu luau-ads Alicin bildiris vermadiyi Seller ha not notiﬁed Buyer in accordance with Article 573, Buyer shall
malom olatsa‘ Aim bu qulr bands Sancxya bildiris vex-in Bela bildjrisda notify Seller of such failure. In such notice, Buyer shall additionally notify
1 5
ﬂ” 4/


Aha slave olaraq Sammy: be]: Keyﬁyyat talablzrinz cavab Vannaan qm Seller wheﬂner it accepts or refuses such Off-Spec Gas and the provisions
qebul etdiyini v9 ya radd etdiyini bilzﬁrir, v2 bu man Madda 5.34m sartbri of Article 53 shall apply.
tavbiq clunuz.
5-5 W
5.5 Dcljvqy Pressure and Temlzerature
Qﬁvvoysminma Tarimden baslayaxaq 31 mm 20ll~ci i1 tarimeko d5vr
3211149 A1101 V9 Salim arasmda gclacek Catdmlma mentaqaleri ﬁzz: razlllq Subject to the consent between Seller and Buyer on further delivery paints
slda olunmas: senile Sanm Cat/dullma maumqalarindo qaz: bu Sazisin for the period ﬁ'am Effective Date until March 31“ 2011, Seller shall make
sartlarina gate, vaxcasm olaraq Sane: tanﬁndon giistarilen, iki yiizdan (200) Gas available at the Delivery Points at a pressure from time to time
minaﬂ 000) qedar ld’a tszyiqu v2 1°C~dsn 30°C»: qadsr temperamrda taqdim speciﬁed by Seller a: a range from two hmdred (200) to one thousand
edir, laldnbu sartla ld,Sat101 has yﬁz (500)1(Pa-dau artiq manometziktszying (1000) kPa and at temperatures between 1'0 and so'c in accordance with
gun Catdmlma mantaqasino teqdim e11an Bhdsliyi dzsimlr. 31 mm 2011.01 j] the totals of this Agreement, provided, however, that Seller shall have no
tarixindsn sonra, glindelik lMSm—den artiq qazx Catmnllma mantaqesinda no obligation to make Gas available at die Delivery Points at a gauge pressure
min doqquz yiz (3900) kPa manommik artiq tozyiqla tahvil vermalidir. in excess of ﬁve hundzcd (500) lchL Aﬁer March 31Sl 2011, the Selle:
must make incremental Gas, in excess of lMSCM per day, available at the
Delivery Points at a gauge pressure in excess of three thousand and nine
56 Santa qazin quim edilmesi va Catdmlma mantaqasin: gatdmlmasi ila Ill-mated (3900) kPa-
bagh bﬁtﬂn xerclm 36:9, 0 cﬁmladen (lakin deyilanlarla mahdudlasmzdan)
naqletma, Verg‘lar vs rﬁsumlarla bagll xarclsro gér: cavabdehlik desxyt'r. Alum 5.5 Seller shall be responsible for all 5051: in connection with the making
qazln qsbulu v0 Catdmlmn mantaqasindan sunra dasznmasx ilo bagh, 0 available and delivery of Gas to the Delivery Points, includmg (without
cﬁmlsdan (lakin deyilenlsrla mehdudlamadan) naqletms, vergilar vs 51111131101) 00513511 COMEOﬁOII With mwoﬁaﬁon, taxes 3115 duﬁes- 13W“
rﬁsumlarla bagll xarcler: gore cavabdehhk dasiyu’. shall be responsible for all costs in connection with acceptance and
msport‘aﬁon of Gas from the Delivery Points, including (without
limitation) costs in connection with transportation, taxes and duties.
5.7 Effektiv rlhito Vﬁg'talaxi
5‘7 Effective Communications
Bu Sazisin intasz nszarattn ssmareliliyi vs tshlﬁkasizlik bazmmndan, Taraﬂsr
ralensulax 1d, Mﬁqavils mﬁddzti salads effcku‘v rabita elaqasini 19min eumk In the interests of safety and the efﬁCiem administmﬁ'm {Imus Agra/met“:
f1an Sahcmm miivaﬁq tayin edﬂmis v9 sslahiyyatli heyati Va Abelmn the Parties agree the: telephone or radio communication procedures must
mﬁvaﬁq tayin edilrnis v: solahiyyotli heyati mnda telefon yaxud radio be establisheIL utilized and prﬁsﬂved between certain of Scller's
rabitasi qaydalan mﬁayyon edilmali, mbiq edilmali v; qonmmahmr. Telefon designated and authorized personnel and certain of Buyer's designated and
v: ya radio ila rabita olaqslan' yalmz Sanctum dispetoer mag: lla ARDNS-niu authorized personnel so as to guarantee 33.9911“ wmmunicaliom during
1 5
7””7 4/


dispatcer otagi amsinda amaliyyat masololari ﬁcﬁn istifadc olurrrnalidin Bu the Contract Period. The telephone or radio communications shall only be
Madd: 5—9 uygim olamq Toraﬂar arasmda heyaia kocirilon rabits alnqslari used for operational mattein between Seller’s control room and SOCAR‘S
Madde 19—62 naurda tutulmus bildin’s olaraq serh odila 'oilmaz. control room. Communications between the Parties carried out in
accordance with this Article 5 shall not be construed to constitute notice as I
provided for in Article 19.
Baslama taxixindan mﬁmkfm oldugu qadar ewal v2 thasin olaraq sonra
Tamﬂar asagidalu mosslolor ﬁoﬂn cayln edilmis saxslorin adlanm v9 telefon As soon :5 possible prior to the Commencement Date, and from time to
némrzlarini bir-birlcrina taqdim ediﬂar. time mercafwr, the Ponies shall provide each other with the name and
telephone numbers ofdesignated contact persons for:
(i) is: salmaldzyandirma vs temilci qulluq;
(ii) normal amaliyyatlar, (i) smeup/shut-down and maintenance;
(ii) normal operatioos;
(iii) qcza hallm; Va
(iii) emergencies; and7
(iv) bcyan edilmis Qaz liscmlaxi
(1v) Gas nominations,
bu settle ki, telefonla veﬁlmis bar hnnsi molumat quX sokkiz (48) seat amino: _
yazili bildin'sla mosayiat olunacaqdir. provided that any notice g’ven by telephone must be followed by written
notice within forty-eight (43) hours,
Hex hansx qua hahmn has vermcsi ya ya potensinl claw; has Vera bilacayi
bands sifahi molumat mﬁmkﬁn oldugu qadzr tez bit vaxtda telefonla v: ya Oral notice ofthe occurrence or potential occurrence of an emergency shall
basqa msqbul whit: vasitcs' ila, o cﬁnllodan radio mbita, faks valynxud be given as soon as possible by telephone or other acceptable means of
elektxon malctublasma vasitasilz calmnlmahdir. Qsza hadisssi ila iizlssmis commmﬁcations including mdio communication and facsimile and/or ew
Taraf aidiyyan Taraﬂara qaza bands asaiuda gostarildiyi ldmi V3 mail correspondence. The Party which experiences the emergency must
wxirasalmmadan malumat vermakfxoi‘mbﬁnin nglzbalan saylari gosharmslidir. use all reasonable endeavours to inform the concaned Parties of the
emergency as set out below and without delay.
Qoza bated; malurnat vernn Torcf oz ‘oildirisinda asagidalnlm géstarmelidir: Tne Party giVing notice of an emergency shall include the following in is
notice:
(i) qua 1131mm taxviri vs yori, o cﬁmladau ssbsbi vs tosirl, hoyat, (i) a description and location of the emergency, including the
amlak v: ya qnzm tadarﬁln‘i vslyaxud 6tﬁrﬁlmasi ﬁoﬁn riskin mahiyyctl; cause and effect and nature of the risk to life, property or the supply
and/or transmission of Gas;
(ii) qaza hnhmn ssbahi, agar mlmndmsa;
“V ’l 7
m


(ii) the cause of the emergency, if known;
(iii) bildin'si vermi$ Taraﬁn qaza sababindnn yaramms xisld ‘
v azaldilmasx ﬁgiin garmakde oIdugu V2 gémn'ls oldugu mdbirlar, (iii) the memes which are being taken and have been taken by
_ the Party giving notice to reduce the risk presented by the
(iv) bildiriﬁ vermis Taraﬁn qaza sababindan yaranms risldn emergency?
azalchlmasx ﬁeﬁn maka etdiyi nddxmlar, , . ‘
(1v) (he steps wluc'n axe proposed by the Party nging notice in
(v) bildjrlsi vermi$ Tamﬁn qaza sobebindsn yuamms riskiu Order ‘0 mm” ‘1’“ 715“ Presented by “35 emerE’J‘CY)
aid: " " ‘d‘ H i ‘ ‘ad ‘
82 1mm Wm”) )yyw Tam 3rd” “Imam Slab “my! dumar’ (v) the steps requested by the Party giving notice to the concerned
Pazﬁes to be taken in order to reduce the risk presented by lhe
(vi) bildirisl vermis Tamﬁn aidiyyau olau Taraﬂarln qaza halxnm magma):
mxiuyggdum ba§a dugmam uexm faydah olacagm: hesab etdlyi bum (vi) all infatuation which is considered by the Party giving the
m9 um 3" notice to be useful to assist the concerned Parties to undetstand the
nature ofthe emergency.
Mada; 6— 619m Article 6 - Measurement
5-1  6.1 Measggnemt @uiment
3?“)   afmn,Ahqya ﬁd’fﬂm Qam hem Yig'njn Va Keyﬁyyzt Seller shall, at its own expense, ensure that there shall be installed and
gostancllsnna olQulmssx MSGdLlG, oz hesabma, Sahmmn Olgu Ayadmlllglmn {hm Gimme and maimain sends Mwmem Equipmm1 to
(13W3m'  ‘59 15mm“ olmas‘ V9 3?ka ,1”de measure the volume, GCV and Speciﬁcations 0f the Gas delivered to
gOSF‘E'lmmm min" 5d“ Madd’ 616419 Cleyd  Tcx‘m“ emahyyaﬂai Buyer hereundexl The Seller's Measurement Equipment shall, except as
Snufde ham cu" “fwd” “Maw”? hall,” Emma. almaqla'vsauumn may set out in the Technical Operations Agreement provided in Article
019:: Avadanhgl bu Sans: asassnmuvaﬁq 0191119 islannda anfada edwlxr. 5.6, be used ﬁx. an $le mcmemems to be made undsr this
Ageem L
6.2 §§n§g vs Kalibrlama an
— . l . , 6.2 Tssu' dCal'brat‘
Sahel Saucmm 019': Avadanlxguun 111cm olamq Ayala b1: dafa, samdan x59, n an ‘ mu
3mm mﬁlalflzidm 361.9), a,“ an M9, bx? dafays qsd‘” amddlnflqla Seller shall carry our external inspections and testing on Seller’s
(avadanhgln dovru elm-3,41 whsman ngncasmda yuxlamalarm keemlma Measurth Equivme min-any once we“. Month) which mummy
18
’VM V/


telliyinin azaldilmasi moqsadouygun saytlan ssviyysyo qodor) xan'cdan may be reduced by Seller at its discretion to a minimmn of at least onoe
yoxlanilrnasi v: sinquan keeixilmasini, elm do, Satimmn Oloﬁ Avadanligimn annually (to the extent historical perfomancc shows that such a reduction
digar smaq vs kalibrlvnmasini hayam keeixir. Altai Va ya (mun nﬁmayandasi in frequency of inspection is reasonable), as Well as other testing and
(Ahcinm 52 riski v: xarci hesabina) hels simiq vo yoxlamalann keqirilrnosina calibration of Seller‘s Measurement Equipment. Such testing and
sahidlik ed; bilarlar. Bela smaq v9 yoxlmialar Texniki ameliyyaxlar Sazisinin calibration may be witnessed by Buyer and its regresentatives (at Buyer’s
muddoalanna muvaﬁq olaraq apanlir. sole risk and cost). The details of such inspwions and testing shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Technical Operations Agreement
6.3 Ezeydlar
6.3 Records
Alicl, Satioiya quavila lli bitdikdm some do (6) 3y mﬁddotindo etibarli
sayilacaq mﬁvaﬁq bildiiis vex-molds, Satioiniri si'yzt‘i gcdan Mﬁqavile lliarzinda Buyer shall have the right, upon giving reasonable nou'oe to Seller and
hat Cafdmlma Mantaqasins oatdzrdigl vs taqdim etdiyi Qazin hacmlorine v9 exercisable within six (6) Months aﬁer the end of a Contract Year, to
keyﬁyyatin: dais qeydleiini yoxlamaq hiiququna malikdir. Sailor belo qeydlsri inspect records in the possession of Seller regarding the amounts and
Miiqavilo lli bitdikdcn soon: on iki (12) ay muddodnda anUd A1101 ilo quality of Gas delivered and made available by Seller to each Delivery
mﬁbahisa yatandigi halda belo sanodlora istinad edilmosi blob olunmaqla Point during such Contact Year. Seller shall maintain such records for a
miibsliiso tam ballini mpana qr;er qoruyuh saxlayir, period of twelve (l2) Months aﬂer the end of the Gourmet Yem' or in the
event that a dispute should orise, until the end of a dispute with Buyer
requiring reference to such records.
6.4. (a) Sailor bu Saziss csassn Aliein gardrnlan Qazm hoard, YlQ-niri,
Keyﬁyyot géstaricilan‘nin 61¢ﬁlm=si i1: bagh Satiomin 6196 Avadanhg; 6,4 (3) Seller shall promptly provide Buyer with dam collected by
vasitesila old: etdiyi géstaiioilgri taxtnsalmmadan Aliciya taqdim ediri Alia Seller from Seller's Measurement Equipment in relation to die
Saticirun, belo gostry'rioilarin toplanmam ﬁoﬁn dcyil, yalniz taqdim odilmssi ila measurement of the volume, GCV, and Speciﬁcations of the Gas delivered
baglimiivaﬁq olaxaq sﬁbut olunmu; xglabaxan xzrolzrinin ovozini ona odsyin to Buyer under this Agreement, Buyer shall reimburse to Seller the
reasonable and properly proved costs of the provision, but not collection,
(b) ARDNS her bans: Ayliq hesab—fakttna vs ya lllik Alqi-Satqi Hesabaum of such data
yoxlayib tasdiqlsrnak maqssdils 6.4-cﬁ Maddanin (a) pmqiaﬁna mﬂvaﬁq
olamq toqdim cdilan hi3th géstericilaii nomrdan keonmok hﬁququna malik (b) SOCAR shall be entitled to review all data provided pursuant to
olur vs 11.2, 11,642 Maddolare 2533911 Sanayn be]: géstoiieilatla olaqadar Article 6.401) for the Fur-posts of verifying any Monthly lnvoioe or Annual
ossslandmlmis sorgular gondare bilar. Purchase Report and may raise reasonable queries with Seller in relation to
such data, subject to Article 112 and to Article 116.
(c) Aliomin vs Sancunn 5.5-ci Maddaye asasan namrds mtulmus
hﬁquqlanna baxmayaraq, 64—43”: Maddanio (a) paraqmﬁna mﬁvaﬂq olaraq (c) Notwithstanding the rights of Buyer and Sella: under Article 65,
1 Sauci torsﬁndon gostorlailaiin taqdim edilmosi yaxud 6,4—Cfx Maddonin (1:) nothing relating to either the provision of data by Seller under
‘ m ‘VV 1 9
l


paraqraﬁna mﬁvaﬁq olaraq Alia bmﬁndan gastaricilarin nazardsn keoirmasi lmcles 6.4(3) or the review of data by Buyer under Article 6403) shall
ila alaqodar Allen-rm Ayqu hesah-faktura v: ya lllik Alqi-Sath Hesaban ﬁzz: remove or delay the obligation of the Buyer to make full payment under
114% Maddaya asasen adorns eumk 6hdaliyi heo lair halda lagv edilrnir v9 ya any Monthly invoice or Annual Purchase Report in accordance with the
mﬁddan geeikdirilmir. provisions of Article ll,
65 Elm em Murath
65 Reference to Expert
Taraﬂar bu Maddo 6-nm mﬁddaalannm tstbiqi, yaxud qatdmlmrs Qaan
karrdwatjnin V: )m keyﬁyyetlnin quﬁlmesi yaxud yoxlamlmasr ile bagli The Parties shall pmmptly meet to discuss and to endeavour to settle any
yaranarl her hansi mﬁbahisalari (rattlipn old: olunmarnzm i1; neticalenan dispute (or failure to agree) which may arise with regard to the application
hallarr) mﬁzakiro elmak v2 halllna say gﬁstsrrnsk maqsadib taximsalmmadan of the provisions of this Article 6 or the measurement or testing of the
go'rﬁ; keqirir Va agar Tereﬂer sézu gedan mﬁbahisani, ortaya outdlqdan sonta quantity or quality of Gas delivered and if, within thirty (30) days aﬂer the
0m (30) Gﬁn am'ndz hell eds (Va ya helli i1: bag}; razrlxga gala) bilmazlarsa, commencement of such dispute, they shall have been unable to settle such
bu our mﬁbahise (whim aide elunmamasr ila mtitnlsman hal) lA-cﬁ dispute (or so to agree) then such dispute (or failure to agree) may he
Maddsye asasen ('l‘eraﬂardan her hansi birinln mﬁraclotl ila) Ekspen‘s hsvala referred (at the reqth of either Party) to an Expert pmant to Article l4.
cdils bilar.
676 Texnild mljwar 5g} i
6.6. Technical Ogerations Ageement
Taroﬂar Baslama Tarbdndan 9n gee lair (1) any sonra bu Sazisa aidiyystl clan
texnild istismar parametrlarini aks ettliran v; Qazm koyﬁyyat v9 kerniyyatinin The Parties shall use reasonable eEorts to enter into a Teelmical
alum-nan, Qurg’ulann bir—biri ll: biﬂa$maxi v9 Taroﬂarin bumm khni Operations Ageement not later than one (1) Month after the
mnlasdrmbilacaklari dig" masalalor ila baghbﬁtﬁn pmsedur qaydalarum dai‘r Commencement Date in form and substance satisfactory to the Parties
mﬁddaalan namrde tum Taraﬂerl qarle edan forma Va torldbde Texnik‘l which shall set forth the technical operating parameters related to this
Bmoliyyatla: Salisinin baglmmasrﬁqﬁn mﬁvaﬁq saylsr géstan‘aolidirlar. Agreement and stipulate all procedures related to the measurement of
quality and quantity of Gas, interconnection of the Facilities and such other
matters as the Parties shall agree
Bela slave taleasma bu Sazi$in aynlmaz hissasini taskll edit V? bu Sazislo
alav: mzrlasmalar arasinda ziddiyyatlilik yamndrgi halda, bu Salish: Such additional agreement shall he an integral part of this Agreement and
mﬁddzalan ﬁstﬁnluk taskil edirl in case of any discrepancies between this Agreement and the additional
agate-merits: the terms of this Agreement shall prevail.
W" 4/ 20


Artie] — ' '
Madda 7 — Qazm hamlari a 7 Qua‘mms °f Gas
7.1 Qatdmlma ham 7 1 Dem ca 30‘
V _ _ _ V 4 . . Subject to thr: (ms of this Agreement, the Seller shall, from the
Bu Samsm 5&1me 9535911 Sam: Balm tammtbu 3(1th mums wash Commencement Date until the Termination Dace, deliver the ERDPSA
Sana mama?“ Mad” 8““ mfddaalm‘? .“Yg‘in 015ml ‘ BIOk‘m Ball“! Pam'es’ Gas ﬁlm: the Bahzr Field of Block which may be properly
Yétaémdan has“ “mm KBIHPBSjm Teraﬂenm“ muvaﬁq 59hm9 bay“ edlh nominated by the Seller in accordance with the provisions of Article 8, and
bllamk qazml gatdmuall, vs Alla 159 Maid: 104 v3 Madda ll—a uygun olm'aq Buyer shall (aka and pay for such Gas in accordance with Article 10 and
be]: qaz: géﬁirﬁb avam'ni Bdomalidir. Mela 11_
7.2 fl all ﬁ Evil; Hscmj GMH Va llljk Mﬁ avile ‘ l _ 742 Dan Commcc Q and {2C9} and Annual Contact Q gang
(AC9
(a) 3“ 52min 84‘3 ‘Madd’f’Sifw “3/3”? .013311 Salim {\hmya Flam-1m? (a) The Daily Contract Quantity (“DCQ”) and Annual Contract Quantity
11291121de bmn enmeslﬁwin Md etdlyl Qflnﬁahk Miqawla Ham (GMH) (“ACQ”) of Gas by reference lo which ﬁle Seller shall make numinations
Vsmik MEQBWSHWHMH) 3532mm klmldm for deliverlm to thc Buyer for each Comract Year in accordance with
Article 8 of this Agreement shall be as follows:
(I) Hasﬂat m d5"?! GMH 1MH (1) Build-up Parlod DCQ Per Day in ACQ Per Contract
Hamil: Mﬁqavﬂa Ear Miiqavila ill (but comm“ YE“
ﬂinde her giin ﬁgﬁn Year
ﬁgﬁn
B'm’nci Mﬁqavile ill 0-62 mils/on SKM 226 mian SKM Fm Contract Year 0‘52 million SCM 225 million SCM
 Mﬁqavﬂa 1-20 mﬂyon SKM 438 milyon SKM Second Conn-act Yeast 1.20 million SCM 438 million scM
1? Third Contract Year 270 million SCM 986 million SCM
U¢ﬁn¢ﬁ 2.70 mllyou SKM 986 milyon SKM
Mﬂqavﬂe Ill
ﬁ/
5"” 21


(ii) Sabit dﬁvr Hamlin Mﬁqavﬂa (1i) Firm Period Per Day in that
Hinds bar gin Contract Year
_ '1‘?“ Fourth Contract Year 3.78 million SCM 1380 million SCM
Dﬁtdﬁncﬁ Miiqavila HS 378 milyon SKM 1380 milyon SKM
Besinci Mﬁqavﬂo Ili, 4.81 milyon KM 1755 milyon SKM Fiﬁh Contract Year, and 481 million SCM 1756 million SCM
bundan sum Sabit each Successive
dévn'in sanuna qadar hat Comma Year thereaﬁﬁf
névbati Mﬁqavﬂa  untﬂ the end of the Firm
Period i,
7.3 GMH v9 1MB dﬁzslj§lari 7.3 Adjustment to Dggg and Acg;
Sam a§a§1da gésmrildiyi kimi Alwyn yam]; bildiris venrak GMH vs NH The Seller “*3 mé‘ﬁfy (ha DCQ and ACQ accordingly by written mice to
am daybﬂdjkhr 559 my“: the Buyer as provxded below:
(i) Hasilat art-mu dﬁvrﬁ 30 gin qabaqmdan bildiri; 6) Build“? Peri“ 30 days, advance mace
(ii) Sabit dﬁvr Sabit diivrﬁn baslamxsma 5 3y 41311111,: (i0 Firm Periud 6 months advance notice prior to the
qabaqcadan bikinis commencement of the Firm Period
Emma 1731;, Sam: dew; gmdg A1151 va saucmm qmmqh mg} olmam ngever, during thc Finn Period no adjustments to the DCQ ampermitted
Ghﬂ‘Lm hat hm dﬁm'ﬁ5g icau vm‘hnt Without mutual agreement of both Buyer and Seller.
774 Mimmum Illik Hacm (MIH
714 Minimum Annual Quantigz m9)
Sazisin hart Mﬁqavila Hi animd: A1101 Sam: teraﬁnllan ml‘lvaﬁq seldlda Sazi§in .
834:6 massing uygun 59km; bayan ednmi; a§agxdak1 Minimum mu: D‘Iﬁmg the 63°" COM“ Y“ °f F“ 1‘ng Buy“ “3.1”” a‘ “‘3
Hanna“ mm) az ulmayan gm 031mb“ Mamgqasinda (Mmmngﬁndg) Dehvery POEMS) and pay for at If made avaﬂable for delwcry but not
35% v3 Ma 10411, maddmlma uyg‘m ()qu awm 5:13in W ya taken pay for, in accordance with the provisions 0f Article 10110111655 than
wqdim olunmu§ 1am qabul edilmamis qazm 9mm hsmin 1mm; vs 11“ @11ng Minimum Annual <2“th (MAQ) of Gas proverb
qaydada adgyir: nommated by the Selle: as per Amcle 8.3 of th: Agteuneut:
m ‘J/ 22


MlH=MIHFXIMH~D MAQ=MAQFXACQ—D
bunch: . Where:
Mjﬂl= Qoma “A”-dn gammmjs “Minimum lllik chm Faktorudur" MHF). MAQF is the “Minimmn Annual QuanLity Factor” (MAQF) as speciﬁed in
> Appendix “A”
IMH mnvaﬁq Mﬁqavile ill in: BAH—air. 7.7-ci Maddaye emu Ahan
Kompensasiya qmm qsbul etmak éhdsliklgdm amal enmk §erli 31;, her 11mm ACQ is the ACQ for the Contract Yea: concernst In any Contract Year
Mﬁqnvile Hinds IMI-I, hazxrkx Sarisin marina asaszm Sancmm satmalz, the ACQ shall be the maximum amoum of Gas that Seller shall be obliged
Alicmm is; almaln qsbul enureli oldugu Qazm maksimal miqdamu 1295161 to sell and that Buyer shall be obliged to purchase, receive under the terms
edacsk. of this Agreemsnt; subjecg how/aver, to Buyers obligations to take Make-
Up Gas undar Article 7V7
D (Y anquq Hecm) mﬁvaﬁq Mﬁqavil: ill azinda (i) Sana taxaﬁndsn bayan D (Deﬁcicnt Quantity) is the smn during the Comma: Year ooncemcd, of
edilmis, laldn hat bans! sabst gin: taqdim olumnam1§ v2 Sahel earsﬁndsn (i) all quantities ofGas nominated by Seller but not made available and not
qabdmlmamm bum l-mcmlarln1 vs (ii) Sahel tamﬁndsn bsyan edilmis, [akin delivered by Seller due to .any reason, and (ii) all quantities cf Gas
Furs Major semblanan 56:; Va Planlawmltms tcxnild xidmstla slaqeda: Alnn naminawd by Seller but not taken by Buycr due to Force Mnjeure and
(eraﬁndan gﬁtﬁxﬁknsmh bikini hacmlorin, Va (iii) mﬁvaﬁq Miiqavile lli Schaduled Maintenance, and (iii) any Gas refused by Buyer pursuant to
armada Madda 53‘s asasan Aim tamﬁndan imﬁna edilmis her bansl qazm Article 5.3 in the Contract Year concemedl
czmidix.
7‘5 Amg gnz v3 Saummg gaz kesiri ‘ 7.5 @0553 Gas and Seller Shortfall Gas
(3) Amq qaz Sane) uraﬁndsn Minimum lllik Hecmdsn amq olaraq (a) Excess Gas shall mean those volumes in excess of the Minimum
gatdmlmaq ﬁpﬁn tsqdim alumnus hacmlnr demakdir, Annual Quantity made available for delivm‘y by Sellerl
(b) agar 83bit dﬁvrda bar hansx Gin Vs ya Gimlar Va ya onlann har WI 03) If liming any Day M 13.935 OT Pm EhGYWf 0f the Firm Pmo‘i 5911‘“
hissssi aninda GMH—deu amq qaz hacmini (“Amq qaz hecmi") mﬁvaﬁq properly nomimms '41 quantity Of Gas “1 excess 0f the DCQ (“Bums
qaydada bayan edema, Ahal Sancxya 8.5—cﬁ Maddaya uygun olaraq mﬁvaﬁq 935i"): Buyﬂ’ Shall 51631 by W913“ HOE-95 ‘0 Sena? in “Dorm”? “ml
bildiri; tsqdim molds bayxn edilmi$ Amq qaz hacm'min bi: hissasinl qabul Artie}? 8-5 ‘0 take any a Speciﬁed Pomona or none 0f the‘ﬂomfnamd
etmak va ya ha; bi: hissasini qabul mama}: haqqmda gal-ax qabul gdg bilm: quantity of Excess stl Buyer’s elncﬁon shall be at the sole discretwn of
7.7.c1 Maddays 9mm Mam Kompgnsasiya qmm qabu] mk Buyer,subjecl however to Buyczs obligation to take Make-U? Gas undcx
23
W7 v“


Ghdcliklan'ne ems} etrnelc sam' 11:), Ahcxmn bu our qcran Ahemm mﬁstesna Article 7‘7.
mﬁlahizesi asasmda qobul edilir.
(c) agar 3mm ham-la Sazigin qﬁwgdsolma mﬁddatindg, ha; ham Ay (c) If in any Month during the term of this Agreement1 Seller fails to
em'nxia, FMS major, Texnild xidmat, yaxud Aha: bu sazis ﬁzra Lam ealdlda make available for delivery the properly nominated quannty of Gas
gatdmlma {lean tsqdim olunmu; gm qabul ed; bﬂmgdiyi halls; xmcinag, bar (including quantities of Exms Gas which Seller has elected to make
harms: sebaba géra, mirvaﬁq sekildz hayan edilmie gm (0 cﬁmladan 3mm available pursuant to Article 85 and including the quantities that Buyer
teraﬁndan Madda 8.54 esasen taqdim edilmak Egan swarm); Amq qaz refuses in accordance will: the pmvisions of Article 53 “Off-Spec Gas”)
hccmlarini vs 0 cﬁmlsden 5.3m”: Maddznin (‘ﬂCcyﬁyyal talahlerim cavab such that MonthlyGas Sales for that Month axe less than metatal DCQ for
Vemeygn_qaz") mﬁddnﬂmna mamﬁq egkﬂdg Ahcmm ngul emakdmimﬁm that Month for any reason other than Force Majeure, Maintenance, or
etdiyi hacmlm-i) eatdmnaq ﬁei‘m quim eds bilTnirsQ, bela k1, hgmin Ayﬁzrg Buyer‘s failure to accept delivery of Gas otherwise ﬁllly available for
Ayqu qaz sauslan hamin Ay am; ﬁmumi Gull-I.ng azdusa, 0 23mm delivery hereunder, the difference between the Monﬂzly Gas Sales and the
sﬁzﬁgcdan Ay ﬁzre Ath qaz 52mm i1: umumi GMH arasmdakl {qu total DCQ for said Month will be deemed as the “Monthly Seller Shortfall
“Satmmm Ath Kasir Hmi” hcsab edilir‘ Hat ham] Ay aninda Sauomm QuanﬁtY’- If the“? i5 3 MUM-My 5911” Shortfall Quantity in any Ell/3n
Ath Kssix Heemi olarsa, udvbeti Ayda gatdxnlan ilk Qaz bamjnm M321 Month, then the ﬁrst Gas delivered in the subsequent Month (at the DCQ)
(GMI-Ivda) Aim awn-nan bu Sazigin “A” Qosmasmda mﬁayyen ed11ng Kzsir will be paid for by Buyer at the Shortfall Gas Pn‘ce speciﬁed in Appendix
qazm qiymsu' ilc, hamln Sancmm A,th Kcsir chmine mﬁvaﬁq mgblggc “A” to this Agreemenv, up to the amount of such Monthly Seller Shortfall
qt;er ﬁdenllacsk. Quantity ‘
Her hansl Mﬁqavile m was Sancxmn Ath Kssir Haemi hamin i1 69111 Any Mommy Seller Sherifall Quantity during a given Cormack Year will
Minimum Illik Hacmdan wxanlacaqr be deducted ﬁ’om the Minimum Annual Quantity for that year.
7.6 Minimgg 5am; 7.6 Minimum Pamant
agar Aha her harm Mﬁqavils 11inch Madde 7.44; uygun olamq hesablanmzs If Buyer fails in any Contact Year to purchase the quanth of Gas equal to
Mil-1.9 bgmbgr Qaz hacnﬁni 21a hm, a mm mm Mung ARDNS MAQ calculated in accordance with Article 7,4, than Buyer shall make
mﬁndan hamin Muqavilg Tli mind; fakﬁld ahnmle haemdan amq clan farqe 133911151“ for the difference by WhiCh 7133 MAQ exams the quantity OfGﬂs
gin? 11min Mﬁqavil: m arzindz tethiq olunan on ild (12) ath Mﬁqavils actually purchased by Buyer during such Contract Year, at lhc Minimum
qiyrmtleriugn Qcma “A"»dz qeyd edilen om riym‘ qiymaﬁ awn-ma Payment Price speciﬁc in Appendix “A” based on the arithmetic average
Minimum Odam‘e Qlymati ilo 653m; hayata kee'uir (Wm (imam), Bela of the twelve (12) monthly Ccntract Prices applicable during that Contract
I {ideals Ahcmm bu Saris um (1:12: gétﬁrs bilmediyine gﬁra Sanctum Ahclya Yea! (Minimum P33311511!) SUCh Payment 511311 17° ‘11” Only ﬁghts and
‘ qargl malik aldugu yegang @191, hﬁququ v; hijquqi madam vasitasidin remedies of Seller against Buyer for the Buyer’s failure to take Gas under
this Agreement.
i471
‘ V 24


7.7 Komgensaelyg gem 7.7 Make~Ug Gas
Abel taraﬁndan 6d9ni1mi§ laldn gétﬁrﬁlmmie hor ham) qaz becmi, qaz Any quantity 0f Gas paid for but not taken by Buyer shall) for a period of
hacminin gEbirﬁlrmdlyi Mﬁqavila Ilim'n sonmdan etibaten iyirmi cléxd (24) ay twenty four (24) Months ("MakcrUp Gas Faded”) from ﬂu: end of thc
mda (‘Kompmsasiya qazr dévrﬁ’m Kcmpensasiya qazr hacmi Cantrth Year in which the quantity was not \aken, be made up as Make—
(“Kompensasiya qazt”) kimi hamin lyirmi dérd (24) ay Gm‘nd: basil cdilml$ Up Gas quantity (“Make~Up Gas“) ﬁ’om any Monthly Excess Gas Quantity
her hansr Ath 2mg qaz hemu'mlan avszlasdirilacekdlr. produced in the said twenty-four (24) Months pm’od,
Kompmsasiya qazl Qosma “A"~da qeyd edilen Kompeusasiya Qazm Make~Up Gas shall he paid for at a price equal to the Make-Up Gas Price
Qiymstine lambs: 01m Va Kompensasiya qaz: hamlm’nin géﬁirﬁldﬁyﬁ speciﬁed in Appendix “A” and calculated as arithmetic avmgc of the
Mﬁqavils Hi aaiuda mtbiq olxmzm an ild (12) aylxq Mﬁqavile qiymatlazinin twelve (11) monthly Contact Prices applicable during the Contract Yeaxin
om riyazi qiymati ldmi hesahlanan qiymatle Sdanilirv which the Make-Up Gas quantities are taken.
7.8 Kommsasim gazm tarnzmlamnasi 7.8 Recovm of Make-U2 Gas
Bu Saziein xatm olundug'u tadde AlLol taraﬁndan ﬁdenilmig, 1.31de If at the date of termination if this Agreement, there remain quantities of
giitﬁnilmamig Kompensasiya qam hmﬂsrinin qaldrgz lulda, Tmﬂar Make-Up Gas which Buyer has paid far but not taken, the Panties shall
1 Kompensasiya qaz hacmlqﬁnl mmamlamaq ﬁpﬁn ﬁgiin zamri ohm, laldn 12 agee on aperiod, not to exceed twelve (12) Months, necessary to recover
aydan cox olmxyan Inﬁdde dair razzlxga galirlar v9 hu Sazle yalmz adenilmis, MakeUp Gas Quantities and the Ageement is damned to be amended,
laldn gétﬁxﬁhnamie qazm eatdmlmasx maqsedile uzadxlml; hesab  solely for the purposes of the delivery of the Gas yaid for but not taken.
' Kompcnsasiw qazr hacmlen‘nin manianmasx ﬁgﬁn taleb 01mm maddztin If at the end of the period necessary to recover Make—Up Gas quantiﬁes,
; sonunda, furs major sahablardsn ba§q2 Saucmm gatdmlma ﬁeiin quim eds there still remains Make~Up Gas quantiﬁes which Seller has failed to make
bilmsdiyi Kompcnsasiya qazr hscmlari qalarsa, 0 man Sana 30 Gﬁn aminda awilahlc for delivery for any reason other than Force Majeure, the Seller
son Mﬁqaw'ls Hi arzlnda mthiq olunan on llcl (12) ath Mﬁqavile shall refund 10 Buyer will-ﬁn 30 days the amount equal to the mail-Ling
Qiymmleriuin arm riyazi qiymad kimi hesahlanmx§ v3 Qosma “A”-da qcyd undelivered quanﬁtlﬁ of MakerUp Gas at the Make-Up Gas PriCe as
‘ edilan Kompmsssiya Qazmm Qiymati ile galdmlmmw Kompensasiya speciﬁed in Appendix “A” and calculated as the arithmetic average ofthe
3 gm qalzm hacmlarixw mﬁvaﬁq mzblagi Ahcrya gal Edayin Bu mahlaga bu twelve (l2) monthly Contract Prices applicable during thc last Contact
Sazisin xitaxm tarbdnden etibaran Raalaadmlnm faiz demeasi ila hesablanan Year. The amount shall include lamest thereon at the Agreed Interest
mﬁvaﬁq faizler daxildirl Rate, fmm the date of termination of this Agreement.
1 m 9/ 25


S'lehay: yol vmnamak msqseclﬂe, Kompensasiya qazx hocmlarlnin For the avoidance of doubt, if at the end of the agreed period we recover
tamamlammasl ﬁgﬁn razlla$dmlzm mﬁddaﬁn sonunda Sanmmn oatdmlma ﬁoﬁn Make/Up Gas quantities, there still remains Make—Up Gas quantiﬁes,
laqdim etdiyl, lalrin Ahcrmn qehul eds bilmsdiyi Kompensasiya qarl hecmbri which Seller has made available for delivery, but which SOCAR has failed
qalarsa, Senor Kompensasiya qazr hacmlarlna gérs Ahcrya mﬁnasihatrls daha to take, the Seller shall have no further obligations to Buyer for the Make-
hee lair ﬁhdallk dagrmayacaq. Up Gas quantities,
Madde 8 - Boyan edilmje hacmlzr Article 8 7 Nominations
3‘1 A 1‘ hm“: ' “1‘1 “02" 8.1 Annual Formmeonmly mums
Ba§lama tarixindsn gee almaqu va ondan sonra ildnci v9 hsr nc‘wbeti Not later than the Commencement Date and thereaﬁer not later than ninety
Mﬁqavila llinin baslamasma an geci doxsan (90) Gﬁn qalnns Saturn uévhati ﬁg (90) days prior to the start of the second and each succeeding Contact
(3) Mﬁqavils Ilinin her hirinds vs nﬁvheti Mﬁqavila iljnin hsr aymda Year, Seller shall give notice to Buyer of its good farth forecast of the
gatdrnlnmq {loin beyan mayl gézlediyi crta gﬁndslik qaz hacrrdarlns dair average daily quantities of Gas (expressed in MSCM) it expects to
vicdanla hamlannus proqnozunu (MSKM-l: iﬁdsolunan)Ahc1}ahildirin nominate for delivery cluxing each of the three (3) succeeding Contract
Years and during each Monthef the next succeeding Contract Year.
8.2 Gﬁndalik hacmlerin a h m nozu 3‘2 Menthlxgormst “133ij 3115565
Her aym haslamesma an geci on. (10) Girl qahmg Sana n'ovbati aym her Not later than ten (10) days before the ccmencemem of each Month,
Gﬁnﬁnde eatdrnhnaq ileﬁn bayan mmayi gellediyi qaz hgcmlarins deh— Seller shall give noticeto Buyer ofirs good ﬁlth forecasr ofthe quantities
viodanla hazulanmw proqnozunu (MSKles ifad: olunan) Ahmyabildirlr. of Gas (expressed in MSCM) it expecm to nominate for delivery during
each Day of the succeeding Month,
83 Mﬁvaﬁg gakilda heyan edilrni§ hocmler 8.3 Prgmly Nminated g Eganﬁﬁes
H91 {3,53an  sag: 15;oo.dan gee ogmayamq, Sam, Almya mam Not later ammo pm run each Wednesday, seller shall by nutioe to Buyer
vermakla, nﬁvhati bazar gilnﬁndsn §snba gﬁnﬁm (daxil olmaqla) qsder her 50min?“ the (humility (1“ MSCM) Of Gas ﬂVallable by 39115? 53011 Df‘Y for
Gﬁn ﬁgﬁh Sancmm taqclirn may: [’13le qaz hacmini (MSKM-ls) bgyan adj; the following Sunday through Saturday. Seller may vary its 1301111113le
Sam her hansx can Egan beyan etdiyi hacmi hemin Gﬁm‘m ha§lamasmdan quantity for any Day by giving the following number oflmms’ notice; pnpr
qabaq asagula gﬁstzrllmi; vaxt oardvaslnds bilclixi; vermakla dzyiedita biler ‘0 the beginning 0f 5‘15“ Day (we ‘1“th 3° MUECd 01'  1“
(bu cﬁr hildin'lmis v3 ya dayi5dirilrni$ ham: Maid: 8‘34: uygun olmq accordance with this Arﬁcle 8.3 being the ‘T‘roperly Nommated
26
$377 Vi/


“Mﬁvaﬂq §sldlda beyan edilm‘w hacmlaf’ say-1hr): Quantity”):
(21) hamin ands gundalik normamn alli fm‘zini (50%) 153:1 her bans; (a) for any variation exceeding ﬁfty percent (50%) ofthe daily rate then in
dayi$iklik ﬁqiin iyixmi dﬁrd (24) saatdan a2 olmayan vaxrda bildixi5; Vs force, nor less than twentyifou: (24) hums‘ notice; and
(b) hamin anda qﬁvvsd: clan gt'mdalik normanm 911i failinl (50%) (b) for any variation not exceeding ﬁﬁy percent (50%) but exceeding ﬁve
asmayan laidn hes ﬂaizini (5%) asan bar her-L51 dayisiklilc ﬁgﬁn on iki (12) percent (5%) cf the daily me then in force, not less than twelve (12) hours
saaidan az olmayan vaxrda bildin'g. notice,
HQmill anda qﬁwada 01311 gﬁndalik normanm be$ faizini (5%) asmayan her No notice is required for any Variation oflrss than ﬁve percent (5%) of the
hams! daﬁgikljk ﬁgﬁn bildiris tolsb olunmur. daily rate Lhen in force.
34 Hasilat Mm dévninda GMH vs T 8.4 DCQ and ACQ During Build-up Period
Hasilat ammx dévrﬁnda GMH V9 Ml, Madda 7.2 vs 7.3%: esasan, yalmz During the Build~up Fetiad the DCQ and the ACQ, provided under
malumst xamkteri dasryxr vs fakﬁld GMH vs IMH Sahel tareﬁndsu hsmin AIﬁClCS 73 and 73, are for infurmaﬁonal imposes 0111}! 31141 the W
db'vr ﬁzra Mﬁvaﬁq $316M; bayau edilmjs faktﬂd. gﬁnrlsllk hacmlen' asasmda DCQ and ACQ will be calculated based on the actual daily Properly
hesablana/eaqdar. Nominated Quantities by the Seller for the period.
8.5 Egan edilmig mg gaz hacmlqﬁ 8.5 Nominations ofExcsss Gas
33bit dﬁvr aninde Madda 8.3—9 asasan Saucmm bayan etdiyi hecmlzrds Amq During the Firm Period. to the extent Sellcfs nominaxion under Mic}? 8.3
qaz olduqda, ARDNS miimkﬁu nldugu qsdar tez bi: mﬁddetda) lakin bayan includes Excess Gas SOCAR shall by notice to Seller as soon {as posSIble,
edilmi$ bale been: hzqumda malumat daxil olduqdan soma hat bfr halda qlrx hm  ény ‘3th Wi‘hiIl {OﬂY‘ﬂlght “8) beTS aﬂef Yew/Wing 5‘10}?-
sckkiz (48) scat sxzinds, Saucrya bildirig vermale, Madda 7.5(b)—d9 HOTUJmuOﬂymﬁke the dammit ‘Cfetmd t0 mAWde 7‘5 (bl
l gﬁstwrilmi§ segimjm' edir.
i 8.6 mm 8.6 eve-9.9m
All“ 1,“ sagsm madam 9mm}? hm- Gﬁn Qall yam-aha. nomada $6ka The SOCAR shall use all reasonable endeavours to mks Gas at an even
ﬁcﬁu bﬁtﬁn aglahatan ssylarini gﬁstzrir. rate throughout each Day during the period of this Agreement.
9"” 4/ 27


Article 9 - Maintenance
Madda 9 — Twmild Xidmot
9'1 Flam 1““ nide Xidmgt 9‘1 Scheduled Maintenance
(3) Tareﬂar hex Mﬁqavila lli sizindc hir dch Planla§dtrxlm1§ Texniki dematin (a) One time per Contract Year the Parties shall have the right to perform
hayata kechilmosi hiiququna malikdir. Tarcﬂcn'n togabbﬁsﬁ i1; kecirilacok Scheduled Maintenance. It is the objective of the Parties that the time
Planlasdmlmis Texniki Xidmat ddvrfmﬁn ﬁstiista dﬁsmasi Torsﬂorin period for the Scheduled Maintenance by the Parties should coincide
msqsadini te$kil edit Madda 9.1 (h) new: almmaqla, Taroﬂarin hsyata Subject to Article 9r1(b), the durah'on of such Scheduled Maintenance
kecinczyi Flanla§dmlnus Texniki dematjn miiddsti on dérd (l4) gfmdan conducted by the Parties shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
3mg olmamahdir.
(b) Teraﬂerlo hoyata keciroccyi Planla§dmlmi§ Tcxniki Xidmmiu ddvrlsrl (b) If the periods for the Scheduled Maintenance of the Parties do not
ﬁst-ﬁsts ducmezse v9 ya Teqvim lli crzind: yalmz bi: Tercf bela coincide, orif only one Party carries out Scheduled Maintenance during a
Planlacdmlmdc Tcxniki Xidmnti hcyata kegiram, Planlasdmlmx; Texniki Calendar Year, the time period for the Party carrying out the Scheduled
Xidtmti keviren Tamfa vcrilen vaxt muddati yeddi (7) ﬁnden artiq olmayacaq. Maintenance shall not exceed seven (7) day:
(0) Tomﬂer isleuilan Mﬁqavih lli aminds PlanlMLrleIS Texuiki Xidmaﬁn (e) The Parties undertake to use all reasonable measures to minimize the
mﬁddeﬁni minimallan meqssdila biitﬁn mﬁvaﬁq tadbirlor gonneyi 52 duration of Scheduled Maintenance within any Contract Year.
during 
(d) Taraﬂar Planlacdmlmig Texniki Xidmot vaxtmm mﬁayyen edilmasini (d) The Parties will coordinate the timing of Scheduled Maintenance as
asapdaki qaydada razrlaedimlar: follows:
(i) Hat Muqavile lliniu sentyabr aymda Tereﬂsr névbati Mﬁqavile ill iicun (i) In September of each Contract Year both Parties will begin to co-
Planli Texniki Xidmadn muddctini razda$d1r1rlarr ordinate the period of Scheduled Maintenance for the next Contract Yeax.
(ii) Her Mﬁqavila  01 dekahr tarixindon gee claw.qu Sane: onun (ii) Not later than the 15‘ of December of each Contract Year, Seller will
novbeti Miiqavilc Ili orzindo keciraceyi Planiacdinlmis Texnild mdmst notify Buyer in writing ofﬂie period of its Scheduled Maintenance within
dbvn‘mﬁ yalel saldlde Aliciyabildinr. Bela hildirisi aldquan some, A1101 the next Contact Year. After receipt ufsuch notice, Buyer should conﬁrm
mﬁmkﬁn cher qlsa miiddatda 0mm Planla$dmlm1§ Teozniki Xidmst in wn'h'ng as soon as possible the period of its Scheduled Maintenance
ddvrﬁnii yazth qaydadn tosdiqlamalidir. MIC! Sahcmin bildii'iSlni Should Buyer fail to conﬁrm its Scheduled Maintenance Within ten (10)
ddquan sonra on (10) gﬁn can-ids Plan]: Texnilci Xidmatin days after receipt of the Seller’s notice, die period, according to Seller’s
28
2% 4/


kegirilecoymi msdiqlomeye mﬁyessar olmazsa, Sanctum bildirlsinda notice will be considered as ﬁle period of Scheduled Maintmce.
gdstsriinﬁ; ddvr Plank T exmlci Xidmstin dovni ldmi giiﬁirﬁlﬁr.
92 Planl dmlmarni Texni ' Xith 9 3 Unschedulsd Mail-"(mm
Pedro: lli srzinds Tereﬁn Qurgulunnu-l tamii'i, texuiki onllugu, modiﬁkasiyasr, If in any Contract Year maintenance, repair, modiﬁcation or replacement
avazlonmesi plandan konur has versrse, v; tadbrrli v2 ehtiyaﬂr operator of a Party’s Facilities are unscheduled but deemed necessary in ihe sole
qisminda 91x15 edan Teraﬁn bu Sam‘s: mﬁveﬁq olacraq 62 ﬁhdaliklsrinin yerino judgment of the Party acting as a reasonable and prudent opexator for ﬂ’le
yetirllmasi iipﬁn saxsi qanaztins got: zaruri hesab edilsrso, bola Tamfyaramms Perfommﬂce 0f SUCh Party’s Obligations under this Agreement, suﬁb PM)!
semith mﬁvuﬁq zaman kssiyinda praktilci cshstdau mﬁmkt’in oldugu qsdar may carry out such operations upon giving the oﬂner Party Within a
digar Tarafs gﬁrdiiyﬁ mdbirlors dair mslumat vermakla he]; tadhirlqri hsyata reasonable time as much notice of such operations as is practicable under
kooks bile: the circumstances.
Mada; 10 — Qiymal Article 10 — Price
101  10.1 Contract Price
Mﬁqavilo mﬁddod arzinda her hansi ay Elm Mliqavila qiymaﬁ Sauci The Contract Price for any Month during the Contract Period for Gas
tenﬁndan taqdim elm-mus Va Keyﬁyyai géstencilsrins uygun gelatin Qaan, her made available by Seller and conforming to the Speciﬁcations, expressed
min (1000) SM freon ABS dollan i1; ifade edilrni; Qosma“A”-<la gésiarilmis in US Dollars per thousand (1000) SCM shall be equal to the Contract
Miiqavilzz qiymotine bembordir. Price as provided in Appendix “A”.
102 Vergj 102 m
Mﬁqavilo qiymstina her hansr Va hee bit Vergi daxil deyil. A1101 Cazdmlma The Contract Price is exclusive of any and all Taxes. Buyer shall be liable
Mentaqalsrin: qadar (yani, oatdmlma yerindan kanarda) bu Sazis osasmda for, and Shall inde Sen“ and its Afﬁliates for, 311‘! Tax“ aﬁSiﬂg 01'
oatdmlan qazm naqli. email, mulldywt huququ vs ya sans: ila elaqadsr mbiq chargeable downstream (Lei, beyond the location) ofthe Delivery Points in
olunan her himsx Vergilm-a gore masuliyyat desiin vs Satan; vs onun Omaq respect of the transportation, processing, ownership or sale of the Gas
sirltstlariui bela masuliyyatden azad edirl agar Sane; v: ya onun bar hansi being delivered and sold heremider. In the event that the Seller or any of
011211 sirketi birbasa vs ya delayisi ila Alicmm v: ya ﬁoiinoii ismf shown its Aﬁiliatcs is or becomes obliged to pay Taxes directly or indirectly the
mssuliyyati dasrdigi Vergilzri adamoli olursa, o zaman Alicl bcls Vergilsrs responsibility of Buyer or a third pany purchaser, Buyer shall pay or
gﬁrs Saucrya v2 ya 0mm mﬁvaﬁq omq 3kme odenis edir v9 ya reimburse the Seller or the relevant Afﬁliate for such Taxes and shall
V 29
M d/


kompcnsasiya hayata keeirir vs licmin Edenislcrlc haili hiltﬁn xcrclam Va indemnify the Seller and its Afﬁliates against all costs and expenses

masraﬂere (o ciimladan, faiz) qaisx Saucun vs onun ortaq sirka‘dcrini (including interest) wwwod with the payment thereof.

mcsuliyyatdan azad edir.

103 Mm avil: Qimgat‘ina dﬁrali§ 103 Amendment of Contract Price

Teraﬂar qarslhqh yath razilasma asasmda Mﬁqavila qiymatina birbasa tasir Parties may, by mutual written agreement1 amend the Comma Priceq

géxtm-s bilsn mﬁvaﬁq amillsri nezaxe alaraq Mtiqavila qiymatine dﬁmlis eds taking into account relevant factors which may have a direct impact on the

bilcr. Contract Price.

10.4 Fikir am 1a 104 Disageemem

(a) egal- har hmisx Ay Ezra tatbiq clunan Mﬁqavile qiymsti ila hagll (a) If there is a disagreement as to the Coth Price applicable to any
ﬁkir aynhgi yaransrsa, u zaman be]; mﬁbahisa hall edile qsdcr, Month, then the last determined and agecd Contract Price shall
son def: mﬁayyan edilmis v9 raleasdmhnig Mﬁqavila qiymeh continue to apply until such time as any such dispute has been
wthiq olunmaqda davam edir. Mubahiss hell adildikdcn some resolved; whereupon the resolved Contract Price shall have
Mﬁqavilc qiymati belc zym baslangzcina géra eks tasks malik olut, retroactive effect to the commencement of such Month and any
Va bumdan ireli gaierak bi: Terafden digar Temfa nizarnlayici resulting adjusting paymens by one Party to the other, which shall
édanislar, Razilasdmlmis faiz damcssi um faiz gestcricilari daxil include interest thereon at the Agreed Interest Rate, shall be shown
olmaqla, Madds 11w? ssasen Aliciya tsqdim olunan névbati ath in the next monthly invoice rendered to Buyer under Article ll,
hesab—fakturada gésbrﬂir.
(b) Tarzﬂar Madd: l0.l-i.u mﬁddsalamnn tethiq ulunmam ile slaqsdar (b) The Parties shall promptly meet to discuss and to reasonahly
butﬁn hall edilmamis mosalelari Va ya yamna bilecak mﬁbahisclan' endeavour in good faith to settle any unresolved issues or dispute:
(yaxud malasmadiqlan masalalexi) muzakixs etmak ﬁgiin (or failure to agree) which may arise with regard to the application
taxixasallnmadan gérﬁsmali v9 ytiluna qoymaq ﬁeﬁn aglahatan of the provisions of Article 101, and if wit'nhi thirty (30) days after
saylari g6steniialidit'ler3 vs agar bale mﬁbahisanin yaranmasmdan the commencement of such dispute, they are unable to settle such
some. otuz (30) gun aminda onlax bu rniihahisani hell eds (v9 ya dispute (or so to agree) then such dispute (or failure to agee) may
hulli i1: bagh mzvllga gala) hilmazlarsc, bu mﬁbahisanin halli he refened (at the request of either Party) to an Expert pursth tn
(yaxud raleasmadiqlan mmlz) l4-cii Madday; asascn Article 14.
(Taxaﬂerdan her birinin mﬁracieti ila) Bkspertc hevala edila bilar.
105 W
105 Kssir gazm gimati
80
M ‘7"


Bu senadin 7.5-ci Maddesinin estuarine gate Saumnm ayliq kasir hecmini Gas wnstimﬁng Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity under the provisions of
new Edam Qaz Qogma “A”da gastarilen "Kesir qazm qiymati" ile Allci Article 7.5 hereof shall be paid fox-“by Buyer at the “Shortfall Gas Price" as
mﬁnden o‘dauilir. , specified in Appendix “A”.
10,6 Keg/13m: talgb mug cavab vex-mean gazm gimmi 10.6 Off-Spec Gas Price
Bu Sam's; gore Keyﬁyyat teloblarino cavab vermsyan'qzz kiwi oatdmlmg v9 Gas delivered herwnder as Off~Spec Gas and accepted by Buyer under the
Madde 5.2 v2 534111 mﬁddozlanna uygun olaraq A1161 temﬁudan qsbul edilmis provisions of Article 5.2 and 53 shall be paid for by Buyer at a price (the
qaz Q0§ma “A”»da gasterilmi§ qiymatle (“Keyﬁyyat (alablarine cavab “Off-Spec Gas Price”) which shall be as speciﬁed in Appendix “A”.
ven-myon qazm qiy-meti”) Alia: tsreﬁndsn 6d2nilir.
Madda 11—- 6dani§ sortlari Article 11 ~ Payment Terms
11“ 1 has” {W21 1L1 Monthly Invoice
Sane: Miiqavila mﬁddaii arzinds her aym beeinci (Sci) ls gﬁnﬁ ya ya ondan Seller shall, on or before the ﬁfth (5th) Business Day ofeaeh Month during
qabaq v: Mﬁqavils mflddeli bane cabdiqdan some onuncu (10~ou) I5 gﬁnii v: ya the Contact Period and on or before the tenth (10th) Business Day
ondan qabaq bu Sazio ﬁzro awelki Ay arzinda eatdmlmr§ Qua gﬁxa hesab following the end of the Contract Period, render an invoice in relation to
fakturam tsqdim edir (“Ath hesab—faktura"). Ayliq hesab faktuxa Catdmlma the Gas delivered hereunder during the preceding Month (“Monthly
Menteqosinde hazn’lanan ayliq tohvil-qobul elm (lam) osasmda tonib olunur v9 Invoice"). The Monthly Invoice shall be issued on the basis of monthly gas
Tamﬂerin salabjyye’di nﬁmaysndsleri Lereﬁnden mchizat aymdan sonralu aym delivery acceptance act (5) prepared at the Delivery Point (5) and signed by
ilk gﬁnﬁnda Temild amaliyyatlar Sazigim gaze imulamri Her Ayliq hesab- authorized representaﬁves of the Parties by the ﬁrst day of the Month
fakturaya bela Ayliq bcsab-fakmramn aid oldugu ayla slaqsdar mbiq edilon following the delivery month as per Technical Operations Agreement.
agagidaln handler daxildir:
Each Monthly Invoice shall include the following items )1de which
are applicable in respect of the Month to which such Monthly Invoice
relates:
(a) Sauci temﬁndsn Almya taqdim olunmus (MSKM-la ifada (3) Monthly Gas Sales (expressed in MSCM) made available by
olxmmu$) Ath qaz sauglan (“Ayliq hazir hem”); Seller to Buyer ( the “Monthly Available Quantity");
7’71 4/ 31


(h) Bu 832359 9535911 Alch taraﬁndan her gﬁn gétﬁrﬁlmﬁs Qaan (b) the actual quantity of Gas (expressed in MSCM) lake: by
r (MSKM~la ifada olunmus) faktiki hacmi v9 Ay ﬁzz: ﬁmumj yekmu Buyer pursuant to this Agreement on each Day and the aggregate
(“erul edilmig aylxq beam“); for the Month. (the “Monthly Taken Quantity");
(0) Ay ﬁzn; Sanemm ath kasir iqazmm hecmi (eeraita gérs); (c) any (if applicable) Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity for the
Month;
(d) Ay minds gﬁndslik olaraq qazm Yuxan istiliktémtma qabiliyyati; (d) the Gross Caloriﬁe Value of Gas on a daily basis over the
Month;

(6) Bu Sazig; csasen Sahel tsraﬁndan teqdim olunmus v9 A1101 (0) the Contract Price payable for Gas made available by Seller
wraﬁndan qebul edilrni; Qaza grits adenilasi Mﬁqavila qiymcd; and taken by Buyer pursuant to Lhis Agreement and;

(f) Ay eminda Alxcxya teqdim olunmus v3 Madds 5.3-; asasau Allcr (i) any (if applicable) quantity of Off-Spec Gas made available
Lamﬁndan qatdmlmasr qabul «mm Keyﬁyyat talcblzrin: cavab to Buyer during such Month which SOCAR has accepted
Vannaan qazm hscmi (scram gﬁra), vs bele Keyﬁyyet mlzblarine delivery pursuant to Article 5.3, and ﬁne price for such Off-Spec
(naval) Vermeyon qazm bu Saziso uygun olamq hesablanmm qiymati; Gas as calculated in eccerdanee with this Agreement;

(g) Sana teraﬁndan taqdim olrmmus V» For; major hallam va/yaxud (g) (if applicable) the volume of Gas made available by Seller
Planlasdmh'ms texniki xidmst v9 tamir sababile A1101 taraﬁndsn and not taken by Buyer due to Force Majeure and/or Scheduled
gﬁtﬁrﬁlmamie qazm hacmi va/ynxud Madds 5.3—6.1: mﬁddaaltmna Maintenance and repair and/or quantiﬁes ofOff—Spec Gas reﬁrsed
uygun clamq A1101 taroﬁndan imﬁna edilmis Keyﬁyyat tolublarina by Buyer in accordance with theprcv-lsions of Article 5.3
cavzh Vannaan qazm hacmlari (grails gang);

0:) Catdmlmls qazm Keyﬁyyst gestarlcilcrina; (h) ﬁre Speciﬁcations ofthe Gas delivered;

(i) Ay erzinda orta gﬁndalik esaslarda gmdmlmﬁ qazm temperamru v9 (1') the temperetme and pressure at which Gas was supplied on
(nzyiqi; all average daily basis over The Month;

‘ (j) Hat grin grand: gatdmlmrs qazm hacmine grim, hamin aya (j) the actual amount payable: by quantity of Gas delivered
mﬁnasiba’rda Mﬁqavile qiy-matinin1 Kasir (132mm qiymatinin, 3591 during each Day calculated to include the total of the Gamma
clarsz, vs Keyﬁyyat tslablarine cavab vermayengazm qiymaﬁrﬁn, Price, the Shortfall Gas Price, if any, and the OfErSpec Gas Price,
agar olarsa, yek‘un'u dc.in olmaqla hesablmrms ﬁakﬁki adenilssi if any in respeclof such Month;

5M 4/ 32


mablag;
(k) Make-Up quantiﬁes, if any, and the price and the total
(k) Kompensasiya hacmlari, agar olarsa, vs Madde 7.8-2 uygun olaraq amount of money to be paid for such MakeUp Quentin‘es in
bale Kompensasiya hecmloiinin qiymmi Va onlara gore adenilasi accordance with Arﬁcle7.8.
vesaitin ﬁmumi moblagi.
11.2 Aha Ayliq hesab~faktuian1 aldiqdan somakl otuz (30) Is gfmﬁ smindo, 11.2 Buyer shall have thirty (30) Business Days aﬁer receipt of 6 Monthly
ya Ath hesab~fakturam deqiq, miivaﬁq v9 Gdanig ssasli olamq qohul emeli, Invoice to either accept the Monthly Invoice as accurate, due and payable
yaxud do, agar liar hansx sohvin edﬂdiyino inamrsav mablago etiraz etmalidiin or to object to the amount if Buyer believes that an error may have been
agar A.th hesab—fakturaye. vaxtinda minaz edilmezse, Ayqu hesab-fakmranm made If no objection to a Monthly Invoice is timely raised, the Monthly
qati ohiiasi hesab edilir v9 deha sonra he; bit etiniz irsli sﬁiﬁle bilmaz. agar Invoice shall be deemed ﬁnal and no ﬁmher objections maybe raisedr Ifan
Ayliq hesab fakturaya etiraz Senor toraﬂnden vaxtmda almmissa v3 Sane) objection to a Monthly Invoice is timely received by Seller and Seller
Ath hesah-ﬁakmrada gostarilan sehvlerin olmasmi qobul edirso, o zaman accepts that the Monthly Invoice contains the referenced error, Seller shall
Sane-1 hernia Ayllq hesab—faktumm geri gotiirﬁr Va dﬁzaldilmis Ath hesab- withde that Monthly Invoice and issue a corrected Monthly Invoice in
fakturam tsqdim edir. Bela dﬁzaldilrnie Ayliq hesab—faldura veiildikdan some substitution. The corrected Monthly Invoice shall be deemed ﬁnal if no
on (10) i§ gﬁm‘i orzindo yeni Ayqu hesab-faktumraya qaxsi hes; bi: etiraz irali further objection is raised to the newly issued Monthly Invoice within ten
sﬁn’ilmazso, onun qeti ohms; hesab edilir. agar Sane! mﬁbahisali Ayllq hesab» (10) Business Days after the issue of such corrected Monthly Invoice. If
fekturaya etirazi qebul etmirso ya Tareﬂer realign gala bilmirlarsa, o zaman Seller does not accept the olijecﬁon to the disputed Monthly Invoice and
A1101 bu Sazisin l4~cﬁ Maddasin: osason mﬁbahisoni Ekspertin gamma the Parties are unable to reach an agreement, Buyer may submit the dispute
[3qu eds bilar va mﬁbahiseli mohloga dair qati qarar qsbul edilans qedor to Expert determination pursuant to Article 14 of this Agreement and
yalmz mﬁbahiseli meblzgleri saxlayabilor. withhold only the disputed sums until a ﬁnal resolution of the disputed
amount has been reached.
11.3 Mﬁbahise hall edildikdon soura iyimii (7.0) is gﬁm‘i sizindo A110! yaxud 113 Within tWeniy (20) Business Days of resolution of the dispute, the
831101 tareﬁndon mﬁvaﬁq olaraq her hansl askik Gdanilmis v3 ya arm; amount of any under—payth or overpayment as appropriate shall be paid
odanilmi; meblog, o (:i’trnleden7 arm] odonildiy'i halda onun qebul edildiyi by Buyer, or Seller as appropriate, together with interest at the Agreed
man faktild geri Edema tax—bone qsdar, oskik Gdanildiyi haldz is: adenisin Interest Ram, in the case of an overpayment from the date of its receipt to
edilmoli oldugu txrlxinden odonisin faktlki edildiyi terlxine qedar the actual date of repayment, and in the ease of an underpayment ﬁom the
Razilasdmlmis faiz damcssi ile faizler adanﬂmalidir. due date for payment to the actual date of payment.
52% “1/
33


1L4 Gdenistzﬁxi “‘4 PL“ “mate

Mﬁba-hiSGSiZ Ayh‘l hesab“§akmanm [afldim wllmesmjn Ot‘mmw (30-511) :5 On or before the thirtieth (303') Business Day after delivery of the

Sana“? V9 Ya Oman qaba‘l All“ bel? AAth hesab'fakmtﬂda géstarilmis undisputed Monthly Invoice, Buyer shall pay to Seller the amount shown

m°b19$h hamiﬁ Ath hesab‘faldmadﬁ Vﬂﬂe bﬂGCSk gﬁswrielam 99355n in such Monthly Invoice, by delivery of such amount to EEOC on behalf

33mm admdan 315003 quim “ﬁnk-la: salmya 5dayir. Hesab—fakturada of Seller as may he directed in the Monthly Invoice. If sums invoiced

qul-m olwmus 11195192191 W 3'3 Onlaxm bi? hiSSGSi mﬁvaﬁq talide V3 ya hereunder, or any ponion thereof, are not received by Seller on or before

Dad-m qabaq 55mm lambda“ allnmazsa. 0 18mm Sam?! bah hiride 801ml ﬂue due date, then the Seller shall, as soon as reasonably possible after such

mm Willi“ Vlad“ WI madd'ima 933331 meblaglaﬁ-n V3 Ya 011131,?“ bi! due date, notify Buyer in writing thin sums due, or any portion lhereof,

“5535mm 3131131311135! b31953 A1191)“ Yam-h mammal Vﬂ'i" C‘Od’én‘iﬁ have not been so received (a "Notice of Non~l>aymem”) and may charge

edilmomasi bar-ads bildiris") w Realasdmlmls ﬂail dammsi asasmda bela interest on such sums at the Agreed lawns: Ram

mzblaﬁlaro faiz hesahlaya bilor.

115 WEE 11.5 Annual Purchase Regen

Her Mﬁqavile ilim'n basa yam-33min otuzuricu (30-w) giiuﬁnda v: ya ondan On or before thirty (30) days pﬁer the end of each Contract Year, the Seller

qabaq Sanci Ahczya lllik alqi—saup hesabaum taqdim edit. lllik alqivsatqi shall provide Buyer with the Annual Purchase Report. The Annual

hesabat miivaﬁq Mﬁqavila ili Ezra asagidaki molumatlan oks edir: Purchase Report shall include the following for the respem've Conﬁact
Year.

(6) Satin tarsﬁnden bu Sazis osasmda her Muqavila ilinin hot ayl Hm (a) the total quantity of Gas (expressed in MSCMs] made
Aliciya taqdim olunmus Qazm umumi hacmi (MSKlea ifada available by Seller to Buyer during each Month of such
alumnus) Va hamin Mﬁqevils ili 9:2de Sahel tamﬁndon Almya Contract Year under this Agreement, and. the aggregate
taqdim olunmus Qazm ﬁmumilesdirilmis hoemi (MSKM—ls ifada quantity of Gas (expressed in MSC‘MS) made available by
olunmus); Seller to Buyer during such Contract Year,

(b) bu Sazis asasmda bela Mﬁqavile iii srzinda Sane: braﬁndan Ahclya (b) the aggregate quandty of Gas (expressed in MSCMs) made
taqdim alumnus v9 Aim taraﬁndon goniﬁilmﬁs Qazm available by Seller and taken by Buyer during such Contract
ﬁmumilesdirilmis hscmi (MSKMJQ ifads alumnus), v9 (samba gore) Year under this Agreement, and (if applicable) the quanﬁty of
Ann; qaz hecmlsri clan qaz hacmleri (MSKM—Is ifada olunmus), such Gas (expressed in MSCMs) that is Excess Gas volumes,
“Gﬁtﬁn‘llmﬁs illik hzcm" the “Annual Taken Volume"

5M <1" 34


(c) Fcrs major hallan vs Planlasdmlnns teamiki xidmat sababindsn (c) the total quantity of Gas not delivered and/or not taken as a
gatdmlmamls Va/yaxud gﬁtﬁriilmemis qazm ﬁmumi hocmi; rcsult cf Force Majeure, and Scheduled Maintenance;

(d)Sauc1 mmﬁndan belc Mﬁqavils, ili Grand; (Aylxq asaslexla) Ahmya (d) any quantity of OfﬁSpcc Gas supplied by 8:1ch to Buyer in
tsqdim alumnus v3 Madd: 5l3(b)-y'a asascn Alm tamﬁnden such Contract Year (on a Month~by~Mcnth basis) of which
qaxdmlmasl qabul edilmis (yamrd qcbul edilmcsi hesab cdjlmis) Buyer has accepted (or is deemed to have accepted) delivery
Keyﬁyyat talablarins cavab vermsyen qazm hccmi, v9 bale Kcyﬁyyat pursuant to Article 5.3 (b), and ﬁre price for such Off—Spec Gas
mlablarim cavab ve-rmayan qazm bu Sazisa uygun olaraq hesablanmls as calculated in accordance with this Agrecmmt;
qiymati;

(a) the calculation of Minimum Annual Quantity, pursuant to

(a) Mndds 7 .44; esascn Minimum illik hacmin hcsablanmasr; Article 7.4;

(if) the aggregate. price payable for Gas takm by Buyc: in that

(8 H3: Ay Alxcr taraﬁndqn gétﬁrﬁlmus Qazm  hecmi i1: hcmin Contract Year, based on the aggregate of the pmduct of the
Mﬁqavilc iliniu hcr ayl iizrs Miiqavils qiymzﬂnin vurma basiliuin total quantity of Gas taken by Buyer each Mouth and the
fununﬁ kamiyynti asasmda hamjn Muqavile Hinds Altai taraﬁndzn Contract Price for each Month ofthat Contract Year;
gatﬁrﬁlmiig qaza gaze 6dcnﬂosi mam-nu qiymsl;

(g) the amounts ‘paid by Buyer for Gas pursuant to this

(g) A1101 mﬁndan bu Sazisc asasan qaz ﬁcﬁn 5dcnilmis (ath asaslarlaj Agreement (on a Momh-hy—Monlh basis) and aggregaxcd
Va Muqavils ill 13m ummilcsdirilmis meblsélcr; for the Contract Year

(11) any Seller Shortfall Gas for such Contract Year;

(ll) Hamill Muqavils ill \‘im Saucunn her hens: kssir qazx;

(1) the amounm of Make—Up Gas delivered to Buyer in xhat

(x) Homin Muqavils ilinds Ahmya Qatdmlmxs Kcmpcnsasiya qazmm digsr Contract Year;
mablailari;

(j) any othzr amouan due and payable by Buyer to Seller, or

(j) Bu Saris: uyguu olaraq A1161 tamﬁndan Sancxyaw yaxud Sancx by Sellcrto Buyer, in accordance with this Agreement;
tsmﬁndcn Ahmya catas1 v; ﬁdenilasi mcblsglsr;

(k) accrued entitlement of Makc—Up Gas
(k) Kompensasiya qazmm wplanmls kompensasiya meblagi
Bu Sazisa 9523er Sam: nmﬁndan (aqdim olunmus lllik aqu—saxqr hesabatr, The Annual Purchase Report delivared by Seller pursuant to th5
am Q” 35


agar onun Verllmaslndan 3mm: alu (6) ay arziuda hela lllik alqr-satq: Aycement shall be deemed to be conclusive ifno objection is received to
hesabauua hen; lair etiraz dexil olmazsa, qut‘i hesab edilir. agar (i) Sahel Illik such Annual Purchase Report within six (6) Months aﬁer the issue uf the
alqrsaxqr hesabatmda sahv olmasun qebul edema, yaxud (ii) Madda 6r6-ya Annual Purchase Report. Where either (i) Seller agrees that Annual
uygun clam/.1 ekSpert qaran asasmda Sanmdan lllik alqr-satqz hesabatmda vs Purchase Report contains an error, or (ii) where Seller is required to amend
ya oradalcl har hansl gostaricllara duzah’s elmek (slab olunarsa, Sauea lllik aqu— Annual Purchase Report, or any data. contained therein pursuant to the
53th hesahaum gerl gétﬁrmal'r v: onun avazlna mﬁvaﬁq dumlis edilmis Illik determination of an expert in acmrdanee with Article 66, Seller shall
alqr-satqr hesabatuu vmalidirr Bela dﬁzalis edilmig llllk alqbsatql hesahau withdraw that Annual Purchase Report and issue a corrected Annual
agar 0mm verilmasindan some alt: (6) ay aninds bela dumlis edilmls lllik Purchase Report as applicable, in substitution. Such correde Annual
aqu-satq: hcsabatmahupbu etixaz daxil ulmma qati hesab edilx'r. Purchase Report shall be deemed to be conclusive if no objection is
received to such Annual Purchase Report within six (6) Months aﬁer the
issue ofsuch corrected Annual Purchase Report.
Diwali; ediln'u's Illik alqrsatqz hesahau quim edlldikdan sum or: (10) gin Within ten (10) Days aﬁer the issuance of an amended Annual Report, the
mantis Alrcr yaxud Sana taraﬁndan mﬁvaﬁq 01am; bar hams! asldk adenilmis amount of any under—payment or over—payment as appropriate shall be paid
vs ya 9mg odanﬂmis meblsg, o aimledau Razrlasdmlmrs faiz datecasi 119 by Buyer or Seller, as appropriate, together with interest at the Agreed
fiizler 6danilir. Faizlar (i) aruq adanis edildlyi halda aruq édanisin tarixindan Interest Rate. The interest will accrue: (i) In the case of an overpayment,
get‘l (idem; tarixjns qadar, (ii) asldk édanix; edildiyi halda isa odsnisin edilmali ﬁom the date of One overpayment to the date. of repayment; (ii) in the ass:
oldugu tarixdan ridenisin faktiki mine qedar toplamr. of an underpayment1 from the due date for the payment no the actual date
of paymenL
11.6 Audit hﬁguglan 1 1‘6 Audit Riaus
Her Taraf, bu Sazjse asas’eu her hansr ay ﬁzra taqdim edilmis her hansr 3313}! PW 555“ have 503 right (“Si-“g independent “(131013 or Pl'i’fe’SSl‘“ml
hesabmm mm W ya 11553913me dﬁzgﬁnlﬁyﬁnﬁ bsdiq emgk [1953, 131ml advisers), exercisable within six (6) Munﬂns aﬁer the end of any Month1 at
olan mﬁddatda bir-birlorinin muhasibat kitablanm, ucot sansdlarini, reasonable hows and 51Xle ‘0 3‘6 COD-Sent Of 1116 other Party (SUCh
csdvallarini vs hemin ay um bu Sazis: ssassn ﬁdemﬂasi her harm Edamalsrla consent “0? ‘0 be Umwonably Withheld 01‘ 55113341): t0 exam—l“ and lake
bagh her hansx digar melumatlan aglabatan saavlarda va digar Taraﬁn Ialergtt “0‘65 0f (but 110‘ COPY 0r Wham“ repfmuce in any form WithW‘ 9‘3 J?lief
ila (hole rauqu asasslz olaraq saxlana vs ya gecikdirﬂa bilmaz) yoxlamaq v9 wring“ COTS”: 0f the 0316' Party) Gac'h 0013's 5001(5) Winds? Chm 39d
qcydlar apamnq (lakin digar Taraﬁn mzrhgr olmadan surstini gnxanmudan v9 “3’ 0‘11“ lnfmmalim mummg CRIME“ m be maﬁa Pmumt “7 his
ya her hansl basqa seldlda whar duulumdan) ﬁpﬁn (must:qu auditorlardan Mammal railing ‘0 SUCh Month t0 the alth DWSSQIY ‘0 Verify Eh:
yaxud pegakar maslshatoilardan istifada cdarek) hernia ayrn basa paunasrndan 3001335)’ Of an)’ Same“ Ghﬂge 01' computation “kids in “W01 05 “911
sonra all: (6) Ay mﬁddeunde taihiq edila bilau hﬁquqa malikdir. M01131 Pm‘lam ‘0 this Amman
W or 36


agar he: bans: bale yoxlama zamam bundan qabaq taqdim edilmi; hex harm if any such examination reveals any inacmracy in any billing previously
hesabda yanhshq askar edilarsa, hamin hesab va édanislards laximsaimmadan made, any agreed necessary adjustments in such billing and payments shall
ranla§dmlml$ bﬁtﬁn zaruri dﬁzaligiar edilir w: bu zaman Madds 11343:: be made pmmptiy and the provisions of AniclbllS shall apply. If the
mﬁddsaian Latbiq olunm. agar Taraﬂgr arastnda bu yaniighqla bagh ﬁkjr Partias disagree as to an inaccuracy, either Patty may submit the dispute to
aynlzgi vma, Tamﬂarin her biti Mada; l4~a asasan mﬂbahisanin hallini Expert determinmion pursuant to Article 14‘
Ekspem'n gararma taqdim eds bileri
11-7 Val 11m 54m ﬁs‘ﬂu 11.7 Chimney and Method ofPament
Aha her A.th hesab—faktura ﬁqﬁn ABS dollan £19 Saucmm vaxta$1n olaraq, Buyer shall pay each Monthly Invoice in United States Dollars ’0 the
1550}; an m otuz (30) gﬁn qabaqcadan yazih bildjriqla bayan eidiyi baukda vs account of the Seller at such bank or banks as the Seller may from time to
ya bankiaxda clan hcsabina Gdsnjs edit. rim: nominate on not less than thirty (30) Days written notice.
Madda 12 — Qazdan isﬁfada Article 12 . Use of Gas
Eu Sam's asasmda Sana tenth-Adan Aixclya gatdmimxs qaz birbaga istehlak, Gas delivered by seller ‘0 Buyer Um?“ this ASTWPem 5h?“ be available
ticamt, Saw V; ya ixrac ﬁtp‘m Alicmm miismsna istifadssins taqdim olunur. for the €X01‘J5iV‘e “53 by my?” {0‘ due“ OOHS‘KI‘PUDR: trading, Mke’fmg
or export.
Madda 13 — Fors major hallm Article 13 - Force Majeure
13.1 Fors ma' hallmm *9 ' 13.1 Deﬁnition ofForce Majeme
“Fats majof’ bu Sazis ﬁzrs Taraﬁn fealiyyaiinin qar$ism1 alan, manecilik "Force Majeure“ means any event which prevgms, hinders or ignpedes a
«Braden yaxud wﬁniik yamdan va mm qalmis Tateﬁn hamin hadissni v9 ya PanY’S Fﬁfomm“ under ibis Agemmt 311d 15 WOW the ability Mme
onun naﬁcalsn‘ni aglabatau ssylar gﬂswrmgklg idem 35ml; iqﬁdannda affected Party to control such event or its wmequences using reasonable
oimadlg-i hadissdir, o cﬂmladen, laldn deyilaniaxis mabdudiamadan, qcyri—adi efforts: indudiﬂg Withom limitation, extraordinary events, natural diSaSWI‘S
haiiar, tabii ﬁlakatlar (2119591231, ildmm v2 minis), mﬁhan'balar (clan edilmi§ (for 51891715 “singing and earﬁlqualfe), wars} “waived 01' undeglared) of
Va ya edilmamis) yaxud harhi Miyyetlcr, yangm, amak mﬁbahisghri! other military actuary", ﬁre, iabaiur disputes, )nsuﬂCFtiODS, rebelling-acts
qiyamlar, asyanlar, terrorqiﬂuq hmkaﬂeri, iglisaslar, ictimai narazllxq, v9 he: 0f Wﬁm rick CIVll commotion, and law, treaties, rules. Ifgula'nofls,
halls! hékumzt orqammn qanunian, mﬁqavilalari, qaydalan, non-main], 5163933, 01593, 3560115 0? mallow 0f any governmental aumonty (Insldc
iermaniam ambit faaliyysti v9 ya feeliyyztsizliyi (Azarbaycan Respublikagg 0r outside of the Republic of Azerbaijan); provided, however, that laws,
daxilinda va ya xaﬁcinda) demekdir, a sax-:1: ki, Azarbaycan Respubiikasmn “681535, WICS; TEEUJEU'ODS. deltas: 01555 or Ollie! 3‘33 Of my emit? 0f
37
1W1 4/


arazisinds he: hansr hékmnst orqam admdan, onun himayasi alnnda, yaxud agency acting on behalf oﬁ under the auspices of, or at the direction of any
birbazﬁa gésisrisi i1; her-aka: edan hat hang: qumm v: ya idarsxrin qammlan, Gave-rman Authority within the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan
mﬁqavilslari, qaydalan, normalan1 femanlan, amrleri yaxud diger hawketlan‘ shall not constitute Force Majeure with respect to delay or non-
Ahm tamﬁndan gecikma v9 ya yen'ns yetirmame i1: bagh For: major hallan performance on the part of Buyer.
amok gsﬁrmjr,
132 W 13.2 Sg§n§gsion ofOblignﬁnns
Fors major hallan sababindsn T712511 tam v9 ya qisman bu San} ﬁne In the event that a Party is rendered unable wholly or in part by Force
6hdalildarini im adv bilmamssi halmda, 176.10 Taraﬁn 'o‘hdalildsn', Furs major Majeure to carry out is obligatiom under this Agreement, the obligations
hallannm tsskim maruz qaldlg qsdar, bale Fors major hallanmn davam ctdiyi of such Party, so far as they are affsaed by such Force: Majeure, shall be
mﬁddat amimia dayandmhr Va be]; tesim mama qalmls Taraf Sazisi pomu; suspended during ﬁne continuance of such Force Mexjaurar and the Party so
hesab cdilmirl aﬂfected shall be timed not to be in breach (2st Agemcnt,
13.3 mm 133 Eodce; Remedral Actions
Oz ﬁbdoljklarlnin yerine yetirilmamesinin sababi olamq bels Furs major AS 500“ as Ymnﬂbly Pracﬁﬁal and in any ‘3th Within “"611 (7) days
hadisasina istinad earns Tmf smell cahatdzn mﬁmkﬁn qadar tez mﬁddatds v9 fOHOWing the occurrence Ofs‘mh Went Of FWDC Mﬁlwfea ‘he PW haVing
bah F05 major hadisasjnjn 1,35 Vemgsmdgn 5mm ycddi (7) gm 9mm; dig” invoked such event of Force Majeure as a cause for non-performance of its
Terafs bale Fors major hadisasinc dair gcnis hesaban vs 6hdaliklarin yen'm Obligations Shall submit TO the 05131 PW {0119315011315 Of‘he 5‘10}! W651
yetiriknamesinin tsbiaﬁna dair asaslandlnhm; sﬁbut taqdim edirl Bundan sama 0f Force Malwe 33d mnabl‘: 9”“ 0f the “me 0f “011 “an
Fors major Ilallanna iddia adsn Tami", asaslandmlmls fasilolarl: (laldn on (10) pafomance- Thereafter, the Party claiming Force Majeure shall, at
gﬁndo bir dafadon az olmamaqla) digar Taran he}: Furs major hadimsi 319 reasonable intmals (but no less frequently than once per ten (10) Days
bth yeni mslumatlan, 1:619 Fors major hadisesim' axadan qaldm-naq ﬁcﬁn Wrich Pmva ﬂ“ Dﬁm Party ‘Vilh Wﬁmm updates Tegmmg “Ch W’mt
garﬁlmakds clan tadbirlsrl v9 bela Furs major hadisasini ararlan qaldm-naq 0f Force Mal-6‘1”: the steps bang undeﬁakeﬂ ‘0 “3me 511011 event 0f
ﬁgﬁn taleb 011mm taxmini Vaxu yazrh $okilda taqdlm edir. Furs major For“ male“re and the! “mind time Tequide for remedies 0f sum “Vim
hadisasine iddia edan Teraf, mﬁmldin Ola bilacak qedar, digar "1':me (v2 onun OfFWW Malme- The Pm’ly Clammg lhe ever"- OfFOWC Maleum 511311; ‘0
sslahiyyatli nﬁmayandalsﬁna Va mﬁsisqil podratwlanna) bela Fors major the “tent able to d0 50: Permit the Other Party (and his audwﬁ-Zed agents
hadisgsinjn has Verdiyi yexi mms gunk wan mm hﬁquq (11an gig“ Taraﬁn and independent coma-actors) full right of access (at such other Pam/s n'sk
risk-j v3 moi hey,me val-1L Tgmﬂm her bid FMS major 132113an 1,35 and expense) to inspedx me scene of such event of Force Majeure. Each
Varmes‘min qargrsrm almaq ﬁgﬁn bﬁtﬂn aglabatan qammi soylari gastzrjr, H9; Party shall use ils reasonable lawful efforts to prevent the occurrence of
1131151 Fors major hadisasi ba§ verdikda, mamz qalmz: Taraf bsla POTS major F03” Mala“: W93“- UPUH the 0901mm” 0f any F01“: Maleure W35“:
hadissgini mam 4131mm“; v9 ya mil-(“3 a,qu ﬁgﬁn aghbam (13mm lhe Party aﬁ’ected shall do all things possible using reasonable lawful
W a/ 38


ssyleri gésmmnk bﬁti'm mﬁmkﬁn islsn' garmalidir effom to remove or mitigate the effect of such Force Majeure event
F015 majcr hallanmn tasiﬁ alt: (6) aydan 90x davam etdjkda, hat ﬂd Taref Both Parties shall have the right to renninate this Agreement in the case of
doxsan (90) giin qahaqcadan digs: Tanfa yalel bildin's vermakle bu Sazi$i extended Force Majeure events exceeding a period af six (6) Months by
dﬁyaﬂdﬂ‘a b11311 submission of a ninety (90) Days prior written notice to the other Party.
114 mamrawumams: 13.4 Failure ofMarket
Almnm har hansl istehlakqmm vs ya isteblakcxlann qa21 gﬁtur: bilmsmasi Buyer shall not be entitled to claim relief through Force Majeure in the
(bale istchlakgllann iradasindan kana: sabablarden 85111 olmayaraq) ssbeb'mdsn W61“ 13'f any failure “1 PCTfOTm 1‘5 Obligations berm-“def caused by any
bu Sari; ﬁzre 5hdaliklarini her hens] bir gakilda ycrim ycdrmadikdg Fors failure of any consumer or consumers tn take Gas (whether or not for
major hallm kimi mesuliyyatdon azad edilma iddiw imli sﬁrmek huququ reasons which are beyond ﬁne control of such consumers). Furﬂ‘mrmorc,
yoxdur. Bmdan lama, bazaa- sartlerinde d9yi§iklildsn o cﬁmledan Qaza yaxud changes in market wndiﬁons, including changes that direedy or indirecdy
Qazdan V9 ya Qazla lsbehsa] edilan her hansx amwaya talebata V9 ya onun affect the demand for or price of Gas or any commodity produced from or
qiymsﬁm birbagza v9 ya delay: tssir edan dsyigikliklsr, mesglan mﬁ$taxﬂaﬁn with Gas, such as loss of customers or loss of market share shall not
iﬁrilmasi yaxud bazar paymm itirilmasi Furs major hallarmr annals gstirmir. constitute F0703 Maj aura. ‘
Madda 14 — Ekspert Am‘cle 1-1 - Expert
[4‘1 Eksnerta miracle: 14.1 Reference to Expert
Tamﬂar bummlu, onlardan ‘birin: mﬁbahissm' (w ya masalani) hall oluumasm Th6 Parties hereby agree that the fellows Procedures shall apply in those
ﬁgﬁn EksPert: quim may: icazs verildikda yaxud, Tamﬂar mﬁbahissmin (V2 5117-1350“ Where a Pmy is Permed ‘0 wbmit 2* dSSFUtE (0T iSSW) W in
ya massbnin) Eksperts taqdim edilmasi ila baglt amiannda razrhga geldikdq, Expert {01“ “scum?- ” Where the Parties 0mm“ mMIY 3g“ “3
asagxdaln prosedur qaydalarmm tathiq olmacagma tazniu-lar, submit ’1 d‘spu‘e (01‘ issue) 10 an Expen-
l4.2 Ekggertin tang edilmesi 142 Aggoinment ngxpm
l ‘ .

Ekspﬁﬁn (gym Edi] iqaydalan aﬂgdab  The procedure for the appomtment ofan Expert shall be as follows

(a) Mubalﬁsali masalani Ekspens hevale etmek niyyeﬁuda clan. Taraf digs: (a) The Party MSW to {afar such 3 mm“ to an Ewe“ Shin Deﬁfy

39
)451 V/


Tenth bildiris verir ki, (i) mﬁbahis: movcuddur (yo belo bildirlsds sezii the other Party that (i) a disagreement exists (and such notiﬁcation
gedan miibahisonin xiilasosi qeyd edilix), (ii) hsmin Taref miihahisaui $11311 outline the issue in dispute in summary form), (ii) the Party
V3 yamoseleni I4.l~ci Maddeya mii'vaﬁq olaraq Eksperta taqdim ounok Wishes to submit the dispute or issue to an Expert pursuant to
istayir v9 (iii) miihahissnin holli moqsodilo yegane miistoqil Ekspenin Article 14.] and (iii) the other Party is requested to join with the
bildirisi Verso Tamils bir‘g: toyin olunmasi digur Tgmfdon xahis Party giving notice to appoint a single independent "Expat" to
olunux. resolve the dispute

(b) l4.7.~ci Maddonin (a) paran mﬁvaﬁq olaraq bildirls teqdirn (b) The Patties shall meet promptly aﬁer delivery of notice pursuant to
edildikda, Tamﬂer mubahisali mesolsnin bolli hovals edilocak yegana Article 111.2(3) in an endeavour to reasonably agree upon a single
Ekspenin toyin alum-lasing dai: osasli seldldo zaleiga galmzya cshd Expert to whom the matter in dispute shall be referred for
glistenan maqsodila taximsahnmadan gﬁrﬁs keqirirlori determination

(o) Sdzii gedon bildiris tsqdim ulunduqdan soura on (in) gun arzindo (a) If, Within ten (10) Days ﬁom the service of the said notice, the
Toreﬂor no gﬁrﬁs kegimays, us do lci, Ekspeiti myin eh'noyo miivoffaq Parties have either failed to meet or failed to agree upon an Expert,
olmazlarsa, Tornﬂgrdon her biri mﬁbahissli mesaloni dorhal Ekspcrtin then the matter may forthwith be referred by either Party to the
on (10) gun arm-ids seeilmssi ﬁqiin miraciot edilocok London President of the Institute of Petroleum in London, who shall be
whenndzlci Neﬁ lustituttmun Prezidentina hevale ed: biler; be]: seeimi requested to select an Expert within ten (10) Days; in making such
edarken, Londondaki Neﬁ Institutumm Prezidenii qanaatino gb'ra selection, the President of the Institute of Petroleum in London may
mﬁvaﬁq saydip miistaqil moslahotdan istifada eds bilar. take such independent advice as he believes is appropriate,

(6.) Bu Maddanin yuxandalo mt'zddoalanna mﬁvaﬁq olaraq Ekspen (d) Upon an Expert being, agreed or selected under the foregoing
seoildikdo Vs ya onun tsyin olunmasi ilo baglt raziltq 21d; edildikda, provisions of this Article, the Parties (or either Party) shall
Taroﬂer (yaxud Tarot) derhal Elcsperta onun seqildiyini va teyinati 1‘13 forthwith notify such Expert of his selection and the proposed teims
bagh taldif ohman sortlari, o cﬁmladen qeyd edilonlorlo yanasi, thereof, including, inter alia7 a covenant that the Expeft will not
Ekspertin tsyinat miiddstinda 0mm bela toyinal ﬁzz foaliyyotine during the term of the appointment accept any duty or acquire or
ohomiyyotli dmcads zidd clan Va ya zidd ole biber her hens) vozifa agree to acquire any interest which materially conﬂicts with or may
v9 ya maxeqlan, mﬁvaﬁq olaraq, qobul mayocoyini v: almayaeagmi materially conﬂict vn'th the Expert‘s function under such
yaxud almmnsma razrliq vennayacayiniifadz edenmiiqavila ﬁhdsliyini appointment The Parties shall request the selected person to
bildirixﬂsrl‘l‘azoﬂar segilmi; saxso onun toklifolmian sartlorlo Ekspert conﬁrm acoqtanoe of the appoinunent as Expert within ten (10)
qisminde tayinaumn qobul olunmasmm on (10) gun srzinda Days on the terms proposed and to disclose any interest or duty
tasdiqlemesi v: beta toyinat ﬁzz: Bkspert kimi faaliyyzt gastannasins which conﬂicts or may conﬂict with such person‘s function as
ridd olacaq vazife vo maraqlan acinamaSi iLa bagh murath edirlor. Expert under such appointment

fig 4/ 40


(a) Ekspert bela toyinati qabul may: :21! olmazsa V9 ya qabul etmalt (e) If such Expert shall be either unwilling or unable to accept such
iqtidannda deyildirsa yaxud daki, sézii gedan toyinlm deyildiyi kin-ti an appointment or shall not have conﬁrmed his acceptance of such
(10) Gﬁn muddatinda tasdiq etmazsa, msala (Torsﬂsr basqa Ekspertin appointment within the said period of ten (10) Days, then (unlws
myin olunmasina dai: maqu 91d: eds bilmayana qedsr) yenidcn (her the Parties are able to agree upon the appointment of another
bir Tomlin msebbusﬁ i1?) somaki segim etmasi its claqsdar nlaraq Expert) the matter shall again be referred (by eithn- Party) to the
miiracist olunacaq 552a gedan Londondaki Neft lnsﬁtummm said President of the Institute ofPen—oleum in Lemon> who shall be
Prezidentino hovala edilir v3 bu proses Dyinati qabul eclech Eksper’t requested to make a. further selection and the process shall be
mﬁayyan olunana qsdar telawlanir. repeated until an Expert is found who accepts appointment

(i) Ekspcrtin tayin edilrnasi ﬁcﬁn onun milbahisali messianin hallinda (t) It shall be arequirement of the Expert's appointment that the Expert
tatbiq olunacaq konﬁdensialliq berado 6hdaliyi Tanﬂar qarsismda shall enter into a conﬁdentiality undertaking with the Parties
qabul etrnasi talsb 01mm governing the matter in dispute.

14.3 Ekspwin lxtisasi 14.3 Qualiﬁcations of Expert

(a) Ekspert fardi saxs qisminda, torefdashq saklindc, assosiasiya v: ya (a) An Expert may be an individual, partnership, association or body
hﬁquqi saxs kjmi {caliyyct gastaro bilar vs mfibahisclsrin halli corporate and shall be generally recognized as an expert in a ﬁeld
salics'mda ekspert kimi qa'bul edilmalidir, elsca do, Taraﬁerdan of expertise relevant to the dispute, and shall be independent of die
mﬁslaqil sakilda faaliyyst gastarmslidir. Parties.

(12) Ekspert her hansi maraqlann thqusdugunu vs ya bel: maraq (b) An Expert shall disclose any cnnflict of interest or potential conﬂict
toqq‘usmalan potcnsislmm max/cud oldugunu myinatim qobul etmazdsn of interest before accepting his appointment [or promptly upon any
9W9] (yaxud sézﬁ gedsn tsyinann ardinca has Venn her hansr bels such conﬂict of interest or potential conﬂict of interest arising V
maraq toqqusmalau yaxud potensial maraq toqqusrnalan hahnda subsequent to such appointment) and the Parties shall Within ten
darhal) agrqlnyrr, Taraﬂar isa halo aqiqlama verildikden sonra an (10) (10) days of such disclosure either conﬁnn the Expert‘s
gun muddetinda Eksper‘lin tzyinaum mdiqlayir vs ya Ekspertin appointment or, if either Patty considers that there is a material risk
qararuia x9121 yetirscsk sﬁzﬁ godan maraq toqqusmalan vs ya hole of such conflict of interest or potential conﬂict of interest
toqqugnalann has Venn; poteneiali ila alaqsda: olamq ahamiyyaili prejudidng the Expert‘s decision, then such Party may apply to the
risldn ortaya cixacagim dﬁsﬁnon Tarsf Ekspertin tayin club‘ President of the Institute UfPetIoleum in London who shall decide
olunmayacagma yaxud fealiyystiui driven edacoyino dair qarar veracsk if such Expert shall be appointed or not or should continue to act.
Lnndondaki Neﬁ lnstitutunun Prezidentina mﬁracist odir. Londondakt If the President of the lnstihrte of Petroleum in London does not
Neﬁ lnstitutunun Prezidenti tsyinau v9 ya myinai tiara faaliyyon'n conﬁrm the appointment or continuance thereof, the President of
davarn etdirilmssini wsdiqlsmozso, Neft lnstitutrmun midenti bu the Institute of Petroleum in London shall select another Expert in
if” wk 41


Madds l4 —ﬁn yuxanda qeyd edilen mﬁddealanna asasan hasqa accordance with the foregoing provisions of thisArticle l4.
Ekspem‘ seen.

(0) Tsyinat amnda her bans! Teraﬁn dircktoru, vezifali soxsi v: ya (0) No person shall be appointed an Expert who at the time of
omakdasi clan (yaxud kecmi; 5 i1 armada olmu§) yaxud one We ya appointment is (or within the previous ﬁve (5) years was) a
onun TESme qurumuna) bixbasa Va ya dclayi olaraq maslahatgi kimi director, Ofﬁceholder or an employee of or directly or indirectly
xidmet gomnnosl ﬁqi‘m tehkim edilrnis Va ya Tareﬁn fealiyyetinda Vs retained as consultant to any Pan‘y (or any Afﬁliate theer or who
ya onun Ortaq sirketinda qurumunda salim payma malik olan scxs is the holder of shares in a Party or any Afﬁliate thereof (unless
Ekspert kimi toyin edilmir (bela Tareﬁn v9 ya onun Onaq sirkatinin such Party or Affiliate (as the case may be) is a company quoted on
(vaziyyetdan asrli olamq) sehmlarinin taxmmms biijada sense eixanlmis a recogtized stock exchange and the Expert’s shareholding is less
sirkat oldugu ve her hams: 531m: kapitalmda Ekspertin sahrn paymm 1 than one (1) per cent of the issqu share capital of any class).

(bir) faizdsn 32 01mm hallan istisna nlmaqla).

14.4 Prosedur Qaydzlcn v9 Eggpem‘n Qaran 14.4 Procedure and Expert Determination

Her bir Tamfa, Ekspert tam layiu edildiyi tarixdan sonra, bir nﬁsxesi eyni Each Party shall have twenty (20) Days from the date of the ﬁnal

manila diger Temfs verilmakla, Bksperta yamli sﬁmtds teqdimatm verilmcsi appointment of the Expert to make representations in writing to such

ﬁcun iyirmi (20) Girl: verilir. Digar Tarafbela teqdimati aldiqdan some on (10) Expert, copied at the same tirnc to the other Party, which other Party shall

Gun srzindc sﬁmtlari eyni zamanda eks Tarefa verilmelde yank sekilde 52 have the righg. within ten (10) Days of receipt of such representations, to

sarhlarini Eksperta bildirir (bu settle lei, Ekspert mﬁbahisali mewlcnin adaletli submit comments in Writing thereupon to the Expert, and copiw of any

qaydada hall olumnasi iici‘m zaruri hesab etdiyi halda bale mﬁddsﬁn amnlrnasr such comments shall be supplied to the other Party at the same time

hﬁququna malﬂcdir). (provided that; the Expert shall have the right to extend such yeriods if the
Expert considers such extension necessary for a fair detenninaﬁon of the
dispute in question}

145 Ekspert Tareﬂardsn 552i": gedsn mﬁbahiseli maselanin helli Cing zsrun' 14.5 The Expert shall be entitled to require the Parties to produce, within

hesab ctdiyi ssnadlarin mﬁeyyan edilmis muddatda taqdim oluumasmi t9le speciﬁed periods, documents which the Expert. considers necessary to

erran hﬁququna malikdii: Her bans bele scnadlarl tsqdim edon Tarsf cnlann determine the dispute in question Any documents so produced shall at the

sﬁretleﬁni digcr Torcfa verir. same time be copied by the producing Party to the other Party.

14.6 Sifahi taqdirnatlar Eksperta 0mm qaran ila mﬁeyysn edilmis mﬁnaslb 14,6 Any oral submission to the Expert shall be made at a. convenient

vaxt v3 yards oreda Olmaq niyyatinde clan Miran Teraﬂarin istiraki ila edilir, time and place to be decided upon by the Expert in the presence of all

prosesda istimk edsn Teraﬂar 52 cavablanm vermzak v9 cks teqdimatlanm Parties Willing no attend; these Parties attending shall have the right to

W V/ 42


etrmk hiiququna malik olurlar. respond thereto and make their own submission in response.
14.7 Ekspert zn‘asdn-rdallari1 ism yazrln istcrss d9 sifahi lngilis dilinda 14.7 Expert proceeiingshoth written and oral, shall be conductedinthe
apanlir vs bu Sazisin yalmz lugilis dilindski msmi Ekspert taraﬁndan isdfuds English language, and only the English language text of this Agreement
edilir. shall be utilized by the Expert.
14.8 Ekspen, ssasli olaraq taleb cdildikdc, mﬁstaqil, pesakar, katiblik ya ya 14.8 The Expert shall he entitled to obtain such independent
texnild mashhat xidmatlarindan istifada eunek hﬁququna malik olur, bu sartla professienal, secretarial and/or technical advice as may be reasnnably
ki, Eksperl Konﬁdensial malumutlann her zaman mum vs mﬁbahisa ile required provided that the Expert use all reasonable efforts to ensure that
claqedar olaraq one yardim edcu ﬁsrd temﬁndan qomnub saidamlmasnun Conﬁdential hiformaﬁon is at all times maintained by the Expert and any
tannin edilmcsi ﬁqlin bﬁtiin laami ssylar gésmrir. individual assisting the Expert with the dispute.
14.9 E‘kspert tam byinahm aldlqdan sonra, Tsrsﬂarin arasmda esasstz 14.9 The Expert shall render a determination (which determination shall
sakilda imtina edils bilimnayccck mlasma asasmda uzadila bilinan (on has be limited to the issue(s) described in the notice delivered pursuant to
(15)g'indan amq olmmaq senile) qirx hes (45) Gun miiddst anuida (Madda Article l4.2(a)), together with full written reasons for such determination:
14.2 (a) asesen Verilmis bildjrisdz qeyd edilsn masslsﬂar) ilc mshdudlasan) within fortyvﬁvc (45) Days of his ﬁnal appointment, which term may be
qsr'anm yard: sﬁcstde tam ssaslandmnalan ilo birga taqdim edin extended by agreement ofﬂie Parties (such extension not to exceed ﬁﬁeen
(15) Days), which ageemmt‘shall not be unreasonably withheld.
14.10 Ekspert tam tsyinatim alqldan some qirx has (45) Gﬁn (V9 ya tatbiq 14.10 If Lhe Expert does not render adetermination Within forty-ﬁve (45)
cdildiyi halda, alums (60) Gin) mﬁddatinds qsrarmi meczsa, bu Maddads Days (or sixty (60) Days, if applicable) ofhis ﬁnal appointment, then ifthe
tcsvir edilmis prosedura qaydalanna Infrvaﬁq clamq, Tsrsﬂar raziliq 91d: Parties so agree, another Expert shall be appointed pursuant to the
edarlerse, basqa Ekspert tsyin edilir. Bela tayinat qsbul alundugu andan procedure described in this Article and, on acocptance of such
awalki Ekspert Tsrsﬂer ﬁeﬁn mccbmi sayila bilscsk V3 yeni Ekspertin appointment, the appointmlmt of the original Expert shall cease unless,
tclimatlsmun daysndmlmasrm hazards tutacaq bu sancdds mﬁayyan edilmis prior to the date when the new Expert accepts his appointment, the original
qerann: Vere bilmazsa, 0mm tsyinah yeni Ekspertin isyinatuu qsbul mssi Expert shall have rendered iris determination hereunder, in which case
tarbtindan 51169 xstm  such determination wall be binding on the Parﬁes and the instructions of
the new Expert shall be withdrawn
14.11 Ekspertin qaran Temﬂcr ﬁgiin yelcun vs macbun' snyilir vs: (a) bela 14.11 The Expert‘s determination shall be ﬁnal and binding on the Parties
qcrarda ﬁaktlarm ifadssinde maddi yanhsliqlara yol verilmesi v: ya Ekspertin and shall not be subject to arbitration hereunder save in the event of either:
aciq-aydm sahvinin aks olunmas; (b) Ekspertin ziddiyyetlilik yamdan mﬁvsﬁq (a) a material mistake of fact or manifest error by the Expert; (h) ﬁiilurc by
maraq v9 ya vszifalari apiqlamaga mﬁyssssr olmamasr; (c) Madde 14.2. (d) the Expert to disclose any relevant conﬂicting interest or duty; (c) breach
m V? 43


paragraﬁnda sézﬁ gedsu malasmamn Ekspert tersﬁndsn pozulmaSI; Va ya (6) by the Expert ofthe covenant speciﬁed in Article 142(6); or (d) fraud.
ﬁnldaq smellednin has vennssi hallmndan basqa digs: bulimia bu SGHQdQ
ssassn arbitraja verilmir.
14le Bu Madda l4-iin mﬂddoalanna asasan mtwaﬁq qaydada. toyin edilmis 14.12 If an Expen duly appointed in accordance with the provisions of
Ekspcrt isini yerins yetirmsk iqtidannda deyildirsa vs ya bels niyyati olmazsa, this Article 14 becomes unwilling or unable to act or determines that he is
yaxud artiq mﬁstsqil olmadigi qanasﬁndcdirss w ya faaliyysti fay-inst aler not, or no longer is, independent or does not in fact act in the matter for
mssalay‘s mﬁvaﬁq deyildiiso, 14.2»ci Maddsds tssvir edilen ptosedur which he is appointed, then another Expert shall be appointed pursuant to
qaydalanna uygnn olamq hasqa Etspert fayin edilirl the procedure described in Article 142‘
Min Tamﬂsrdsn her biz-i bu Madde l4-ﬁn heyata keeililmasi ils bagli 14,13 Bach Party shall bear the costs and expenses of all lawyers,
xidmatlerindan istifade etdiyi hﬂquqsﬁnasiar, msslshsteilar, sshidlsr ve advisers, witnesses and employees retained by such Party in connection
smokdaslara qekilsn mmlori iiz hesabina titlsyirl Eksperﬁn fealiyyati ii: bngh with the operation ofthis Article 14‘ The 0053 and expenses ofthe Expert,
xsrclsr, o cﬁmlsden, onun qarar Vern-195i i1; elaqsdar katiblik v: inzibatgiqu, including his secretarial and administrative costs and expenses, and any
else: (is tshkim edilmis mastsqu maslehatqi xidmstlarina eskilseek xsrcleri independent advisers to the Expert retained by the Expert in connection
yanhayan olmq Taraﬂsrin her biri 5dsyir; Tsraﬂaxdsn her hansi biri Ekspexts with a determination, shall be borne oneehalf by each Party; Failure of
aid bels xarclari Bdsya bilrnadiyi taqdirda, hamin Taier bu Sazisi 90mins eiﬂier Party to pay such costs and expenses of the Expert shall be a breach
hesnb edilin of this Ageemenz by such Party.
14.14 Ekspertin arbitr hesab edilmir vs 0, ekspert olaraq, éz qsranni verir. 14.14 The Expert shall not be deemed an arbitrator but shall render his
1996 i1 iarbdi Arbih'aj haqqmda Qanunun mﬁddaalan v2 arbin'nj mshksma determination as an expcrL and the provisions of the Arbitration Act 1996
prosesins aidiyysu' ohm qanunlar Eksperts, onun qoraima v9 ya hale qeraan and the laws relating to arbitration shall not apply to the Exyert or his
qahul edilmssi prosedurasma samil edilmir. determination or the procedure by which he reaches his determination,
14.15 Bu Mead: 14—ds basqa cﬁr mﬁsyyen olundugu hal istisna olrnaqla, 14.15 Except as otherwise provided in this Article 14, the Expert's
Tensile! Ekspertin gamma riayst etmslidirlsr v: Tatsﬂsrdsn her hansr biri determination shall be complied with by the Parties, and in the event that
sézii gedsn qarara riayat may; mﬁvsffsq olmndiqda bele ha] Sazisin either Party fails to comply with such determination, such failure shall he
pozulmasi kimi hesab olunur. Hat biz Teraf itaatsizlik gastaran diger Tsrsﬁn deemed to be a breach of this Agreement, Either Party may apply to any
Eksperﬁn qamnda qeyd edilan sexier: ems] etmasina macbmi qaydads nail court having jurisdiction for an order to compel the non-oomplying Party
olmnq ﬁgﬁn buna salahiyyetlsri clan mahkarns orqanina miiracist eds bilsr; to comply with the terms of the Expert‘s determination; such application
bcle mﬁraciat xiisusi sardarin vs ya tartaric bagh 6hdeliklarin yerine may include an order for speciﬁc performanoe and/or damages.
yetirilmsa‘ni ehtiva ed: bilsr. #1

W 44


Article 15 - Dispute Resolution
Madda IS — Mibahisalarin holli
Subject to Article 14 with respect to the Expen, any dispute, controversy or
Ekspertla alachar Madda l4—ﬁn mﬁddaalan mum almmaqla, bu Sazisden claim arising out of or in relation to or in connection with rlu's Agreement
imli gelan vs ya onunla, yaxud bu Sazi§ asasmdn heyata kegirilan or the operations carried out under lhis Agreement, including without
smaliyyaﬂarla glaquar her hansr mﬁbahisc, ﬁkir aynlrgl ya ya iddia, o limitation any dispute as to the validity, canstrucn’nn, enforceability or
ciimladan, [akin deyilanlsrla mehdudla§madan bu Sazisjn etrbarlrligr, qurulusu, breach of ibis Agreemeng shall be exclusively and ﬁnally settled by
hﬁquqi qavvasi va ya mﬁddaalanmn pozulrnasr ila alaqadar bar bansr mﬁbahisa arbitration in accordance With the PYOViSiODS 0f ANGIE 263 and Appendix
KBIHPS—nin 26.3~CE Maddssinin vs 6~c1 Qosmasmm mﬁddaalzmna uygun 6 of the ERDPSA, and such provisions are deemed incorporated by
olaraq mlislasna qaydada vs qati surctda arbin tsmﬁmdan hall edilir, V3 bele reference hﬁrein.
mﬁddaalann istinad saklinds bu semda daxll edilruis olmas: hesab edilir.
Article 16~ Warranties and Undertaldngs
Madda 16 — Zamuurlar Va tadhirlar
15.1 Title tn Gas/Seller‘s lndemnigy
161 WWW
Seller hereby warrants and conﬁrms that for Vhe Contract Period:
Sana buuunla zamnnot verir v9 tasdiqleyir 1d, foqavila Miiddati arzinda: ‘
(a) Seller Will a! all Limes (until delivery at the Delivery Point) have
(a) Bu sanada zsason Qazm satisma (Catdinlma Mantaqasina galdmlana full title to sell Gas hereunder and that such Gas will (prior to
qsdsr) tam hﬁququ vardir v9 bu Qaz (Catdmlma Msanssiua delivery at the Delivery Point) be free from all. lions or adverse
gatdmhnamisdan avvsl) 1191’ ham] girov hiiquqlarmdan Va ya ﬁgﬁncﬁ claims of whatsoever nature;
32x5 iddialamidan azaddrr;
(b) Seller will maintain the rights during the Contract Period to
0:) Satin Mﬁqavile Mﬁddati sizinda Q32: Sancmm bu Sazisin sartlarina transport the Gas to the Delivery Points in such quantities, times
amal etmssine $913k yamdan kamiyyatda, vaxtda v9 qiymat and rates as shall enable Seller to comply with the terms of this
manna:le i1: Cardmlrna Mantsqesins qadar 11qu etmslc hﬂququnu Agreement; and
626m: saxlayacaq.
(c) Seller shall indemnify Buyer from any and all costs, losses:
(:2) Satin yuxarldalq zamanstlarin yanks, aldadici yaxucl qeyri—dsqiq damages and expenses that Buyer may incur in connection with
oldugu halda, Alicia: bummla bagli yaraxm bilecak her harm va bﬁtﬁn the above warranﬁes being or becoming untrue, misleading or
xzrclar, itldlar, zarar v: masraﬂardsn azad edacak. inaccurate.
16.2 Buyer’s Indemnity
f”? <f/ 45


16.2 Allcmm Tominau

Buyer hereby Warrants and conﬁrms that for the Cantract Period the Buyer
A1101 buuunla zamanet vexir v; (asdiqlayir ld, Muqavila Mﬁddsti aninda A1101 will maintain the rights during the Contract Period to take delivery of the
Qazm qabul edilmasi Va Ahcmm bu $32151}: 5315mm: ems] amusing aarait Gas and to transport the Gas from the Delivery Points in such quantiﬁes,
yamdan kamiyyatds, vaxtda v9 qiymat mszannalari ila eazdmlmia qazm times and rates as shall enable Buyer to comply with the terms of this
gétﬁxﬁlmasi v9 Catdmlma Mamaqasinden nsql olunmasi ila bagll hﬁquqlarmi Agreement, and Buyer shall indemnify Seller and its Afﬁliates from any
631th saxlaylr v; Alien yuxandalq zamanallaxin yanks, aldadlq yaxud qeyri- and all costs, losses, damages and expenses that Seller or its Affiliates may
dnqiq oldugil halda, Sancml Va 0mm (mag §irk9t1=riui bununla bagli yarzna incur in connection wiﬂa the above warranty being or becoming untrue,
bibch her hens: Va bﬁti'm xerclar, itkilar, zmr va mesmﬂare qmr tazmin misleading or inaccurate Furthermore Buyer warrants and conﬁrms that it
edit. Bundan baeqa, A110: zammat verir Va tasdiqlayir ki, o, Sancmi V? (>an Will indemnify and hold harmless Seller and its Afﬁliates from and against
Ortaq airkatlarini Catdmhna Manmqasindan soma baa vemn hqr hansi v9 any and all loss to the Gas occurring aﬁer the Delivery Points or damage
17min Qaz itkilarlna yaxud Catdmlma Menlaqasiudan some Qazm yetim which may be caused by the Gas aﬂer the Delivery Pcian.
bilacayi zarara qar§1 tazminax Verir Va mesuliyyatdca azad edir,

1643 Mutual Undertaking
16-3 Déglluhlléllirla‘

Both Parties undertake that they shall maintain, or procure maintenance of
Her iki Teraf Qazm (Sahel halmda) sang: verilmasi yaxud (A1101 halmda) all facilities necessary for making available Gas (in the case of Seller) or
qabul edﬂmasi ﬁqﬁn qurgulara zaruxi texnild xidmadn géstadlmasini yaxud taking Gas (in the case of Buyer) to the standard of a Reasonable and
bale teXniki xidmatin gastan'lmasi xidmatindan istifada edilmasini Tadbirli v9 Prudent Person.
Ehtiyatll Saxsin talab etdiy-l standartlam uygun aaldlda ﬁzar'ma gétﬁrﬁrlar.

‘- 5’4 WherWiﬂiE—WE
16.4 Digar Bazanat v9 Zamanaﬂardan lmﬁna

To the ﬁll extent permitted by applicable law, except as expressly stated in
Taraﬂar, qanunla yol verilan bﬁﬂm hallarda, bu Sazisda xﬁsusi olaraq This Ag‘mem: '11: Parties n€$3t6_3ny Other fepfcsmtalion <7! warranty)
gﬁsmnlmis haJlar istisna olmaqla, her banal digar, wall v9 ya alfabi, agiq written or oral» eXPWSS 01' mled-s iDCIUdmg any {Wiesemamﬂ 01
bayan edilan v9 ya nazarda tutulan bayanatlardan Va ya zamanaﬂsrdan, 0 WW {0! merchantability, conformity to samples’ or ﬁtness {0‘ any
cﬁmladan sah§a yaxarhhq, nx'nnunalaxe uygunluq ward hat bans; xﬁsusi partied” purpose»
maqsada mﬁvaﬁqliya dair bayanat yaxud zamanatlardan imtina edirlar.

Vb
,cm
46


Madde 17 — Hﬁquqi Mﬁdaﬁa Vasimlari Article 17 —— Remedies
17.1 Saummn Hﬁ i Mﬁdaﬁa Vasitaleri 171 Sena»: B medias

(a) Ahemm 7.4‘eﬁ Maddeys  olmq Minimum Ilik Hscmlara gate (a) Buyer’s payment for the Minimum Annual Quantities pursuant to
cdscayi édanislar mﬁvaﬁq Mﬁqavila Hi aminds Allemm Qaz'l qabul eds Anicle 7.4 shall be in M1 satisfaction cfall or any rights or remedies
Mlmmasi ila bagh Sanctum her bans: hllquqlanm vs hﬁquql mﬁdaﬁe (including, without prejudice to The generality of the foregoing,
vasitahrini (0 Medal, yuxanda qeyd edilsn (Emmi milddaalara x3191 damages or equitable remedies) of Seller in respect of Buyer‘s
yetirmsdsn, zanrlari vs odalet pnnsipi lizm 1nehk2mad2 mﬁdaﬁe failure to take Gas within the relevant Contract Yeah
hﬁquqlmm) tam temin etmalidir,

(b) Teraﬂax Madds 17.1 (a)-d3 qeyri edilen mﬁddealm Saucmm hazards (b) The Parties accept the provisions of Am‘cle 17.1(3) as a genuine and
tutulmus hallarda mam qala bilacayi lawlerin hsqiqi v‘a mﬁvaﬁq ilkin “asomme PW‘ESﬁmale 0f 1h" damages likeb’ ‘0 be “fitted by
qiymetlandirilmssi kimi qabul cdirler. Tamﬂar hu Sazisi Sanelnm mamz Seller in the circumstances provided for. This Agreement has been
qaldlgx fakﬁld itkilarln Madde 17‘1(a)-da sézﬁ gedsn 6dsni$d9u 90): vs made by the Parties with the knowledge that the actual damage
ya az ola hileceyini bilemk baglayular‘ suffered by Seller may he more or lass than the payment referred to

in Article 17.1(a). V
17.2 Almhm Hﬁgugi Mﬁdaﬁa Vasitaly‘ 17.2 Buyer’s Remedies

(a) Qazm Kesir Qm bera‘car ohm hecmi i1: elaqadar Madde 10.5-9 asasen (a) The HPPHCW'UD 0}" 316 Shortfall Gas Price pumiam to Anidc 19-5 in
Kesir Qaz Qiyanﬁxﬁn mthiqi Sahclmn qaz‘l qeytl edilcn 112de v9 "Slim Ofa qua-“my 0f G35 equal to 315 Shcrtfan Gas $11311 be 133 fun
gfmda tachiz eds bilmemasi ile bagn Ahcmm her hansz v3 bﬁtfm satisfaction of all or any lights or remedies (includine “arbour
hﬁquqlznm v: hﬁquqi mﬁdaﬁasi vasiteloﬁni (o climledan, yuxanda “5105593 “3 Tm Emerali‘)’ 0f the forcgomgx damages or equﬁable
qeyd edilan ﬁmumi mﬁddaalara x9121 yetirmadsn, mrlarixﬁ vs edalst maladies) 0f Buyer in 155W“ 0f SCHCF’S failum ‘0 make available
prlnsipi ('m-a mahkamada mﬁdaﬁe hﬁquqlamu) tam lamin etmelidin 5119}! quanﬁty Ofaas 0“ 94°11 DaY-

(h) Tmﬂer Madds 17.2(a)»da qeyd edilan mﬁddaalmn Allcmm nznrd: (b) The Pmes have agrﬁed the WOWSiOﬂS 0f Ankle 172(3) 35 a genuine
mmlmus hallmdamgmz gala bilacsyi 19mm hgqiqi V9 mﬁvaﬁq ind); and reasonable pro-estimate of the damages hkely to he suffered by
qiymatlaudidlmssi oldnguna razdxrlar. Teraﬂar bu Sazlsl Allunm Buyer in “16 dimstanfﬁs PmVldbd for. This Agreﬁmim has bcm
maruz qaldlgx fakn'ki it]QO Madda 17.7.(a)—da sézﬁ gedsn adenisdan made by the Panes With me knowledge that the actual damage
(Aux Va ya a: Ola bilmyiui bﬂmk baglayular. suﬁ'erod by Buyer may be more or less than the payment provided for

in Article 17.2(a).
2927 V/ 4?


Mada? 18 — Salish: Kim Article 18 - Termination
18.1 Sazigin xilarm . 18.1 Tmninaticn
Bu Sazi§9 Mﬁqavil: Miiddminin sonuneu Gﬁm‘z gees yam] xitam verilecakclir This Agreement will terminate at. midnight on the last Day of the Contract
(“Ximm tarixi”). Period (“Termination Date”).
182 Sahel tamﬁndsn sazig‘n vaxtmdm QWQI ximml
18.2 Early Termination by Seller
Saucmm, Alia taraﬁndan he: bans: on iki (12) ayllq mildth arzinda
mﬁbahisasiz Ath hmb-ﬁkturalm 351-: ﬁg (3) Va daha 90x tam v9 vaxnnda Seller, upon Written notice to Buyer, shall be entitled, notvmbstanding ﬂue
lidsnig edilmamasi hahnda, Madda 3.34111 mﬁddealanna baxmayamq, Alxuya pmVisions of Articles 33, to terminate this Agreement in the event that
yazrlrbildiris vermeklabu Sazi§a xitzm Vermakhﬁququ vaxdir, Buyer fails to make three (3) or more full and timely payments for
undisputed Momth Invoices during any twelve (l 2) month period.
18.3 A1151 mﬁngn 9mm} Vaxtmdan awal xjtaml
18.3 E:ng Tenninaiion by Bum
Alicmm, Samar taraﬁndan Mandela 9.1 v; 9.2.9 uygun olaraq Fors major V9 ya
mmﬂd xidmstden farqli ssbablsra gar: otuz (30) when 6611 arzinds Gﬁndalik Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 3.3, Buyer, upon written notice
Mﬁqavila Hacmimn an azz alli (50) ﬂuid gatdmla bilmadjkda, Madda 3.341;; to Seller. shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement in the event mat
mﬁddaalanna baxmayamq, Sammya yalex bildirl§ vermskln bu Sazi;i Selierhas failed to deliver a1. least ﬁﬁy percent (50%) ofthe Dally Contact
dayandmmq huququ vardu. Quanﬁty for a period of thirty consecutive (30) days, for reasons other than
Force Majeure or maintenance in accordance with Articles 91 and 9.2.
18.4 glava 6hdal'lg an); plasmas:
18.4 No Funher Obligations
Bu Sazi§a xitam veriﬁdiyi andan vs scum bu Sazigin $9111an esasen Saucmm
Qaz tsqdim emmk ﬁgﬁn hen bir slave ﬁhdaliyi olmur, Va Alrcmm be]; Q32; From and aﬁer the termination of Lhis Agreement, Seller shall have no
qzbul musk v: 66:11:15 ctran €391“er hoe bir slave Shdsliyi olmur. Yuxanda further Obligation to make Gas available, and Buyer shall have no further
deyﬂsnlam baxmayaraq, her harm sabahe gal-9 bu Sazisin xitami minds}: obligation to accept and pay for such Gas, pursuant to the terms of this
qabaq amala galan v; ya 629nm; gBtﬁrﬁlmﬁs bar bans: {Shdelildgra yaxud Await. Notwithstanding “15 “$80133: any ‘maﬁon Of this
mosuliyyaba x2191 gsﬁnnsdsn ba$ ven'r, Agreement for whatsoever reason shall be without prejudice to any
obligation or liabilities arising or incurred prior to the date oftetmi'nation
i411 V 48


18.5 Uzadilma mﬁddati 185 Extension Period
Tereﬂar Dérdimcﬁ (4—cﬁ) Miiqavila ilinin birinci rdbii eninda Sazisin Dun'ng ﬂue ﬁrst quarter ofthe fourth (4th) Contract Year, the Parties shall
Mﬁqavilo mﬁddaﬁnden slave daha bog (5) i1 miiddeﬁne miimkﬁn amnlmaszm meet to discuss Che possible exicnsion of this Agreement beyond the
mﬁzakilo etmak ﬁcﬁn génlsﬁrlot Contract Period for an additional ﬁve (5) years
Madda l9 7 Bildirislar Article 19 — Notices
19,1 Xﬁsusi olaraq mﬁeyyan edilmis hallo: istisna olmaqla, bﬁu‘in bildirisler, 19.1 Exoept as otherwise speciﬁcally provided, all notices, requests,
mﬁmcietler, talebler, hesab-ﬁakturalar, hesahaﬂar ya ya bu Sazisin her bans-i demands, invoices, statements or other communications authorized or
mﬁddeasma 361: Tenﬂor arasmda yol vex-lien vo (slob olunan digar melumat required between the Parties by any of the provisions of this Agreement,
mdbudilolori yalei sokilda, ingilis dilindo olmah vs aoxson v: ya kin-yer shall be in Writing, in English and delivered in person or by courier service
xidmati ﬁlo, yaxud do yazih mslumaﬂmn tam ﬁuirﬁlmosi hated; yazﬂi tssdiq or by any electronic means of transmitting written mwnunicadons which
taqdim edon claim-on ﬁtﬁriicﬁ vasitalar kdmakliyi bale Tereﬂaﬁn asaglda provides written conﬁrmation of complete mmission, and addressed to
gSsterllmis ﬁnvanlanna oazdinlir. Sifahi molumat mﬁbadilasi bu Sazisin such Parties asdcsignated below. Oral communication does not constitute
meqsedleri baxzmmdan bildiris togldl etmir vo asagida verilmis ialefon notice for purposes of this Agreement, and telephone numbers for the
nonunion yalmz elveriglilik ﬁeﬁndﬁr. Bu Sazisin her hens: mﬁddeasz ssasmda Parties are listed below as a matter of convenience only, The originating
mahkama prosesini haslatrnaq ﬁoﬁn verilon hildiris yalmz bu bildirisin notice given under any provision of this Agreement shall be deemed
imvanlzndlgi Torsf onu qnbul oldide catdmluu; hesah edilix v9 verilan helo delivered only when received by the Party to whom such notice is directed,
bildiriso oavab olara/q halo Tereﬁn her hausi bildiris vermosi dcﬁn vaxt and the lime for such Party to deliver any notice in response to such
bildinsin qebul odildiyi lmixden hesablamr. lkinci vo hat hansi cavah bildirigi originating notice shall run from the date the originating notice is received,
yalmz qebul edildikde catdinlmis hash edih'r. Bu Sazisin maqsodlori The second or any responsive notice shall be deemed delivered when
baximmdan “qabul edilmis" dedide bﬂdin'sin toqdim adilacak Taraﬁn bu received. For purposes hereof, ‘Teceivod” shall mean actual delivery ofthe
Madda 19'da gdsunlmis ﬁnvamna faktiki oatdmlmasl base dﬁsﬁlﬁti notice to 1hr, address of the Party to be notiﬁed speciﬁed in accordance
Tmﬂsrdsn her  istonilon vaxt 62 iinvamm dsyismok ve/yaxud bﬁtﬁn with this Article 19. Each Party shall have the right to change its address
bole bildirislorin sumdarinin, digor Teran yazilx malu'mat Vermokle, home at any time and/or designate that copies of all such notices be directed to
ﬁnvanda basqa sexso ydneldilmasini trey-in etmok hﬁququ vardir. another person at another address, by y'ving written notice thereof to ma
other Paﬁy.

ARDNS: SOCAR:

Azorbaycan Respublikasmm Doylet NBR Sirkati - State Oil Company oleie Republic of Azerbaijan

Azor‘uaycan RewulnlilcamJ Bald schari, 73 Neﬁohilar avenue

49
5o 4/


AZlOOO, Neﬁeﬂar pMi 73. Baku AZ 1000 Republic of Azerbaijan
Fm: (+994 12) 493 64 92 Facsimile: (+994 12) 493 64 92
Tel: (+994 12) 492 07 45 Telephone: (+994 12) 492 ()7 45
Kima: Prezident Attention: The President
EEOC: EEOC:
Ballet Energy Operating Company Limited Balm Energy Operating Company Limited
Azerbaycan Respublikasx, B310 esharl, 24, H. Alier :11,
H. 81ier kﬁe. 24‘ Baku, Republic of Azerbaijm
Faks: (499412) 497 10 05 Facsimile: (+99412) 497 10 05
Tel: (+99412) 497 88 66 Te1ephoue: (+9941?) 497 88 66
Kima: Prezidem Attention: The President
Madda 13, 14, 15 Va 18-12 alaqsdar bﬁtﬁn mesalsler hemqiniu bu ﬁnvanlara Any matters related to Articles 13, 14, 15 and 18 shall be additionally
g'o'nderilir: copied in: _
Bahm' Energy Limited ' Balm: Energy Limited
c/o Greenﬁelds PeircIeuu-l Corporation do Greenﬁelds Petroleum Corporation
211 Highland Cross, Suite 227 211 Highland Cross, Suite 227
Houston, TX 77073 Houewn, TX 77073
USA USA
Faks: (+1 832) 2340823 Facsimile (+1 832) 234—0823
19.2 Mada: 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 v9 11 asasmda A1101 wmﬁndan Sauciya verilmssi 19.2 Notices required to be given by Buyer to Seller under Articles 5, 6,
(slab olunanbildin'513r Sans! admdan asagidaki ﬁnvanlarda BOEC—e verildikds 7, S, 9, and 11 will be deemed given to Seller if given to BEOC on behalf
Saumya verilmis, hesab edilix: of Seller at the fo1lowing address:
Baker Energy Operating Company Limith Balm matey Operating Company Limin
Ambaycau Respubukw, Bale gahari, 24=H»A1‘YCVVS‘I~ ..
. Baku, Repubhc of Azerbaijan
H. 811er my. 24, - ~ . .
A . Facsimile. (799412) 497 10 05
We 099412) 497 1° 03 Telephone: (+99412) 497 88 55
50
M *2”


T :1: (469412) 497 88 66 Attention: The President ‘»
Kime:Pre21’dent l
Madda 5, e, 7, s, 9 v9 11 ssasmda Saucx taraﬁndan ARDNS-m veﬁknasi Caleb Notices required to be given by Seller to SOCAR under Articles 5, 6, 7, 8,
olunan bildirisla! ARDN$~a verilacakdiry 9, and l 1 will be given to SOCAR
Madda 20 — Masuliyyaﬁn mahdudla§dmlmasl Article 20 — Limitation 0f Liabilities ‘

20‘] Sancmm mssullyyan‘ 20.1 Seller’s Liability

Bu 5:2in xﬁsusi olaraq g5sterilmi§ hallmszisna olmaqla, Saum,har bans: bit Save as expressly provided in this Agreement. Seller shall not have any
galdldz mﬁqaviledan, hﬁquq pozunmsundan (o cﬁlnlgdgﬁ sahlgnkaﬂlq ya ya liability to Buyer in respect of all or any loss, damage, cost and/or expense
faaliyystsizlik, yuud A1161 qar§1smda qammla mﬁzyyan adilmis abdaliyiu Suﬁered by Buyer whatsoever and howsoever arising whether in contract,
pcmﬂmasl), qanundan {1311' galarak, yaxud bama cit, bu Sazislc bagll v9 ya, tort (including negligence or omission or breach of statutory duty to
0mm ytrlna yeﬁrilmssi yaxud yetirilmemesi ila slaqadar Allcmm msmz Buyer), at 13W 0? DthIWiSe in Wmection With 0‘ 3’35ng 0‘“ 0f 01' in
(131cm her hansl Va hﬁiﬁn itldlara, antlers, xsrc va/yaxud mosrsﬂera gﬁra Iﬁlﬁﬁun mlhel7ﬁ¥f<>m13m==01'13011178301111311473Oﬂb‘is Agreement-

Alm qamsmda he: hm: masuliyyet damn A

202 Almmn mosuliﬂati 20.2 Buyer'sLiabilig

Bu Sazi$da xﬁsusi olzraq gastarilznis hallar istisna olmaqla, clean 63 Allcmm Save as ex171'35513’ Provided in this Agreement, Buyer 511a“ mt have any

bu Suzi; ﬁzn Sammya borclu oldugu Bdsnisleri Vaxlmda eds bilmediyl liability Y0 5311” in T551933 of 5110? my 1055: damage» 005‘ and/0‘ expense
hallardan basqa, Alma, hat hansx lair seldlde mﬁqavilgdsu, hﬁquq suﬁfemd by Seller whatsoevex and howsoever arising whether in contract,
pozuntusmmdan (o mimladan sshlankarllq vs ya faaliyyatsizlik, yaxud Sane: tort (inaluding “$51ng 01' $113350“ 0r W011 Of gammy d‘ItY ‘0
qargsmda qammla mﬁsyyan edilmis dealiyiu pozulmasx), qanundan mu Seller), at law or othemisc in connection will: or arising out of or in
gslctek, yaxud basqa cﬁx, bu Sazisla bagh va ya 0mm yerlna yetirilmssi yaxud ﬁlalion t0 the pﬂfomance 0r Don-1931fme 03" this Agmwt unless
yeﬁrilmsmssi ila alaqadar Saucmm mamz qalchg) 1m balm vs bﬁtﬁn itkilam, the Buyer Maui‘s in the timely paymem of what it was to ﬁne Seller
urethra, xaxc ve/yaxud mamﬂem gﬁra Sauemm qamsmda hat hansl under this Agreement

mamliyyst dasmm'.

20.3 Dolaﬂ zawrler 20.3 W

Bu Sazisdsn imli galaxek v; ya bu 832$: bail] yaxud onun ssasmda hayara With 165W“ to inﬁrm 01‘ CWSe‘luenﬁal 1055 “15.1% ‘3‘“ 0f 0‘ in

5‘1
547/ V


keyirilan fsaliyyatlsr naticesinds man birbasa olmayan V9 ya dolayt itldlerls connection with this Agreement or any activitiw ﬂiereimden
alaqsdar olaraq, bu Saﬁsin eksini ifada edon hsr hansi mﬁddaalarma notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in the Agreement, the
baxmayaraq, Tamﬂsr, her; bit halda rm‘iqaviladsn, huquq pommtusundan irali Parties shall not be liable whether in contract, tort or otherwise and
gslan ya ya basqa cﬁr, yaxud da her hansi sshlsnkzrliga hmcmayaraq; hor hams: rcgardlms of any negligence under any circumstances whatsoever for any
hirbasa olmayan va ya delay) itkilars gar: masuliyyst dasimir. Bu Madds 203- indirect or consequential loss For the purposes of this Article 203, the
ﬁn meqsodloxi baxnmndan “hirlzvasa olmayan v: ya dolayi itki" ifadssi her expression "indirect or consequential loss" shall mean any indirect or
harm hirhasa olmayart vs ya dolayi has veren itki Va ya Zarar demekdh‘, vs bu wnsexluential loss or damage, and shall include but not limited to, inability
ifadaya, deyilanlarla mahdudlasmaqu, Qazi sata bilmamak, Qazm sattsinda to sell Gas, loss of or delay in the sale of Gas or loss of proﬁts.
itki Va ya gecikma, yaxud manfssﬁn itirilrnssi daxildir.
20.4 Bu sazisd: sksini tapmis her hansi mastiliyystla hagli mahdudiyyetlar 204 Any limitations or exclusions of liability contained in this Agreement
vs ya lstisnalar bu Sazisin her hansi xitarmndan sonra da qiivvssini saxlaytr. shall survive any termination of this Agreement howsoever arising,
Madda 21 — Hﬁquqlann ﬁtﬁrﬁlmasi Article 21 v Assignment
2“  21.1 Assignment to Afﬁliate
Manda 21.341 nears alaniq, Tamﬂsrdon heg: biri bu Sazis 621'; oz htiquq Va Subject tn Article 21.3, no Party may transfer its rights anti obligations
6hdsliklarini digzr Taraﬁn qahaqcadan yeah ramligi ohnadan ﬁqﬁncﬁ tarsfa under this Agreement to anythird party without the prior written consent
an: bih-naz (bale maqu asasstz olaraq saxlana, gecikdirila va ya sartlandirila of the other Party (such consent not to he unreasonably withheld, delayed
bills-:271 bu sartla ld, hazards tutulmus hiiquqlan qahul edsn tsraf miivaﬁq or conditioned, provided that the proposed transferee has adequate
maliyys, texnilci v9 hﬁquqi statusa vs Miiqavils muddztinin bﬁo‘m hissasi ﬁvﬁn ﬁnancial, technical and legal status and ability to perform the obligations to
Btﬁrﬁlan éhdelikleri yerins yetimiek qabiliyyetina malik Olson). Yuxanda he transferred for the Whole ofthe Contract Period). Notwithstanding the
deyilsulan baxmaqu, her bir Taraf bu Saa's ﬁrm hi3qu v: 6hdalildarini, foregoing, any Party may mfer its rights and obligations under this
digsr Tsnﬁn yanh ranth olrnadan, Ortaq sirkata attire hilsr (Va bole Ortaq Agreement, to an Afﬁliate (and such Afﬁliate may itself subsequently
sirkzt 51 névhesinda hiiquqlart basqa Ortaq sirkats Emits v9 ya havala eds assign and transfer to another Afﬁliate) without the Written consent ofthc
bilar). Hﬁquqlarm 0:131; sitter: {iﬁirﬁlrnesi mam, titﬁran Tomf hﬁquqlan other Patty. In the event of a transfer to an Afﬁliate, the transferringme
qabui edanla birlikds v9 aynhqda bu Sazis Eter Ghdaliklerina gar: tam shall remain fully liable jointly and severally with the transferee in relation
masuliyyst dasimaqda lian edit. Her hanst hﬁquqlan qahul edan tamﬁn to its obligations under this Agreement Prior to any transferee Afﬁliate
Ortaq sirkat olmastna xitam verildikda, hela Ortaq sirk'at bu Sazis ﬁns 51 ceasing to be an Afﬁliate, such Afﬁliate shall retransfer its rights and
hﬁquq Va Bhdaliklarini illdn Tarsfo geri qay‘tat‘mahdir, obligations under this Ageemcnt hack to the original Party,
54% «IV 52


21.2 Hﬁguglmn 9"tijrﬁlmasinin gabul edilmsi 2142 Ammnw of Assigme-nt
Madd: 21343 1192912 alamq vs ona xalal getirmadan bu Madde 21 asasmda he; Subject, and without prejudice, to Article, 213, no transfer under this
bir hﬁquqi ﬁtﬁrﬁhm, hiiquqlan 6mm v9 hﬁquqlan qabul edan tsmf ln‘iquqi Article 21 shall be effective unless and until the transfemr and transferee
Glﬁn-m etruoym Tamﬁn asele rabbi ila hiiquqlan qabul edan terafm bu Salish-l shall enter into such agreement or agreements as the non—umsfaﬁng Party
mﬁvaﬁq Temﬂ kimi adlaudmlnm sakild; bu Sazisin 59111915 i1: ﬁzarin: shall reasonably require whereby the lransferee agrees to be bound by the
Shdslik gﬁu‘imiays mala§drgx saziﬁi yaxud sazi§19ri imzalamayma qadar, terms ofthis [kg-cement as if named as the ralevaxit Party herein.
hiiquq'l qﬁvvaya malfk deyill
2L3 Mali 1: (ﬁrm: 21.3 mm
1311 Madda 21in hm; bit muddoasi Tamﬁn vs (mun omaq $irkatlerinjn Nothing contained in this Articlc 21 shall prohibit aParty or its Afﬁliates
maﬁyyzlegdililmosi ila alaqada: taminat vermasi \‘igﬁn bu Sazi§ flue ﬁmm mortgagiug, pledging, or otherwise encumberng its rights and
hiiquqlanm va menfbau'ni girov qoymagi, amine vermsyi W ya hot hansi beneﬁts under this Ageement to a third party in order to provide security
ba§qn §ekild2 borcla yﬁklemayi qadagan eds bilmsz, 0 52111: kl: relating to ﬁnance, provided that:
(a) bele Taref bu Sazis ﬁx: bﬁtﬁn Vazifelarim gEra V9 bale girov (a) such Party shall remain liable for all of its obligations under
hﬁququ ilo elaqadar 5hdalik damnaan davam edecakdjr, this Agreement and relating to such sscuriiy interest;
(b) glrov hﬁququ bu 8321'; '32:: digs: Tatsﬂsrin hﬁquqlanna aydm (b) the security interest shall be expressly subordinated to the
§sldld9 taba cdilmalidir, v3 rights of the other Parties under dais Agreement; and
(c) bale Torafhor hansl bale y‘rov hﬁququnun bu Sazigin mﬁddealamia (c) such Party shall ensure that any such security intercst shall
x2191 geﬁnnadan ifada edilmasini tamin etmalidir. be expressed 10 be without prejudice to the pmvlsions of
this Ayeernent.
Yuxanda deyikmlari mehdudlasdirmadau, Saucmm (v9 0mm 0mg Without limitatiun to the foregoing, the Seller (and its Aililiates) will have.
ﬁrkztlariniu) bu Sazi$ ﬁzta hﬁquqlanm, Ahcmm msdlqi olmzdan, KBIHPBS the right to assign its rights under this Agreement without the Buyer‘s
ils alaqadar Saucmm (Va ya (mun Ortaq sirkatlaxinin) fsaliyyaﬁni approval in favour of a ﬁnancial insﬁmtion ﬁnancing or reﬁnancing the
maliyyelsadimn v: w ’Lakrar maliyyzlasdimn maliyya ta§1cilat1mn xeyrlne Seller‘s (or its Afﬁliate’s) activities related to the ERDPSA, The Buyer
gﬁzasta gen-Mk hﬁququ vardir. Aha bela maliny mkilau taraﬁndan talsb undertakes to Sign any acmwlsdgemenz of assignment necessary or
olunan bela hﬁquqlann Gﬁrulmssini ba§a gatdmuaq udm hﬁquqlann (o desirable to perfect the assignment of such rights that may be requestad by
ci‘imlsdan v9 deyilanlsm mshdudla§mayaraq, cumin-lam tutma yc'inaltmak such ﬁnancial institution (including, withoutlimjtaﬁon, step-infights).
53
5m 4/


hﬁququnun) ﬁtﬁrillmasim tasdiq edscsk zeruri Va ya arzu alunan har hansl
somdi imzalamag ﬁhdasine gétﬁrfm
Article 22 - Confidentiality
Madds 22 # Konﬁdensialllq
22,1 Agglanma vermsya razmg 22.1 Consent to Disclose
Tamﬂarden hot; bin hazxrkl Sazisin mﬁddsalanm Va somlarini vs ya hazula No Party shall have ﬁre right to disclose the terms and conditions of this
Sazisla elaqedar elda alumnus bar-bans: malumau (“Konﬁdensial Mslumat”) Agreement or any information (“Conﬁdential Information”) received
digar Taraﬂsﬁn qahaqcadan yazﬂr razrh§1 olmadan, bu Sazigin xitzmundan hereunder to any third party prior to the third anniversary of the
soma ii; ilkeqmsmis har—hansr ilqﬁncﬁ wrath agqlaya bilmaz. termination of this Agrecmem, without the prior written consent of the
other Pardm,
22.2 $435le edilzn agglamnlar 222 Exemgted Disclosures
(a) Madds 22.2(b)‘ni ngzara alarm, Madds 22.14 ssasen rathq almaq (a) Subject to Article 222$), the consent requirements under Article
talablari Konﬁdensial Molumamn aaagldakr gsxslara vs anagrdnkr 2271 shall not apply to the disclosure of Conﬁdential Information;
hallarda waam-nasma ratbiq olunmur:
(i) Hat-bans) Tamﬁn her-bans: direktonma, sslahiyyaﬂi gaxsina, (i) to any director, ofﬁcer and employee, shareholder or
igqislne, sahmdanna v: ya Onaq sirkatins; Alﬁliate of any Party;
(in Her-bans: Taraftnraﬁndan pegakar qisminda call: 01mm saxslars; (ii) to persons professionally engaged by any Party:
(iii) Taraf v3 ya onun Orth $irkatl=ri ﬁzerinds yurisdlksiyasl clan (iii) to any applicable Govcmment, leg’slaﬁvs, administrative or
Hﬁkumag qanunvarici, 1ch v3 mshkama orqanlanmn rasmilsrina judicial authority or any relevant stock exchange authority
Va ya aidiyyati clan birjalann mimaysndalarina o halda kl, harnin having jurisdiction over a Party or any Afﬁliane, to the extent
Tsmfdsn Konﬁdensial Malumalm acrqlanmasr rasn'u' that such Party is mqulred or requesred by such amthorlty to
nﬁmayandslar tsraﬁndzm xahis v: ya 1913b olunur‘ disclose the Conﬁdential Information;
(iv) Tareﬂsrln ameliyyarlarm mallyyalasdjrilmasi ila bugh har-hansr (iv) to any lending or other ﬁnancial institution in connection
kreditvenn v2 ya digar maliny mkilatlara; withme ﬁnancing of a Party's operations;
5:44 G V 54


(v) Tamﬂan'n potensial, diln'lst hﬁquqi Varislerin: V: ya investorlaxma (v) to hem ﬁdc potential assignees ofor investors in a Party; and
v9;

(vi) Tatbiq 011mm har—hansx Qamma uygun clam. (vi) under any applicable Law.

(b) Madda 22.2(3).da nugde mmlmu§ 13535313: asagldahm “3 Us) The exemption provisions of Article 212.2(3) shall be conditional
$ad9ndln'lir: on:

(i) qulanma vet-119:1 her-hams) 59x5 mfmasibotind: malumata clan (i) any (133105015 Of Conﬁdwﬁal Infmmaﬁon by 3 Party being
ehﬁyac bamnundan barn: gamdm—na quiﬁnda Kanﬁdgnsial justiﬁed on a reasonable needdo-know basis on the part of each
Malumaun agquanmasxg person to whom disclosure is made;

(ii) Madds 22.2(a)(i) tslbiq olunduqda, malumau agquayau Tarafhar (ii) in the 0553 “f Hilde 22-2096), ‘ha dlSCIOSing PW “Sing
bi: mﬁmkiin irnkandm isﬁfadg muck]; hymn Gunslide ki, reasonable endeavours to Emma That each person to Whom such
mslumat her bale bit 52x59 aqlqlaudlqda, hernia gaxs hawk; $501033“ W35 made maintains the Infomaﬁon Conﬁdemial as
Madda 22min (alableri ila bagh clan 59x5 lg‘mi hemln malumah ifthalperson were bound by the provisions of this Article 22;
konﬂdensial saxlayacaq. ’

(iii) the persons referred to in Article 22,2(a)(ii), (iv) and (v) being

(m) Madda 222mm), (iv) v: (v)-da glistsrilmi§ pxslar aglqlayan reqm’md by the disclosing Party to ﬁrst enter into a written
Tanﬁn Lalabi ila aqquayan Terreﬂa yath sazis baglayaraq bu agmemm‘ Wi‘h the diSdOSing Pliny ‘0 be bound by
Madda 22419 Veﬁlmi; mﬁddgalardan a1 gamikda olmayan conﬁdentiality provisions that are no less stringent man those
konﬁdensial mﬁddsalan ilo ﬁzz)an ﬁhdolik gétﬁra cakdix. “mailed in this Amide 23.

22,3 Agg mﬁlacigtlg: 223 Public Announccmgm

a) Tstbiq 011mm hﬁquqlavs ya harhmsn haldmiyyat orqam Va ya birja (a) N0 Party Shall issue or milk: any Public monument 0’3
taraﬂndsn taleb olunan, vs ya. yayundan qabaq digar Taraﬂam taqdim statement regarde this Agfecmmt. except as Tequifw by
olundugu vs onla: tareﬁnden qebul olundugu ballardm bugs, applicable law or any legal 0! WEUWOYY mummy 01' “Wk
Tamﬂardan hm; biri hazxrk: Sazisle alaqadar ictimaiyyate her-bans: clan “Change Mammy, “53mm $1011 mouncemmt or Statement
v: yabsyaml Vera bilmsz; having been submittcd to and approved by the other Parties in

advance of dissemination.
M
<// 55


(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article 22 each Party
\ b) Hazll’kl 22-ci maddsnin har~hansx digar miiddsalanna baxmayaraq) may make disclosures of summaries of a general nature relating to
qiymotli 1(3er ﬁzm analitiklsnn gérﬁslaxinda, illik hesabatlarda, this Agrwment which are customarily or routinely described or
isqilarin ve sshmdarlann qezeﬂerinds, jumallannda v: 5311‘ nesrlarda reported in securities analysrs’ meetings, annual reports, employee
snanevi vs ya bi: qayda olaraq aks vs ya memza alum, hawk: Sazis: and stockholder newsletters, magazines and the likel and which
aid clan  malumA’t xaraktari daslyan v9 agqlaumasi kommersiya disclosures are not comcrciallyvsensiﬁve.
baximmdan whlﬁkeli olmayan icmallan her lair "1‘9er agiqlaya bile:
22.4 agli rnﬁlkimt 22.4 Intellectual Propertx
Bu Sazisin hes; bix mi‘xddoasx mﬁvaﬂq agiqlayan Tanﬁn sahib oldug'u v9 ya Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to grant any Party a license,
nazant etdiyi har bans: mévcud Wyn $lncak pat/ant hﬁququ, mﬁsllif hilququ right to use or other right in respect of any existing or future patent,
vs ya. digsr 9qu miilldyyat hiiququ ila bagh bar hanst 1‘9me istifmis erran wpyright, or other intellectual pmpcny right owned or controlled by the
iCazasi, hﬁququ, ymmd digar hﬁquq verrnasi hesab olunmur. relevant disclosing Party,
Madda 23 v Digs? sartlar Article 23 - Miscellaneous
211 Tenzimleﬂ'g' Qanun 23.1 Governing Law
Bu Sazis, masslsni basqa ytuisdiksiyamn qanunlanna aid edacsk bar hansi This Ageemem shall be govemsd by and construed, interpreted and
hﬁquq normasi segimini istisna eunekle Ingiltsranin qanunlan esasmda applied in accordance with the laws of England, excluding any choice of
tsnzimlanir, vs 0116 uygun olxrzq izah cdilir, ssrh olunur vs tatbiq edilir. law rules which would refer the matter to the laws of another jurisdiction
23.2 Dﬁzalig 23.2 Amendment
(a) Bu Subs her hams) (mum bum“ Taraﬂgdn qabaqmd“ yank (a) Each amendment to this Ageamcm shallrsquire the prior written
Wham fabb wk consent of all Parties.
. .. .. x . i. No waiver by any Parry ofitx ﬂyits or remedies under this
(1)) Bar bans; Taraﬁn bu Sans uzra huquqlanndan vs ya huquqr mudaﬁa (b) . . . . .
vasitalarindan imu'na :msi, yam: sakilds tosqu edilmeyana qadar, Agreement shall be bmdmg unless conﬁrmed mwmmg'
eﬁbarh deyilv
ﬂ"! ‘7” 56


23.3 Maddalorin bir-birinden ath-nasi 7.33 chcrabilitv
Bu Sazisin her bir mﬁddaasi bir—biu’ndan ayndar vs ferqlidir, Va agar her bans: Each of the provisions contained in this Agreement shall be severable and
zaman bela mﬁddaalardnn blli vs ya daha coxu etibarsiz, qeyn-qanuni v: ya distinct from one another and if ii any time any one or more such
iddia asasmdan mohr‘um olursa vs ya clan edilirss, belo etibamzliq, qeyri~ provisions is or becomes invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the validity,
qanunilik Va ya iddiz. asasuia malik olmnma bu Sam'5in yerda qalan legality and enforceability of each of the remaining provisions of this
mﬁddoalmnm etibarlihgrna, qanuniliyina V: iddia use.in olmagma hag bir Agreement shall not in any Way be affected, prejudiced or impaired by
soldlde Lasir eimir, x9131 gatirmir Va ya Zora): yetimiir, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability,

23.4 §azi§in bﬁtﬁvlﬁyg" 23.4 Entire Agement

Bu Sam's (o cﬁmladan buradalcr Csdvallar) A1101. V9 Sanm msmda bu senadin This Agreement (including the Schedules hereto) constitutes the entire
mommiu ile baglr bﬁtév mlasmzm mskil edir. Bununla, Toraﬂai' arasinda bu agreement between Buyer and Seller concerning the subject matter hereoi
sanadin memunu ila bagll biitfui bundan qabaqki sanadlar, boyanatlar, All previous (laments, representations, undertakings and ageemcnts,
taahhiidlar w razrlasmalar, gifabi, yazrli vo ya basqa our club olmamasrndan whether verbal, written or otherwise, ban/em the Parties concerning the
asih olmayaraq, lagv edilir Va bu Sazisdo mﬁeyyun edilmig liar hanSi aortlare subject matter hereof are hereby cancelled and shall not affect or modify
voyaéhdalildera tasir eds yaxud onlan deyisdira bilmaz Buraya slave edllmis any of ﬁne terms or obligations set fofth in this Ageemem. The
Qosmalar bu Sazisin tsﬂdl) hissasini taskil edir va Taraﬂsiin iizorin: tam Appendices are hereby madc‘an integral part of this Agreement and shall
saldldo ﬁhdsliklar qoyux. be fully binding upon the Parties.

235 Hm" ugi varisl'ar Va miivakkillar 235 Successors and Assigees

Bu Saris buradalq Taraﬂar, vs Madda 21-h) mﬁddaalanna uygun claraq This Agreement shall bind and ensure to the beneﬁt of the Parties hereto
onlmn mﬁvaﬁq hﬁquqi varislwri vo salahiyystli mﬁvakkillari ﬁpﬁn macburidir and, subject to compliance with the provisions of Ardcle 21, to their
v0 hﬁquqi quvvaya malikdir. respective successors and permitted assigns.

23.6  23.6 Language

Hazrrki Quin Sans: haqqmda Sazis Ingilis vs Azorbaycan dillsrindg mrtib This Gas Sales Agreement is executed in the English and Azerbaijani
edilmisdir v9 liar iki dil, bu Sazis asasinda vo ya onunln bagh hGF 11131151 languages and each language shall have equal force, except inthe event of
mﬁbahisa yarandigi hallar istisna olmaqla, ayni huquqi qiivvaye malikdir. Bela any dispute, unch or in connection with this Agreement, in respect of
mﬁbahisalarda bu Sazisin ingilis dilindaki mstni  bsldl edit. Bu Sazis which the English language text of this Agreement shall prevail All
ssastnda tzm‘v cdilacsk bﬁtﬁu sensdlar v9 ya melumat mﬁbadilasi ingilis documents to be ﬁxmishcd or communications to be given or made under

57
W {4/


dilinds apanltr, yaxud basqa dildsdirss, miivaﬁq Tarsﬁn m'hnayandssiuin this Agreement shall be in the Engjsh language or, if in another language,

tssdiq etdiyi ingilis dilins maximal ila mﬁsayiet olunur. shall be accompanied by a translation into English certiﬁed by a
reprmentative ofthe relevant Party.

23.7 Nﬁsxalag 23.7 Countmaﬁs

Sazis Inglis v: Azarbaymn dillsrinda 90x1“ nﬁsxada tsrtib edﬂmisdir. Bu Agreement is executed in multiple counterparts in the English and Azeri

Sazisin her hansi miiddaasmm v9 ya bu Saris asastnda verilmis har hansi languages. lnthe event ofany conflicting lnterpreutlons afany provisions

hfldiﬁsin Lafsizi ila bagh nﬁsxalarin dili masmda bar hanst ziddiyyet olarsa1 of this Agreement or any notices hereunder between the language

higilis dilindski nﬁsxeya ﬁstﬁnli'zk verilir. counterparts, the English Image counterpm shall prevail.

23‘8 Byhglar 23.8 Headings

Bu Sazisdsld bashqlar yalmz elverislilik msqsedila vex-ilmisdir Va bu Salish: The headings in this Agreement are inserted for convenience only and shall

tafsirim task ctmir. not affect the construction of this Agreement.

239 Qogmalg 23.9 Apnendices _

Bu Sam's; Qosma “A” alave edilmisdir vs bu qosma hiitﬁn maqsadlar There is attached to this Agreement Appendix “A” and such Appendix is

bammmdan bu Sazisin taﬂdb hissssini taskil edit. Her hansi Q0$maxun sarﬂeri hereby made pan of this Agreement for all puxposes‘ In the event of a

v2 nﬁiddsalm ila bu Sazisin maminda mﬁsyysn odilmis mﬁddaalar W $911191 conﬂict between the terms and conditions of any Appendix and the terms

arasmda ziddiyyst olarsa, sonuncuya ﬁstﬁnltik Verilir. and conditions set forth in the body of this Agreement, the latter shall
prevail.

2310 Suvaren toxunulmazligdan imﬁna 23.10 Waiver OfSovereigi hnmuniﬂ

Tsmﬂezdsn hat bh-i bu Sam'sin kommers-iya sévdslasmesi oldugunu, bu Sazis Each Party recognizes and acknowledges that this Agreement constitutes a

asasmda onun hiltun v: Bhdelilderilﬁn kommersiya xarakteri dasidiﬁuu Va commercial transacu'on, and that its rights and obligations under this

hékumat: aid meals nlmadigmi eﬁraf edit Va qabul edit: Bununla. elaqadar, Agreement are of a commercial nature and are not of a governmental

Tamﬂardsn hai- hit-i 52 admdtm Va 52 aktivlari admdan yuxisdiksiya, machuri nature. To that end, each of the Parties hereby irrevocably waives on

mehksma icmati i1; elaqedar va her hams: basqa maqsadlar ﬁcﬁn hm: hams! v: behalf of itself and its assets, any and all immunities fwm jurisdiction,

bt‘m'm wxunulmathlardan imtina edit. from enforcement and for my other puxpose whatsoever,

5%»; vb 58


BUNUNLA Te SDIQ EDIHR KL bu Sazig Taraﬂar amsmda yuxanda. IN W11 N 658 whereof, the Pames have duly executed this Agreement as
g6 starilmig gx'm v9 ilds mﬁvaﬁq qaydada imzalannugdxr of the day and yea: first above written.
Azarbaycan Respubljkasmm Dévlat Neft Sirketi/ Bahar Energy Operating Company Limitett
The State Oil Company of the Republic of Azerbaijan A
Adi/By. "Rovneg Abdunaggv" AdVBM'megci'; @412 (203334“
Vozifasi/ Tide: Vazifasi/ Title:
5 9


00W“ “A” Appendix A
m” ti an; Gas Price
443M “ﬂ? i m Cognact Price
M“ ‘1 ” d ti ‘ ‘ “ ' ' ' ‘ ’
5133f éﬁgﬁﬁqumb Qlymm 1000 am mm) The Contact Price for any Month during the Contact Faded shall be one
‘ hundred and forty (140) US Dollaxs per d10usand (1000) SCNL
M‘mmum “bk Hem F mm Mmeum Annual 5 Egghtv Factor jMAg 2?
7476!?! Madd-ads bah: edilan Minimum l'llik Hacm Falctoru 80% (ssksau) ‘ l V . .
gain bamberdjn The Mmmum Annual Quanmy Factor as set forth In Amcle 7.4 shall
be equal to eighty percent (80%}
minimum Odam l Qﬁ  Pamem Price ‘
Minimum édznis Qiymcti Salish 7.64:1 Maddesinds mﬁsyysn edildiyi Th V , V
l A .V V V V . . . V V V . V . Mxmmmn Pa t has shall be seven: ﬁ a sweat 75°/ of
km“ ﬁngévda 1.11 “Vanda mtblq edﬂ'm Muqamg Qlymgtm 75% Gem” mceContrad. Pdceygglicable during mar. Congactv‘fgar as sel fort: in
b5) mm aim Article 7 ,6 of the Agreement
Kommgaslﬂ 9212mm glmau MakEAU Gas Pace
7V7 Mulder}: bells edilan Kompcnsasiya qazmm qiymau‘ Kompensasiya The Make u G - ~ -
, l V , . . . -. . . . . l - asPnceassetfonhmAmcle 7.7sha1l betwent fvc
. . . qabuul 641ml“ Mugayllh m. “Pd; mblq add” Mmavllg percent (25;) of the Contact Price applicable during the Cofm-‘act
WWW“ 25 4 Gym“ “’9 {mm “1‘11 ed“ Year in which the Make-Up Quantity is taken.
Kasir 9321mm gimgti
W
Sammy: Q82 Kasirinin ha; verdiyi Ayrlan senm ilk gain-11211, Aylxq
Saucmm Ayllq Kas'rr Hmnins qadar Qaz hacminin (Gindslik Mﬁqavila The price of the quantity of Gas 551 delivered (at the Daily Contract
60
M ‘V/


Hacminda) qiymati aeagldakdardan fbmt olacaq: Quantity) aﬁer the Monm in which the Seller‘s shortfall occurred, up
to Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity, shall he:
1) Kasirin le Dow—ﬁnds bag verdiyi teqdirda: bu Summon A.th Kosir l) eighty percent (80%) ofthe Contract Price for the Mouth when such
Hocmim'n qabul edilmesi zamaru homin Ay Ezra Mﬁqavila Qiymetinm Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity is taken, if Shortfall occurred during
sakscn faizl (80%). the Winter Period
2) Kssirin Yay Dévrﬁnda bag verdiyi tsqdirda, bu Saucmm Ayqu Kasir 2) ninety percent (90%) of the Contract Price for the Month when such
Hominin qobul edilmzsi hamin Ay ﬁzra Mﬁqavil: Qiytmtinin doxsan faizi Monthly Seller Shortfall Quantity is taken, if Shortfall occurred during
(90%). the Simmer Periodv
Kﬁmt talablarlne cavab Vermeygn gum gimati OfﬁSgec gas Price
Keyﬁyyst talablsrina cavab vermoyon_qazm qiyrnotj Madda 106de The Off-Spec Gas Price, as set; forth in Article 10.6, shall be either
gﬁston'ldiyi kimi, ya:
(a) Mﬁanile qiymatinin doxsan bee fain' (95%) qadar teeldl edir) agar (a)ninety five percent (95%) of the Contract Price, if the chemical
karbolﬁdrogcnlarln ldmyovi tgrldbi vs merlmptan kﬁkﬁrd miqdarﬂan)1 composition of hydrocarbons and mcrcaptan sulphur conteut(s) do not
QOST 5542—87 Ezra oartlara uygun galmirso; vs ya conform with the provisions ofGOST 5542-87; or
(b) Mﬁqavlls qiymaﬁnin doxsan iki faizi (92%) qodar teskil edit, agar bela (bjninety two percent (92%) of the Contract Price, if the dew point
Keyﬁyyat talablsrina cavab vermayamqazm taqdim olundugu Ay ﬁzra does not conform with the provisions of (3031‘ 5542~87 for the Month
koodensasiya temperaum: QOST 5542v87 I‘m-9 $211191: uygun gelmirss. when such Off-Spec Gas is made available
/
M 61

