
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549  
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
[X] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2010
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from [   ] to [   ]
Commission file number 000-52138
LEXARIA CORP.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
#950-1130 WEST PENDER STREET, VANCOUVER,
BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA 
(Address of principal executive offices)
Nevada
20-2000871
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
V6E 4A4 
(Zip Code)
Registrant's telephone number, including area code:  604-602-1675
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of Each Class
N/A
Name of Each Exchange On Which Registered
N/A
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, Par Value $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 the Securities Act.
Yes [   ]     No [X]
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act
Yes [   ]     No [X]
1
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports) and (2) has been subject to such filing
requirements for the last 90 days.
Yes [X]     No [   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data File 
required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such
shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
Yes [   ]     No [   ]
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and 
will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form
10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See
definition of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer [   ]
Non-accelerated filer   [   ]
Accelerated filer                  [   ]
Smaller reporting company [X]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
Yes [   ]    No [X]
The aggregate market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the Registrant on April 30, 2010 was $761,735 based on the average of the high
and low bid and asked price of the Registrant’s shares of common stock on the OTC Bulletin Board or $0.10 on April 30, 2010. For purposes of this
computation, all executive officers and directors have been deemed to be affiliates. Such determination should not be deemed to be an admission that such
executive officers and directors are, in fact, affiliates of the Registrant.
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock as of the latest practicable date.
13,033,409 common shares as of January 28, 2011
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
None.
2
Item 1. 
 
Item 1A. 
 
Item 1B. 
 
Item 2. 
 
Item 3. 
 
Item 4. 
 
Item 5. 
 
Item 6. 
 
Item 7. 
 
Item 7A. 
 
Item 8. 
 
Item 9. 
 
Item 9A. 
 
Item 9B. 
 
Item 10. 
 
Item 11. 
 
Item 12. 
 
Item 13. 
 
Item 14. 
 
Item 15.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Business 
 
Risk Factors 
 
Unresolved Staff Comments 
 
Properties 
 
Legal Proceedings 
 
Removed and Reserved 
 
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities 
 
Selected Financial Data 
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
 
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
 
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
 
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
 
Controls and Procedures 
 
Other Information 
 
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
 
Executive Compensation 
 
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters 
 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
 
Principal Accounting Fees and Services 
 
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
3
4
8
13
13
23
23
23
25
26
31
31
60
60
61
61
65
68
69
69
71
Item 1.    Business
PART I
This annual report contains forward-looking statements. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you
can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “expects”, “plans”, “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates”, “predicts”, 
“potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known and
unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, including the risks in the section entitled “Risk Factors” that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, 
levels  of  activity,  performance  or  achievements  to  be  materially  different  from  any  future  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance  or  achievements
expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Although  we  believe  that  the  expectations  reflected  in  the  forward-looking  statements  are  reasonable,  we  cannot  guarantee  future  results,  levels  of
activity, performance or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update
any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles.
In this annual report, unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars and all references to “common shares” refer to 
the shares in our common stock.
As used in this current report and unless otherwise indicated, the terms "we", "us", "our" and "Lexaria" mean Lexaria Corp.
General Overview
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on December 9, 2004. We are an exploration and development oil and gas company currently engaged in the
exploration for and development of petroleum and natural gas in North America. We maintain our registered agent's office and our U.S. business office at
Nevada Agency and Transfer Company, 50 West Liberty, Suite 880, Reno, Nevada 89501. Our telephone number is (755) 322-0626.
The address of our principal executive office is Suite 950, 1130 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia V6E 4A4. Our telephone number is
(604) 602-1675. We have another office located in Kelowna. Our current locations provide adequate office space for our purposes at this stage of our
development.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbol "LXRP" and on the Canadian National Stock Exchange under the symbol
“LXX”
Lexaria  is  an  oil  and  gas  company  engaged  in  the  exploration  for  oil  and  natural  gas  in  Canada  and  the  United  States.  The  Company  is  currently
generating revenues from its business operations in Mississippi. The Company’s business plan is to focus on development of the Belmont Lake oil field,
in which it has working interests, in order to maximize cash flow and use excess cash flow to pay debt and conduct additional development well drilling.
Eventually, if cash flows are strong enough, the Company will once again be able to explore for additional oil and gas by way of its existing 60% interest
option to drill 38 exploratory wells (see “Oil & Gas Properties - Mississippi and Louisiana: Frio-Wilcox Project”). To accomplish this, the Company 
intends to focus on development drilling first. Eventually the Company will seek a balance between exploration, development and exploitation drilling.
To achieve sustainable and profitable growth, the Company intends to control the timing and costs of its projects wherever possible. The Company is not
currently the operator of any of its properties and will consider becoming the operator only when its financial conditions have improved sufficiently.
4
Overview of Business over the Last Five Years
Since we began operations in 2005, the Company has been focused exclusively on the exploration for and development of oil and gas assets located in
North America. We participated in the drilling of a single well in Strachan Hills Alberta and eventually wrote down the value of that well to $nil. We
participated  in  the  drilling  of  wells  in  Oklahoma  where  we  successfully  produced  and  sold  oil  and  gas  prior  to  selling  our  interest  in  the  Oklahoma
properties. We have participated in the drilling of oil and gas wells in Mississippi and remain focused there as our key area of interest with all our current
assets within Amite and Wilkinson Counties, Mississippi.
On June 21, 2007, we acquired an assignment of a 10% gross working interest in an Area of Mutual Interest (AMI) formerly held by Brinx Resources
Ltd, a non-related company, in up to 50 oil & gas wells to be drilled, and any future development prospects thereof associated, located in Mississippi,
USA. Interests in seven wells previously drilled under the conditions of the AMI remain the property of Brinx Resources Ltd. and we are not a party to
Brinx’s interest in these wells, while the right to assume the 10% gross working interest in the remaining 43 wells and any future development prospects
thereof, now belongs to our company. Because we already had a 40% gross working interest in this AMI, as a result of this transaction, we have a 50%
gross working interest in the AMI.
On June 23, 2007, we acquired an assignment of a 10% gross working interest in 12 previously drilled oil & gas wells and any future development
prospects thereof, formerly held by 0743868 BC Ltd, a non-related company. Since we had a 20% gross working interest in these same 12 oil and gas
wells and development prospects, as a result of this transaction we obtained a 30% gross working interest in the 12 oil & gas wells and development
prospects. We were obligated to make cash payments of US$520,000 over approximately a one-year period to complete this transaction ($200,000 paid as 
of  October  31,  2007).  The  Company  had  made  total  of  $350,000  repayment  and  accrued  $18,016  interest  expense  since  June  23,  2007  with  ending
balance of $169,938 as at April 30, 2008.
On May 13, 2008 the Company entered into an Assignment of Debt between 0743868 BC Ltd. (the “Assignor”) and the President and shareholder of the
Company (collectively the “Assignees”). The Assignor agreed to accept US$46,000 from the Company in satisfaction of the outstanding amount and
agreed to assign the Assignees all of the Assignor’s right, title and interest in and to the US$124,000 balance of the outstanding amount. As a result, the
Assignor no longer has any claim against the Company.
On May 14, 2008 the Company entered into an unsecured Loan Agreement with each of the President and a shareholder of the Company for $62,000. The
purpose of this Loan Agreement was to set out terms of the arrangement by which the Company agreed to make a Loan of US$124,000 at an interest rate
of 16.8% and no set principal payments for one year available to the Company. The purpose of the Loan Agreement was to provide the Company with
capital funds for oil and gas exploration and/or general corporate purposes. On October 27, 2008, the loan from the President in the amount of US$62,000
was terminated in favour of an updated debt agreement.
On August 29, 2008, the Company sold all of its working interests in its Owl Creek Project, located in Garvin County, Oklahoma, to an unrelated third
party for net proceeds of $206,021. The property sold included the Company’s 7.5% working interest in Isbill #2.
5
On October 27, 2008, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd., Chris Bunka, and another shareholders of the
Company (“Purchasers”) for an aggregate amount of nine hundred thousand (cdn) dollars (CDN $900,000). The Purchasers agreed to purchase an 18%
interest bearing Promissory Note of the Company subject to and upon the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement.
The Company’s obligations to repay the Promissory Note are secured by certain specified assets of the Company pursuant to a Security Agreement. Also,
as long as the Promissory Note is outstanding, the Purchasers may voluntarily convert the Promissory Note to Common Shares at the conversion price of
$0.45 per share of Common Stock. Additionally, in consideration for the Purchasers agreeing to purchase the Promissory Notes, the Company agrees to
issue Warrants to the Purchasers.
The share purchase Warrants entitles the Purchaser to acquire Shares of the Company’s common stock, and the number of Series A and B Warrants 
issuable shall be determined by the Purchase Amount divided by $0.45, which Warrants shall have the following terms:
1.
2.
3.
4.
each Series A Warrant entitling the holder to purchase one-half of one Warrant Share for a term of one year from issuance and an exercise
price of US $0.45 per whole Warrant Share (the exercise price is subject to adjustment pursuant to the loan agreement);
 
each Series B Warrant entitling the holder to purchase one-half of one Warrant Share for a term of two years from issuance and exercise
price of US $0.90 per whole Warrant Share (the exercise price is subject to adjustment pursuant to the loan agreement); and
 
Mandatory  conversion  of  the  Warrants  at  the  option  of  the  Company  upon  the  Company’s  Common  Stock  closing  at  200%  of  the 
applicable exercise price for twenty consecutive Trading Days.
 
Two whole Warrants and the exercise price are required to purchase one share of the Company.
The issuance of the Promissory Notes and Warrants were issued to 3 non-US persons pursuant to the exemption from registration provided by Regulation
S promulgated under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Company and Purchases agreed that all previous Loan Agreements are
terminated and any amounts due and owing there under are replaced and superseded by the Promissory Notes issued by the Company pursuant to the
Purchase Agreement.
On April 3, 2009, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Delta Oil & Gas, Inc. and The Stallion Group to acquire additional 
interests  in  its  existing  core  producing  Mississippi  oil  and  gas  properties.  The  Company  paid  $40,073.39  to  acquire  an  additional  two  percent  (2%)
working interest in the proven Belmont Lake oil and gas field and an additional 10% working interest in potential nearby exploration wells, bringing its 
total gross working interest in the Belmont Lake oil and gas field to 32% and bringing its total gross working interest to 60% in the 38 wells that remain
to be drilled of this original 50-well option with Griffin & Griffin Exploration in over 140,000 acres surrounding Belmont Lake in all directions.
On August 28, 2009, the Company entered into four separate assignment agreements with Enertopia Corp., 0743608 BC Ltd., David DeMartini, and
Murrayfield Ltd.three of which were with people or companies with related management. The Company received from these four parties proceeds of
$371,608.57 to fund additional interests in this well. As a result, the Company has a 25.84% perpetual gross interest in the well (18.0% net revenue
interest); as well as a 5.2% net revenue interest in the non-consent interest. The non-consent interest remains valid until such time as the well produces 
500% of all costs and expenses back to the participants in the form of revenue, at which time the non-consent interest ends. Enertopia Corp, a company 
with  related  management,  has  acquired  from  Lexaria  a  6.16%  perpetual  gross  interest  in  the  12-4  well;  David  DeMartini,  a  director  of  Lexaria,  has 
acquired from Lexaria a 5% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the 12-4 well; and 0743608 BC Ltd. a company owned by the President of the
Company, has acquired from Lexaria a 11.6% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the 12-4 well. Effective June 23, 2009, the Company amended 
its Articles of Incorporation to undertake a one (1) for four (4) share consolidation of its authorized and issued and outstanding common stock. As a
result, the Company’s authorized capital decreased from 75,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001 to 18,750,000 shares of common
stock  with  a  par  value  of  $0.001  and  its  issued  and  outstanding  shares  decreased  from  24,369,500  shares  of  common  stock  to  6,092,370  shares  of
common stock.
6
Effective July 22, 2009 the Company completed an equity financing from the sale of 4,545,000 units at a price of $0.05 per unit for net proceeds of
$182,250. The equity financing was comprised of a partial debt settlement of $45,000 and an equity financing of $182,250. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one warrant. Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one additional common share of the Company for a period two years from
the date of the closing of the financing at an exercise price of $0.20 per share.
On September 9, 2009, Dr. David DeMartini was appointed as Director for the Company. Dr. DeMartini is a recognized expert in several geophysical
fields including seismic “bright spot” data analysis. He held various senior positions at the Shell Bellaire Research Center in Houston, Texas from 1980
through 1998. Dr. DeMartini was inducted to the Offshore Energy Center Hall of Fame as a Technology Pioneer last year and was for several years a
member of the Dean’s Advisory Council for the College of Mathematical and Physical Sciences at The Ohio State University from which he received a
PHD in Physics following his B.S. in Physics cum laude from the University of Notre Dame.
Effective October 21, 2009, 191,000 warrants were exercised for 95,500 common shares of the Company at a price of US$0.05 per share for net proceeds
of $4,775. Effective October 21, 2009, the Company had 10,732,870 shares of common stock issued and outstanding.
On October 28, 2009, the Company announced that effective at the open of market, the Company’s shares began trading on Canadian National Stock 
Exchange (“CNSX”) with the trading symbol LXX.
Our Current Business
The Company is an oil and gas company engaged in the exploration for oil and natural gas in Canada and the United States. The Company is currently
generating revenues from its business operations in Mississippi.
We have acquired working interests in various oil and gas properties in Mississippi USA. All of our current oil and gas assets are located in Wilkinson
and Amite counties, Mississippi, where we have between 32% gross working interest and 60% gross working interests in producing oil and/or gas wells
and in exploration wells yet to be drilled. Our Belmont Lake oil field discovered in December 2006 is located within the Palmetto Point area of Wilkinson
county,  Mississippi.  We previously  had  an  interest  in oil  and  gas  wells located  in  Oklahoma  but those assets  were  sold in August  2008. We have  a
nominal interest in a non-commercial well located in Strachan Alberta which expired in fiscal year 2010.
The Company’s business plan is to focus on development of the Belmont Lake oil field, in which it has working interests, in order to maximize cash flow
and use excess cash flow to pay debt and conduct additional development well drilling. Eventually, if cash flows are strong enough, the Company expects
to explore for additional oil and gas by way of its existing 60% interest option to drill 38 exploratory wells (see “Oil & Gas Properties - Mississippi and 
Louisiana: Frio-Wilcox Project”). To accomplish this, the Company intends to focus on development drilling first. Eventually the Company will seek a
balance between exploration, development and exploitation drilling. To achieve sustainable and profitable growth, the Company intends to control the
timing and costs of its projects wherever possible. The Company is not currently the operator of any of its properties and will consider becoming the
operator only when its financial conditions have improved sufficiently.
7
During the past fiscal year we experienced the following significant corporate developments:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
On November 13, 2009, the Company announced that its Operator in Mississippi, Griffin & Griffin Exploration LLC, has declared force
majeure on the Belmont Lake offset wells. 
 
On December 21, 2009, our Board of Directors amended and restated our bylaws. The amendment and restatement of the bylaws was for
the purpose of, among other things, removing certain outdated and redundant provisions that existed in our prior bylaws with respect to
corporate  governance,  shareholder  and  director  meeting  procedures,  and  indemnification  procedures.  The  changes  to  our  prior  bylaws
include: (i) expanding certain provisions with respect to shareholders’ meetings including change of quorum requirements; (ii) amending 
certain  provisions  respecting  appointment  of  directors,  corporate  governance  and  committees,  and  directors’  meetings;  (iii)  expanding 
certain  provisions  with  respect  to  officers  and  their  duties;  (iv) changing  certain  provisions  with  respect  to  share  certificates;  and  (vi)
adding certain indemnification provisions. 
 
During the first quarter of its 2010 fiscal year the Company completed an equity financing from the sale of 1,617,752 units at a price of
CAD$0.12 per unit for net proceeds of CAD$194,130. Each unit consisted of one common share and a half warrant. Two half warrants
entitled  the  holder  to  purchase  an  additional  common  share  of  the  Company  for  a  period  of  one  year  from  the  date  of  closing  of  the
financing at an exercise price of CAD$0.22. Effective December 27, 2009, the Company had 12,350,622 shares of common stock issued
and outstanding. 
 
On March 17, 2010, the Company had increased its authorized share capital from 18,750,000 common shares to 200,000,000 common
shares. 
 
On May 31, 2010, the Company issued 499,893 units at at a price of $0.12 per for a Settlement Agreement valued at $59,987.24. Each
unit consist one common share and one share purchase warrant at $0.20 per share for a period of two years. All shares and warrants issued
were restricted under applicable securities rules. Effective May 31, 2010, the Company had 12,850,515 shares of common stock issued
and outstanding. 
 
On July 29, 2010, the Company had agreed with its Operators at Belmont Lake not to proceed to drill a horizontal 12-4 well. Rather, two 
of  the  three  proposed  vertical  wells  12-2,  12-4,  or  12-5  were  proposed  to  be  drilled  in  August  2010.  To  take  best  advantage  of  this
opportunity, the Company cancelled all previous agreements with respect to the Belmont Lake horizontal well 12-4 and entered into three 
separate assignment agreements, of which all three were with people or companies with related management. The Company received total
proceeds of $324,677.12 to fund additional interests in these wells. As a result, the Company has a 32% perpetual gross interest in the
wells (24.0% net revenue interest); as well as a 8% gross interest (6% net revenue interest) in the non-consent interest. The non-consent 
interest remains valid until such time as the well produces 500% of all costs and expenses back to the participants in the form of revenue,
at which time the non-consent interest ends. Emerald Atlantic LLC, a company owned by a director of Lexaria, has acquired from Lexaria
a  8.74%  gross  interest  in  the  non-consent  interest  in  two  of  the  three  vertical  wells;  and  0743608  BC  Ltd.  a  company  owned  by  the
President of the Company, has acquired from Lexaria a 20.79% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the two of the three vertical 
wells; an advisor to the Company has acquired from Lexaria 2.46% gross interest in the non-consent interest in two of the three vertical 
wells.
8
7.
8.
9.
10.
On September 13, 2010, Lexaria Corp. (the “Company”) entered into three separate assignment agreements with 0743608 BC Limited,
solely owned by a Director/Officer of the Company; Emerald Atlantic LLC, solely owned by a Director of the Company, and the Senior
VP  Business  Development.  (the  “Assignees”),  whereby  the  Assignees  have  paid  a  fee  of  US$408,116.48  to  earn  a  24%  share  of  the
Company’s  gross  non-  perpetual  32%  interest  in  the  three  oil  wells  being  drilled  in  Wilkinson  County,  Mississippi.  This  agreement
replaces  the  one  signed  on  August  28,  2009.  As  a  result  of  the  three  assignment  agreements,  Lexaria  receives  at  no  cash  cost  to  the
company, a carried interest of 8% in these same rights and benefits. The Company assigns, transfers and sets over to the Assignees, all
proportionate  rights,  interest  and  benefits  in  the  Assigned  Non  Perpetual  Interest  held  by  or  granted  to  the  Assignor  in  and  to  the
Participation Agreement between the Company and Griffin but limited to a gross 500% revenue payout based on the total amount paid
under the Initial Consideration and the Subsequent Consideration after which all rights, interests and benefits cease. 
 
On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the debt, namely US$1,625 with CAB Financial Services by converting 65,000
warrants into 32,500 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
 
On October  21, 2010, the Company settled a portion  of the  debt,  namely  US$2,166.65  with Christopher Bunka  by converting 86,667
warrants into 43,333 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
 
In September and October, 2010, new wells were drilled at the Belmont Lake oil field, namely wells 12-2; 12-4 and 12-5.
The  Company  plans  to  continue  its  current  business  of  acquiring  interests  in  potentially  high-impact  oil  and  gas  property  interests  that  offer  a  high 
probability  of  being  able  to  drill  without  significant  time  delays.  The  Company  also  tries  to  choose  North  American  properties  where,  if  drilling  is
successful,  the  wells  could  be  quickly  connected  to  infrastructure  and  thus,  with  success,  brought  into  production  and  able  to  generate  cash  flow  as
quickly as possible.
The Company’s business plan does not anticipate that it will hire a large number of employees or that it will require extensive office space. The Company 
has, to date, and plans to continue to acquire most of the industry and geological expertise it requires through third party contractual relationships with
consulting experts and with operating companies which will act as operators of the Company’s various interests. Although this exposes the Company to 
certain risks on behalf of those operators, it also allows the Company to participate in the often unique experience and knowledge that local persons have
related to certain properties. This strategy allows the Company to participate in a wider variety of oil and gas opportunities than if all of its geological
expertise were in-house and confined to a single geographical area. From a business operations perspective, this strategy also enables the Company to
minimize its ongoing fixed in-house costs for geological or geophysical analytical expenses while still allowing it to contract for that expertise when and
as needed. This business strategy has been successful during a time of declining oil and gas prices, when many companies with high internal overheads
and cost structures due to large numbers of highly expensive in-house professionals cannot be sustained due to declining revenues. The Company will
hire third-party consulting geophysicists and geologists on an as-needed basis to evaluate oil and gas properties that may be of interest, and to reinforce
and double-check the technical work and abilities of its third-party operators. This provides the Company with the required expertise it needs, when its
needed, whilst avoiding high fixed long-term costs.
9
The Company relies on the business experience of its existing management, on the technical abilities of consulting experts, and on the technical and
operational abilities of its operating partner companies to evaluate business opportunities.
Competition
We are in the business of acquisition and exploration of oil and gas properties. The petroleum industry is competitive in all its phases. We compete with
numerous  other  participants  in  the  search  for  and  the  acquisition  of  oil  and  natural  gas  properties,  and  in  the  marketing  of  oil  and  natural  gas.  Our
competitors include oil and natural gas companies that have substantially greater financial resources, staff and facilities than ours. Our ability to obtain or
increase reserves in the future will depend not only on our ability to explore and develop our present properties, but also on our ability to select and
acquire suitable producing properties or prospects for exploratory drilling. Competitive factors in the distribution and marketing of oil and natural gas
include price and methods and reliability of delivery.
Compliance with Government Regulation
The  exploration  and  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties  is  subject  to  various  United  States  federal,  state  and  local  and  foreign  governmental
regulations. We may from time to time, be required to obtain licenses and permits from various governmental authorities in regards to the exploration of
our property interests.
Employees
We primarily used the services of sub-contractors and consultants for manual labour exploration work and drilling on our properties. Our Director, Mr.
David DeMartini is our technical advisor.
On September 1, 2008, the Company entered into a Controller Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd. for accounting and controller services of
CAB on a continuing basis for a consideration of CAD$4,500 per month plus GST. This agreement was terminated on May 11, 2009.
On May 12, 2009 the Company entered into a six month consulting agreement with BKB Management Ltd., a corporation organized under the laws of the
Province in British Columbia. BKB Management Ltd. is a consulting company controlled by the chief financial officer and director for a consideration of
CAD $4,500 per month plus GST. This agreement replaces the September 1, 2008, Controller Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd.
On November 27, 2008, the Company entered into a consulting agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd., a corporation organized under the laws of
the Province of British Columbia. CAB Financial Services  is a consulting company  controlled by the chairman of the  board and the chief  executive
officer of the Company. The consulting services provided by CAB Financial Services is on a continuing basis for a consideration of $8,000 per month
plus GST. CAB Financial Services Ltd. may terminate the agreement at any time by giving 30 days written notice of his intention to do so.
On September 9, 2009, the Company appointed Mr. David DeMartini to the Board of Directors.
On August 5, 2010 we entered into a three-month Management agreement with Tom Irkhe, whereby Mr. Irkhe will act as the Senior Vice-President, 
Business  Development  for  the  Company  for  consideration  of  US$3,125  per  month  and  has  signed  a  revised  agreement  to  continue  the  Management
relationship on a continuing month to month basis.
10
Research and Development
We have incurred $Nil in research and development expenditures over the last fiscal year.
Item 1A.   Risk Factors
Our business operations are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to those set forth below:
We have a limited operating history and as a result there is no assurance we can operate on a profitable basis.
We have a limited operating history. Our company's operations will be subject to all the uncertainties arising from the absence of a significant operating
history. Potential investors should be aware of the difficulties normally encountered by resource exploration companies and the high rate of failure of
such enterprises. The likelihood of success must be considered in light of the problems, expenses, difficulties, complications and delays encountered in
connection  with  the  exploration  of  the  properties  that  we  plan  to  undertake.  These  potential  problems  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  unanticipated
problems  relating  to  exploration,  and  additional  costs  and  expenses  that  may  exceed  current  estimates.  The  expenditures  to  be  made  by  us  in  the
exploration of our properties may not result in the discovery of reserves. Problems such as unusual or unexpected formations of rock or land and other
conditions are involved in resource exploration and often result in unsuccessful exploration efforts. If the results of our exploration do not reveal viable
commercial reserves, we may decide to abandon our claims and acquire new claims for new exploration or cease operations. The acquisition of additional
claims will be dependent upon us possessing capital resources at the time in order to purchase such claims. If no funding is available, we may be forced to
abandon our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to operate on a profitable basis.
If we do not obtain additional financing, our business will fail and our investors could lose their investment.
We had cash in the amount of $62,989 and working capital deficiency of $909,441 as of our year ended October 31, 2010. We currently do not generate
significant revenues from our operations. Any direct acquisition of a claim under lease or option is subject to our ability to obtain the financing necessary
for us to fund and carry out exploration programs on potential properties. The requirements are substantial. Obtaining additional financing would be
subject to a number of factors, including market prices for resources, investor acceptance of our properties and investor sentiment. These factors may
negatively affect the timing, amount, terms or conditions of any additional financing available to us. The most likely source of future funds presently
available to us is through the sale of equity capital and loans. Any sale of share capital will result in dilution to existing shareholders.
Because there is no assurance that we will generate material revenues, we face a high risk of business failure.
For the fiscal year 2010, we have earned revenues of $362,471. We currently have only modest oil or gas reserves that are deemed proved, probable or
possible pursuant to American standards of disclosure for oil and gas activities. All of our existing wells are in Mississippi, USA.
There can be no assurance that our current or future drilling activities will be successful, and we cannot be sure that our overall drilling success rate or our
production operations within a particular area will ever come to fruition, and if they do, will not decline over time. We may not recover all or any portion
of our capital investment in the wells or the underlying leaseholds. Unsuccessful drilling activities would have a material adverse effect upon our results
of operations and financial condition. The cost of drilling, completing and operating wells is often uncertain, and a number of factors can delay or prevent
drilling  operations,  including:  (i)  unexpected  drilling  conditions;  (ii)  pressure  or  irregularities  in  geological  formation;  (iii)  equipment  failures  or
accidents; (iv) adverse weather conditions; and (v) shortages or delays in the availability of drilling rigs and the delivery of equipment.
In addition, our exploration and development plans may be curtailed, delayed or cancelled as a result of lack of adequate capital and other factors, such as
weather, compliance with governmental regulations, current and forecasted prices for oil and changes in the estimates of costs to complete the projects.
We will continue to gather information about our exploration projects, and it is possible that additional information may cause our company to alter our
schedule or determine that a project should not be pursued at all. You should understand that our plans regarding our projects are subject to change.
11
We recognize that if we are unable to generate significant revenues from our activities, we will not be able to earn profits or continue operations. We
cannot guarantee that we will be successful in raising capital to fund these operating losses or generate revenues in the future. We can provide investors
with no assurance that we will generate any operating revenues or ever achieve profitable operations. If we are unsuccessful in addressing these risks, our
business will most likely fail and our investors could lose their investment.
The oil and natural gas industry is highly competitive and there is no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring leases.
The oil and natural gas industry is intensely competitive. Although we do not compete with other oil and gas companies for the sale of any oil and gas that
we may produce, as there is sufficient demand in the world market for these products, we compete with numerous individuals and companies, including
many major oil and natural gas companies which have substantially greater technical, financial and operational resources and staff. Accordingly, there is a
high degree of competition for desirable oil and natural gas leases, suitable properties for drilling operations and necessary drilling equipment, as well as
for access to funds. We cannot predict if the necessary funds can be raised or that any projected work will be completed.
There can be no assurance that we will discover oil or natural gas in any commercial quantity on our properties.
Exploration for economic reserves of oil and natural gas is subject to a number of risks. There is competition for the acquisition of available oil and
natural gas properties. Few properties that are explored are ultimately developed into producing oil and/or natural gas wells. If we cannot discover oil or
natural gas in any commercial quantity thereon, our business will fail.
Even if we acquire an oil and natural gas exploration property and establish that it contains oil or natural gas in commercially exploitable quantities, the
potential profitability of oil and natural gas ventures depends upon factors beyond the control of our company.
The potential profitability of oil and natural gas properties is dependent upon many factors beyond our control. For instance, world prices and markets for
oil and natural gas are unpredictable, highly volatile, potentially subject to governmental fixing, pegging, controls or any combination of these and other
factors,  and  respond  to  changes  in  domestic,  international,  political,  social  and  economic  environments.  Additionally,  due  to  worldwide  economic
uncertainty,  the  availability  and  cost  of  funds  for  production  and  other  expenses  have  become  increasingly  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  project.  In
addition, adverse weather conditions can hinder drilling operations. These changes and events may materially affect our future financial performance.
These factors cannot be accurately predicted and the combination of these factors may result in our company not receiving an adequate return on invested
capital.
In addition, a productive well may become uneconomic in the event water or other deleterious substances are encountered which impair or prevent the
production of oil and/or natural gas from the well. Production from any well may be unmarketable if it is impregnated with water or other deleterious
substances. Also, the marketability of oil and natural gas which may be acquired or discovered will be affected by numerous related factors, including the
proximity and capacity of oil and natural gas pipelines and processing equipment, market fluctuations of prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, allowable
production and environmental protection, all of which could result in greater expenses than revenue generated by the well.
The marketability of natural resources will be affected by numerous factors beyond our control which may result in us not receiving an adequate return
on invested capital to be profitable or viable.
The marketability of natural resources which may be acquired or discovered by us will be affected by numerous factors beyond our control. These factors
include market fluctuations in oil and natural gas pricing and demand, the proximity and capacity of natural resource markets and processing equipment,
governmental regulations, land tenure, land use, regulation concerning the importing and exporting of oil and natural gas and environmental protection
regulations.  The  exact  effect  of  these  factors  cannot  be  accurately  predicted,  but  the  combination  of  these  factors  may  result  in  us  not  receiving  an
adequate return on invested capital to be profitable or viable.
12
Oil and natural gas operations are subject to comprehensive regulation which may cause substantial delays or require capital outlays in excess of those
anticipated causing an adverse effect on our company.
Oil and natural gas operations are subject to federal, state, and local laws relating to the protection of the environment, including laws regulating removal
of natural resources from the ground and the discharge of materials into the environment. Oil and natural gas operations are also subject to federal, state,
and local laws and regulations which seek to maintain health and safety standards by regulating the design and use of drilling methods and equipment.
Various  permits  from  government  bodies  are  required  for  drilling  operations  to  be  conducted;  no  assurance  can  be  given  that  standards  imposed  by
federal, provincial, or local authorities may be changed and any such changes may have material adverse effects on our activities. Moreover, compliance
with such laws may cause substantial delays or require capital outlays in excess of those anticipated, thus causing an adverse effect on us. Additionally,
we  may  be  subject  to  liability  for  pollution  or  other  environmental  damages.  To  date,  we  have  not  been  required  to  spend  any  material  amount  on
compliance with environmental regulations. However, we may be required to do so in the future and this may affect our ability to expand or maintain our
operations.
Exploration and production activities are subject to certain environmental regulations which may prevent or delay the commencement or continuation of
our operations.
In general, our exploration and production activities are subject to certain federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to environmental quality
and pollution control. Such laws and regulations increase the costs of these activities and may prevent or delay the commencement or continuation of a
given operation. Specifically, we may be subject to legislation regarding emissions into the environment, water discharges and storage and disposition of
hazardous wastes. In addition, legislation has been enacted which requires well and facility sites to be abandoned and reclaimed to the satisfaction of state
authorities.  However,  such  laws  and  regulations  are  frequently  changed  and  we  are  unable  to  predict  the  ultimate  cost  of  compliance.  Generally,
environmental requirements do not appear to affect us any differently or to any greater or lesser extent than other companies in the industry.
Exploratory drilling involves many risks and we may become liable for pollution or other liabilities which may have an adverse effect on our financial
position.
Drilling  operations  generally  involve  a  high  degree  of  risk.  Hazards  such  as  unusual  or  unexpected  geological  formations,  power  outages,  labor
disruptions, blow-outs, sour natural gas leakage, fire, inability to obtain suitable or adequate machinery, equipment or labor, and other risks are involved. 
We may become subject to liability for pollution or hazards against which it cannot adequately insure or which it may elect not to insure. Incurring any
such liability may have a material adverse effect on our financial position and operations.
Any change to government regulation/administrative practices may have a negative impact on our ability to operate and our profitability.
The  business  of  oil  and  natural  gas  exploration  and  development  is  subject  to  substantial  regulation  under  various  countries  laws  relating  to  the
exploration for, and the development, upgrading, marketing, pricing, taxation, and transportation of oil and natural gas and related products and other
matters. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities of oil and natural gas exploration and development operations
could have a material adverse impact on our business. In addition, there can be no assurance that income tax laws, royalty regulations and government
incentive programs related to the properties subject to our farm-out agreements and the oil and natural gas industry generally will not be changed in a
manner which may adversely affect our progress and cause delays, inability to explore and develop or abandonment of these interests.
Permits, leases, licenses, and approvals are required from a variety of regulatory authorities at various stages of exploration and development. There can
be no assurance that the various government permits, leases, licenses and approvals sought will be granted in respect of our activities or, if granted, will
not be cancelled or will be renewed upon expiry. There is no assurance that such permits, leases, licenses, and approvals will not contain terms and
provisions which may adversely affect our exploration and development activities.
13
If we are unable to hire and retain key personnel, we may not be able to implement our business plan.
Our success is largely dependent on our ability to hire highly qualified personnel. This is particularly true in highly technical businesses such as resource
exploration. These individuals are in high demand and we may not be able to attract the personnel we need. In addition, we may not be able to afford the
high salaries and fees demanded by qualified personnel, or may lose such employees after they are hired. Failure to hire key personnel when needed, or
on acceptable terms, would have a significant negative effect on our business.
We are not the "operator" of any of our oil and gas exploration interests, and so we are exposed to the risks of our third-party operators.
We rely on the expertise of our contracted third-party oil and gas exploration and development operators and third-party consultants for their judgment,
experience and advice. We can give no assurance that these third party operators or consultants will always act in our best interests, and we are exposed
as a third party to their operations and actions and advice in those properties and activities in which we are contractually bound.
Our management has limited experience and training in the oil and gas industry and could make uninformed decisions that negatively impact our oil and
gas operations.
Because our management has limited experience and training in the oil and gas industry, we may not have sufficient expertise to make informed best
practices decisions regarding oil and gas operations. We do not have a petroleum engineer on staff to provide internal oversight. It is possible that, due to
our  limited  knowledge,  we  might  elect  to  complete  a  well  and  incur  financial  burdens  that  a  more  experienced  petroleum  team  might  elect  not  to
complete. Our ability to internally evaluate oil and gas operations and opportunities could be less thorough than that of a more highly trained management
team.
Our independent certified public accounting firm, in the notes to the audited financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2010 states that there is
a substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
As at October 31, 2010, we have experienced significant losses since inception. Failure to arrange adequate financing on acceptable terms and to achieve
profitability would have an adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, cash flows and prospects. Accordingly, there is substantial doubt
that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Risks Associated with Our Common Stock
Trading on the OTC Bulletin Board may be volatile and sporadic, which could depress the market price of our common stock and make it difficult for our
stockholders to resell their shares.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board service of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Trading in stock quoted on the OTC
Bulletin Board is often thin and characterized by wide fluctuations in trading prices, due to many factors that may have little to do with our operations or
business prospects. This volatility could depress the market price of our common stock for reasons unrelated to operating performance. Moreover, the
OTC Bulletin Board is not a stock exchange, and trading of securities on the OTC Bulletin Board is often more sporadic than the trading of securities
listed on a quotation system like Nasdaq or a stock exchange like Amex. Accordingly, shareholders may have difficulty reselling any of the shares.
14
Penny stock rules will limit the ability of our stockholders to sell their stock.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted regulations which generally define “penny stock” to be any equity security that has a market price 
(as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the
penny  stock  rules,  which  impose  additional  sales  practice  requirements  on  broker-dealers  who  sell  to  persons  other  than  established  customers  and 
“accredited investors”. The term “accredited investor” refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or individuals with a net worth 
in excess of $1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouse. The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior 
to a  transaction in  a penny  stock not  otherwise exempt from the rules, to  deliver a standardized risk  disclosure  document in  a  form prepared by  the
Securities and Exchange Commission which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market. The
broker-dealer also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of the broker-dealer and its 
salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account. The bid and 
offer quotations, and the broker-dealer and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the
transaction and must be given to the customer in writing before or with the customer’s confirmation. In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior 
to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from these rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock 
is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction. These disclosure requirements may have the
effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules. Consequently, these penny
stock rules may affect the ability of broker-dealers to trade our securities. We believe that the penny stock rules discourage investor interest in and limit
the marketability of our common stock.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA, has adopted sales practice requirements which may also limit a shareholder's ability to buy and
sell our stock.
In  addition  to  the  "penny  stock"  rules  described  above,  FINRA  has  adopted  rules  that  require  that  in  recommending  an  investment  to  a  customer,  a
broker-dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that customer. Prior to recommending speculative low priced
securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about the customer's financial status, tax
status, investment objectives and other information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative
low priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make it more difficult for broker-dealers to recommend that 
their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market for its shares.
Other Risks
Because majority of our officers and directors are located in non-U.S. jurisdictions, you may have no effective recourse against them for misconduct and
you may not be able to enforce judgment and civil liabilities against our officers, directors, experts and agents.
All of our directors and officers except for one are nationals and/or residents of countries other than the United States and all or a substantial portion of
their assets are located in the United States. As a result, it may be difficult for investors to enforce within the United States any judgments obtained
against our officers or directors, including judgments predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United States or any state
thereof.
Trends, Risks and Uncertainties
We have sought to identify what we believe to be the most significant risks to our business, but we cannot predict whether, or to what extent, any of such
risks may be realized nor can we guarantee that we have identified all possible risks that might arise. Investors should carefully consider all of such risk
factors before making an investment decision with respect to our common stock.
15
Item 1B.   Unresolved Staff Comments
Not Applicable.
Item 2.     Properties
Executive Offices
The address of our principal executive office is Suite 950, 1130 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6E 4A4, for which we share 250
square feet of office space, which includes one executive office for a monthly rental of CAD$1,337. Our telephone number is (604) 602-1675. We have 
another office located in Kelowna, for which we share 1,500 square feet of office space, which includes two executive offices. Our current locations
provide adequate office space for our purposes at this stage of our development.
Resource Properties
As at October 31, 2010, the Company currently owns a 32% gross working interest in 13 wells and with the exception of a 40% working interest in wells
PP F-12-4 and PP F-12-5; a 45% gross working interest in 7 wells; and a 60% gross working interest in 43 wells (of which 38 remain to be drilled); all
located in Mississippi under various agreements with Griffin and Griffin Exploration, L.L.C. The most significant of these wells are the producing oil
wells PP F-12-1, PP F-12-3, PP F-12-4, and PP F-12-5 located within the Belmont Lake oil field which is itself located in the Palmetto Point region. The
Belmont  Lake  oil  field  is  onshore,  as  are  all  of  the  Company’s  wells,  but  located  in  a  flood  plain  of  the  Mississippi  River  which  forces  seasonal
constraints on certain field activities. The Company has an interest in one producing gas well, the PP F-29, but because the gas from this well is consumed 
by field operations it is deemed to be of no commercial value. Except for this and the four oil wells noted immediately above, the Company has no other
producing wells. Additional details of these interests are noted below and not all of these wells were successful.
A description of the Company’s Palmetto Point Project and Frio-Wilcox Project follow. For a description of the Company’s other properties, please see 
the section titled “Significant Acquisitions and Dispositions”.
Mississippi: Palmetto Point Project
On December 21, 2005, the Company agreed to purchase a 20% gross working and revenue interest in a 10 well drilling program in Palmetto Point,
Mississippi owned by Griffin & Griffin Exploration (“Griffin”) for cash payments of $700,000, comprised of $220,000 paid upon entering the Agreement
and the remaining balance of $480,000 paid on January 17, 2006. The Company applied the full cost method to account for its oil and gas properties and
as of July 31, 2009, seven wells were found to be proved wells, and three wells were found impaired. One of the wells was impaired due to uneconomic
life, and the other two wells were abandoned due to no apparent gas or oil shows present. The costs of impaired properties were added to the capitalized
cost in determination of the depletion expense. Palmetto Point is approximately 150 miles southwest of Jackson, Mississippi and approximately 50 miles
north/northwest  of  Baton  Rouge,  Louisiana.  It  is  30  miles  west  of  Woodville,  Mississippi  off  of  State  Highway  33  and  is  entirely  within  Wilkinson
County.
There  were  no  further  costs  to  the  Company  in  earning  its  interest  in  the  10  well  drilling  program,  including  well  development  costs  or  pipeline
connections. Griffin has agreed that the leases held by it covering any mineral estate underlying the applicable well site acreage shall not provide for more
than  twenty-five  (25%)  percent  royalty  and  overriding  royalty  interest.  The  Company’s  net  interest  in  any  oil  and  gas  produced  is  calculated  by 
subtracting the applicable royalties from its 20% gross interest. Consequently, its original net working interest in the drilling program was a minimum
fifteen (15%) percent net working interest. Griffin conducted the Drilling Program in its capacity as Operator and receives a 15% carried interest.
16
One of these original 10 wells was the PP F-12-1 well, which was the discovery well of a field now known as the Belmont Lake field. All of these
original  10  wells  were  targeting  the  Frio  geological  formation  of  the  Cenozoic  era  and  Oligocene  series,  which  is  characterized  in  this  region  as  a
generally shallow, sandstone-rich layer. In this area of Mississippi, the Frio geologic formation is generally found between 2,000 and 4,500 foot depth
from surface.
On September 22, 2006, the Company elected to participate in an additional two-well program in Palmetto Point, Mississippi owned by Griffin by paying 
an  additional  $140,000  (paid).  The  Company  earned  the  same  20%  gross  interest  in  the  two  (2)  additional  wells  (12  wells  total  and  all  drilled)  and
subsequently increased its gross interest to 32% in these 12 wells, or a net revenue interest of 20.802815%. As of July 31, 2009, the two wells were found
to be proved wells.
On June 23, 2007, the Company acquired an assignment of a 10% gross working interest in the Palmetto Point wells described above from a third party
for $520,000 which was payable by a secured loan. The $520,000 loan was valued at a Net Present Value of $501,922, which is the capitalized amount.
The Company calculated the net present value of the secured loan payable by applying 8% interest rate, which was based on a T-bill rate of 4.28% plus a 
risk premium.
On October 4, 2007, the Company elected to participate in the drilling of the PP F-12-3 well in Palmetto Point, Mississippi which was conducted by 
Griffin. This well was the second well drilled in the Belmont Lake oil field. The Company had a 30% gross working interest and paid $266,348. On July
31, 2008, the Company accrued and paid an additional cost of $127,707 for the workovers of wells PP F-12 and PP F-12-3. PP F-12 has had intermittent 
production from October 2007, and PP F-12-3 has had intermittent production from November 2007.
On April 3, 2009, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Delta Oil & Gas, Inc., and The Stallion Group to acquire additional
interests  in  its  existing  core  producing  Mississippi  oil  and  gas  properties.  The  Company  paid  $40,073.39  to  acquire  an  additional  two  percent  (2%)
working interest in the proven Belmont Lake oil and gas field and an additional 10% working interest in potential nearby exploration wells.
The Company had a short-lived opportunity to acquire additional fractional interests in the upcoming Belmont Lake 12-4 well which was expected to be a 
horizontal well. An unrelated third party did not participate in its right to participate in the 12-4 well, and therefore a share of its interest (a “non consent”
interest) was made available to the other participating parties including Lexaria. On August 28, 2009 and effective on September 1, 2009, to take best
advantage of this opportunity, the Company entered into four separate assignment agreements, three of which were with people or companies with related
management. The Company received from these four parties proceeds of $371,608.57 to fund additional interests in this well. As a result, the Company
has a 25.84% perpetual gross interest in the well (18.0% net revenue interest); as well as a 5.2% net revenue interest in the non-consent interest. The non-
consent interest remains valid until such time as the well produces 500% of all costs and expenses back to the participants in the form of revenue, at
which time the non-consent interest ends. Enertopia, a company with related management, had acquired from Lexaria a 6.16% perpetual gross interest in
the 12-4 well; David DeMartini, a director of Lexaria, had acquired from Lexaria a 5% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the 12-4 well; and 
0743608 BC Ltd. a company owned by the President of the Company, had acquired from Lexaria a 11.60% gross interest in the non-consent interest in 
the 12-4 well.
On May 31, 2010, the Company signed a Settlement Agreement with Enertopia Corp., whereby the Company issued 499,893 units at $0.12 per unit and
each unit consists of one restricted common share and one share purchase warrant at $0.20 per share for a period of two years in exchange for the working
interest initially assigned on August 28, 2009.
17
On June 16, 2010, the Company signed a Settlement Agreement with a third party, who had originally participated in the August 28, 2009, opportunity in
the non-consent interest for Belmont Lake 12-4. The Company returned back $144,063.46 to the third party and cancelled its participation.
On July 29, 2010, the Company had agreed with its Operators at Belmont Lake not to proceed to drill a horizontal 12-4 well. Rather, two of the three 
proposed vertical wells 12-2, 12-4, or 12-5 are proposed to be drilled in August 2010. To take best advantage of this opportunity, the Company cancelled
all  previous  agreements  relating  to  August  28,  2009  with  respect  to  Belmont  Lake  horizontal  well  12-4  and  entered  into  three  separate  assignment 
agreements, of which all three were with people or companies with related management. The Company received total proceeds of $324,677.12 to fund
additional interests in these wells. As a result, the Company has a 32% perpetual gross interest in the wells (24.0% net revenue interest); as well as a 8%
gross interest (6% net revenue interest) in the non-consent interest. The non-consent interest remains valid until such time as the well produces 500% of
all costs and expenses back to the participants in the form of revenue, at which time the non-consent interest ends. Emerald Atlantic LLC, a company 
owned  by  a  director  of  Lexaria, has  acquired  from  Lexaria a 8.74%  gross  interest  in  the  non-consent  interest in  two  of  the three vertical  wells;  and 
0743608 BC Ltd. a company owned by the President of the Company, has acquired from Lexaria a 20.79% gross interest in the non-consent interest in 
the two of the three vertical wells; an advisor to the Company has acquired from Lexaria 2.46% gross interest in the non-consent interest in two of the 
three vertical wells.
On September 13, 2010, Lexaria Corp. (the “Company”) entered into three separate assignment agreements with 0743608 BC Limited, solely owned by
Director/Officer of the Company; Emerald Atlantic LLC, solely owned by a Director of the Company, and the Senior VP Business Development. (the
“Assignees”), whereby the Assignees have paid a fee of US$408,116.48 to earn a 24% share of the Company’s gross non-perpetual 32% interest in the 
three oil  wells being drilled  in Wilkinson County,  Mississippi.  This agreement  replaces the one signed  on August 28,  2009.  As a  result  of the  three
assignment agreements, Lexaria receives at no cost to the company, a carried interest of 8% in these same rights and benefits. The Company assigns,
transfers and sets over to the Assignees, all proportionate rights, interest and benefits in the Assigned Non Perpetual Interest held by or granted to the
Assignor in and to the Participation Agreement between the Company and Griffin but limited to a gross 500% revenue payout based on the total amount
paid under the Initial Consideration and the Subsequent Consideration after which all rights, interests and benefits cease.
Total working interest for Belmont Lake as of October 31, 2010 is 32%, with the exception of a 40% interest in wells PP F-12-4 and PP F-12-5; and total 
working interest in the exploration wells on approximately 130,000 acres surrounding Belmont Lake in all directions as of October 31, 2010, is 60%.
As of October 31, 2010, there were additional well interest changes or workovers pending of wells PP F-12, PP F12-3, PP F12-4, PP F12-5 and PP F-29 
in the amount of $397,983.21.
As of December 29, 2010, the status of the Palmetto Point, Mississippi wells is as follows:
Well Name 
PP F-40 
PP F-118 
PP F-121
Spud/Start 
May 11/06 
May 18/06 
May 24/06
Complete 
May 16/06 
May 22/06 
May 29/06
Results 
Frio Gas; 12 ft. 
Frio Gas; 14 ft. 
Dry
Depth 
3850 
3808 
3850
Status 
Shut-in 
Shut-in 
Plug & abandon
18
PP F-7 
PP F-39 
PP F-42 
PP F-36-2 
PP F-4 
PP F- 29 
PP F-12-1
PP F-6B 
PP F-52A 
PP F-12-3 
PP F-12-4
May 31/06 
June 10/06 
June 18/06 
June 23/06 
Oct 31/06 
Nov 11/06 
Dec 18/06
Oct/07 
Aug/10
June 4/06 
June 16/06 
June 21/06 
July 2/06 
Nov. 5/06 
Nov. 14/06 
Dec. 24/06
July 27/06 
July 27/06 
Oct/07 
Oct/10
Dry 
Frio Gas/Oil; 12 ft. 
Frio Gas/Oil; 10 ft. 
Frio Gas; 8 ft. 
Frio Gas; 8 ft. 
Frio Gas; 37 ft. 
Frio Gas; 3 ft.  
Frio Oil, 26 ft. 
Frio Gas 
Frio Gas 
Frio Oil 
Frio Oil
3800 
3900 
3170 
3450 
4200 
4100 
4016
3150 
3150
Plug & abandon 
Shut-in 
Shut-in 
Shut-in 
Shut-in 
Producing 
Producing
Shut-in 
Shut-in 
Producing 
Producing
Mississippi and Louisiana: Frio-Wilcox Project
After participating in the Palmetto Point project, the Company entered into a separate agreement that expanded both its percentage interest in future wells,
and also expanded the geographical area on which those wells could be drilled.
On August 3, 2006, the Company entered into a Phase II agreement with Griffin, to acquire a working interest in multiple zones of potential oil and gas
production in Mississippi and Louisiana. This agreement contemplates up to a 50 well drill program, which are exclusive to the participants, for Wilcox
and Frio wells, at the Company’s option, within the defined area of mutual interest (“AMI”). From these 50 prospects, Griffin and the participants will 
select all drill locations with the expectation that the wells will be drilled to depths sufficient to test prospectively for producible hydrocarbons from the
top of the Frio Formation to the bottom of the Wilcox Formation.
These 50 wells are in addition to all wells drilled under the original 10-well agreement and also in addition to any development wells to be drilled at the
Belmont Lake oil field discovery. The AMI originally included over 200,000 gross acres located non-contiguously between Southwest Mississippi and 
North East Louisiana which include the approximately 32,000 acres of the Palmetto Point area but also include other areas.
The Company had contracted to assume a 40% gross interest in this AMI, meaning it was obligated to pay 40% of costs related to licensing, permitting,
drilling, completion and all other related costs. Upon payment of 40% of the costs, the Company earned a net 32% of all production from all producible
zones to the base of the Frio formation (Frio Targets); and, 30% of all production to the base of the Wilcox formation (Wilcox Targets). All working
interests are to be registered in the name of the Company. This 50-well AMI was intended to be drilled in several stages.
19
The Company’s pro rate share of the first stage had a total cost $1.6 million. As of October 31 2007, the Company had placed $1,600,000 in trust to
completely fund this initial commitment. During the drill program, an unrelated third party participant elected not to continue their participation in the
program, and we assumed our pro-rata portion of their 10% gross working interest as our own, at no additional cost, bringing our total gross working
interest in the seven (7) wells and their leases (Initial AMI Drilling Program), to 45%.
On June 21, 2007, the Company acquired an additional 10% from a third party for all rights, title and benefits excluding the seven wells drilled under the 
AMI Agreement between August 3, 2006 and June 19, 2007, specifically wells CMR-USA-39-14, Dixon #1, Faust #1 TEC F-1, CMR/BR F-14, RB F-1 
Red Bug #2, BR F-33, and Randall #1 F-4, and any offset wells that could be drilled to any of these specified wells (Subsequent AMI Drilling Program).
This brought our interest in the remaining 43 wells to 50% and we drilled 5 wells under this arrangement.
On April 3, 2009, the Company acquired an additional 10% working interest in the 38 exploration wells remaining to be drilled, bringing its total gross
working interest to 60% in the 38 wells that remain to be drilled of this original 50-well option in over 140,000 acres surrounding Belmont Lake in all 
directions.
Initial AMI Drilling Program
The Company’s pro rate share of the first stage had a total cost $1.6 million. As of October 31 2007, the Company had placed $1,600,000 in trust to
completely fund this initial commitment. During the drill program, an unrelated third party participant elected not to continue their participation in the
program, and we assumed our pro-rata portion of their 10% gross working interest as our own, at no additional cost, bringing our total gross working
interest in these seven (7) drilled wells and their leases, to 45%.
The Company successfully drilled and completed seven (7) wells under this drilling program. Certain wells were placed into production.
Details of the drill program are outlined below:
In December 2006, the first well CMR-US 39-14 was found to have sufficient hydrocarbons to become economic. USA 1-37 and BR F-33 had started 
intermittent production from November 2007. The Company applied the full cost method to account for its oil and gas properties.
As at January 31, 2007, the Company abandoned Dixon #1 due to no economic hydrocarbons being present and $162,420 of drilling costs was added to
the  capitalized  costs.  The  Dixon  #1  was  the  only  Wilcox  well  the  Company  has  drilled  to  date.  Every  other  well  it  has  participated  in  located  in
Mississippi and Louisiana is a Frio well. Slightly deeper than the Frio targets, but also of the Cenozoic era, the Wilcox geologic formation is of the
Eocene series, generally found at depths of less than 8,000 feet.
On  June  2,  2007,  the  Company  abandoned  Randall  #1  and  $107,672  drilling  costs  were  added  to  the  capitalized  costs  in  determination  of  depletion
expense.
During August to October 2007, three additional wells, PP F-90, PP F-100, and PP F-111 were drilled in the area. These Frio wells were abandoned due 
to modest gas shows and a total of $306,562 drilling costs was added to the capitalized costs in determination of depletion expense.
During December 2007, two additional wells, PP F-6A and PP F-83, were drilled and were plugged and abandoned due to non-economic gas shows. A 
total of $247,086 drilling costs were added to the capitalized costs in determination of depletion expense.
20
The results of the initial drill program are as follows:
Well Name 
CMR-USA-39- 14  
RB F-3 
Dixon #1 
Faust #1,  
TEC F-1 
CMR/BR F-24 
RB F-1  
Red Bug #2 
BR F-33 
Randall #1  
Closure F-4
Spud/Start 
Sept. 8/06
Jan. 03/07 
Feb. 05/07
Feb. 20/07 
May 08/07
May 20/07 
May 27/07
Complete 
Sept. 12/06
Jan. 20/07 
Feb. 11/07
Feb. 24/07 
May 13/07
May 24/07 
June 03/07
Results 
Frio Gas 14 ft.
Wilcox Target; Dry 
Frio Gas 9 ft
Frio Gas 
Frio Gas 10 ft
Frio Gas 12 ft 
Frio Target: Dry
Depth 
3,200
8,650 
5,350
3,250 
3,180
3,837 
5,100
Subsequent AMI Drilling Program
Status 
Shut-in
Plug & abandon 
Shut-in
Shut-in 
Shut-in
Shut-in 
Plug & abandon
As  of  April  30,  2008,  five  additional  wells  were  drilled  under  the  50-well  AMI.  Each  of  these  wells  encountered  non  commercial  quantities  of
hydrocarbons and were plugged and abandoned.
Significant Acquisitions and Dispositions
Alberta, Canada: Strachan Leduc Reef
On September 23, 2005, the Company entered into an agreement to participate in the Strachan Leduc Reef Farm-In in Alberta, Canada. The Company
made a payment of $218,739. (CDN $253,977) for a 4% participation in the costs of Strachan Leduc Reef Farm-In. In addition, the Company incurred
$186,668 for required supplemental funds due to well hole problems. The Company will earn on completion, capped or abandoned with respect to the
well to be drilled at 14 of 9-38-9-W5M the following:
1.
2.
In the Spacing Unit for the Earning Well: 
 
a. 
 
b.
A 2.000% interest in the petroleum and natural gas below the base of the Mannville excluding natural gas in the formation; and
 
A 4.000% interest in the natural gas in the Leduc formation before payout subject to payment of the Overriding Royalty which is
convertible upon payout at royalty owners option to 50% of the Farmee’s Interest;
A 1.600% interest in the rights below the base of the Shunda formation in Section 10, Township 38, Range 9W5M; and
21
3.
A 1.289% interest in the rights below the base of the Shunda formation in Sections 15 and 16, Township 38, Range 9W5M down to the
base as shown in the schedule attached to the agreement dated September 23, 2005.
The Company wrote down the cost of the property to a nominal value of $1 as the future realization of the property is uncertain.
As at October 31, 2010, the Company’s working interest in Strachan Leduc Reef property has expired.
Production and Prices
The following table sets forth information regarding net production of oil and natural gas, and certain price and cost information for fiscal years ended
October 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008.
Production Data: 
Natural gas (Mcf) 
Oil (Bbls) 
Average Prices: 
Natural gas (per Mcf) 
Oil (per Bbl) 
Production Costs: 
Natural gas (per Mcf) 
Oil (per Bbl)
Productive Wells
For the fiscal year ended
October 31, 2010
For the fiscal year ended
October 31, 2009
For the fiscal year ended
October 31, 2008
360 
4,641
$4.50 
$81.47
$15.72 
$17.43
13,138 
7,461
$3.77 
$50.00
$9.43 
$11.00
58,791 
5,522
$8.52 
$101.28
$3.71 
$23.70
The following table summarizes information at October 31, 2010, relating to the productive wells in which we owned a working interest as of that date.
Productive wells consist of producing wells and wells capable of production, but specifically exclude wells drilled and cased during the fiscal year that
have yet to be tested for completion (e.g., all of the operated wells drilled by the Company during this year have been cased in preparation for completion,
but no operations have been initiated that would allow these wells to be productive). Gross wells are the total number of producing wells in which we
have an interest, and net wells are the sum of our fractional working interests in the gross wells.
22
Location 
Mississippi 
  
Total
Oil
4 
  
         4
Gross 
Gas
5 
 
           5
Total
9 
 
            9
Oil
0.21355 
 
0.21355
Net  
Gas
0.27 
  
.27
Total
0.48355 
 
0.48355
Unaudited Oil and Gas Reserve Quantities
The unaudited reserve estimates for Mississippi, as of October 31, 2010, were prepared by Veazey & Associates, an independent petroleum engineering
firm.
The  estimated  proved  reserves  prepared  by  Veazey  and  Associates  are  summarized  in  the  table  below,  in  accordance  with  definitions  and  pricing
requirements as prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Prices paid for oil and natural gas vary widely depending upon the 
quality such as the Btu content of the natural gas, gravity of the oil, sulfur content and location of the production related to the refinery or pipelines.
There are many uncertainties inherent in estimating proved reserve quantities and in projecting future production rates and the timing of development
expenditures. In addition, reserve estimates of new discoveries that have little production history are more imprecise than those of properties with more
production history. Accordingly, these estimates are expected to change as future information becomes available.
Proved oil and gas reserves are the estimated quantities of crude oil and natural gas which geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable
certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions.
Proved developed oil and gas reserves are those reserves expected to be recovered through existing wells with existing equipment and operating methods.
Unaudited net quantities of proved developed and undeveloped reserves of crude oil and natural gas (all located within United States) are as follows:
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved natural gas and oil reserves is as follows:
Future cash inflows 
Future production costs 
Future development costs 
Future net cash flows - undiscounted 
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows 
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
23
USD$
10,235,672 
(2,111,745) 
(848,227) 
7,275,700 
(893,508) 
6,382,192
Year-end price per Mcf of natural gas used in making standardized measure determinations as of October 31, 2010 was $4.50. Year-end price per Bbl of 
oil used in making these same calculations was $81.47.
Estimated Net quantities of Natural Gas and Oil Reserves:
The following table sets forth our proved reserves, including changes, and proved developed reserves at the end of October 31, 2010.
Proved reserves: 
Beginning of the year reserve 
Adjustments of reserves in place 
Productions 
End of year reserves 
  
Proved developed reserves: 
Beginning of the year reserve 
End of year reserves
Oil and Gas Acreage
Crude Oil
(MBbls)
77.18 
53.10 
(4.64) 
125.64
26.63 
57.33
Natural
Gas
(MMcf)
Crude Oil
Equivalents
(MBbls)
80.65 
49.73 
(4.74) 
125.64
30.10 
57.33
20.80  
(20.20) 
(0.60) 
0  
 
 
20.80  
0
The following table sets forth the undeveloped and developed acreage, by area, held by us as of October 31, 2010. Undeveloped acres are acres on which
wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit the production of commercial quantities of oil and gas, regardless of whether or not
such acreage contains proved reserves. Developed acres are acres, which are spaced or assignable to productive wells. Gross acres are the total number of
acres in which we have a working interest. Net acreage is obtained by multiplying gross acreage by our working interest percentage in the properties. The
table does not include acreage in which we have a contractual right to acquire or to earn through drilling projects, or any other acreage for which we have
not yet received leasehold assignments.
24
Mississippi 
Total
Drilling Activity
Undeveloped Acres
Gross
Net
220 
220
132 
132
Developed Acres
Gross
Net
1,160 
1,160
241.31 
241.31
The following table sets forth our drilling activity during the years ended October 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008.
Exploratory wells: 
   Productive 
   Dry 
  
Development wells: 
   Productive 
   Dry 
  
      Total wells
Item 3.     Legal Proceedings
2010
Gross
2 
1 
  
3
Net
1.28 
.64
1.92
2009
Gross
2
Net 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
.72
2008
Gross
2 
  
  
  
  
  
2
Net 
  
  
.72 
  
  
  
  
  
.72
We  know  of no material,  existing  or  pending legal proceedings against us, nor  are we involved  as a  plaintiff  in any material proceeding  or pending
litigation. There are no proceedings in which any of our directors, officers or affiliates, or any registered or beneficial shareholder, is an adverse party or
has a material interest adverse to our Company.
25
Item 4.     (Reserved and Removed)
PART II
Item 5.     Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of
Equity Securities
Our common shares are quoted on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board under the symbol “LXRP.” Our common shares are also quoted on the Canadian 
National Stock Exchange (CNSX) under the symbol “LXX”. The following quotations, obtained from Yahoo Finance, reflect the high and low bids for
our common shares as quoted on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board based on inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission 
and may not represent actual transactions.
The high and low bid prices of our common stock for the periods indicated below are as follows:
National Association of Securities Dealers OTC BulletinBoard(1)
Quarter Ended 
       January 31, 2008 
       April 30, 2008 
       July 31, 2008 
       October 31, 2008 
       January 31, 2009 
       April 30, 2009 
       July 31, 2009 
       October 31, 2009 
       January 31, 2010 
       April 30, 2010 
       July 31, 2010 
       October 31, 2010 
(1) Over-the-counter market quotations reflect inter-dealer prices without retail mark- up, mark-down or commission, and may not represent actual 
transactions.  
(2) No high or low bid prices for our common stock were recorded for the period indicated.
Low 
$2.80 
$1.28 
$0.80 
$0.40 
$0.32 
$0.16 
$0.16 
$0.14 
$0.10 
$0.12 
$0.12 
$0.12
High 
$4.92 
$3.92 
$3.00 
$1.60 
$0.32 
$0.16 
$0.16 
$0.16 
$0.16 
$0.13 
$0.20 
$0.29
On January 5, 2011, the last closing price for one share of our common stock as reported by the OTC Bulletin Board was $0.31. This closing price reflects
an inter-dealer price, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and may not represent an actual transaction.
As of January 20, 2011, there were 33 holders of record of our common stock. As of such date, 13,033,409 common shares were issued and outstanding.
Our  common  shares  are  issued  in  registered  form.  Nevada  Agency  and  Trust  Company,  50  West  Liberty  Street,  Suite  880,  Reno,  Nevada  89501
(Telephone: 775.322.0626; Facsimile: 775.322.5623) is the registrar and transfer agent for our common shares.
Dividend Policy
We have not paid any cash dividends on our common stock and have no present intention of paying any dividends on the shares of our common stock.
Our current policy is to retain earnings, if any, for use in our operations and in the development of our business. Our future dividend policy will be
determined from time to time by our board of directors.
26
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
We did not sell any equity securities which were not registered under the Securities Act during the year ended October 31, 2010 that were not otherwise
disclosed on our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or our current reports on Form 8-K filed during the year ended October 31, 2010.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
We have no long-term incentive plans other than the stock option plan described below:
2007 Equity Plan
Our current stock option plan, entitled the 2007 Equity Incentive Stock Option Plan was approved by our shareholders on April 25, 2007 and filed Form
S-8 on May 7, 2009.
Discretionary Options granted to the Key Participants hereunder, the Board, on the recommendation of the Committee, may at any time authorize the
granting of Options to such Eligible Employees and Eligible Directors as it may select for the number of Shares that it shall designate, subject to the
provisions of the Plan. When the grant is authorized, the Board, on the recommendation of the Committee, shall specify the date of grant.
Each Option granted to an Eligible Employee or to an Eligible Director shall be evidenced by an option agreement with terms and conditions consistent
with the Plan and as approved by the Board on the recommendation of the Committee, which terms and conditions need not be the same in each case and
may be changed from time to time.
Discretionary Options to be vested immediately pursuant to grant hereunder, the Option Period for the Options remaining under the Plan shall be four
years from the date of grant thereof or such greater or lesser duration as the Board, on the recommendation of the Committee, may determine at the date
of grant thereof, and may thereafter be reduced with respect to any Option as provided in Section 2.8 hereof covering termination of employment or death
of the Optionee.
In addition, unless otherwise determined from time to time by the Board, on the recommendation of the Committee, the Options remaining under the Plan
may be exercised (in each case to the nearest full Share) during the Option Period as follows:
(a)
(b)
at any time during the first year of the Option Period, the Optionee may purchase up to 25% of the total number of Shares reserved for
issuance pursuant to his or her Option; and 
 
at any time during each additional year of the Option period the Optionee may purchase an additional 25% of the total number of Shares
reserved for issuance pursuant to his or her Option plus any Shares not purchased in accordance with the preceding subsection (a) until, in
the fourth year of the Option Period, 100% of the Option will be exercisable.
Except as set forth in Section 2.8 hereof, no Option may be exercised unless the Optionee is at the time of such exercise:
(c)
in the case of an Eligible Employee, in the employ of the Company or an Affiliate and shall have been continuously so employed since the
grant of his Option, but absence on leave, having the approval of the Company or such Affiliate, shall not be considered an interruption of
employment for any purpose of the Plan; or
27
(d)
in the case of an Eligible Director, a director of the Company or an Affiliate and shall have been such a director continuously since the
grant of his Option.
Subject to Section 2.6 hereof, the exercise of any Option will be contingent upon the Optionee having entered into an option agreement with the Company
on such terms and conditions as have been approved by the Board, on the recommendation of the Committee, and which incorporates by reference the
terms of the Plan. The exercise of any Option will also be contingent upon receipt by the Company of cash payment of the full purchase price of the
Shares being purchased. No Optionee or his legal representatives or legatees will be, or will be deemed to be, a holder of any Shares subject to an Option,
unless and until certificates for such Shares are issued to him or them under the terms of the Plan.
On July 23, 2009 the Company had a 1 for 4 share consolidation. The 2,000,000 maximum granting of stock options has now been reduced to 500,000
stock options.
2010 Equity Compensation Plan
On February 26, 2010, the Company’s shareholders approved and adopted the Company’s 2010 equity incentive plan (the “2010 Plan”). The purpose of 
the 2010 Plan is to enhance the long-term stockholder value of the Company by offering opportunities to our directors, officers, employees and eligible
consultants (“Participants”) to acquire and maintain stock ownership in the Company in order to give these persons the opportunity to participate in our
growth and success, and to encourage them to remain in our service.
The 2010 Plan is required to be administered by our Board of Directors or a committee appointed by, and consisting of two or more members of our
Board of Directors (the “Plan Administrator”). The Plan Administrator has the exclusive authority, in its discretion, to determine all matters relating to
any option granted (“Awards”) under the 2010 Plan including: (i) the selection of individuals to be granted Awards; (ii) the type of Awards; (iii) the
number of shares of Common Stock subject to an Award; (iv) all terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations, if any, of an Award; and (v) the terms of
any instrument that evidences the Award.
The Plan Administrator also has exclusive authority to interpret the 2010 Plan and the terms of any instrument evidencing the Award and may from time
to time adopt and change rules and regulations of general application for the 2010 Plan’s administration. The Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the 
2010 Plan and its rules and regulations is conclusive and binding on all parties involved or affected.
Options that are eligible for grant under the 2010 Plan to Participants include: (a) incentive stock options, whereby we will grant options to purchase
shares of our common stock to Participants with the intention that the options qualify as "incentive stock options" as that term is defined in Section 422 of
the Internal Revenue Code; (b) non-incentive stock options, whereby we will grant options to purchase shares of our common stock to Participants that do
not qualify as "incentive stock options" under the Internal Revenue Code; (c) stock appreciation rights; and (d) restricted shares. The 2010 Plan provides
that a maximum of Two Million (2,000,000) shares of common stock are available for granting of awards under the 2010 Plan.
The Plan Administrator has the authority in its sole discretion to grant Awards to participants as incentive stock options or as non-qualified stock options, 
as  appropriate.  Unless  an  earlier  termination  date  is  set  by  the  Plan  Administrator,  Awards  under  the  2010  Plan  will  terminate  at  the  earliest  of  the
following:
28
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c)
(d)
(e)
Ten (10) years after the Award is granted; 
 
The date the stock option expires in accordance with its terms;
 
Ninety (90) days after the Participant’s employment terminates (or ceases to provide services to the Company if the grantee is a non-
employee director or a consultant) (the “Employment Termination Date”), if the Participant's Employment Termination Date occurs by 
reason of retirement, resignation or for any other reasons other than for cause, disability or death;
 
Twelve (12) months after the Employment Termination Date, if the termination or cessation of services is a result of death or disability;
and 
 
Five (5) years after the Incentive Stock Option is granted for holders of 10% or more of the Company’s common stock.
To the extent that the right to purchase shares under an Award has vested, in order to exercise the Award the participant must execute and deliver to the
Company a written stock option exercise agreement or notice in a form and in accordance with procedures established by the Plan Administrator. In
addition, the full exercise price of the Option Award must be delivered to the Company and must be paid in a form acceptable to the Plan Administrator.
The  exact  terms  of  the  option  granted  are  contained  in  an  option  agreement  between  us  and  the  person  to  whom  such  option  is  granted.  Eligible
employees are not required to pay anything to receive options. The exercise price for incentive stock options must be no less than: 100% of the fair
market value of the common stock on the date of grant for Participants that hold less than 10% of the Company’s outstanding common stock; and 110%
of the fair market value of the common stock on the date of grant for Participants that hold 10% or more of the Company’s outstanding common stock. 
The exercise price for nonqualified stock options is determined by the Plan Administrator in its sole and complete discretion. An option holder may
exercise options from time to time, subject to vesting. Options will vest immediately upon death or disability of a participant and upon certain change of
control events.
Options  will  become  exercisable  by  the  participants  in  such  amounts  and  at  such  times  as  shall  be  determined  by  the  Plan  Administrator  in  each
individual grant. Options are not transferable except by will or by the laws of descent and distribution. Options granted under the 2010 Plan will become
exercisable in the manner at the times and in the amounts determined by the Plan Administrator. Participants may exercise options by delivery to the
Company of a written stock option exercise agreement or notice, in a form and in accordance with procedures established by the Plan Administrator,
setting forth the number of shares purchased under such exercise agreement, accompanied by payment in full in the form of a check or bank draft or other
method of payment or some combination thereof as may be acceptable to the Plan Administrator. All incentive stock options granted under the 2010 Plan
must comply with Section 422 of the Code.
As at the date of the annual report, there was nil stock options exercised.
29
Plan category
Equity compensation  
plans approved by  
security holders 
2007 Equity compensation  
plans not approved by  
security holders 
2010 Equity compensation  
plans not approved by  
security holders 
Total
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Number of securities
to be issued upon
exercise of
outstanding options,  
warrants and rights
Weighted-average  
exercise price of
outstanding options,  
warrants and rights
Number of securities  
remaining available  
for future issuance
under equity
compensation plans  
(excluding securities  
reflected in column
(a))
Nil
400,000
1,125,000
1,525,000
Nil
$0.20
$0.20
0.20
Nil
100,000
875,000
975,000
As at the date of the annual report, there were no stock options exercised.
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
We did not purchase any of our shares of common stock or other securities during our fiscal year ended October 31, 2010.
Item 6.     Selected Financial Data
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide the information required by this Item.
Item 7.     Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in
this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could 
differ materially from those discussed in the forward looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not
limited to; those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in the section entitled "Risk Factors" beginning on page 10 of this
annual report.
Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles.
Results of Operations for our Years Ended October 31, 2010 and 2009
Our net loss and comprehensive loss for our year ended October 31, 2010, for our year ended October 31, 2009 and the changes between those periods for
the respective items are summarized as follows:
30
Revenue 
Other (income)expenses 
General and administrative 
Interest expense 
Write down in carrying value of oil 
and gas properties 
Consulting fees 
Oil and gas operating expenses 
Professional Fees 
Net Income (loss)
Revenue
$
Year Ended  
October 31,
2010
$
Year Ended  
October 31,
2009
$
362,471
Nil
641,318 
167,322
1
168,512 
152,479 
50,562 
(552,462)
$
421,955
(94)
627,300 
160,121
Nil
165,959 
207,447 
69,928 
(753,573)
$
Change Between
Year Ended
October 31, 2010  
and Year Ended  
October 31, 2009
$
(59,484)
94
14,018 
7,201
1
2,553 
(54,968) 
(19,366) 
201,111
The decrease in our oil and gas revenues for our year ended October 31, 2010 was largely due to lower production volumes for oil wells PP F-12-1 and 
PP F-12-3.
General and Administrative
The increase in our general and administrative expenses for our year ended October 31, 2010 was due to increased stock based compensation.
Professional Fees
There was a decrease in accounting, audit and legal fees for our year ended October 31, 2010. In the year ended October 31, 2009 the fees were higher
due to the Canadian stock exchange listing.
Interest Expense
The increase in interest expense for our year ended October 31, 2010 is due to the outstanding loan made to the Company.
31
Oil and Gas Operating Expenses
The decrease in oil and gas operating expenses for our year ended October 31, 2010 was due to the lower production volumes for oil and gas.
Liquidity and Financial Condition
Working Capital 
  
  
Current assets 3
Current liabilities 
  
Working capital (deficiency) 
 
Cash Flows 
  
  
Cash flows from (used in) operating activities 
Cash flows (used in) investing activities 
Cash flows from (used in) financing activities 
Net increase (decrease) in cash during year
Operating Activities
$
$
$
$
October 31,
2010
At
140,206   $
 
1,049,647  
 
 
 (909,441)  $
Year Ended  
October 31,  
2010  
 (330,336) 
(285,242) 
348,400  
 (267,178)
At
October 31,
2009
372,362 
1,031,547
(659,185)
October 31 
2009 
(36,402) 
(223,826) 
(79,238) 
(339,466)
Net cash used in operating activities was $330,336 for our year ended October 31, 2010 compared with cash used in operating activities of $36,402 in the
same period in 2009. This difference was largely due to the payments made in accounts payable and an increase in accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $285,242 for our year ended October 31, 2010 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $223,826 in 
the same period in 2009 was mainly attributable to the oil and gas costs for Belmont Lake.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided in financing activities was $348,400 for our year ended October 31, 2010 compared to net cash used of $79,238 in the same period in
2009. This was largely from the proceeds of a private placement in 2010 and proceeds from a loan payable.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Going Concern
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a
going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The
Company has a net loss of $552,462 for the year ended October 31, 2010 [2009 – net loss of $753,573] and at October 31, 2010 had a deficit accumulated 
during the exploration stage of $3,924,392 [2009 – $3,371,930]. The Company generated revenue of $362,471 for the year ended October 31, 2010 [2009
- $421,955]. The Company has working capital deficiency of $909,441 as at October 31, 2010. The Company requires additional funds to maintain its
existing  operations  and  to  acquire  new  business  assets.  These  conditions  raise  substantial  doubt  about  the  Company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going 
concern.  Management’s  plans  in  this  regard  are  to  raise  equity  and  debt  financing  as  required,  but  there  is  no  certainty  that  such  financing  will  be
available or that it will be available at acceptable terms. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted at this time.
32
These financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and
classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
At this time, we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common stock or through
a loan from our directors to meet our obligations over the next twelve months. We do not have any arrangements in place for any future debt or equity
financing.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in 
financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in
accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing financial statements requires management to
make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  reported  amounts  of  assets,  liabilities,  revenue,  and  expenses.  These  estimates  and  assumptions  are
affected  by  management’s  application  of  accounting  policies.  We  believe  that  understanding  the  basis  and  nature  of  the  estimates  and  assumptions
involved with the following aspects of our financial statements are critical to an understanding of our financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In  June  2009,  the  FASB  issued  ASC  860,  “Transfers  and  Servicing”.  This  Standard  eliminates  the  concept  of  a  qualifying  special  purpose  entity
("QSPE") and modifies the de-recognition provisions in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 140. This statement is effective for financial
asset  transfers  occurring  after  the  beginning  of  an  entity's  first  fiscal  year  that  begins  after  November  15,  2009.  Early  application  is  prohibited.  The
Company does not anticipate any significant financial impact from adoption of ASC 860.
In October 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) regarding accounting for own-
share lending arrangements in contemplation of convertible debt issuance or other financing. This ASU requires that at the date of issuance of the shares
in a share-lending arrangement entered into in contemplation of a convertible debt offering or other financing, the shares issued shall be measured at fair
value  and  be  recognized  as  an  issuance  cost,  with  an  offset  to  additional  paid-in  capital.  Further,  loaned  shares  are  excluded  from  basic  and  diluted 
earnings per share unless default of the share-lending arrangement occurs, at which time the loaned shares would be included in the basic and diluted
earnings-per-share calculation. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2009, and interim periods within those fiscal
years for arrangements outstanding as of the beginning of those fiscal years. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s 
financial statements.
33
In January 2010, the FASB issued an update to the Fair Value topic. This update requires new disclosures for (1) transfers in and out of levels 1 and 2,
and (2) activity in level 3, by requiring the reconciliation to present separate information about purchases, sales, issuance, and settlements. Also, this
update clarifies the disclosures related to the fair value of each class of assets and liabilities and the input and valuation techniques for both recurring and
nonrecurring fair value measurements in levels 2 and 3. the effective date for the disclosures and clarifications is for the interim and annual reporting
periods beginning after December 15, 2009 except for the disclosures about purchases, sales, issuances and settlements, which is effective for fiscal years
beginning after December 15, 2010. This update is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In  January  2010,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  2010-01,  Equity  (Topic  505):  Accounting  for  Distributions  to  Shareholders  with 
Components of Stock and Cash (A Consensus of the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force). This amendment to Topic 505 clarifies the stock portion of a
distribution to shareholders that allows them to elect to receive cash or stock with a limit on the amount of cash that will be distributed is not a stock
dividend for purposes of applying Topics 505 and 260. Effective for interim and annual periods ending on or after December 15, 2009, and would be
applied on a retrospective basis. The Company does not expect the provisions of ASU 2010-01 to have a material effect on the financial position, results 
of operations or cash flows of the Company.
In  January  2010,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  2010-02,  Consolidation  (Topic  810):  Accounting  and  Reporting  for  Decreases  in 
Ownership of a Subsidiary. This amendment to Topic 810 clarifies, but does not change, the scope of current US GAAP. It clarifies the decrease in 
ownership provisions of Subtopic 810-10 and removes the potential conflict between guidance in that Subtopic and asset de-recognition and gain or loss 
recognition guidance that may exist in other US GAAP. An entity will be required to follow the amended guidance beginning in the period that it first
adopts FAS 160 (now included in Subtopic 810-10). For those entities that have already adopted FAS 160, the amendments are effective at the beginning
of the first interim or annual reporting period ending on or after December 15, 2009. The amendments should be applied retrospectively to the first period
that an entity adopted FAS 160. The Company does not expect the provisions of ASU 2010-02 to have a material effect on the financial position, results 
of operations or cash flows of the Company.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-06 Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic 820 “Improving Disclosures about Fair Value 
Measurements.” This ASU requires certain new disclosures and clarifies existing disclosure requirements about fair value measurement as set forth in
Codification Subtopic 820-10. The FASB’s objective is to improve these disclosures and, thus, increase the transparency in financial reporting. This ASU
is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2009, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of this ASU did not have
a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In  February  2010,  the  FASB  issued  ASC  No.  2010-09,  “Amendments  to  Certain  Recognition  and  Disclosure  Requirements”,  which  eliminates  the 
requirement for SEC filers to disclose the date through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events. ASC No. 2010-09 is effective for its fiscal 
quarter beginning after 15 December 2010. The adoption of ASC No. 2010-09 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial 
statements.
On March 5, 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-11 Derivatives and Hedging Topic 815 “Scope Exception Related to Embedded Credit Derivatives.”
This  ASU  clarifies  the  guidance  within  the  derivative  literature  that  exempts  certain  credit  related  features  from  analysis  as  potential  embedded
derivatives requiring separate accounting. The ASU specifies that an embedded credit derivative feature related to the transfer of credit risk that is only in
the form of subordination of one financial instrument to another is not subject to bifurcation from a host contract under ASC 815-15-25, “Derivatives and 
Hedging  —  Embedded  Derivatives  —  Recognition.”  All  other  embedded  credit  derivative  features  should  be  analyzed  to  determine  whether  their
economic characteristics and risks are “clearly and closely related” to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract and whether bifurcation
is required. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
34
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-13, “Compensation—Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Effect of Denominating the Exercise Price of a Share-
Based  Payment  Award  in  the  Currency  of  the  Market  in  Which  the  Underlying  Equity  Security  Trades,”  or  ASU  2010-13.  This  ASU  provides 
amendments to Topic 718 to clarify that an employee share-based payment award with an exercise price denominated in currency of a market in which a
substantial portion of the entity’s equity securities trades should not be considered to contain a condition that is not a market, performance, or service 
condition. Therefore, an entity would not classify such an award as a liability if it otherwise qualifies as equity. The amendments in this ASU are effective
for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning on or after December 15, 2010. The Company does not expect the adoption of
ASU 2010-13 to have a significant impact on its financial statements.
In April 2010, the FASB codified the consensus reached in Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 08-09, “Milestone Method of Revenue Recognition.”
FASB ASU No. 2010-17 “Revenue Recognition – Milestone Method (Topic 605)” provides guidance on defining a milestone and determining when it 
may  be  appropriate  to  apply  the  milestone  method  of  revenue  recognition  for  research  and  development  transactions.  FASB  ASU  No.  2010  –  17  is 
effective for fiscal years beginning on or after June 15, 2010, and is effective on a prospective basis for milestones achieved after the adoption date. The
Company does not expect this ASU will have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
In May 2010, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2010-19 (ASU 2010-19), Foreign Currency (Topic 830): Foreign Currency Issues: Multiple 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rates. The amendments in this Update are effective as of the announcement date of March 18, 2010. The Company does not
expect the provisions of ASU 2010-19 to have a material effect on the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flows of the Company.
35
Item 7A.   Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Not Applicable.
Item 8.      Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
36
Chang Lee LLP
Chartered Accountants
606 – 815 Hornby Street 
Vancouver, B.C, V6Z 2E6 
Tel: 604-687-3776 
Fax: 604-688-3373 
E-mail: info@changleellp.com
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
LEXARIA CORP.
We have audited the balance sheets of LEXARIA Corp. (“the Company”) as at October 31, 2010 and 2009 and the related statements of stockholders’
equity, operations and comprehensive loss and cash flows for the years then ended. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require
that we plan and perform an audit to obtain reasonable assurance whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as at October31,
2010 and 2009 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in
the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements refer to above have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in
Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company had recurring losses and requires additional funds to maintain its planned operations. These factors raise
substantial  doubt  about  its  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  Management’s  plans  in  regard  to  these  matters  are  also  described  in  Note  1.  The 
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Vancouver, Canada 
January 21, 2011
Chartered Accountants
37
LEXARIA CORP. 
BALANCE SHEETS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
ASSETS 
 
Current 
         Cash and cash equivalents 
         Accounts receivable 
         Prepaid expenses 
 
Total Current Assets 
 
Capital assets, net 
 
Oil and gas properties (Note 5) 
       Proved property 
       Unproved properties 
 
  
 
TOTAL ASSETS 
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY 
 
LIABILITIES 
 
Current 
         Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
         Loan payable (Note 7,8) 
         Due to a related party 
 
Total Current Liabilities 
 
Loan Payable (Note 6) 
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
 
STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY 
  
Share Capital 
         Authorized:  
         200,000,000 common voting shares with a par value of $0.001 per share  
         Issued and outstanding: 12,926,348 common shares at October 31, 2010  
         (10,732,870 common shares at October 31, 2009) 
 
Additional paid-in capital 
 
Deficit 
 
Total Stockholders' Equity 
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
$
$
$
$
October 31
2010
3,118,376 
19,293 
 
3,137,669
62,989  $
74,879 
 
2,338 
 
   
 
140,206 
 
   
 
425 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 3,278,300  $
   
 
 
 
 
 
 137,437  $
910,441 
 
1,769 
 
   
 
1,049,647 
 
   
 
75,000 
 
   
 
1,124,647
October 31
2009
330,167 
42,195 
-
372,362
1,445
2,823,277 
132,034
2,955,311
3,329,118
240,983 
788,795 
1,769
1,031,547
-
1,031,547
12,926 
 
6,065,119 
 
(3,924,392) 
 
2,153,653
3,278,300  $
10,733
5,658,768
(3,371,930)
2,297,571
3,329,118
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
38
Year ended
October 31
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
LEXARIA CORP.
For the year ended October 31, 2010
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Revenue 
       Natural gas and oil revenue 
  
Cost of revenue 
       Natural gas and oil operating costs 
       Depletion 
  
  
Gross profit (loss) 
  
Expenses 
       Accounting and audit 
       Insurance 
       Advertising and promotions 
       Bank charges and exchange loss 
       Stock Based Compensation 
       Consulting (note 9) 
       Depreciation 
       Fees and Dues 
       Interest expense from loan payable (note 6,7) 
       Investor relation 
       Legal and professional 
       Office and miscellaneous 
       Rent 
       Telephone 
       Taxes 
       Training 
       Travel 
       Write down of oil and gas property 
  
  
  
(Loss) for the period before other income 
  
       Other Income 
         Interest income 
  
Net (loss) and comprehensive (loss) for the year 
  
Basic and diluted (loss) per share 
  
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding
- Basic and diluted
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
39
2010
$
362,471 
 
 
152,479 
121,136 
273,615 
 
88,856 
 
 
27,547 
7,014 
559 
26,832 
161,366 
168,512 
1,021 
26,567 
167,322 
1,943 
23,015 
1,213 
15,404 
2,917 
5,745 
- 
4,340 
1 
 
641,318 
 
(552,462) 
 
 
- 
 
(552,462) 
 
(0.04) 
 
 
12,325,675
2009
$
421,955
207,447 
340,875 
548,322
(126,367)
31,958 
8,103 
930 
98,210 
56,912 
165,959 
1,254 
24,530 
160,121 
5,821 
37,970 
1,982 
13,590 
4,009 
6,958 
350 
8,643 
-
627,300
(753,667)
94
(753,573)
(0.10)
7,327,478
LEXARIA CORP.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
For the year ended October 31, 2010
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Cash flows used in operating activities 
  
       Net (loss) 
  
       Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities: 
               Consulting - Stock based compensation 
               Depreciation 
               Depletion 
               Impairment of oil and gas acquisition cost 
               Foreign exchange gain / loss 
               Accredited interest on loan payable 
  
       Change in operating assets and liabilities: 
               (Increase)/Decrease in accounts receivable 
               (Increase)/ Decrease in prepaid expenses and deposit 
               Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
  
Net cash used in operating activities 
  
Cash flows used in investing activities 
  
       Oil and gas property acquisition and exploration costs 
  
Net cash used in investing activities 
  
Cash flows from financing activities 
  
       Proceeds (payments) of loan payable 
       Proceeds from private placement 
       Warrant Conversion 
  
Net cash from (used in) financing Activities 
  
Increase (Decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
  
       Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
40
Year ended
October 31
2010
$
(552,462) 
 
 
161,366 
1,021 
121,136 
1 
23,765 
11,672 
 
 
(32,684) 
(2,338) 
(61,813) 
 
(330,336) 
 
 
 
(285,242) 
 
(285,242) 
 
 
 
165,000 
183,400 
- 
 
348,400 
 
(267,178) 
 
330,167 
 
62,989
2009
$
(753,573)
56,912
1,254
340,875
-
88,165
15,525
(26,689)
6,186
234,943
(36,402)
(223,826)
(223,826)
(266,263)
182,250
4,775
(79,238)
(339,466)
669,633
330,167
LEXARIA CORP.
STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
For the year ended October 31, 2010 to October 31, 2008
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Balance, October 31, 2008 
  
Granted Stock Options at $0.48 per share 
  
Stock options revalued and issued at $0.20  
per share  
  
Issuance of common stock per Subscription  
Agreement at $0.05 per share  
  
Warrant exercise per Loan Agreement at  
$0.05 per share  
  
Comprehensive income (loss): 
     (Loss) for the year 
  
Balance, October 31, 2009
SHARES
COMMON STOCK
AMOUNT
6,092,370
4,545,000
95,500
10,732,870
6,092
4,545
96
10,733
41
STOCK 
TO BE 
ISSUED 
AMOUNT
-
-
ADDITIONAL
PAID-IN 
  CAPITAL
5,374,472  
 
20,194  
 
36,718
DEFICIT
(2,618,357)
TOTAL
STOCKHOLDERS'
EQUITY
2,762,207
20,194
36,718
227,250
4,775
(753,573) 
 
2,297,571
222,705
4,679
5,658,768
(753,573) 
 
(3,371,930)
Granted Stock Options at $0.20 per share 
 
Issuance of common stock per Subscription  
Agreement at $0.1143 per share 
 
Issuance of common stock per Settlement  
Agreement at $0.12 per share 
 
Granted Stock Options at $0.20 per share 
 
Warrant exercise pursuant to loan agreement  
at $0.05 per share 
 
Comprehensive income (loss): 
     (Loss) for the year 
  
Balance, October 31, 2010
1,617,752
499,893
75,833
12,926,348
$
1,618
500
75
12,926
$
139,050
181,782
59,487  
 
22,316
3,716
6,065,119
$
-
$
139,050
183,400
59,987
22,316
3,791
(552,462)
(3,924,392)  $
(552,462)
2,153,653
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
42
1.
2.
3.
LEXARIA CORP.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
______________________________________________________________________
October 31, 2010
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Organization and Business 
 
The Company was formed on December 9, 2004 under the laws of the State of Nevada and commenced operations on December 9, 2004. The
Company is an independent natural gas and oil company engaged in the exploration, development and acquisition of oil and gas properties in the
United States and Canada. The Company’s entry into the oil and gas business began on February 3, 2005. The Company has offices in Vancouver
and Kelowna, BC, Canada. 
 
On March 17, 2010, the Company increased its authorized share capital to 200,000,000 common shares.
 
These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to a going concern, which
contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The Company has
incurred an operating loss and required additional funds to maintain its operations. Management’s plans in this regard are to raise equity and/or
debt financing as required. 
 
These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. These financial statements do not include
any adjustment that might result from this uncertainty.
Business Risk and Liquidity 
 
The Company is subject to several categories of risk associated with its operating activities. Natural gas and oil exploration and production is a
speculative business and involves a high degree of risk. Among the factors that have a direct bearing on the Company’s prospects are uncertainties 
inherent in estimating natural gas and oil reserves, future hydrocarbon production and cash flows, particularly with respect to wells that have not
been fully tested and with wells having limited production histories; access and cost of services and equipment; and the presence of competitors
with greater financial resources and capacity. 
 
Significant Accounting Policies
a)
b)
Principles of Accounting 
 
These  financial  statements  are  stated  in  U.S.  dollars  and  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting
principles. 
 
Revenue Recognition 
 
The Company uses the sales method of accounting for natural gas and oil revenues. Under this method, revenues are recognized upon the
passage of title, net of royalties. Revenues from natural gas production are recorded using the sales method. When sales volumes exceed
the Company’s entitled share, an overproduced imbalance occurs. To the extent the overproduced imbalance exceeds the Company’s share 
of the remaining estimated proved natural gas reserves for a given property, the Company records a liability. At October 31, 2010, the
Company had no overproduced imbalances.
43
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d)
 
c)
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 
Cash equivalents comprise certain highly liquid instruments with a maturity of three months or less when purchased. As of October 31,
2010 and 2009, cash and cash equivalents consist of cash only.
 
Oil and Gas Properties 
 
The Company utilizes the full cost method to account for its investment in oil and gas properties. Accordingly, all costs associated with
acquisition, exploration and development of oil and gas reserves, including such costs as leasehold acquisition costs, capitalized interest
costs relating to unproved properties, geological expenditures, tangible and intangible development costs including direct internal costs are
capitalized to the full cost pool. When the Company obtains proven oil and gas reserves, capitalized costs, including estimated future costs
to  develop  the  reserves  and  estimated  abandonment  costs,  net  of  salvage,  will  be  depleted  on  the  units-of-production  method  using 
estimates of proved reserves. 
 
Investments in unproved properties are not depleted pending determination of the existence of proved reserves. Unproved properties are
assessed  periodically  to  ascertain  whether  impairment  has  occurred.  Unproved  properties  whose  costs  are  individually  significant  are
assessed individually by considering the primary lease terms of the properties, the holding period of the properties, and geographic and
geologic data obtained relating to the properties. Where it is not practicable to assess individually the amount of impairment of properties
for  which  costs  are  not  individually  significant,  such  properties  are  grouped  for  purposes  of  assessing  impairment.  The  amount  of
impairment assessed is added to the costs to be amortized, or is reported as a period expense, as appropriate. 
 
Pursuant to full cost accounting rules, the Company must perform a ceiling test periodically on its proved oil and gas assets. The ceiling
test provides that capitalized costs less related accumulated depletion and deferred income taxes for each cost center may not exceed the
sum of (1) the present value of future net revenue from estimated production of proved oil and gas reserves using current prices, excluding
the future cash outflows associated with settling asset retirement obligations that have been accrued on the balance sheet, at a discount
factor of 10%; plus (2) the cost of properties not being amortized, if any; plus (3) the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproved
properties included in the costs being amortized, if any; less (4) income tax effects related to differences in the book and tax basis of oil
and gas properties. Should the net capitalized costs for a cost center exceed the sum of the components noted above, an impairment charge
would be recognized to the extent of the excess capitalized costs.
 
Sales of proved and unproved properties are accounted for as adjustments of capitalized costs with no gain or loss recognized, unless such
adjustments would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of oil and gas, in which case the gain
or loss is recognized in the statement of operations.
 
Exploration activities conducted jointly with others are reflected at the Company’s proportionate interest in such activities.
 
Cost related to site restoration programs are accrued over the life of the project.
 
Stock-Based Compensation 
 
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, “Compensation – Stock Compensation”, to account for its stock 
options and similar equity instruments issued. Accordingly, compensation costs attributable to stock options or similar equity instruments
granted are measured at the fair value at the grant date, and expensed over the expected vesting period. ASC 718 requires excess tax
benefits be reported as a financing cash inflow rather than as a reduction of taxes paid.
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
j)
Accounting Estimates 
 
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires  management  to  make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the
date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ
from those estimates and assumptions. 
 
Capital Assets 
 
The capital asset represents computer equipment which is carried at cost and is amortized over its estimated useful life of 3 years straight-
line. Computer equipment is written down to its net realizable value if it is determined that its carrying value exceeds estimated future
benefits to the Company. 
 
Loss Per Share 
 
Loss per share is computed using the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period. The Company has adopted ASC
220 “Earnings Per Share”. Diluted loss per share is equivalent to basic loss per share because the potential exercise of the equity-based 
financial instruments was anti-dilutive. 
 
Foreign Currency Translations 
 
The Company’s operations are located in the United States of America and Canada, and it has offices in Canada. The Company maintains
its accounting records in U.S. Dollars, as follows: At the transaction date, each asset, liability, revenue and expense that was acquired or
incurred in a foreign currency is translated into U.S. dollars by the using of the exchange rate in effect at that date. At the period end,
monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the exchange rate in effect at that date. The resulting foreign exchange gains and losses are
included in operations. 
 
Financial Instruments 
 
ASC 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use
of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective
evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based 
upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be
used to measure fair value: 
 
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
 
Level 2 - Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are either directly or indirectly observable; and
 
Level  3  -  Unobservable  inputs  that  are  supported  by  little  or  no  market  activity,  therefore  requiring  an  entity  to  develop  its  own
assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing.
 
The Company’s financial instruments consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents , accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued
liabilities, loans payable and due to related parties. With the exception of non-current portion of loans payable, the carrying amounts of 
these financial instruments approximate their fair values due to their short maturities. The fair values of the non-current portion of loans 
payable are estimated using the discounted value of future cash flows.
The Company is located in Canada, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The financial risk is
the risk to  the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates.
Currently, the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk. 
 
Income Taxes 
 
The Company has adopted ASC 740, “Income Taxes”, which requires the Company to recognize deferred tax liabilities and assets for the
expected  future  tax  consequences  of  events  that  have  been  recognized  in  the  Company’s  financial  statements  or  tax  returns  using  the 
liability method. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the temporary differences between the
financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the year in which the differences are expected
to reverse. 
 
Long-Lived Assets Impairment 
 
Long-term assets of the Company are reviewed for impairment when circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable in
accordance  with  the  guidance  established  in  ASC  360,  “Property,  Plant  and  Equipment’.  For  assets  that  are  to  be  held  and  used,  an 
impairment loss is recognized when the estimated undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset or group of assets is less than their
carrying value. If impairment exists, an adjustment is made to write the asset down to its fair value. Fair values are determined based on
discounted cash flows or internal and external appraisals, as applicable. Assets to be disposed of are carried at the lower of carrying value
or estimated net realizable value. 
 
Asset Retirement Obligations 
 
The  Company  accounts  for  asset  retirement  obligations  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  ASC  410,  “Asset  Retirement  and 
Environmental Obligations”. ASC 410 requires the Company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability in the
period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, 
construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. The management of the Company had estimated the asset retirement obligation
to be immaterial and therefore was not reflected on the financial statements as of October 31, 2010 and 2009. 
 
Comprehensive Income 
 
The Company has adopted ASC 220, “Comprehensive Income”, which establishes standards for reporting and display of comprehensive 
income, its components and accumulated balances. The Company is disclosing this information on its Statement of Stockholders’ Equity. 
Comprehensive  income  comprises  equity  changes  except  those  transactions  resulting  from  investments  by  owners  and  distributions  to
owners. 
 
Concentration of credit risk 
 
The Company places its cash and cash equivalent with high credit quality financial institution. As of October 31, 2010, the Company had
approximately $62,989 in a bank beyond insured limit (October 31, 2009: $330,167).
 
New Accounting Pronouncements
k)
l)
m)
n)
o)
p)
In June 2009, the FASB issued ASC 860, “Transfers and Servicing”. This Standard eliminates the concept of a qualifying special purpose 
entity ("QSPE") and modifies the de-recognition provisions in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 140. This statement is
effective for financial asset transfers occurring after the beginning of an entity's first fiscal year that begins after November 15, 2009.
Early application is prohibited. The Company does not anticipate any significant financial impact from adoption of ASC 860.
In  October  2009,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  an  Accounting  Standards  Update  (“ASU”)  regarding 
accounting for own-share lending arrangements in contemplation of convertible debt issuance or other financing. This ASU requires that
at the date of issuance of the shares in a share-lending arrangement entered into in contemplation of a convertible debt offering or other
financing, the shares issued shall be measured at fair value and be recognized as an issuance cost, with an offset to additional paid-in 
capital. Further, loaned shares are excluded from basic and diluted earnings per share unless default of the share-lending arrangement 
occurs, at which time the loaned shares would be included in the basic and diluted earnings-per-share calculation. This ASU is effective
for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2009, and interim periods within those fiscal years for arrangements outstanding as of
the beginning of those fiscal years. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In January 2010, the FASB issued an update to the Fair Value topic. This update requires new disclosures for (1) transfers in and out of
levels 1 and 2, and (2) activity in level 3, by requiring the reconciliation to present separate information about purchases, sales, issuance,
and settlements. Also, this update clarifies the disclosures related to the fair value of each class of assets and liabilities and the input and
valuation techniques for both recurring and nonrecurring fair value measurements in levels 2 and 3. the effective date for the disclosures
and  clarifications  is  for  the  interim  and  annual  reporting  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2009  except  for  the  disclosures  about
purchases,  sales,  issuances  and  settlements,  which  is  effective  for  fiscal  years  beginning  after  December  15,  2010.  This  update  is  not
expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In  January  2010,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  2010-01,  Equity  (Topic  505):  Accounting  for  Distributions  to 
Shareholders with Components of Stock and Cash (A Consensus of the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force). This amendment to Topic
505 clarifies the stock portion of a distribution to shareholders that allows them to elect to receive cash or stock with a limit on the amount
of cash that will be distributed is not a stock dividend for purposes of applying Topics 505 and 260. Effective for interim and annual
periods  ending  on  or  after  December  15,  2009,  and  would  be  applied  on  a  retrospective  basis.  The  Company  does  not  expect  the
provisions of ASU 2010-01 to have a material effect on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows of the Company.
In  January  2010,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  2010-02,  Consolidation  (Topic  810):  Accounting  and  Reporting  for 
Decreases in Ownership of a Subsidiary. This amendment to Topic 810 clarifies, but does not change, the scope of current US GAAP. It
clarifies the decrease in ownership provisions of Subtopic 810-10 and removes the potential conflict between guidance in that Subtopic 
and asset de-recognition and gain or loss recognition guidance that may exist in other US GAAP. An entity will be required to follow the
amended guidance beginning in the period that it first adopts FAS 160 (now included in Subtopic 810-10). For those entities that have 
already adopted FAS 160, the amendments are effective at the beginning of the first interim or annual reporting period ending on or after
December 15, 2009. The amendments should be applied retrospectively to the first period that an entity adopted FAS 160. The Company
does not expect the provisions of ASU 2010-02 to have a material effect on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows of
the Company.
In January 2010, the FASB issued ASU No. 2010-06 Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic 820 “Improving Disclosures about 
Fair  Value  Measurements.”  This  ASU  requires  certain  new  disclosures  and  clarifies  existing  disclosure  requirements  about  fair  value
measurement as set forth in Codification Subtopic 820-10. The FASB’s objective is to improve these disclosures and, thus, increase the 
transparency in financial reporting. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2009, and interim periods
within those fiscal years. The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In  February  2010,  the  FASB  issued  ASC  No.  2010-09,  “Amendments  to  Certain  Recognition  and  Disclosure  Requirements”,  which 
eliminates the requirement for SEC filers to disclose the date through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events. ASC No. 2010-09 
is effective for its fiscal quarter beginning after 15 December 2010. The adoption of ASC No. 2010-09 is not expected to have a material 
impact on the Company’s financial statements.
On  March  5,  2010,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.  2010-11  Derivatives  and  Hedging  Topic  815  “Scope  Exception  Related  to  Embedded
Credit  Derivatives.”  This  ASU  clarifies  the  guidance  within  the  derivative  literature  that  exempts  certain  credit  related  features  from
analysis as potential embedded derivatives requiring separate accounting. The ASU specifies that an embedded credit derivative feature
related  to  the  transfer  of  credit  risk  that  is  only  in  the  form  of  subordination  of  one  financial  instrument  to  another  is  not  subject  to
bifurcation from a host contract under ASC 815-15-25, “Derivatives and Hedging — Embedded Derivatives — Recognition.” All other 
embedded credit derivative features should be analyzed to determine whether their economic characteristics and risks are “clearly and 
closely related” to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract and whether bifurcation is required. The adoption of this
ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In April 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-13, “Compensation—Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Effect of Denominating the Exercise 
Price of a Share-Based Payment Award in the Currency of the Market in Which the Underlying Equity Security Trades,” or ASU 2010-13. 
This ASU provides amendments to Topic 718 to clarify that an employee share-based payment award with an exercise price denominated 
in  currency  of  a  market  in  which  a  substantial  portion  of  the  entity’s  equity  securities  trades  should  not  be  considered  to  contain  a 
condition that is not a market, performance, or service condition. Therefore, an entity would not classify such an award as a liability if it
otherwise qualifies as equity. The amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years,
beginning on or after December 15, 2010. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2010-13 to have a significant impact on its
financial statements.
In April 2010, the FASB codified the consensus reached in Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 08-09, “Milestone Method of Revenue 
Recognition.”  FASB  ASU  No.  2010-17  “Revenue  Recognition  –  Milestone  Method  (Topic  605)”  provides  guidance  on  defining  a 
milestone  and  determining  when  it  may  be  appropriate  to  apply  the  milestone  method  of  revenue  recognition  for  research  and
development transactions. FASB ASU No. 2010 – 17 is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after June 15, 2010, and is effective on a
prospective basis for milestones achieved after the adoption date. The Company does not expect this ASU will have a material impact on
its financial position or results of operations.
In May 2010, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2010-19 (ASU 2010-19), Foreign Currency (Topic 830): Foreign Currency 
Issues: Multiple Foreign Currency Exchange Rates. The amendments in this Update are effective as of the announcement date of March
18, 2010. The Company does not expect the provisions of ASU 2010-19 to have a material effect on the Company's financial position, 
results of operations or cash flows of the Company.
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by the FASB or other standards-setting bodies that do not require adoption 
until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements upon adoption.
4.
Capital Stock
Share Issuances
On June 23, 2009, the Company amended its Articles of Incorporation to undertake a one (1) for four (4) share consolidation of its authorized and
issued and outstanding common stock. As a result, the Company’s authorized capital decreased from 75,000,000 shares of common stock with a
par value  of  $0.001 to 18,750,000 shares  of  common stock  with  a  par  value  of  $0.001  and  its issued  and  outstanding  shares  decreased  from
24,369,500 shares of common stock to 6,092,370 shares of common stock.
On July 22, 2009, the Company completed an equity financing and issued 4,545,000 unit at the price of $0.05 per unit and each unit consists of
one common shares and one share purchase warrant at $0.20 per share for a period of two years, so that effective July 22, 2009, the Company had
10,637,370 shares of common stock issued and outstanding. All shares and warrants issued were restricted under applicable securities rules.
On October 21, 2009, 191,000 warrants were exercised for 95,500 common shares for total proceeds of $4,775.
On December 24, 2009, the Company completed an equity financing and issued 1,617,752 units at the price of CAD$0.12 per unit and each unit
consists of one share purchase warrant which two warrants entitle a holder to purchase one common share at CAD$0.20 per share for a period of
one year, so that effective December 24, 2009, the Company had 12,350,622 shares of common stock issued and outstanding. All shares and
warrants issued were restricted under applicable securities rules.
On March 17, 2010, the Company had increased its authorized share capital from 18,750,000 common shares to 200,000,000 common shares.
On May 31, 2010, the Company issued 499,893 units at a price of $0.12 per unit for a Settlement Agreement valued at $59,987. Each unit consists
of one common share and one share purchase warrants at $0.12 per share for a period of two years. All shares and warrants issued were restricted
under applicable securities rules.
On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the debt, namely US$1,625 with CAB Financial Services by converting 65,000 warrants
into 32,500 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the debt, namely US$2,166.65 with Christopher Bunka by converting 86,667 warrants into
43,333 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
As at October 31, 2010, Lexaria Corp. has 12,926,348 shares issued and outstanding and 6,662,645 warrants issued and outstanding.
A summary of warrants as at October 31, 2010 is as follows:
1. 
2.
2010 
Type
Warrants
Number
Outstanding
499,893 
4,545,000 
1,617,752
1 
1 
2
Exercise
Price
$0.20 
$0.20
CAD$0.22
Expiry 
Date
May 31, 2012 
July 10, 2011 
December 24, 2010*
Each warrant entitles a holder to purchase one common share.
Two warrants entitle a holder to purchase one common share.
* Subsequent to the year end, 132,600 warrants were exercise and 66,300 common share were issued. The remaining warrants were expired unexercised.
Oil and Gas Properties  
  
Proved properties  
  
(1)
Palmetto Point Project
On December 21, 2005, the Company agreed to purchase a 20% working and revenue interest in a 10 well drilling program in Mississippi
owned by Griffin & Griffin Exploration for $700,000. Concurrent with signing the Company paid $220,000 and January 17, 2006 the
Company paid the remaining $480,000. The Company applied the full cost method to account for its oil and gas properties, seven wells
were found to be proved wells, and three wells were found impaired. One of the wells was impaired due to uneconomic life, and the other
two wells were abandoned due to no apparent gas or oil shows present. The costs of impaired properties were added to the capitalized cost
in determination of the depletion expense.
On September 22, 2006, the Company elected to participate in an additional two-well program in Mississippi owned by Griffin & Griffin 
Exploration and paid $140,000. The two wells were found to be proved wells.
On June  23,  2007,  the Company acquired an assignment of  10% gross  working interest  from  a third party  for  $520,000 secured  loan
payable. The Company recognized $501,922 in the oil and gas property.
On October 4, 2007, the Company elected to participate in the drilling of PP F-12-3 in Mississippi by Griffin & Griffin Exploration. The 
Company had 30% gross working interest and paid $266,348. On July 31, 2008, the Company accrued and paid an additional cost of
$127,707 for the workovers of wells PP F-12 and PP F-12-3. PP F-12 has started limited production from October 2007, and PP F-12-3 
has started limited production from November 2007.
On April 3, 2009, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to acquire additional interests in its existing core producing
Mississippi oil and gas properties. The Company paid $40,073.39 to acquire additional 2% working interest in the proven Belmont Lake
oil and gas and an additional 10% working interest in potential nearby exploration wells. Total working interest for Belmont Lake is 32%;
and total working interest in the exploration wells on approximately 140,000 acres surrounding Belmont Lake in all directions is 60%.
5. 
  
(a)
The Company had a short-lived opportunity to acquire additional fractional interests in the upcoming Belmont Lake 12-4 well which is 
expected to be a horizontal well. An unrelated third party did not participate in its right to participate in the 12-4 well, and therefore a 
share of its interest (a “non consent” interest) was made available to the other participating parties including Lexaria. On August 28, 2009
and  effective  on  September  1,  2009,  to  take  best  advantage  of  this  opportunity,  the  Company  entered  into  four  separate  assignment
agreements,  three  of  which  were  with  people  or  companies  with  related  management.  The  Company  received  from  these  four  parties
proceeds of $371,608.57 to fund additional interests in this well. As a result, the Company has a 25.84% perpetual gross interest in the
well (18.0% net revenue interest); as well as a 5.2% net revenue interest in the non-consent interest. The non-consent interest remains 
valid until such time as the well produces 500% of all costs and expenses back to the participants in the form of revenue, at which time the
non-consent interest ends. Enertopia, a company with related management, has acquired from Lexaria a 6.16% perpetual gross interest in
the 12-4 well; David DeMartini, a director of Lexaria, has acquired from Lexaria a 5% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the 12-
4 well; and 0743608 BC Ltd. a company owned by the President of the Company, has acquired from Lexaria a 11.60% gross interest in
the non-consent interest in the 12-4 well.
On May 31, 2010, the Company signed a Settlement Agreement with Enertopia Corp., whereby the Company issued 499,893 units at
$0.12 per unit and each unit consists of one restricted common share and one share purchase warrant at $0.20 per share for a period of two
years in exchange for the working interest initially assigned on August 28, 2009.
On June 16, 2010, the Company signed a Settlement Agreement with a third party, who had originally participated in the August 28, 2009,
opportunity in the non-consent interest for Belmont Lake 12-4. The Company returned back $144,063.46 to the third party and cancelled
its participation.
On July 29, 2010, the Company had agreed with its Operators at Belmont Lake not to proceed to drill a horizontal 12-4 well. Rather, two 
of  the  three  proposed  vertical  wells  12-2,  12-4,  or  12-5  are  proposed  to  be  drilled  in  August  2010.  To  take  best  advantage  of  this
opportunity, the Company cancelled all previous agreements relating to August 28, 2009 with respect to Belmont Lake horizontal well 12-
4 and entered into three separate assignment agreements, of which all three were with people or companies with related management. The
Company received total proceeds of $324,677.12 to fund additional interests in these wells. As a result, the Company has a 32% perpetual
gross interest in the wells (24.0% net revenue interest); as well as a 8% gross interest (6% net revenue interest) in the non-consent interest. 
The non-consent interest remains valid until such time as the well produces 500% of all costs and expenses back to the participants in the
form of revenue, at which time the non-consent interest ends. Emerald Atlantic LLC, a company owned by a director of Lexaria, has
acquired  from  Lexaria  a  8.74%  gross  interest  in  the  non-consent  interest  in  two  of  the  three  vertical  wells;  and  0743608  BC  Ltd.  a
company owned by the President of the Company, has acquired from Lexaria a 20.79% gross interest in the non-consent interest in the 
two of the three vertical wells; an advisor to the Company has acquired from Lexaria 2.46% gross interest in the non-consent interest in 
two of the three vertical wells.
On September 13, 2010, Lexaria Corp. (the “Company”) entered into three separate assignment agreements with 0743608 BC Ltd, solely
owned  by  Director/Officer  of  the  Company;  Emerald  Atlantic  LLC,  solely  owned  by  a  Director  of  the  Company,  and  the  Senior  VP
Business  Development.  (the  “Assignees”),  whereby  the  Assignees  have  paid  a  fee  of  US$408,116.48  to  earn  a  24%  share  of  the
Company’s  gross  non-perpetual  32%  interest  in  the  three  oil  wells  being  drilled  in  Wilkinson  County,  Mississippi.  This  agreement
replaces the one signed on August 28, 2009. A balance of $83,439.36, which is outstanding, will be received by the Company in the
month of September. As a result of the three assignment agreements, Lexaria receives at no cost to the company, a carried interest of 8%
in these
same rights and benefits. The Company assigns, transfers and sets over to the Assignees, all proportionate rights, interest and benefits in
the Assigned Non Perpetual Interest held by or granted to the Assignor in and to the Participation Agreement between the Company and
Griffin but limited to a gross 500% revenue payout based on the total amount paid under the Initial Consideration and the Subsequent
Consideration after which all rights, interests and benefits cease.
As of October 31, 2010, there were additional well interest changes or workovers pending of wells PP F-12, PP F12-3, PP F12-4, PP F12-
5 and PP F12-29.
(2) Mississippi and Louisiana, Frio-Wilcox Project
In December 2006, the first well CMR-US 39-14 was found to have sufficient hydrocarbons to become economic. USA 1-37 and BR F-33 had 
started intermittent production from November 2007. The Company applied the full cost method to account for its oil and gas properties.
As at January 31, 2007, the Company abandoned Dixon #1 due to no economic hydrocarbons being present and $162,420 of drilling costs was
added to the capitalized costs. The Dixon #1 was the only Wilcox well the Company has drilled to date. Every other well it has participated in
located in Mississippi and Louisiana is a Frio well.
On June 2, 2007, the Company abandoned Randall #1 and $107,672 drilling costs was added to the capitalized costs in determination of depletion
expense.
During  August  to  October  2007,  three  additional  wells,  PP  F-90,  PP  F-100,  and  PP  F-111  were  drilled  in  the  area.  These  Frio  wells  were
abandoned  due  to  modest  gas  shows  and  a  total  of  $306,562  drilling  costs  was  added  to  the  capitalized  costs  in  determination  of  depletion
expense.
During December 2007, two additional wells, PP F-6A and PP F-83, were drilled and were plugged and abandoned due to non-economic gas
shows. A total of $247,086 drilling costs was added to the capitalized costs in determination of depletion expense.
Properties 
  
  
U.S.A. – 
Proved property
Properties 
  
  
U.S.A. – 
Proved property
Unproved Properties
$
$
(b)
October 31,
2009
October 31,
2008
2,823,277  $
Addition
416,235
$
Addition
129,402
$
Depletion
for the
period
(121,136) $
Depletion
for the
period
(340,875) $
Write down 
in Carrying
Value
Write down 
in Carrying
Value
October 31,
 
 
 
 
 -  $
2010
3,118,376
October 31,
 
 
 
 
 -  $
2009
2,823,277
3,034,750  $
U.S.A.-Unproved properties 
  
Canada- Unproved properties
Properties 
  
  
U.S.A.-Unproved properties 
  
Canada- Unproved properties
$
$
$
$
October 31,
2008
132,033  $
1
132,034  $
October 31,
2008
34,264  $
1
34,265  $
Addition
$
$
-
Addition
122,769  $
-
122,769  $
Cost added to
capitalized
cost/write down
(112,740)  $
(1)
(112,741)  $
Cost added to 
capitalized
cost/write down
(25,000)  $
-
(25,000)  $
October 31,
2010
19,293
0 
19,293
October 31,
2009
132,033
1 
132,034
(1)
Strachan Leduc Reef, Alberta, Canada 
 
On September 23, 2005, the Company entered into an agreement to participate in the Strachan Leduc Reef Farm-In in Alberta, Canada. 
The Company made a payment of $218,739. (CDN $253,977) for a 4% participation in the costs of Strachan Leduc Reef Farm-In. In 
addition,  the  Company  incurred  $186,668  for  required  supplemental  funds  due  to  well  hole  problems.  The  Company  will  earn  on
completion, capped or abandoned with respect to the well to be drilled at 14 of 9-38-9-W5M the following: 
 
(i)
A 2.000% interest in the petroleum and natural gas below the base of the Mannville excluding natural gas in the formation; 
and 
 
A 4.000% interest in the natural gas in the Leduc formation before payout subject to payment of the Overriding Royalty 
which is convertible upon payout at royalty owners option to 50% of the Farmee’s Interest;
In the Spacing Unit for the Earning Well:
 
a.
b.
A 1.600% interest in the rights below the base of the Shunda formation in Section 10, Township 38, Range 9W5M; and
(ii) 
 
(iii)  A 1.289% interest in the rights below the base of the Shunda formation in Sections 15 and 16, Township 38, Range 9W5M down
to the base as shown in the schedule attached to the agreement dated September 23, 2005.
The Company wrote down the cost of the property to a nominal value of $1 as the future realization of the property is uncertain in the
fiscal year 2008. 
 
 
As at October 31, 2010, the Company’s working interest in Strachan Leduc Reef property has expired and the nominal value of $1 has
been written off.
6.
(2)  Mississippi and Louisiana, USA
The Company entered into an Agreement to acquire a working interest in multiple zones of potential oil and gas production in Mississippi
and Louisiana. This Agreement contemplates up to a 50 well drill program for Wilcox and Frio wells, at the Company’s option, within the 
defined  area  of  mutual  interest  (AMI).  The  AMI  includes  over  200,000  gross  acres  located  non-contiguously  between  Southwest 
Mississippi and North East Louisiana. 
 
The Company originally agreed to pay 40% of all prospect fees, mineral leases, surface leases, and drilling and completion costs to earn a
net 32% of all production from all producible zones to the base of the Frio formation (Frio Targets); and, 30% of all production to the base
of the Wilcox formation (Wilcox Targets). All working interests are to be registered in the name of Lexaria Corp. 
 
The Joint Participation Agreement and Joint Lands Agreements are between Lexaria Corp. and Griffin & Griffin Exploration LLC (G&G)
of Jackson, Mississippi. 
 
On June 21, 2007, the Company acquired an additional 10% from a third party for all rights, title and benefits excluding the seven wells
drilled under the AMI Agreement between August 3, 2006 and June 19, 2007, specifically wells CMR-USA-39-14, Dixon #1, Faust #1 
TEC F-1, CMR/BR F-14, RB F-1 Red Bug #2, BR F-33, and Randall #1 F-4, and any offset wells that could be drilled to any of these 
specified wells. 
 
On July 26, 2007, the Company acquired 5% from a third party for all rights, title and benefits in the seven wells drilled under the AMI
Agreement between August 3, 2006 and June 19, 2007, specifically wells CMR-USA-39-14, Dixon #1, Faust #1 TEC F-1, CMR/BR F-14, 
RB F-1 Red Bug #2, BR F-33, and Randall #1 F-4, and any offset wells that could be drilled to any of these specified wells.
 
On April 3, 2009, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to acquire additional interests in its existing core producing
Mississippi oil and gas properties. The Company paid $40,073.39 to acquire an additional 2% working interest in the proven Belmont
Lake oil and gas field, and an additional 10% working interest in potential nearby exploration wells. Further, the Company is required to
pay $100 per month for a period of 4 years from the closing. Total working interest for Belmont Lake as of October 31, 2010 is 32%; and
total working interest in the exploration wells on approximately 140,000 acres surrounding Belmont Lake in all directions as of October
31, 2010, is 60%.
Loan Payable 
 
On April 1, 2010, we entered into a purchase agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd., a company controlled by Chris Bunka, our President,
Chief Executive Officer and Director, (“Purchaser”) for a non- secured promissory note in the amount of US$75,000 (the “Promissory Note”). 
The  Purchaser  agreed  to  purchase  a  non-secured  18%  interest  bearing  Promissory  Note  of  our  company  subject  to  and  upon  the  terms  and
conditions of the Purchase Agreement. The Promissory Note is due and payable on April 1, 2012 or, if mutually agreed to by all parties then April
1, 2011. The Promissory Note may be prepaid in whole or in part at any time prior to April 1, 2012 by payment of 108% of the outstanding
principal amount including accrued and unpaid interest.
 
As long as the Promissory Note is outstanding, the Purchaser may voluntarily convert the Promissory Note including accrued and unpaid interest
to common shares of our company at the conversion price of $0.30 per common share.
7.
The Company did not incur beneficiary conversion charges as the conversion price is great than the fair value of the Company’s equity.
(a) Secured loan payable
On October 27, 2008 the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement in the amount of CAD$900,000 of Notes being purchased by the President
(CAD$400,000), the President’s wholly-owned company (CAD$300,000) and a shareholder (CAD$200,000) of the Company (“Purchasers”). The
Purchasers agreed to purchase an 18% interest bearing Promissory Note of the Company subject to and upon the terms and conditions of the
Purchase  Agreement.  The  Company’s  obligations  to  repay  the  Promissory  Note  will  be  secured  by  certain  specified  assets  of  the  Company
pursuant to a Security Agreement. As long as the Promissory Note is outstanding, the Purchasers may voluntarily convert the Promissory Note to
Common Shares at the conversion price of $0.45 per share of Common Stock. The Promissory Note matures on October 27, 2010 or by mutual
agreement by all parties on October 27, 2009.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement, the Company issued a total of 390,000 (1,560,000 pre- consolidation) warrants which two warrants
entitle  a  holder  to  purchase  a  common  share  of  the  Company  of  which  195,000  (780,000  pre-consolidation)  warrants  are  eligible  at  $0.05 
(adjusted price) and 195,000 (780,000 pre-consolidation) warrants are eligible at $0.05 (adjusted price) per share and expire October 27, 2009 and
October 27, 2010, respectively.
The Company did not incur beneficiary conversion charges as the conversion price is greater than the fair value of the Company’s equity.
As  at  the  date  of  the  issuance  of  the  above  noted  Promissory  Note,  the  Company  allocated  CAD$21,321  and  CAD$683,559  to  warrants
(additional  paid-in  capital)  and  Promissory  Note  based  on  their  relative  fair  value.  On  October  31,  2008,  the  allocated  Promissory  Note  was
revalued as $723,857 based on the effective interest rate of 18% per annum and related foreign exchange rate.
On July 10, 2009 the Purchasers converted $45,000 of the Promissory Note into equity at $0.05.
On October 27, 2009, 191,000 warrants were exercised for 95,500 common shares. As at October 31, 2009 the Promissory Note is valued at
$788,795 based on the effective interest rate of 18% per annum and related foreign exchange rate.
On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the debt, namely US$1,625 with CAB Financial Services by converting 65,000 warrants
into 32,500 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the debt, namely US$2,166.65 with Christopher Bunka by converting 86,667 warrants into
43,333 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share.
On October 21, 2010, the Company entered into an amendment with loan holders to extend the loan to be on a month-to-month basis with the 
same terms and conditions as pursuant to the amendment.
(b)    Unsecured Loan Payable
On September  13,  2010,  we  entered into  a demand  loan  agreement and promissory  note  with  CAB Financial  Services Ltd.  (the  “Lender”),  a
company controlled by a director and officer of our company. The principal amount of the note is US$90,000. The loan agreement and promissory
note provides that the debt be payable on demand. The note has an interest rate of 12% per annum.
8.
9.
Related Party Transactions 
 
(a)
For the year ended October 31, 2010, the Company paid / accrued $97,200 to CAB Financial Services (“CAB”) (2009: $117,721), RMA 
Resource Management Associates (“RMA”)  Nil (2009: $15,000), Tom Ihrke $8,557 (2009:Nil), and BKB Management Ltd. (“BKB”) 
CAD$54,900 (2009: $26,740) for management, accounting, and consulting services. CAB is owned by the president of the Company and
RMA is owned by a former vice president of the Company, BKB is owned by the CFO of the Company. 
 
The related party transactions are recorded at the exchange amount established and agreed to between the related parties.
 
On October 27, 2008 the Company made a secured loan agreement in the amount of CAD$300,000 with CAB Financial Services Ltd.
(See Note 7). On July 10, 2009 $40,000 of the debt was converted to equity. On October 21, 2010, the Company settled a portion of the
debt, namely US$1,625 with CAB Financial Services by converting 65,000 warrants into 32,500 common shares of the Company as per
Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share. For the year ended, October 31, 2010, the Company accrued
and paid interest expenses of CAD$51,025. 
 
On October 27, 2008 the Company made a secured loan agreement in the amount of CAD$400,000 with Christopher Bunka. (See Note 7).
On October  21, 2010, the Company settled a portion  of the  debt,  namely  US$2,166.65  with Christopher Bunka  by converting 86,667
warrants into 43,333 common shares of the Company as per Purchase Agreement dated October 27, 2008 at a price of $0.05 per share. For
the year ended, October 31, 2010, the Company accrued and paid interest expenses of CAD$80,874. 
 
See Note 5(a)(1), 6 and 7. 
 
On April 1, 2010, the Company made a non-secured loan agreement in the amount of US$75,000 with CAB Financial Services Ltd. (See 
Note 6). For the year ended, October 31, 2010, the Company accrued and paid interest expenses of US$7,875. 
 
On September 13, 2010, the Company made a demand loan agreement in the amount of US$90,000 with CAB Financial Services Ltd.
(See Note 7). For the year ended, October 31, 2010, the Company accrued interest expenses of $US1,509. 
 
Included in accounts payable, $90,027 (October 31, 2009: $25,200) was payable to a company controlled by the president and a director
of the Company, $6,075 to a company controlled by a director of the Company and $1,712 to the Senior VP Business Development.
Stock Options 
 
On July 8, 2009, the Company granted 75,000 stock options to directors and consultants of the Company with exercise prices of $0.20, vested
immediately, and re-priced 325,000 of the previously issued stock options to $0.20 that expire over 1.47 years. 
 
On July 23, 2009, the Company had a 1 for 4 share consolidation. The 2,000,000 maximum granting of stock options was then reduced to 500,000
stock options. 
 
On  January  20,  2010,  the  Company  approved  a  new  2010  Equity  Compensation  plan  and  granted  975,000  stock  options  to  directors  and
consultants of the Company with exercise prices of $0.20, vested immediately and expiring on January 20, 2015.
(b)
(c)
(d) 
 
(e)
(f)
(g)
On August 16, 2010, the Company granted 150,000 stock options to a consultant of the Company with an exercise price of $0.20, vested 75,000
immediately and 75,000 on August 16, 2011 and expiring on August 16, 2015.
For the year ended October 31, 2010, the Company recorded a total of $161,366 (October 31, 2009 - $56,912) for stock based compensation
expenses.
A summary of the stock options for the year ended October 31, 2010 is presented below:
Balance, October 31, 2008 
   Granted 
Expired 
Balance, October 31, 2009 
Granted 
Expired 
Balance, October 31, 2010
*The exercise price is post re-priced.
Number of Shares
Options Outstanding
Exercise Price
Weighted Average 
 
325,000   $
 
275,000  
(100,000) 
 
500,000   $
 
1,125,000  
(100,000) 
 
1,525,000   $
3.24   
 0.23* 
3.20 
 0.53* 
0.20 
1.84 
0.20
The  fair  value  of  each  option  granted  has  been  estimated  as  of  the  date  of  the  grant  using  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model  with  the
following assumptions:
Expected volatility 
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected life 
Dividend yield
Period ended October 31, 2010
145.85% 
2.46% 
5 years 
0.0%
Period ended October 31, 2009
129.38% 
1.48%
2.28 years
0.00%
A summary of weighted average fair value of stock options granted during the year ended October 31, 2010 is as follows:
Year ended October 31, 2010
Exercise price is greater than market price at grant date:
Year ended October 31, 2009 
 
Exercise price is greater than market price at grant date:
$
$
Weighted 
Average  
Exercise  
Price
0.20   $
Weighted  
Average  
Exercise  
Price
0.20  $
Weighted 
Average 
Fair 
Value
0.14
Weighted 
Average 
Fair 
Value
0.16
10.
11.
The Company has the following options outstanding and exercisable.
October 31, 2010 
  
  
  
Range of 
Exercise prices 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
Total
Options outstanding 
 
 
Weighted 
average 
remaining 
contractual life 
4.79 years 
4.22 years 
0.72 years 
0.64 years 
3.34 years
Number 
of shares 
150,000 
975,000 
75,000 
325,000 
1,525,000
Weighted  
Average  
Exercise 
Price 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20
Options exercisable
Number 
of shares 
75,000 
975,000 
75,000 
325,000 
1,450,000
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise 
Price 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.20
Commitments and Significant Contracts 
 
On November 27, 2008, the Company entered into a Consulting Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd. for consulting services of CAB on
a continuing basis for a consideration of US$8,000 per month plus GST.
 
On May 12, 2009 the Company entered into a consulting agreement with BKB Management Ltd. to act as the Chief Financial Officer  and a
Director for a period of six months for a consideration of CAD $4,500 per month plus GST. This agreement replaces the September 1, 2008,
Controller  Agreement  with  CAB  Financial  Services  Ltd.  Subsequent  to  October  31,  2010,  effective  January  1,  2011,  the  consideration  was
increased to CAD$5,500 per month plus GST/HST.
 
On  August  5,  2010  we  entered  into  a  three-month  Management  agreement  with  Tom  Irkhe,  whereby  Mr.  Irkhe  will  act  as  the  Senior  Vice-
President, Business Development for the Company for consideration of US$3,125 per month and has signed a revised agreement to continue the
Management relationship on a continuing month to month basis.
 
Note 5(2) 6, and 7. 
 
Income Tax 
 
The Company's provision for income taxes comprise of the following:
Current Tax Provision 
 
Deferred Tax Provision 
 
Tax Expense
2010
$ Nil
$ Nil
$ Nil
2009 
 
$ Nil 
 
$ Nil 
 
$ Nil
Rate Reconciliation
Income taxes vary from the amount that would be computed by applying the statutory federal income tax rate of 35% for the following reasons:
U.S. Federal Statutory Rate 
 
Tax Benefit Not Recognized 
 
Tax Expenses
2010
$ (132,973)
$ 132,973
$ Nil
2009 
 
$ (256,215) 
 
$ 256,215 
 
$ Nil
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to the Company's deferred tax asset (liability) are as follows:
Deferred Tax Assets: 
Net Operating Loss Carry forward 
Valuation Allowance 
Net Deferred Tax Assets
$
$
$
2010
1,191,357   $
(1,191,357)  $
 Nil   $
2009
1,039,371 
(1,039,371) 
Nil
Changes in the valuation allowance relate primarily to net operating losses, resources expenditures and others which are not currently recognized.
The  Company  has  reviewed  its  net  deferred  tax  assets  and  has  not  recognized  potential  tax  benefits  arising  there  from  because  at  this  time
management believes it is more likely than not that the benefits will not be realized in future year.
For  tax  purpose,  as  of  October  31,  2010,  the  Company  has  operating  loss  carry  forwards  of  approximately  $3,045,000  which  expire  in  2025
through 2030 as follow:
12.
13.
14.
Year
2025 
2026 
2027 
2028 
2029 
2030
Total
$
$
Amount
76,000 
508,000 
1,056,000 
720,000 
753,000 
391,000
3,504,000
Segmented Information 
 
The Company’s business is considered as operating in one segment (United States) based upon the Company’s organizational structure, the way
in which the operation is managed and evaluated, the availability of separate financial results and materiality considerations. 
 
Comparative Figures
Certain 2009 comparative figures have been reclassified to conform with the financial statements presentation adopted for 2010.
 
Subsequent Events
On November 16, 2010, the Company settled the debt incurred as a result of that consulting agreement, being US$9,375, to Mr. Tom Ihrke by
issuing 40,761 restricted common shares of the Company at a price of $0.23 per share. (subsequently issued)
On  November  30,  2010,  we  closed  the  first  tranche  of  a  private  placement  offering  of  convertible  debentures  in  the  aggregate  amount  of
US$450,000. (subsequeint received) The convertible debentures mature on November 30, 2012, subject to forced conversion as set out in the
convertible debenture certificate. The convertible debentures pay an interest rate of 12% per annum (on a simple basis) and are convertible at
US$0.35 per unit. Each unit is comprised of one share of our common stock and one share purchase warrant. Each warrant entitles the holder
thereof to purchase one share at a price of US$0.40 per share from the earlier of the maturity date of the convertible debenture or one year from
conversion of the convertible debenture. We also entered into a general security agreement with the subscribers, whereby the obligations to repay
the convertible debenture are secured by certain of our assets.
On December 2, 2010, the Company entered into a month to month management agreement with Tom Ihrke, where by Mr. Ihrke will continue to
act as the Senior Vice-President Business Development for the Company. The Company will pay a monthly consulting fee of $3,125.
On  December  16,  2010,  we  closed  the  second  tranche  of  a  private  placement  offering  of  convertible  debentures  in  the  aggregate  amount  of
US$170,000 (subsequently received). The convertible debentures mature on November 30, 2012, subject to forced conversion as set out in the
convertible debenture certificate. The convertible debentures pay an interest rate of 12% per annum (on a simple basis) and are convertible at
US$0.35 per unit. Each unit is comprised of one share of our common stock and one share purchase warrant. Each warrant entitles the holder
thereof to purchase one share at a price of US$0.40 per share from the earlier of the maturity date of the convertible debenture or one year from
conversion of the convertible debenture. We also entered into a general security agreement with the subscribers, whereby the obligations to repay
the convertible debenture are secured by certain of our assets.
15.
On  December  16,  2010,  the  Company  entered  into  an  assignment  agreement  with  Emerald  Atlantic  LLC,  solely  owned  by  a  Director  of  the
Company (the Assignee”), whereby the Assignee has paid a fee of US$30,075.95 to earn 18% of a 4.423% share of the Company’s net revenue 
interest after field operating expenses for a well to be drilled in Wilkinson County.
 
On December 13, 2010, the Company entered into a 21 day investor relations agreement with Pentony Enterprise LLC for a total consideration of
$6,000. 
 
Effective January 1, 2011, the CFO’s compensation was increased to CAD$5,500 per month plus HST/GST. 
 
Subsequent  to  the  year  end,  the  Company  issued  66,300  common  shares  in  pursuant  to  the  exercise  of  warrants  for  a  total  proceeds  of
CAD$14,586. 
 
Supplemental Information On Natural Gas and Oil Exploration, Development and Production Activities (Unaudited):
 
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved oil and gas reserve quantities: 
 
The  following  summarizes  the  policies  we  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  accompanying  natural  gas  and  oil  reserve  disclosures,  standardized
measures of discounted future net cash flows from proved natural gas and oil reserves and the reconciliations of standardized measures from year
to year. The information disclosed, as prescribed by the Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 69 (ASC 932), is an attempt to present
the information in a manner comparable with industry peers.
 
The information is based on estimates of proved reserves attributable to our interest in natural gas and oil properties as of October 31, 2010. These
estimates  were  prepared  by  independent  petroleum  consultants.  Proved  reserves  are  estimated  quantities  of  natural  gas  and  crude  oil  which
geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing
economic and operating conditions. 
 
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows from production of proved reserves was developed as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Estimates are made of quantities of proved reserves and future periods during which they are expected to be produced based on year-end 
economic conditions. 
 
The estimated future cash flows are compiled by applying year-end prices of natural gas and oil relating to our proved reserves to the year-
end quantities of those reserves. 
 
The future cash flows are reduced by estimated production costs, costs to develop and produce the proved reserves and abandonment
costs, all based on year-end economic conditions.
 
Future net cash flows are discounted to present value by applying a discount rate of 10%.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows does not purport, nor should it be interpreted, to present the fair value of our natural
gas and oil reserves. An estimate of fair value would also take into account, among other things, the recovery of reserves not presently classified
as proved, anticipated future changes in prices and costs, and a discount factor more representative of the time value of money and the risks
inherent in reserve estimates.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved natural gas and oil reserves is as follows:
Future cash inflows 
Future production costs 
Future development costs 
Future net cash flows - undiscounted 
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows 
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
USD$ 
10,235,672 
(2,111,745) 
(848,227) 
7,275,700 
(893,508) 
6,382,192
Year-end price per Mcf of natural gas used in making standardized measure determinations as of October 31, 2010 was $4.50. Year-end price per
Bbl of oil used in making these same calculations was $81.47.
Estimated Net quantities of Natural Gas and Oil Reserves:
The following table sets forth our proved reserves, including changes, and proved developed reserves at the end of October 31, 2010.
Proved reserves: 
Beginning of the year reserve 
Adjustments of reserves in place 
Productions 
End of year reserves 
  
Proved developed reserves: 
Beginning of the year reserve 
End of year reserves
Crude Oil
(MBbls)
77.18 
53.10 
(4.64) 
125.64
26.63 
57.33
Natural
Gas
(MMcf)
Crude Oil
Equivalents
(MBbls)
80.65 
49.73 
(4.74) 
125.64
30.10 
57.33
20.80  
(20.20) 
(0.60) 
0  
 
 
20.80  
0
Item 9.     Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
There were no disagreements related to accounting principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, internal controls or auditing scope or procedure
during the two fiscal years and interim periods, including the interim period up through the date the relationship ended.
Item 9A.   Controls and Procedures
Management’s Report on Disclosure Controls and Procedures
We  maintain  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  that  are  designed  to  ensure  that  information  required  to  be  disclosed  in  our  reports  filed  under  the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and
Exchange Commission's rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our president and
chief executive officer (also our principal executive officer) and our chief financial officer (also our principal financial and accounting officer) to allow
for timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
As of October 31, 2010, the end of our fiscal year covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of
our president and chief executive officer (also our principal executive officer) and our chief financial officer (also our principal financial and accounting
officer),  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  design  and  operation  of  our  disclosure  controls  and  procedures.  Based  on  the  foregoing,  our  president  and  chief
executive officer (also our principal executive officer) and our chief financial officer (also our principal financial and accounting officer) concluded that
our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Responsibility,  estimates  and
judgments by management are required to assess the expected benefits and related costs of control procedures. The objectives of internal control include
providing management with reasonable, but not absolute, assurance that assets are safeguarded against loss from unauthorized use or disposition, and that
transactions  are  executed  in  accordance  with  management’s  authorization  and  recorded  properly  to  permit  the  preparation  of  consolidated  financial
statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our management assessed the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting  as of  October 31, 2010. In  making  this assessment, our  management  used  the criteria  set forth  by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (“COSO”) in Internal Control-Integrated Framework. Our management has concluded that, as 
of  October  31,  2010,  our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  is  effective  in  providing  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  US  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  Our
management reviewed the results of their assessment with our Board of Directors.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our Company’s registered public accounting firm regarding internal control over financial
reporting. Management’s report was not subject to attestation by our Company’s registered public accounting firm pursuant to temporary rules of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission that permit our Company to provide only management’s report in this annual report.
Inherent limitations on effectiveness of controls
Internal control over financial reporting has inherent limitations which include but is not limited to the use of independent professionals for advice and
guidance, interpretation of existing and/or changing rules and principles, segregation of management duties, scale of organization, and personnel factors.
Internal control over financial reporting is a process which involves human diligence and compliance and is subject to lapses in judgment and breakdowns
resulting from human failures. Internal control over financial reporting also can be circumvented by collusion or improper management override. Because
of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements on a timely basis, however these inherent
limitations are known features of the financial reporting process and it is possible to design into the process safeguards to reduce, though not eliminate,
this risk. Therefore, even those systems determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation
and presentation. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of
changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting that occurred during the year ended October 31, 2010 that have materially or
are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal controls over financial reporting.
Item 9B.   Other Information
None.
Item 10.   Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
PART III
All directors of our Company hold office until the next annual meeting of the security holders or until their successors have been elected and qualified.
The officers of our Company are appointed by our board of directors and hold office until their death, resignation or removal from office. Our directors
and executive officers, their ages, positions held, and duration as such, are as follows:
Name 
Chris Bunka
Bal Bhullar 
David DeMartini 
Tom Ihrke
Business Experience
Position Held with our Company
Chairman, Director and Chief Executive
Officer
Chief Financial Officer and Director
Director
Senior Vice-President, Business
Development
Age 
49
41 
68 
43
Date First Elected
Or Appointed 
October 26, 2006  
February 14, 2007
May 12, 2009
September 8, 2009 
August 5, 2010
The following is a brief account of the education and business experience of each director and executive officer during the past five years, indicating each
person's principal occupation during the period, and the name and principal business of the organization by which he was employed.
Mr. Christopher Bunka Chairman/CEO
Mr. Bunka has served as our director, chairman, president and chief executive officer since October 26, 2006. From February 14, 2007 until May 12,
2009 he was the chief financial officer of our company. Since October 26, 2006 Mr. Bunka has successfully completed both equity and debt financings
for the Company, completed the acquisition of additional oil & gas assets, disposed of other oil & gas assets, and restructured the Company. He has
refocused  the  Company  from  one  of  natural  gas  exploration  to  that  of  development  of  existing  oil  reserves,  and  has  engaged  additional  geophysical
expertise  in  an  attempt  to  better  understand  its  exploration  and  development  opportunities.  Mr.  Bunka  has  privately  evaluated  numerous  oil  and  gas
properties and investment opportunities for his private investments during the past 10 years.
Since 1988, Mr. Bunka has been the CEO of CAB Financial Services Ltd., a private holding company located in Kelowna, Canada. He is a venture
capitalist and corporate consultant.
From  1999  to  2002,  Mr.  Bunka  was  the  President  and  CEO  of  Secure  Enterprise  Solutions  (symbol  SETP-OTC)  (formerly  Newsgurus.com,  symbol 
NGUR-OTC). The Company subsequently changed its name to Edgetech Services and traded on the OTC with the symbol EDGH. Newsgurus.com was a
web-based  media  company.  Secure  Enterprise  Solutions  moved  into  Internet-based  computer  security  products  and  services  and  was  subsequently 
purchased by Edgetech Services. Mr Bunka is also Chairman/CEO of Enertopia Corp, (symbol ENRT-OTC) a clean energy company. Mr. Bunka is a 
director of Defiance Capital Corp., (symbol DEF-TSXV) a Canadian resource company.
Ms. Bal Bhullar, CFO and Director
Ms. Bhullar brings over 18 years of diversified financial and risk management experience in both private and public companies, in the industries of high-
tech, film, mining, marine, oil & gas, energy, transport, and spa industries.
Among  some  of  the  areas  of  experience,  Ms.  Bhullar  brings  expertise  in  financial  &  strategic  planning,  operational  &  risk  management,  regulatory
compliance  reporting,  business  expansion,  start-up  operations,  financial  modeling,  program  development,  corporate  financing,  and  corporate
governance/internal controls.
Previously, Ms. Bhullar has held various positions as President of BC Risk Management Association of BC, and served as Director and CFO of private
and public companies. Currently, Ms. Bhullar serves as a Director and CFO for Bare Elegance Medspa, CFO for public company Enertopia Corp (symbol
ENRT-OTC) and former CFO for ISEE3D Inc. (symbol ICT-TSXV).
Ms.  Bhullar  is  a  Certified  General  Accountant  and  as  well  holds  a  CRM  designation  from  Simon  Fraser  University  and  a  diploma  in  Financial
Management from British Columbia Institute of Technology.
Mr. Tom Ihrke, Senior Vice-President, Business Development
Tom Ihrke recently sold his General Partner interest in Commissum Capital Management, a capital management and advisory firm which he co-founded 
in 2001. During his tenure at Commissum, Tom served as portfolio manager and trader of the firm's investment fund, while also being retained as a
consultant  by  several  companies,  including  Lexaria,  to  advise  on  such  matters  as  capital  structure,  accessing  the  capital  markets,  and  mergers  and
acquisitions. Between 1993 and 2001 Tom worked for Morgan Keegan and Company as Senior Investment Banker in the firm's Financial Institution's
Group, and prior to that as Senior Trader and Market Maker, overseeing the firm's proprietary trading of financial and energy shares. From 1990 to 1991
Tom  traded  commodities  for  his  own  account  as  a  floor  trader  on  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade,  owning  a  seat  on  the  Mid-America  Commodities 
Exchange.  Tom  earned  his  Bachelor  of  Science  at  Texas  Christian  University  in  1989,  and  received  his  Masters  of  Business  Administration  at  the
University of Tennessee in 1993.
Mr. David DeMartini, Director
Dr. DeMartini received a B.S. Physics cum laude at the University of Notre Dame in 1963; and a PhD Physics at Ohio State University in 1969. He is the
author of 19 public technical publications and 78 publications that are proprietary to Shell Oil Company. He has served as a Research Advisor at Shell
Development Company at the Bellaire Research Center in Houston; a Senior Staff Supervisor; and a Senior Staff Geophysicist. He has belonged to the
Society of Exploration Geophysicists from 1970 to present and was inducted to the Offshore Energy Center Hall of Fame as a Technology Pioneer on
September  30,  2006.  He  has  made  significant  contributions  in  the  fields  of  rock  physics  theory  and  applications;  seismic  amplitude  interpretation,
borehole  geophysics,  and  more.  Dr.  DeMartini  was  professionally  engaged  by  the  Company  in  2007  as  a  consulting  geophysicist  to  assist  in
interpretations of seismic data at its Mississippi properties, and has been a director of the Company since September 9, 2009.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between any of our directors, executive officers and proposed directors or executive officers.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
None of our directors, executive officers, promoters or control persons has been involved in any of the following events during the past five years:
1.    A petition under the Federal bankruptcy laws or any state insolvency law was filed by or against, or a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer was
appointed by a court for the business or property of such person, or any partnership in which he was a general partner at or within two years before the
time of such filing, or any corporation or business association of which he was an executive officer at or within two years before the time of such filing;
2.    Such person was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and other
minor offenses);
3.     Such  person  was  the  subject  of  any  order,  judgment,  or  decree,  not  subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  of  any  court  of  competent
jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining him from, or otherwise limiting, the following activities:
i.
ii. 
 
iii.
Acting  as  a  futures  commission  merchant,  introducing  broker,  commodity  trading  advisor,  commodity  pool  operator,  floor  broker,
leverage transaction merchant, any other person regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, or an associated person of any
of the foregoing, or as an investment adviser, underwriter, broker or dealer in securities, or as an affiliated person, director or employee of
any investment company, bank, savings and loan association or insurance company, or engaging in or continuing any conduct or practice
in connection with such activity 
 
Engaging in any type of business practice; or
 
Engaging in any activity in connection with the purchase or sale of any security or commodity or in connection with any violation of
Federal or State securities laws or Federal commodities laws;
4.    Such person was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any Federal or State authority
barring, suspending or otherwise limiting for more than 60 days the right of such person to engage in any activity described in paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this
section, or to be associated with persons engaged in any such activity;
5.    Such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commission to have violated any Federal or State securities
law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commission has not been subsequently reversed, suspended, or vacated;
6.    Such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated any
Federal commodities law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has not been subsequently
reversed, suspended or vacated;
7.    Such person was the subject of, or a party to, any Federal or State judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or finding, not subsequently
reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation of:
i.
Any Federal or State securities or commodities law or regulation; or
ii.
iii.
Any law or regulation respecting financial institutions or insurance companies including, but not limited to, a temporary or permanent
injunction,  order  of  disgorgement  or restitution,  civil  money  penalty or  temporary  or permanent  cease-and-desist  order, or  removal  or 
prohibition order; or 
 
Any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
8.     Such  person  was  the  subject  of,  or  a  party  to,  any  sanction  or  order,  not  subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  of  any  self-regulatory 
organization (as defined in Section 3(a)(26) of the Exchange Act (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(26))), any registered entity (as defined in Section 1(a)(29) of the
Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1(a)(29))), or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its
members or persons associated with a member.
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
4.
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires our executive officers and directors and persons who own more than 10% of our common
stock to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission initial statements of beneficial ownership, reports of changes in ownership and annual reports
concerning their ownership of our common stock and other equity securities, on Forms 3, 4 and 5 respectively. Executive officers, directors and greater
than 10% shareholders are required by the SEC regulations to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) reports that they file.
Based solely on our review of the copies of such forms received by us, or written representations from certain reporting persons, we believe that during
fiscal year ended October 31, 2010, all filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors and greater than 10% percent  beneficial owners were
complied with, with the exception of the following:
Name 
Christopher Bunka 
Bal Bhullar 
David DeMartini 
Tom Ihrke
Code of Ethics
Number of Late
Reports
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Number of
Transactions Not
Reported on a Timely
Basis 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Failure to File  
Requested Forms
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
We adopted a Code of Ethics applicable to our senior financial officers and certain other finance executives, which is a "code of ethics" as defined by
applicable rules of the SEC. Our Code of Ethics is attached as an exhibit to our Form SB-2 filed on September 20, 2007. If we make any amendments to 
our Code of Ethics other than technical, administrative, or other non-substantive amendments, or grant any waivers, including implicit waivers, from a
provision of our Code of Ethics to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or certain other finance executives, we will disclose the nature of the
amendment or waiver, its effective date and to whom it applies in a Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC.
Board and Committee Meetings
Our board of directors held no formal meetings during the year ended October 31, 2010. All proceedings of the board of directors were conducted by
resolutions consented to in writing by all the directors and filed with the minutes of the proceedings of the directors. Such resolutions consented to in
writing by the directors entitled to vote on that resolution at a meeting of the directors are, according to the Nevada General Corporate Law and our
Bylaws, as valid and effective as if they had been passed at a meeting of the directors duly called and held.
Nomination Process
As of October 31, 2010, we did not effect any material changes to the procedures by which our shareholders may recommend nominees to our board of
directors. Our board of directors does not have a policy with regards to the consideration of any director candidates recommended by our shareholders.
Our board of directors has determined that it is in the best position to evaluate our Company’s requirements as well as the qualifications of each candidate 
when the board considers a nominee for a position on our board of directors. If shareholders wish to recommend candidates directly to our board, they
may do so by sending communications to the president of our Company at the address on the cover of this annual report.
Audit Committee and Audit Committee Financial Expert
Currently our audit committee consists of our entire board of directors. We currently do not have nominating, compensation committees or committees
performing  similar  functions.  There  has  not  been  any  defined  policy  or  procedure  requirements  for  shareholders  to  submit  recommendations  or
nomination for directors.
Our board of directors has determined that it does not have a member of its board of directors (audit committee) that qualifies as an "audit committee
financial expert" as defined in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K, and is "independent" as the term is used in Item 7(d)(3)(iv) of Schedule 14A under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
We believe that the members of our board of directors are collectively capable of analyzing and evaluating our financial statements and understanding
internal controls and procedures for financial reporting. We believe that retaining an independent director who would qualify as an "audit committee
financial expert" would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our circumstances given the early stages of our development and the fact
that  we  have  not  generated  any  material  revenues  to  date.  In  addition,  we  currently  do  not  have  nominating,  compensation  or  audit  committees  or
committees performing similar functions nor do we have a written nominating, compensation or audit committee charter. Our board of directors does not
believe that it is necessary to have such committees because it believes the functions of such committees can be adequately performed by our board of
directors.
Item 11.    Executive Compensation
The particulars of the compensation paid to the following persons:
(cid:122) our principal executive officer;
(cid:122) each of our two most highly compensated executive officers who were serving as executive officers at the end of the years ended October 31,
2010 and 2009; and
(cid:122) up to two additional individuals for whom disclosure would have been provided under (b) but for the fact that the individual was not serving as
our executive officer at the end of the years ended October 31, 2010 and 2009,
who we will collectively refer to as the named executive officers of our Company, are set out in the following summary compensation table, except that
no disclosure is provided for any named executive officer, other than our principal executive officers, whose total compensation did not exceed $100,000
for the respective fiscal year:
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Name and  
Principal  
Position 
Christopher  
Bunka(1) ,
President, Chief
Executive  
Officer, &  
Former Chief
Financial  
Officer  
(Principal  
Executive  
Officer)
Bal Bhullar(2) ,  
Chief Financial
Officer
Tom Ihrke(3)
Sr. Vice  
President,  
Business
Development
Year 
2010  
2009
Salary ($) 
$97,200  
$117,721
2010  
2009
$52,636  
$26,204
2010
$8,557
Bonus ($)
Nil  
Nil
N/A  
N/A
N/A
Stock
Awards ($)
Nil  
Nil
Nil  
Nil
Nil
Option  
Awards  
($)(4) 
$71,308  
$12,394
$42,785  
$5,888
$25,881
Non-  
Equity  
Incentive
Plan
Compensa 
-tion ($)
Nil  
Nil
N/A  
N/A
N/A
Nonqualified
Deferred  
Compensa
tion
Ea-rnings
($) 
Nil  
Nil
N/A  
N/A
N/A
All Other 
Compensa 
- tion ($)
Nil  
Nil
N/A  
N/A
Nil
Total ($) 
$168,508  
$130,115
$95,421  
$32,092
$34,438
(1)  Mr.  Bunka  was  appointed  president  and  chief  executive  officer  on  October  26,  2006,  and  was  chief  financial  officer  of  our  company  from
February 14, 2007 until May 12, 2009.
(2)  Ms. Bhullar was appointed Chief Financial Officer on May 12, 2009
(3)  Mr. Ihrke was appointed Senior Vice President, Business Development on August 5, 2010.
 
(4)
The fair value of the option award was estimated using the Black-Scholes pricing model with the following assumptions: expected volatility of
145.85%, risk–free interest rate of 2.46%, expected life of 5 years, and dividend yield of 0.0%.
The Company is currently paying its President US$8,000 per month as consulting fees and is paying its Chief Financial Officer CAD$4,500 per month in
consulting fees. Subsequent to year end, on January 1, 2011, the Chief Financial Officer’s compensation increased to CAD$5,500 per month in consulting 
fees.
Employment/Consulting Agreements
We have entered into a consulting agreement and a controller agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd., a company controlled by our president, chief
executive  officer,  Christopher  Bunka  on  October  26,  2006,  wherein  he  is  reimbursed  at  the  rate  of  $2,500  per  month  for  the  consulting  agreement.
Effective November 27, 2008 the rate has been changed to $8,000 per month. Under this agreement, Mr. Bunka provides the services of chief executive
officer, chairman of the board, and president to our Company, such duties and responsibilities to include the provision of management and consulting
services, strategic corporate and financial planning, management of the overall business operations of our company, and the supervision of office staff
and exploration consultants.
The controller agreement was entered into on March 1, 2008 wherein he is reimbursed at the rate of $4,500 per month for accounting and management
services. This controller agreement was terminated on May 11, 2009.
On May 12, 2009, the Company entered into a consulting agreement with BKB Management Ltd, a corporation organized under the laws of the Province
of British Columbia. BKB Management controlled by the chief financial officer of the Company. A fee of CAD$4,675 including GST is paid per month.
We may terminate this agreement without prior notice based on a number of conditions. BKB Management Ltd. may terminate the agreement at any time
by  giving  30  days  written  notice  of  his  intention  to  do  so.  Subsequent  to  year  end,  on  January  1,  2011,  the  Chief  Financial  Officer’s  compensation 
increased to CAD$5,500 per month plus HST/GST in consulting fees.
On August 5, 2010 we entered into a three-month Management agreement with Tom Irkhe, whereby Mr. Irkhe will act as the Senior Vice-President, 
Business Development for the Company for consideration of US$3,125 per month and has signed a revised agreement to go on a continuing basis.
Other than as set out in this annual report on Form 10-K we have not entered into any employment or consulting agreements with any of our current
officers, directors or employees.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards Table
The Company did not grant any awards to our named executive officers in the during our fiscal year ended October 31, 2010.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End
The particulars of unexercised options, stock that has not vested and equity incentive plan awards for our named executive officers are set out in the
following table:
Name  
(a)
Christopher  
Bunka
Bal Bhullar
David  
DeMartini 
Tom Ihrke
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR-END
OPTION AWARDS
STOCK AWARDS
Number of  
Securities  
Underlying  
Unexercised
Options
Number of  
Securities  
Underlying  
Unexercised
Options
Exercisable
Unexercisable
(#)
(b)
(#)
(c)
Equity  
Incentive
Plan
Awards:  
Number of  
Securities  
Underlying  
Unexercised  
Unearned  
Options
(#)  
(d)
100,000  
100,000  
18,750  
500,000 
12,500  
37,500  
300,000 
6,250  
100,000 
25,000  
12,500  
6,250  
25,000  
75,000
-  
-  
-
-  
-
-  
- 
-  
-  
-
75,000
Option  
Exercise
Price  
($)  
(e)
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20 
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20 
$0.20  
$0.20 
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20  
$0.20
Option
Expiration
Date  
(f)
Number
of
Shares  
or Units  
of Stock
That  
Have  
Not  
Vested
(#)  
(g)
Market  
Value of  
Shares  
or Units  
of Stock
That  
Have  
Not  
Vested
($)  
(h)
2011/04/26  
2011/07/20  
2011/07/20  
2015/01/20 
2011/07/20  
2011/07/20  
2015/01/20 
2011/07/20  
2015/01/20 
2011/06/18  
2011/07/20  
2011/07/20  
2015/01/20  
2015/08/16
Equity  
Incentive
Plan
Awards:  
Number of  
Unearned  
Shares,  
Units or  
Other  
Rights  
That
Have Not  
Vested
(#)  
(i)
Equity  
Incentive
Plan
Awards:  
Market or  
Payout  
Value of  
Unearned  
Shares,  
Units or
Other Rights  
That Have  
Not Vested
(#)  
(j)
Option Exercises
During our fiscal year ended October 31, 2010 there were no options exercised by our named officers.
Compensation of Directors
We do not have any agreements for compensating our directors for their services in their capacity as directors, although such directors are expected in the
future to receive stock options to purchase shares of our common stock as awarded by our board of directors.
Pension, Retirement or Similar Benefit Plans
There are no arrangements or plans in which we provide pension, retirement or similar benefits for directors or executive officers. We have no material
bonus or profit sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation is or may be paid to our directors or executive officers, except that stock
options may be granted at the discretion of the board of directors or a committee thereof.
Indebtedness of Directors, Senior Officers, Executive Officers and Other Management
None of our directors or executive officers or any associate or affiliate of our Company during the last two fiscal years is or has been indebted to our
Company by way of guarantee, support agreement, letter of credit or other similar agreement or understanding currently outstanding.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
During 2010, we did not have a compensation committee or another committee of the board of directors performing equivalent functions. Instead the
entire board of directors performed the function of compensation committee. Our board of directors approved the executive compensation, however, there
were no deliberations relating to executive officer compensation during 2010.
Compensation Committee Report
None.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The following table sets forth, as of December 17, 2010, certain information with respect to the beneficial ownership of our common shares by each
shareholder known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our common shares, as well as by each of our current directors and executive
officers  as  a  group.  Each  person  has  sole  voting  and  investment  power  with  respect  to  the  shares  of  common  stock,  except  as  otherwise  indicated.
Beneficial ownership consists of a direct interest in the shares of common stock, except as otherwise indicated.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner 
Christopher Bunka  
Kelowna BC Canada 
Bal Bhullar  
Vancouver, BC 
David DeMartini,  
Texas, Houston 
Tom Ihrke  
South Carolina 
Directors and Executive Officers as a Group (3 persons) (4)
Christopher Bunka  
Kelowna BC Canada 
David DeMartini,  
Texas, Houston
*             Less than 1%.
Amount and Nature of  
Beneficial Ownership
6,055,257 (1)
431,250 (2)
3,852,678(3)
469,835(4)
4,744,606
5% Stockholders
6,055,257 (1)
1,606,250(3)
Percentage
of Class 
28.7%
0.3*
12.9%
1.9%
43.8%
28.7%
12.9%
(1)          Includes 2,478,521 shares held in the name of C.A.B. Financial Services and 1,257,986 shares held directly by Chris Bunka. Includes 1,600,000
warrants held in the name of C.A.B. Financial Services. Includes 718,750 options which are exercisable at $0.20 within 60 days of December 27, 2010.
(2)          Includes 40,000 warrants held and 350,000 options which are exercisable at $0.20 within 60 days of December 27, 2010.
(3)           Includes  1,500,000  warrants,  571,428  in  convertible  debt  warrants  and  106,250  options  which  are  exercisable  at  $0.20  within  60  days  of
December 27, 2010.
(4)          Includes 218,750 options of which 143,500 are exercisable at $0.20 within 60 days of December 27, 2010.
(5)           Under  Rule  13d-3,  a  beneficial  owner  of  a  security  includes  any  person  who,  directly  or  indirectly,  through  any  contract,  arrangement,
understanding, relationship, or otherwise has or shares: (i) voting power, which includes the power to vote, or to direct the voting of shares; and (ii)
investment power, which includes the power to dispose or direct the disposition of shares. Certain shares may be deemed to be beneficially owned by
more than one person (if, for example, persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the shares). In addition, shares are deemed to be
beneficially owned by a person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon exercise of an option) within 60 days of the date as of
which the information is provided. In computing the percentage ownership of any person, the amount of shares outstanding is deemed to include the
amount  of  shares  beneficially  owned  by  such  person  (and  only  such  person)  by  reason  of  these  acquisition  rights.  As  a  result,  the  percentage  of
outstanding shares of any person as shown in this table does not necessarily reflect the person’s actual ownership or voting power with respect to the 
number of shares of common stock actually outstanding on December 27, 2010. As of January 25, 2011, there were 13,033,409 shares of our Company’s 
common stock issued and outstanding.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract or other arrangement the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of our Company.
Item 13.    Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Except as disclosed herein, no director, executive officer, shareholder holding at least 5% of shares of our common stock, or any family member thereof,
had any material  interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction, or proposed  transaction since  the year ended October 31,  2010, in which the amount
involved in the transaction exceeded or exceeds the lesser of $120,000 or one percent of the average of our total assets at the year end for the last three
completed fiscal years.
Director Independence
We  currently  act  with  two  (3)  directors,  consisting  of  Christopher  Bunka,  Bal  Bhullar  and  David  DeMartini.  We  have  determined  that  none  of  our
directors is an “independent director” as defined in NASDAQ Marketplace Rule 4200(a)(15).
Currently our audit committee consists of our entire board of directors. We currently do not have nominating, compensation committees or committees
performing  similar  functions.  There  has  not  been  any  defined  policy  or  procedure  requirements  for  shareholders  to  submit  recommendations  or
nomination for directors.
Our board of directors has determined that it does not have a member of its audit committee who qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert” as 
defined in as defined in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
From inception to present date, we believe that the members of our audit committee and the board of directors have been and are collectively capable of
analyzing and evaluating our financial statements and understanding internal controls and procedures for financial reporting.
We do not have a standing compensation or nominating committee, but our entire board of directors act in such capacity. We believe that our directors are
capable of analyzing and evaluating our financial statements and understanding internal controls and procedures for financial reporting. Our directors do
not believe that it is necessary to have an audit committee because we believe that the functions of an audit committee can be adequately performed by
the board of directors. In addition, we believe that retaining additional independent directors who would qualify as an “audit committee financial expert”
would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our circumstances given the early stages of our development.
Item 14.    Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The aggregate fees billed for the most recently completed fiscal year ended October 31, 2010 and for fiscal year ended October 31, 2009 for professional
services  rendered  by  the  principal  accountant  for  the  audit  of  our  annual  financial  statements  and  review  of  the  financial  statements  included  in  our
quarterly  reports  on  Form  10-Q  and  services  that  are  normally  provided  by  the  accountant  in  connection  with  statutory  and  regulatory  filings  or
engagements for these fiscal periods were as follows:
Audit Fees 
Audit Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
All Other Fees 
Total
Year Ended
October 31, 2010
October 31, 2009
16,202 
8,952 
Nil 
Nil
27,154
16,275 
16,867
Nil 
Nil
33,142
Audit Fees. Audit fees consist of fees billed for professional services rendered for the audits of our financial statements, reviews of our interim financial
statements included in quarterly reports, services performed in connection with filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and related comfort
letters and other services that are normally provided by Chang Lee LLP for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009 in connection
with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
Audit related Fees. There were $16,202 audit related fees paid to Chang Lee LLP for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2010 and $16,275 for the fiscal
year ended October 31, 2009.
Tax Fees. Tax fees consist of fees billed for professional services for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning. These services include assistance
regarding federal, state and local tax compliance and consultation in connection with various transactions and acquisitions. For the fiscal years ended
October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009, we did not use Chang Lee LLP for non-audit professional services or preparation of corporate tax returns.
We do not use Chang Lee LLP, for financial information system design and implementation. These services, which include designing or implementing a
system that aggregates source data underlying the financial statements or generates information that is significant to our financial statements, are provided
internally or by other service providers. We do not engage Chang Lee LLP to provide compliance outsourcing services.
Effective May 6, 2003, the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted rules that require that before our independent auditors are engaged by us to
render any auditing or permitted non-audit related service, the engagement be:
(cid:122) approved by our audit committee (which consists of our entire board of directors); or  
(cid:122) entered  into  pursuant  to  pre-approval  policies  and  procedures  established  by  the  board  of  directors,  provided  the  policies  and  procedures  are
detailed as to the particular service, the board of directors is informed of each service, and such policies and procedures do not include delegation
of the board of directors' responsibilities to management.
Our board of directors pre-approves all services provided by our independent auditors. All of the above services and fees were reviewed and approved by
the board of directors either before or after the respective services were rendered.
Our board of directors has considered the nature and amount of fees billed by our independent auditors and believes that the provision of services for
activities unrelated to the audit is compatible with maintaining our independent auditors’ independence.
Item 15.    Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
PART IV
(a)
(b)
Financial Statements 
 
(1) 
 
(2)
Financial statements for our Company are listed in the index under Item 8 of this document
 
All financial statement schedules are omitted because they are not applicable, not material or the required information is shown in the
financial statements or notes thereto. 
 
 
Exhibits
*        Filed herewith.
Exhibit No. 
 
(3) 
 
3.1(1) 
 
3.2(1) 
 
3.3(9) 
 
3.4(10) 
 
(4) 
 
4.1(1) 
 
4.2 
 
4.3 
 
(10) 
 
10.1(1) 
 
10.2(1) 
 
10.3(1) 
 
10.4(2) 
 
10.5(3) 
 
10.6(4) 
 
10.7(4) 
 
10.8(5)
Document Description 
 
Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
 
Articles of Association 
 
Bylaws 
 
Amendments to Articles of Incorporation 
 
Amended and restated Bylaws 
 
Instruments defining the rights of security holders, including indentures
 
Specimen Stock Certificate 
 
Form of Warrant dated July 10, 2009 
 
Form of Warrant dated December 24, 2009 
 
Material Contracts 
 
Strachan Participation & Farmout Agreement 
 
Griffin Model Form Operating Agreement 
 
Griffin Drilling Program Agreement 
 
Management Services Agreement with Leonard MacMillan 
 
Consulting Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd. 
 
Agreement with Brink Resources 
 
Agreement with 0743608 BC Ltd. 
 
Amended Agreement and Promissory Notes
10.9(6) 
 
10.10(7) 
 
10.11(8) 
 
10.12(11) 
 
10.13(12) 
 
10.14(13) 
 
10.15 
 
10.16 
 
10.17(17) 
 
10.18(18) 
 
10.19(19) 
 
10.20(20) 
 
(14) 
 
14.1(14) 
 
(23) 
 
23.1 
 
(31) 
 
31.1* 
 
31.2*
 
(32) 
 
32.1* 
 
32.2*
 
(99) 
 
99.1(15) 
 
99.2(16)
* Filed herewith.
Consulting Agreement with CAB Financial Services Ltd. 
 
Agreement with Delta Oil & Gas, Inc. and The Stallion Group 
 
Agreement with BKB Management Ltd. 
 
Equity Compensation Plan 
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement 
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement 
 
Form of Private Placement Subscription Agreement dated July 10, 2009 
 
Form of Private Placement Subscription Agreement dated December 24, 2009 
 
Assignment Agreements and Loan Agreement 
 
Consulting Agreement with Tom Ihrke 
 
Equity Compensation Plan 
 
Form of Convertible Debt 
 
Code of Ethics 
 
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics 
 
Consents of experts and Counsel 
 
Consent of Chang Lee LLP, Chartered Accountants 
 
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) 
 
Section 302 Certifications under Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 of Christopher Bunka 
 
Section 302 Certifications under Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 of Bal Bhullar
 
Section 1350 Certifications 
 
Section 906 Certification under Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 
 
Section 906 Certification under Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 
 
Exhibit No. 
 
Haas Reserve Reports 
 
Veazey Reserve Report
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20)
Incorporated by reference from Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on March 1, 2006.
Incorporated by reference from Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on May 5, 2006.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on June 21, 2007.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on October 22, 2010.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on December 1, 2008.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on April 7, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on May 19, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on June 23, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on December 22, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form S8 filed on May 7, 2007.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on March 4, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on July 10, 2009.
Incorporated by reference from Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on September 20, 2007.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on July 17, 2007.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on October 31, 2007.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on September 13, 2010.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on August 6, 2010.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on January 21, 2010.
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed on November December 1, 2010.
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the registrant caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized.
SIGNATURES
LEXARIA CORP.
By: /s/ Christopher Bunka 
Christopher Bunka 
President, Chief Executive Officer, Chairman and Director
Date: January 28, 2011
By: /s/ Bal Bhullar 
Bal Bhullar 
Chief Financial Officer and Director
Date: January 28, 2011
In accordance with the Exchange Act, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on
the dates indicated.
By: /s/ Christopher Bunka  
Christopher Bunka 
President, Chief Executive Officer, Chairman and Director  
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: January 28, 2011
By: /s/ Bal Bhullar 
Bal Bhullar 
Chief Financial Officer and Director 
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer)
Date: January 28, 2011
By: /s/ David DeMartini 
David DeMartini  
Director