
EX-99.1 2 exhibit99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1 B2Gold Corp.: Exhibit 99.1 - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
B2GOLD CORP.
US$100,000,000
EQUITY DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
August 11, 2016
Canaccord Genuity Corp. 
609 Granville Street, Suite 2100 
Vancouver, BC V7Y 1H2
Canaccord Genuity Inc. 
350 Madison Ave 
New York, NY 10017
HSBC Securities (Canada) Inc. 
Suite 900, 70 York Street 
Toronto, ON M5J 2S9
HSBC Securities (USA) Inc. 
452 Fifth Avenue 
New York, NY 10018
Ladies and Gentlemen:
B2Gold Corp., a company incorporated under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia)
(the “Company”), confirms its agreement (this “Agreement”) with Canaccord Genuity Corp. and
Canaccord  Genuity  Inc.  (collectively,  “Canaccord”),  and  HSBC  Securities  (Canada)  Inc.  and
HSBC Securities (USA) Inc. (collectively, “HSBC”, and together with Canaccord, the “Agents”),
as follows:
1.          Issuance and Sale of Shares. The Company agrees that, from time to time during the term
of this Agreement, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth herein, it may issue and
sell through the Agents, common shares (the “Shares”) of the Company having an aggregate
offering price of up to US$100 million, provided that the market value of Shares distributed under
any single Canadian Prospectus Supplement (as defined below) shall not exceed 10% of the
aggregate market value of the outstanding Shares as of the date specified in Section 9.1 of NI 44-
102 (as defined below), which shall be calculated in accordance with Section 9.2 of NI 44-102
(the “Offering”).  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  herein,  the  parties  hereto
agree  that  compliance  with  the  limitation  set  forth  in  this  Section  1  on  the  number  of  Shares
issued and sold under this Agreement and under any single Canadian Prospectus Supplement
shall  be  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  Company  and  the  Agents  shall  have  no  obligation  in
connection with such compliance. The Shares will be sold on the terms set forth herein at such
times and in such amounts as the Company and the Agents shall agree from time to time. The
issuance and sale of the Shares through the Agents will be effected pursuant to the Canadian
Prospectus (as defined below) and the Registration Statement (as defined below) filed by the
Company and declared effective by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the
“Commission”).
When  determining  the  aggregate  value  of  the  Placement  Shares  (as  defined  below)  sold,  the
Company  will  use  the  noon  exchange  rate  posted  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  on  the  date  the
applicable Placement Shares were sold to determine the United States dollar equivalent of any
Placement Shares sold in consideration for Canadian dollars.
2.          Placements.
(a) Placement  Notice.  Each  time  that  the  Company wishes  to  issue  and  sell  Shares
hereunder (each, a “Placement”), it will notify the applicable Agent by e-mail notice (or
other  method mutually  agreed  to  in  writing  by  the  parties)  (a  “Placement Notice”)
containing the parameters within which it desires to sell the Shares, which shall at a
minimum include the number of Shares (“Placement Shares”) to be issued, the time
period  during  which sales are requested to be made, any limitation on the number of
Placement Shares that may be sold in any one Trading Day (as defined in Section 3),
whether the Company desires the Placement Shares to be sold on a particular stock
exchange, and any minimum price below which sales may not be made, with a copy to
the other Agent, a form of which shall be mutually agreed upon by the Company and
the Agents. The Company will identify in the Placement Notice which Agent will effect
the Placement. The Placement Notice shall originate from any of the individuals (each
an “Authorized Representative”) from the Company set forth on Schedule 1 (with a
copy to each of the other individuals from the Company listed on such schedule), and
shall be addressed to each of the respective individuals from the applicable Agent set
forth on Schedule 1 attached hereto (with a copy to each of the respective individuals
from the other Agent set forth in Schedule 1 attached hereto), as such Schedule 1 may
be  amended 
from time  to  time.  The  Placement  Notice  shall  be  effective  upon
confirmation of receipt by the applicable Agent unless and until (i) the applicable Agent
declines to accept the terms contained therein for any reason, in its sole discretion, in
accordance with the notice requirements set forth in Section 4, (ii) the entire amount of
the Placement Shares have been sold, (iii) the Company suspends or terminates the
Placement Notice in accordance with the notice requirements set forth in Section 4, (iv)
the Company  issues  a  subsequent  Placement  Notice  with  parameters  superseding
those on the earlier dated Placement Notice, or (v) this Agreement has been terminated
under the provisions of Section 13. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company may
not deliver a Placement Notice to an Agent if, during the same calendar week (Monday
through Sunday) the Company has delivered a Placement Notice to the other Agent,
unless the Company has terminated the prior Placement Notice in accordance with the
notice requirements set forth in Section 4.
 
(i) Placement Fee. The amount of compensation to be paid by the Company to the
Agents with respect to each Placement (in addition to any expense reimbursement
pursuant  to  Section  8(j)(ii))  shall be equal to 2.0% of gross proceeds from each
Placement,  which  amount  shall be paid in the same currency as the sale of the
Placement Shares it pertains to and shall be divided equally between the Agents
regardless of which Agent effects the Placement.
No Obligation. It is expressly acknowledged and agreed that neither the Company
(ii)
No Obligation. It is expressly acknowledged and agreed that neither the Company
nor the Agents will have any obligation whatsoever with respect to a Placement or
any Placement Shares unless and until the Company delivers a Placement Notice
to the applicable Agent that is confirmed by the applicable Agent, and then only
upon the terms specified therein and herein. It is also expressly acknowledged that
th e Agents  will  be  under  no  obligation  to  purchase  Placement  Shares  on  a
principal basis. In the event of a conflict between the terms of this Agreement and
the terms of a Placement Notice, the terms of the Placement Notice control.
2
3 .          Sale of Placement Shares by the Agents. Subject to the terms and conditions of this
Agreement,  upon  the  Company’s  issuance  of  a  Placement  Notice,  and  unless  the  sale  of  the
Placement Shares described therein has been declined, suspended, or otherwise terminated in
accordance with the terms of this Agreement, the applicable Agent will severally and not jointly
use its commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices to
sell on behalf of the Company and as agent, such Placement Shares up to the amount specified
during the time period specified, and otherwise in accordance with the terms of such Placement
Notice. The Agents covenant and the Company acknowledges that the Agents will conduct the
sale  of  Placement  Shares  in  compliance  with  applicable  law,  rules  and  regulations  including,
without limitation, all applicable United States state and federal securities laws, including, the
United  States  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended  (the  “Securities  Act”),  the  United  States
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), all applicable Canadian
Securities  Laws  (as  defined  below),  and,  if  applicable,  the  rules  of  the  NYSE  MKT  LLC  (the
“NYSE  MKT”)  and  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (the  “TSX”),  and  that  such  compliance  may
include  a  delay  in  commencement  of  sales  efforts  after  receipt  of  a  Placement  Notice.  The
applicable Agent will severally and not jointly provide written confirmation to the Company (with
a  copy  to  the  other  Agent)  no  later  than  the  opening  of  the  Trading  Day  (as  defined  below)
immediately  following  the  Trading  Day  on  which  it  has  made  sales  of  Placement  Shares
hereunder setting forth the number of Placement Shares sold on such day (showing the number
of Placement Shares sold on the TSX, on any other “marketplace” (as such term is defined in
Instrument  21-101 Market  Operations  (“NI  21-101”))  in  Canada  (a  “Canadian
National 
Marketplace”), on the NYSE MKT, on any other “marketplace” (as such term is defined in NI 21-
101)  in  the  United  States  (a  “United  States  Marketplace”)  and  pursuant  to  any  other  sales
method  used  by  the  Agents),  the  average  price  of  the  Placement  Shares  sold  (showing  the
average price of the Placement Shares sold on the TSX, a Canadian Marketplace, the NYSE
MKT, a United States Marketplace and pursuant to any other sales method used by the Agents),
the compensation payable by the Company to the Agents with respect to such sales, and the Net
Proceeds (as defined below) payable to the Company. Subject to the terms and conditions of the
Placement  Notice,  the  Agents  may  sell  Placement  Shares  by  any  method  permitted  by  law
deemed to be an “at the market distribution” under NI 44-102, including, without limitation, sales
made directly on the NYSE MKT and the TSX, or on any Canadian Marketplace or United States
Marketplace.  The  Agents  severally  and  not  jointly  acknowledge  and  agree  that  the  aggregate
number  of  Placement  Shares  sold  on  the  TSX  and  all  other  Canadian  Marketplaces  on  any
Trading Day shall not exceed 25% of the total trading volume of the Shares on the TSX and all
other Canadian Marketplaces on that Trading Day, and covenant not to exceed that threshold. If
expressly authorized by the Company in a Placement Notice, the Agents may sell Placement
Shares  in  privately  negotiated  transactions  in  the  United  States,  subject  to  any  required  pre-
clearance  of  any  such  transactions  by  the  NYSE  MKT  and  the  TSX.  During  the  term  of  this
Agreement, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Agents severally and not
jointly  agree  that  in  no  event  will  they  or  any  of  their  affiliates  engage  in  any  market  making,
bidding, stabilization or other trading activity with regard to the Shares if such activity would be
prohibited  under  Regulation  M  or  other  anti-manipulation  rules  under  the  Securities  Act,
Exchange  Act  or  Canadian  Securities  Laws.  Notwithstanding  sections  7(rr)  and  8(cc)  of  this
Agreement, the Agents shall not purchase Placement Shares for their own account as principal
unless  expressly  authorized  to  do  so  in  a  Placement  Notice.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the
contrary  set  forth  in  this  Agreement  or  a  Placement  Notice,  the  Company  acknowledges  and
agrees  that  (i)  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  the  Agents  will  be  successful  in  selling  any
Placement Shares or as to the price at which any Placement Shares are sold, if at all, and (ii) the
Agents will incur no liability or obligation to the Company or any other person or entity if they do
not  sell  Placement  Shares  for  any  reason  other  than  a  failure  by  the  Agents  to  use  their
commercially reasonable efforts consistent with their normal trading and sales practices to sell on
behalf of the Company and as agent such Placement Shares as provided under this Section 3.
For the purposes hereof, “Trading Day” means any day on which either the NYSE MKT or the
TSX are open for trading.
3
4.          Suspension of Sales.
(a) The Company or the applicable Agent may, upon notice to the other party in writing, by
telephone  (confirmed  immediately  by  e-mail) or  by  e-mail  notice  (or  other  method
mutually agreed to in writing by the parties), with a copy to the other Agent, suspend
any sale of Placement Shares for which it has received a Placement Notice; provided,
however, that such suspension shall not affect or impair either party’s obligations with
respect to any Placement Shares sold hereunder prior to the receipt of such notice. The
Company and the Agents agree that no such notice shall be effective against the other
party unless it is made to one of the individuals named on Schedule 1 hereto, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, during any period in which the
Company  is  in  possession  of  material non-public  information,  the  Company  and  the
Agents  (provided  they  have been given prior written notice of such by the Company,
which notice the Agents agree to treat confidentially) agree that no sale of Placement
Shares will take place.
5.          Settlement.
(a) Settlement  of  Placement  Shares.  Unless  otherwise specified  in  the  applicable
Placement Notice, settlement for sales of Placement Shares will occur on the third (3rd)
trading  day  on the applicable stock exchange on which the Placement Shares were
sold  or, if the Placement Shares are not sold on a stock exchange, on the third (3rd)
Trading  Day  (or,  in  either  case,  such  earlier  day  as  is agreed  by  the  parties  to  be
industry practice for regular- way trading) following the date on which such sales are
made  (each  a  “Settlement Date”).  The  amount  of  proceeds  to  be  delivered  to  the
Company on a Settlement Date against the receipt of the Placement Shares sold (“Net
Proceeds”) will be equal to the aggregate sales price at which such Placement Shares
were sold, after deduction for (i) the commission or other compensation for such sales
payable  by  the  Company  to  the  Agents pursuant  to  Section  2  hereof,  (ii)  any  other
amounts  due  and  payable  by the  Company  to  the  Agents  hereunder  pursuant  to
Section 8(j) hereof, and (iii) any transaction fees imposed by any governmental or self-
regulatory organization in respect of such sales.
(b) Delivery  of  Shares.  On  each  Settlement  Date,  the Company  will,  or  will  cause  its
transfer agent to, electronically transfer the Placement Shares being sold by crediting
the applicable Agent’s accounts or its designee’s account (provided that the applicable
Agent shall  have  given  the  Company  written  notice  of  such  designee  at  least  one
Trading Day prior to the Settlement Date) at The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”)
through its Deposit Withdrawal at Custodian System for Placement Shares sold in the
United  States  and  at  CDS  Clearing  and Depository  Services  Inc.  though  its  CDSX
system  for  Placement  Shares  sold in Canada or by such other means of delivery as
may  be  mutually  agreed upon  by  the  parties  hereto  and,  upon  receipt  of  such
Placement Shares, which in all cases shall be freely tradeable, transferable, registered
shares in good deliverable form, the applicable Agent will, on each Settlement Date,
deliver the related Net Proceeds in same day funds to an account designated by the
Company prior to the Settlement Date. The applicable Agent that effects the Placement
shall send to the other Agent its proportionate share of the compensation to be paid to
the  Agents  for  such  placement,  in  same  day  funds  to  an  account  designated  by  the
other  Agent,  on  the  last  Business  Day  of  the  month  in  which  the  Settlement  Date
occurred. If the Company defaults in its obligation to deliver Placement Shares on a
Settlement  Date,  the  Company  agrees  that  in  addition  to  and  in  no  way  limiting  the
rights and obligations set forth in Section 11 hereto, it will (i) hold the Agents harmless
against  any  loss,  claim,  damage,  or  expense  (including  reasonable  legal  fees  and
expenses),  as  incurred,  arising  out  of  or  in  connection  with  such  default  by  the
Company and (ii) pay to the Agents any commission, discount, or other compensation
to which it would otherwise have been entitled absent such default; provided, however,
that without limiting Section 11 herein, the Company shall not be obligated to pay the
Agents any commission, discount or other compensation on any Placement Shares that
it  is  not  possible  to  settle  due  to:  (i)  a  suspension  or  material  limitation  in  trading  in
securities  generally  on  the  NYSE  MKT  or  the  TSX;  or  (ii)  a  material  disruption  in
securities settlement or clearance services in the United States or Canada.
4
6 .          Registration Statement and Prospectuses. The Company has prepared and filed with the
securities  regulatory  authorities  in  each  of  the  provinces  of  Canada  other  than  Quebec  an
amended  and  restated  preliminary  short  form  base  shelf  prospectus  (in  both  the  English  and
French  languages)  dated  December  23,  2015  (the  “Amended  and  Restated  Canadian
Preliminary  Base  Prospectus”)  and  has  prepared  and  filed  with  the  Autorité  des  marches
financiers  a  preliminary  short  form  base  shelf  prospectus  (in  both  the  English  and  French
languages)  dated  December  23,  2015  (the  “Quebec  Preliminary  Base  Prospectus”  and,
together  with  the  Amended  and  Restated  Canadian  Preliminary  Base  Prospectus,  the
“Canadian  Preliminary  Base  Prospectus”),  and  has  prepared  and  filed  with  the  securities
regulatory  authorities  (the  “Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities”)  in  each  of  the  provinces  of
Canada  (collectively,  the  “Canadian  Qualifying  Jurisdictions”)  a  final  short  form  base  shelf
prospectus (in both the English and French languages) dated January 11, 2016, in respect of an
aggregate  of  up  to  US$300,000,000  in  certain  securities  of  the  Company,  including  Shares
(collectively, the “Shelf Securities”) in each case in accordance with the applicable securities
laws of each of the Canadian Qualifying Jurisdictions and the respective applicable rules and
regulations under such laws, together with applicable published national, multilateral and local
policy statements, instruments, notices and blanket orders of the Canadian Qualifying Authorities
in  each  of  the  Canadian  Qualifying  Jurisdictions  and  the  exemptive  relief  decision  (the
“Exemption”) dated July 29, 2016 obtained by the Company pursuant to National Instrument 11-
203  – Process for Exemptive Relief Applications  in  Multiple  Jurisdictions  providing  relief  from
certain  Canadian  securities  law  requirements  with  respect  to  the  Offering  (collectively,
“Canadian  Securities  Laws”).  The  British  Columbia  Securities  Commission  (the  “Reviewing
Authority”)  is  the  principal  regulator  of  the  Company  under  the  passport  system  procedures
provided for under Multilateral Instrument 11-102 – Passport System and National Policy 11-202
– Process for Prospectus Reviews in Multiple Jurisdictions in respect of the offering of the Shelf
Securities.  The  Reviewing  Authority  has  issued  a  receipt  evidencing  that  a  receipt  has  been
issued on behalf of itself and the other Canadian Qualifying Authorities, other than the Autorité
des marches financiers, for the Amended and Restated Canadian Preliminary Base Prospectus,
the  Autorité  des  marches  financiers  has  issued  a  receipt  evidencing  that  a  receipt  has  been
issued  on  behalf  of  itself  for  the  Quebec  Preliminary  Base  Prospectus  and  the  Reviewing
Authority has issued a receipt evidencing that a receipt has been issued on behalf of itself and
the other Canadian Qualifying Authorities for the Canadian Base Prospectus (the “Receipt”). The
term “Canadian Base Prospectus” means the final short form base shelf prospectus (in both the
English and French languages) dated January 11, 2016 relating to the Shelf Securities, including
any documents incorporated by reference therein and the documents otherwise deemed to be a
part thereof or included therein pursuant to Canadian Securities Laws, at the time the Reviewing
Authority issued the Receipt with respect thereto in accordance with Canadian Securities Laws,
including  National  Instrument  44-101  – Short Form Prospectus Distributions (“NI 44-101”)  and
National Instrument 44-102 – Shelf Distributions (“NI 44-102”, and together with NI 44-101, the
“Canadian Shelf Procedures”). As used herein, “Canadian Prospectus Supplement” means
the  most  recent  prospectus  supplement  (in  both  the  English  and  French  languages)  to  the
Canadian Base Prospectus relating to the Placement Shares, to be filed by the Company with
the  Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities  in  accordance  with  Canadian  Securities  Laws;  and
“Canadian  Prospectus”  means  the  Canadian  Prospectus  Supplement  (and  any  additional
Canadian prospectus supplement prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement
and filed with the Canadian Qualifying Authorities in accordance with Canadian Securities Laws)
together with the Canadian Base Prospectus.
5
The Company has also prepared and filed with the Commission, pursuant to the Canada/U.S.
Multi-Jurisdictional Disclosure System adopted by the Commission, a registration statement on
Form  F-10  (File  No.  333-208506)  covering  the  registration  of  the  Shelf  Securities  under  the
Securities Act and the rules and regulations (the “Rules and Regulations”) of the Commission
thereunder, and such amendments to such registration statement as may have been permitted or
required to the date of this Agreement. Such registration statement, including the Canadian Base
Prospectus (with such deletions therefrom and additions thereto as are permitted or required by
Form F-10 and the Rules and Regulations and including exhibits to such registration statement),
has  become  effective  in  such  form  pursuant  to  Rule  467(b)  under  the  Securities  Act.  Such
registration statement on Form F-10, at any given time, including amendments and supplements
thereto  to  such  time,  the  exhibits  and  any  schedules  thereto  at  such  time  and  the  documents
incorporated by reference therein at such time, is herein called the “Registration  Statement.”
The  Canadian  Base  Prospectus,  with  such  deletions  therefrom  and  additions  thereto  as  are
permitted  or  required  by  Form  F-10  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  in  the  form  in  which  it
appeared in the Registration Statement on the date it became effective under the Securities Act
is herein called the “U.S. Base Prospectus.” “U.S. Prospectus Supplement” means the most
recent Canadian Prospectus Supplement, with such deletions therefrom and additions thereto as
are  permitted  or  required  by  Form  F-10  and  the  Securities  Act,  relating  to  the  offering  of  the
Placement  Shares,  to  be  filed  by  the  Company  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  General
Instruction II.L of Form F-10; “U.S. Prospectus” means the U.S. Prospectus Supplement (and
any additional U.S. prospectus supplement prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and filed with the Commission in accordance with General Instruction II.L of Form F-
10) together with the U.S. Base Prospectus and together with any “issuer free writing prospectus”
(“Issuer Free Writing Prospectus”) as defined in Rule 433 under the Securities Act (“Rule 433”)
relating  to  the  Placement  Shares  that  (i)  is  required  to  be  filed  with  the  Commission  by  the
Company or (ii) is exempt from filing pursuant to Rule 433(d)(5)(i), in each case in the form filed
or required to be filed with the Commission or, if not required to be filed, in the form retained in
the Company’s records pursuant to Rule 433(g).
the  Base  Prospectuses,
the  Prospectus  Supplements  or
As used herein, “Base Prospectuses” means, collectively, the Canadian Base Prospectus and
the  U.S.  Base  Prospectus;  “Prospectus  Supplements”  means,  collectively,  the  Canadian
Prospectus  Supplement  and  the  U.S.  Prospectus  Supplement;  and  “Prospectuses”  means,
collectively,  the  Canadian  Prospectus  and  the  U.S.  Prospectus.  Any  reference  herein  to  the
Registration  Statement, 
the
Prospectuses or any amendment or supplement thereto shall be deemed to refer to and include
the documents incorporated by reference therein, and any reference herein to the terms “amend,”
“amendment” or “supplement” with respect to the Registration Statement, the Base Prospectuses,
the Prospectus Supplements or the Prospectuses shall be deemed to refer to and include the
filing  or  furnishing  of  any  document  with  or  to  the  Commission  or  Canadian  Qualifying
Authorities, as applicable, on or after the effective date of the Registration Statement or the date
of the Base Prospectuses, the Prospectus Supplements or the Prospectuses, as the case may
be,  and  deemed  to  be  incorporated  by  reference  therein.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  all
references  to  the  Canadian  Base  Prospectus,  the  Canadian  Prospectus  Supplement  and  the
Canadian Prospectus or any amendment or supplement thereto shall be deemed to include any
copy  filed  with  any  Canadian  Qualifying  Jurisdiction  pursuant  to  the  System  for  Electronic
Document Analysis and Retrieval (“SEDAR”) and all references to the Registration Statement,
the  U.S.  Base  Prospectus,  the  U.S.  Prospectus  Supplement  and  the  U.S.  Prospectus  or  any
amendment  or  supplement  thereto  shall  be  deemed  to  include  any  copy  filed  with  the
Commission  pursuant  to  the  Electronic  Data  Gathering  Analysis  and  Retrieval  System
(“EDGAR”).
6
The  Agents  shall  offer  the  Placement  Shares  for  sale  to  the  public  directly  and  through  other
investment dealers and brokers in the United States and Canada only as permitted by applicable
law  and  upon  the  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  Prospectuses,  this  Agreement  and
applicable Placement Notices. The Agents agree that they will not, directly or indirectly, distribute
the  Registration  Statement  or 
the  Prospectuses  or  publish  any  prospectus,  circular,
advertisement  or  other  offering  material  in  any  jurisdiction  other  than  the  Canadian  Qualifying
Jurisdictions  and  such  states  of  the  United  States  in  which  the  Shares  are  duly  qualified  or
exempt  under  U.S.  federal  and  applicable  U.S.  state  securities  laws,  in  such  manner  as  to
require registration of the Placement Shares or the filing of a prospectus or any similar document
with  respect  to  the  Placement  Shares  by  the  Company  therein  or  subject  the  Company  to
ongoing periodic reporting obligations in such jurisdiction pursuant to the securities laws of such
jurisdiction.
Each  of  the  Company  and  the  Agents  hereby  agree  and  acknowledge  that  all  sales  and
solicitations of sales of Placement Shares by Canaccord and HSBC as agents of the Company
shall be made only in the United States and the Canadian Qualifying Jurisdictions.
The  Company  has  also  prepared  and  filed  with  the  Commission  an  appointment  of  agent  for
service  of  process  upon  the  Company  on  Form  F-X  in  conjunction  with  the  filing  of  the
Registration Statement.
All  references  in  this  Agreement  to  financial  statements  and  schedules  and  other  information
which  is  “contained,”  “included”  or  “stated”  in  the  Registration  Statement,  the  U.S.  Base
Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus (or other references of like import) shall be deemed to mean and
include all such financial statements and schedules and other information which is incorporated
by reference in or otherwise deemed by the Rules and Regulations to be a part of or included in
the Registration Statement, the U.S. Base Prospectus or the U.S. Prospectus, as the case may
be;  and  all  references  in  this  Agreement  to  amendments  or  supplements  to  the  Registration
Statement,  the  U.S.  Base  Prospectus  or  the  U.S.  Prospectus  shall  be  deemed  to  mean  and
include  the  filing  of  any  document  under  the  Exchange  Act,  and  which  is  deemed  to  be
incorporated therein by reference or otherwise deemed by the Rules and Regulations to be a part
of or included in the Registration Statement, the U.S. Base Prospectus, the U.S. Prospectus, as
the case may be. All references in this Agreement to financial statements and other information
which is “described,” “contained,” “included” or “stated” in the Canadian Base Prospectus or the
Canadian Prospectus (or other references of like import) shall be deemed to mean and include
all  such  financial  statements  and  other  information  which  is  incorporated  by  reference  in  or
otherwise  deemed  by  Canadian  Securities  Laws  to  be  a  part  of  or  included  in  the  Canadian
Prospectus.
7.          Representations and Warranties of the Company. The Company represents and warrants
to, and agrees with, the Agents that:
(a) Registration  Statement  and  Prospectuses.  The Shares  are  registered  pursuant  to
Section  12(b)  of  the  Exchange  Act,  and the  Company  has  filed  and  furnished  all
material reports, schedules, forms, statements and other documents required to be filed
or furnished by it with the Commission (the “Commission Documents”) within the last
two  years,  and  all  Commission  Documents  required  to  be  filed  within  the last  12
months have been filed on a timely basis. The Company meets the general eligibility
requirements for the use of NI 44-101 and NI 44-102 and for the use of a short form
base  shelf  prospectus  with  respect  to  a distribution  of  securities.  The  Reviewing
Authority has issued the Receipt on behalf of itself and the other Canadian Qualifying
Authorities for the Canadian Base Prospectus.
7
Subsequent  to  the  issuance  of  the  Receipt  for  the  Canadian  Base  Prospectus,  no  other
document  with  respect  to  the  Canadian  Base  Prospectus  has  heretofore  been  filed  with  the
Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities,  except  for  any  document  filed  with  the  Canadian  Qualifying
Authorities subsequent to the date of such Receipt in the form heretofore delivered to the Agents
or made available to the Agents on SEDAR. No order, ruling or determination having the effect of
suspending the sale or ceasing the trading of the Shares or any other securities of the Company
has  been  issued  or  made  by  any  Canadian  Qualifying  Authority,  any  other  securities
commission, stock exchange or other regulatory authority and is presently outstanding and no
proceedings for that purpose have been initiated or are pending or, to the best of the Company’s
knowledge,  are  contemplated  or  threatened  by  any  Canadian  Qualifying  Authority,  any  other
securities commission, stock exchange or other regulatory authority having jurisdiction over the
Company,  and  any  request  made  to  the  Company  on  the  part  of  any  Canadian  Qualifying
Authority, any other securities commission, stock exchange or other regulatory authority having
jurisdiction over the Company for additional information has been complied with. At the time of
filing  the  Registration  Statement,  the  Company  met,  and  as  of  the  date  hereof  the  Company
meets, the general eligibility requirements for use of Form F-10 under the Securities Act. The
Registration Statement has become effective pursuant to Rule 467(b) under the Securities Act.
The  Company  has  complied  to  the  Commission’s  satisfaction  with  all  requests  of  the
Commission for additional or supplemental information. Any amendment or supplement to the
Registration Statement or the Prospectuses required by this Agreement will be so prepared and
filed by the Company and, as applicable, the Company will use commercially reasonable efforts
to cause it to become effective as soon as reasonably practicable. No stop order suspending the
effectiveness of the Registration Statement has been issued, and no proceeding for that purpose
has  been  instituted  or,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Company,  threatened  by  the  Commission.  No
order preventing or suspending the use of the Base Prospectuses, the Prospectus Supplements,
the Prospectuses or any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus has been issued by the Commission or
any  Canadian  Qualifying  Authority.  Copies  of  all  filings  made  by  the  Company  under  the
Securities  Act  and  all  Commission  Documents  that  were  filed  with,  or  furnished  to,  the
Commission in connection with the Offering have either been delivered to the Agents or made
available  to  the  Agents  on  EDGAR.  Copies  of  all  filings  made  by  the  Company  under  the
Canadian  Securities  Laws  in  connection  with  the  Offering  have  either  been  delivered  to  the
Agents  or  made  available  to  the  Agents  on  SEDAR.  For  the  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  the
“Applicable  Time”  means,  with  respect  to  any  Placement  Shares,  the  time  of  sale  of  such
Placement Shares pursuant to this Agreement. The Canadian Prospectus, at the time of filing
thereof  with  the  Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities,  complied  in  all  material  respects  and,  as
amended  or  supplemented,  if  applicable,  will  comply  in  all  material  respects  with  Canadian
Securities Laws. The Canadian Prospectus, as amended or supplemented, as of its date, did not
and,  as  of  each  Applicable  Time  and  Settlement  Date, 
if  any,  will  not  contain  a
misrepresentation, as defined under Canadian Securities Laws, or include any untrue statement
of  a  material  fact  or  omit  to  state  a  material  fact  necessary  in  order  to  make  the  statements
therein,  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  made,  not  misleading.  The
Canadian  Prospectus,  as  amended  or  supplemented,  as  of  its  date,  did  and,  as  of  each
Applicable  Time  and  Settlement  Date,  if  any,  will  contain  full,  true  and  plain  disclosure  of  all
material facts relating to the Placement Shares and to the Company. The representations and
warranties set forth in the two immediately preceding sentences do not apply to statements in or
omissions from the Canadian Prospectus, or any amendments or supplements thereto, made in
reliance upon and in conformity with information relating to the Agents furnished to the Company
in writing by the Agents expressly for use therein. The U.S. Prospectus, at the time first filed in
accordance with General Instruction II.L. of Form F-10, conformed in all material respects and, as
amended or supplemented, if applicable, will conform in all material respects to the Canadian
Prospectus,  except  for  such  deletions  therefrom  and  additions  thereto  as  are  permitted  or
required by Form F-10 and the Rules and Regulations. There is no franchise, contract or other
document  of  a  character  required  to  be  described  in  the  Registration  Statement  or  the
Prospectuses, or to be filed as an exhibit to the Registration Statement, which is not described or
filed as required. The statistical, industry and market related data included in the Prospectuses is
based on or derived from sources that the Company believed, as of the date of such information,
to be reliable and accurate and such data agrees with the sources from which it is derived. The
Company  has  delivered  to  the  Agents  one  complete  copy  of  each  of  the  Canadian  Base
Prospectus and the Registration Statement and a copy of each consent and certificate of experts
filed as a part thereof, and conformed copies of the Canadian Base Prospectus, the Registration
Statement  (without  exhibits)  and  the  Prospectuses,  as  amended  or  supplemented,  in  such
quantities and at such places as the Agents have reasonably requested. The Company has not
distributed and will not distribute any offering material in connection with the Offering other than
the  Prospectuses  or  the  Registration  Statement.  At  the  earliest  time  after  the  filing  of  the
Registration Statement that the Company or another offering participant made a bona fide offer
(within the meaning of Rule 164(h)(2) under the Securities Act) of the Placement Shares and at
the date hereof, the Company was not and is not an “ineligible issuer,” as defined in Rule 405
under the Securities Act, in the preceding three years not having been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor or having been made the subject of a judicial or administrative decree or order as
described in Rule 405 of the Securities Act (without taking account of any determination by the
Commission pursuant to Rule 405 of the Securities Act that it is not necessary that the Company
be considered an ineligible issuer), nor an “excluded issuer” as defined in Rule 164 under the
Securities Act.
8
(b) No Misstatement or Omission. Each part of the Registration Statement, when such part
became or becomes effective, at any deemed effective date pursuant to Form F-10 and
the  Rules  and  Regulations on  the  date  of  filing  thereof  with  the  Commission  and  at
each  Applicable Time and Settlement Date, and the U.S. Prospectus, on the date of
filing thereof with the Commission and at each Applicable Time and Settlement Date,
conformed  in  all  material  respects  or  will  conform  in  all  material respects  with  the
requirements  of  the  Rules  and  Regulations;  each  part  of the  Registration  Statement,
when  such  part  became  or  becomes  effective, did  not  or  will  not  contain  an  untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements therein not misleading; and the U.S. Prospectus,
o n the  date  of  filing  thereof  with  the  Commission,  and  the  U.S.  Prospectus and  the
applicable  Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus(es)  issued  at  or  prior to  such  Applicable
Time, taken together (collectively, and with respect to any Placement Shares, together
with  the  public  offering  price  of  such Placement Shares, the “Disclosure  Package”)
and at each Applicable Time and Settlement Date, did not or will not include an untrue
statement of  a  material  fact  or  omit  to  state  a  material  fact  necessary  to  make  the
statements  therein,  in  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were made,  not
misleading; except that the foregoing shall not apply to statements or omissions in any
such document made in reliance on information furnished in writing to the Company by
the  Agents  expressly stating  that  such  information  is  intended  for  use  in  the
Registration Statement, the U.S. Prospectus, or any amendment or supplement thereto,
it being understood and agreed that the only such information furnished by any Agent
consists of the information described as such in Section 11 hereof.
9
included
in
(c) Financial Information. The consolidated financial statements of the Company and the
related notes thereto included in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses
and the Disclosure Package present fairly in all material respects the financial position
of  the Company and its subsidiaries as of the dates indicated and the results of their
operations and the changes in their cash flows for the periods specified; such financial
statements  have  been  prepared  in  conformity  with International  Financial  Reporting
Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board, applied
on  a  consistent basis  throughout  the  respective  periods  covered  thereby;  the  other
financial information related to the Company and its subsidiaries included in  each  of
the  Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure Package  has  been
derived from the accounting records of the Company and its subsidiaries and presents
fairly the information shown thereby as at the date of such information and the financial
information 
the Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the
Disclosure Package presented under IFRS has been derived from financial statements
of  the Company  prepared  in  conformity  with  IFRS,  applied  on  a  consistent  basis
throughout  the  periods  covered  thereby.  There  are  no  “significant acquisitions”  or
“significant  probable  acquisitions”  for  which  the  Company is  required,  pursuant  to
Canadian Securities Laws, to include additional financial disclosure in the Registration
Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package.
(d) No Material Adverse Change. Since the date of the most recent financial statements of
the Company included in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure  Package, except  in  each  case  as  otherwise  disclosed  in  each  of  the
Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package (i) there has not
been any material change in the share capital or material increase in the long-term debt
of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  (defined  below), or  any  dividend  or
distribution of any kind declared, set aside for payment, paid or made by the Company
on any class of shares, (ii) no Material Adverse Effect (defined below) or development
involving a prospective Material Adverse Effect has occurred; (iii) neither the Company
nor any of its subsidiaries has entered into any transaction or agreement that is material
to  the  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  taken  as  a whole  or  incurred  any  liability  or
obligation,  direct  or  contingent,  that is  material  to  the  Company  and  its  subsidiaries
taken as a whole; and (iv) neither the Company nor any of its subsidiaries taken as a
whole  has sustained any material loss or material interference with its business from
fire, explosion, flood or other calamity, whether or not covered by insurance, or from any
labour disturbance or dispute or any action, order or decree of any court or arbitrator or
governmental or regulatory authority.
 
Organization and Good Standing. The  Company and each of its material subsidiaries
(e)
Organization and Good Standing. The  Company and each of its material subsidiaries
listed  in  Schedule  2  (the “Subsidiaries”)  have  been  duly  organized  and  are  validly
existing and in good standing (or similar status, to the extent applicable) under the laws
of their respective jurisdictions of organization, are duly qualified to do business and
are in good standing (or similar status, to the extent applicable) in each jurisdiction in
which their respective ownership or lease of property or the conduct of their respective
businesses requires such qualification, and have all power and authority necessary to
own, hold, lease or operate their respective properties and to conduct the businesses in
which  they  are  engaged,  except  where  the failure  to  be  so  qualified,  be  in  good
standing  (or  similar  status,  to  the extent  applicable)  or  have  such  power  or  authority
would  not,  individually or  in  the  aggregate,  have  a  Material  Adverse  Effect  (defined
below).  There are  no  active,  material  subsidiaries  of  the  Company  other  than  the
Subsidiaries  listed  in  Schedule  2  to  this  Agreement.  A  “Material Adverse  Effect”
means  an  effect  that  is  material  and  adverse  to  the  business,  properties,  assets,
financial condition or results of operations of the Company and its subsidiaries taken as
a whole or on the performance by the Company of its obligations under this Agreement,
except any such effect resulting from or arising in connection with: (i) any changes in
IFRS;  (ii)  any  adoption,  proposal,  implementation  or  change  in  any  applicable  laws,
statutes,  ordinances,  judgments,  decrees,  injunctions,  writs,  certificates,  orders,  by-
laws,  rules,  regulations,  protocols,  codes,  guidelines,  policies,  notices,  directions  or
other  requirements  of  any  multinational,  federal,  provincial,  state,  municipal,  local  or
other  governmental  or  public  department,  regulatory  authority,  central  bank,  court,
commission, board, bureau, ministry, agency or instrumentality, domestic or foreign or
any  quasi-governmental,  self-regulatory  organization  or  private  body  exercising  any
regulatory, expropriation or taxing authority under or for the account of its members or
any of the above, and includes the TSX and the NYSE MKT (“Governmental Entity”)
or any interpretation, application or non-application thereof by any Governmental Entity;
(iii) any change in Canadian, United States or global political conditions (including the
outbreak  of  war  or  acts  of  terrorism)  or  in  general  economic,  financial,  currency
exchange, business, regulatory, political or market conditions or in Canadian, United
States or global financial, securities, credit, commodities or other capital markets; (iv)
any change in the conditions affecting the mining industry generally in jurisdictions in
which the Company and its subsidiaries carry on business; (v) any natural disaster; (vi)
any matter which has been publicly disclosed by the Company as of the date of this
Agreement;  or  (vii)  any  change  in  the  market  price  or  trading  prices  of,  or  any
suspension of trading in, securities generally on any securities exchange on which any
securities of the Company trade; provided, however, that with respect to clauses (ii),
(iii), (iv) and (v), such matter does not have a materially disproportionate effect on the
Company relative to other comparable companies and entities operating in the industry
in which the Company operates.
10
(f) Capitalization.  As  of  the  date  of  this Agreement,  the  Company  has  an  authorized
capitalization as set forth in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and
the  Disclosure Package  under  the  heading  “Consolidated  Capitalization”;  all  the
outstanding share capital of the  Company  has  been  duly  and  validly authorized  and
issued and is fully paid and non-assessable and is not subject to any pre-emptive or
in  each  of
thereof  contained
similar  rights;  except  as  described  in  or expressly  contemplated  by  each  of  the
Registration  Statement,  the Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure  Package,  there  are  no
outstanding  warrants or  options  to  acquire,  or  instruments  convertible  into  or
exchangeable for, any share capital or other equity interest in the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries; the common shares of the Company conform in all material respects to
the  description 
the  Registration Statement,  the
Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure  Package;  and  all  the outstanding  share  capital  or
other  equity  interests  of  each  Subsidiary held  by  the  Company  have  been  duly  and
validly authorized and issued, are fully paid and non- assessable (except, in the case of
any 
foreign subsidiary,  for  directors’  qualifying  shares,  and  except  as  otherwise
described in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure
Package), and have not been issued in violation of any preemptive rights, rights of first
refusal or other similar rights; and the Company owns, directly or indirectly, its interest
in each of the Subsidiaries, free and clear of any lien, charge, encumbrance, security
interest or any other claim of any third party (collectively, “Liens”), except for Liens (i) in
favour of Governmental Entities or that are required or imposed under applicable law;
(ii) that do not materially interfere with the use made and proposed to be made of such
property  by  the  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries;  (iii)  that  could  not reasonably  be
expected,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  to  have  a Material  Adverse  Effect  or;  (iv)
securing  debt  or  payment  obligations,  including,  obligations  in  connection  with  the
Revolving Credit Facility Agreement, dated May 20, 2015, as amended, among B2Gold
Corp., the guarantors party thereto, HSBC Bank USA, National Association, as agent,
and the lenders and the hedge providers party thereto (the “Credit Facility”) and any
equipment financing of the Company.
11
(g) Stock  Options.  With  respect  to  the  stock  options (the  "Stock  Options")  granted
pursuant to the stock-based compensation plans of the Company and its subsidiaries
(the  "Company Stock  Plans"),  (i)  each  Stock  Option  intended  to  qualify  as  an
"incentive stock option" under Section 422 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended  (the  “Code”)  so  qualifies,  (ii)  each  grant  of  a Stock  Option  was  duly
authorized no later than the date on which the grant of such Stock Option was by its
terms to be effective (the "Grant Date") by all necessary corporate action, including, as
applicable, approval by the board of directors of the Company (or a duly constituted and
authorized committee thereof) and any required shareholder approval by the necessary
number of votes or written consents, and the award agreement governing such grant (if
any) was duly executed and delivered by each party thereto, (iii) each such grant was
made in accordance with the terms of the Company Stock Plans, the Exchange Act and
all other applicable laws and regulatory rules or requirements, including the rules of the
TSX  and the NYSE MKT and any other exchange on which Company securities are
traded, (iv) the per share exercise price of each Stock Option was equal to or greater
than the fair market value of a Common Share on the applicable Grant Date and (v)
each such grant was properly accounted for in accordance with IFRS in the financial
statements  (including  the  related notes)  of  the  Company  at  the  relevant  time.  The
Company  has  not  knowingly granted,  and  there  is  no  and  has  been  no  policy  or
practice of the Company of granting, Stock Options prior to, or otherwise coordinate the
grant  of Stock  Options  with,  the  release  or  other  public  announcement  of  material
information regarding the Company or its subsidiaries or their results of operations or
prospects.
(h) Due  Authorization.  The  Company  has  full corporate  right,  power  and  authority  to
execute  and  deliver  this  Agreement and to perform its obligations hereunder; and all
action required to be taken for the due and proper authorization, execution and delivery
of  this Agreement and the consummation of the transactions contemplated thereby or
by each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package
has been duly and validly taken. This Agreement has been duly authorized, executed
and delivered by the Company and, when duly executed and delivered in accordance
with its terms by each of the parties thereto, will constitute a valid and legally binding
agreement  of  the  Company enforceable against the Company in accordance with its
terms, except as enforceability may be limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency or
similar  laws  affecting  the  enforcement  of  creditors’  rights  generally  or by  equitable
principles relating to  enforceability  (collectively,  the “Enforceability Exceptions”); no
registration, filing or recording of this Agreement under the laws of British Columbia or
the  federal  laws of  Canada  applicable  therein  is  necessary  in  order  to  preserve  or
protect the validity or enforceability of this Agreement.
(i) Enforceability of Agreements. All material agreements between the Company and third
parties  expressly  referenced  in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses
and  the  Disclosure Package are legal, valid and binding obligations of the Company
enforceable  against  it  in  accordance  with  their  respective  terms  subject to  the
Enforceability Exceptions.
12
(j)
(l)
The  Placement  Shares.  Upon  issuance  and  delivery of  the  Placement  Shares  in
accordance with this Agreement, and upon receipt of payment thereof, the Placement
Shares will be validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable, and the issuance of the
Placement Shares will not be subject to any preemptive or similar rights.
(k) No  Violation  or  Default.  Neither  the Company  nor  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  is  (i)  in
violation  of  its  notice  of articles,  articles,  charter  or  by-laws  or  similar  organizational
documents; (ii) in default, and no event has occurred that, with notice or lapse of time or
both,  would  constitute  such  a  default,  in  the  due performance  or  observance  of  any
term,  covenant  or  condition  contained  in any indenture, hypothec, mortgage, deed of
trust, loan agreement or other agreement or instrument to which the Company or any of
its Subsidiaries is a party or by which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is bound
or  to which  any  property,  right  or  asset  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its Subsidiaries  is
subject; or (iii) in violation of any law or statute or any judgment, order, rule or regulation
of any court or arbitrator or governmental or regulatory authority, except, in the case of
clauses 
(i), (ii)  and  (iii)  above,  for  any  such  default  or  violation  that  would  not,
individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect.
No  Conflicts. The  execution,  delivery  and performance  by  the  Company  of  its
No  Conflicts. The  execution,  delivery  and performance  by  the  Company  of  its
obligations under this Agreement, the issuance and sale of the Placement Shares as
contemplated  under  this Agreement and compliance by the Company with the terms
hereof  and  the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement or
the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package will not (i)
conflict  with  or  result  in  a  breach  or  violation  of  any  of  the terms  or  provisions  of,  or
constitute a default under, result in the termination, modification or acceleration of, or
result  in  the  creation  or imposition  of  any  lien,  charge  or  encumbrance  upon  any
property,  right  or asset  of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  pursuant  to,  any
indenture,  hypothec,  mortgage,  deed  of  trust,  loan  agreement  or  other agreement  or
instrument to which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is bound or to which any property, right or asset of
the  Company  or  any  of  its Subsidiaries  is  subject,  (ii)  result  in  any  violation  of  the
provisions of the notice of articles, articles, charter or by-laws or similar organizational
documents of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or (iii) result in the violation of any
law  or  statute  or  any  judgment, order,  rule  or  regulation  of  any  court  or  arbitrator  or
governmental  or regulatory  authority,  except,  in  the  case  of  clauses  (i),  (ii)  and  (iii)
above, for any such conflict, breach, violation, default, lien, charge or encumbrance that
would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect.
(m) No Consents Required. No consent, approval, authorization, order, filing, registration or
qualification of or with any court or arbitrator or governmental or regulatory authority is
required for the issue and sale of the Placement Shares and the consummation by the
Company  of  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement,  except  as  have been
obtained under the Securities Act, the Exchange Act and Canadian Securities Laws,
and such as may be required under the blue sky laws of any jurisdiction or the rules
and  regulations  of  the  Financial  Industry Regulatory  Authority,  Inc.  (“FINRA”),  the
NYSE  MKT  or  the  TSX  in connection  with  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this
Agreement.  Except  as set 
this  Agreement,  all  consents,
authorizations, orders, filings and registrations which the Company is required to obtain
pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be obtained or effected on or prior  to  each
Applicable Time.
forth  elsewhere
in
13
(n) Stamp  Taxes.  There  are  no  stamp  duties,  fees, registration  or  documentary  taxes,
duties  or  other  similar  charges  payable (either  by  direct  assessment  or  withholding)
under  Canadian  or  U.S. federal  law  or  the  laws  of  any  province  or  any  political
subdivision  of Canada  in  connection  with:  (i)  the  execution  and  delivery  of  this
Agreement; or (ii) the enforcement or admissibility in evidence of this Agreement; or (iii)
the  issuance,  sale  and  delivery  to  the  Agents  of  the Shares;  or  (iv)  the  sale  of  the
Shares through the Agents to U. S. residents.
(o) Transfer Taxes. There are no transfer taxes or similar fees or charges under Canadian
or U. S. federal law or the laws of any province or any political subdivision of Canada
required to be paid in connection with the execution, delivery and performance of this
Agreement, the issuance, sale and delivery to the Agents of the Shares, or the sale of
the Shares through the Agents to U.S. residents.
(q)
(p) Legal  Proceedings.  Except  as  described  in each  of  the  Registration  Statement,  the
Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure Package,  there  are  no  legal,  governmental  or
regulatory investigations, actions, demands, claims (including cease and desist letters
o r invitations  to  take  a  patent  license),  suits,  arbitrations,  inquiries  or proceedings
(“Actions”) pending to which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is or may be a
party or to which any property, right or asset of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
is  or  may  be  the  subject  that, individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  could  reasonably  be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect; and, to the knowledge of the Company, no
such Actions  are  threatened  or  contemplated  by  any  governmental  or  regulatory
authority or by others.
 
Independent  Accountants.  PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  who  have  certified  certain
financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries are independent with respect
to the Company and its subsidiaries within the meaning of the Rules of Professional
Conduct  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of British  Columbia  and  Canadian
Securities  Laws.  There  has  not  been  any “reportable  event”  (within  the  meaning  of
National  Instrument  51-102— Continuous  Disclosure  Obligations of  the  Canadian
Securities Administrators  (“NI  51-102”))  between  the  Company  and  its  current and
previous  auditors.  There  has  never  been  any  reportable  disagreement (within  the
meaning of NI 51-102) with the Company’s current or previous auditors.
(r) Mineral Information. The information set forth in each of the Registration Statement, the
Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package relating to the estimates by the Company of
the  mineral reserves  and  resources  (collectively,  the  “Mineral  Report”)  at  the
Company’s material properties (i) has been reviewed and verified by qualified persons
(as  defined  in  National  Instrument  43-101— Standards of  Disclosure  for  Mineral
Projects of the Canadian Securities Administrators (“NI 43-101”)) where required by NI
43-101  as disclosed in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure  Package,  (ii)  has  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  NI  43-101, and  (iii)
fairly  reflects,  in  all  material  respects,  as  at  the  effective date  of  such  estimate,  the
estimated  proven  and  probable  mineral  reserves and  estimated  measured,  indicated
and inferred mineral resources (as such terms are defined by the Canadian Institute of
Mining,  Metallurgy  and Petroleum (“CIM”) in the CIM Definition Standards on Mineral
Resources  and  Mineral  Reserves  adopted  by  the  CIM  Council,  as  amended)  of the
Company  and  its  Subsidiaries,  as  applicable,  at  the  dates  indicated therein.  The
method  of  estimating  such  mineral  reserves  and  resources  has been  in  accordance
with  applicable 
industry  standards  and  practices, including  the  standards  and
guidelines  established  by  the  CIM,  and  in accordance  with  all  applicable  laws,
including  NI  43-101,  and  has  been verified  by  qualified  persons  using  accepted
guidelines and practices, and the information upon which the estimates of reserves and
resources was based at the time of delivery thereof, was complete and accurate in all
material respects and there have been no changes to such information since the date of
delivery  or  preparation  thereof  that  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  constitute  a
Material Adverse Effect, except as disclosed in each of the Registration Statement, the
Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure  Package.  The  Company  has  duly  filed  with  the
applicable Canadian securities commissions in compliance with applicable Canadian
Securities Laws all technical reports required to be filed under NI 43-101 and all such
reports  comply  in  all  material  respects  with  the  requirements  thereof;  prior  to  the
issuance  of  such  technical  reports,  the  Company  made  available  all  information
requested  by  the  authors  of  such  reports  and  such  information  did  not  contain  any
misrepresentation at its date that could reasonably be expected to constitute a Material
Adverse Effect.
14
(s) Real and Personal Property. Except as set forth in each of the Registration Statement,
the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package, the Company and its Subsidiaries are
the legal and beneficial owners of and have good, valid and marketable title to, or have
valid rights to lease or otherwise use, all mineral titles, including all interests in mining
claims,  concessions,  mining  leases,  leases  of occupation,  exploitation  or  extraction
rights, participating interests or other property, interests or rights or similar rights, and all
licenses, sub licenses, certificates, permits, claims and instruments, that are material to
the respective businesses of the Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, as
currently  conducted  (“Mining  Claims”)  in  each case  free  and  clear  of  all  liens,
encumbrances, charges, claims and defects and imperfections of title except those that
(i)  do  not  materially interfere  with  the  use  made  and  proposed  to  be  made  of  such
property  by the Company and its Subsidiaries, (ii) could not reasonably be expected,
individually or in the aggregate, to have a Material Adverse Effect, (iii) secure the Credit
Facility  or  any  equipment  financing  of  the  Company,  or (iv)  have  been  publicly
disclosed by the Company. There are no expropriations or similar proceedings or any
challenges  to  title  or ownership,  actual  or  threatened,  of  which  the  Company  or  its
subsidiaries has received notice against the Mining Claims or any part thereof and no
such expropriations, proceedings or challenges are, to the knowledge of the Company,
contemplated. Except as may be required by law, there are no restrictions on the ability
of  the  Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  to use  or  otherwise  exploit  any  of  their
respective personal or real property rights that are material to the respective business of
the Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, as currently conducted, and the
Company does not know of any claim or basis for a claim that may adversely affect
such  rights,  except  as  would  not,  individually  or  in  the  aggregate,  have  a Material
Adverse  Effect.  Except  as  could  not  reasonably  be  expected, individually  or  in  the
aggregate, to have a Material Adverse Effect, neither the Company nor its subsidiaries
have granted any other person any right to acquire the Mining Claims or any portion of
the  Mining  Claims other than as described in each of the Registration Statement, the
Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package.
 
Intellectual Property. Except as could not reasonably be expected, individually or in the
aggregate, to have a Material Adverse Effect, (i) the Company and its subsidiaries own
or  have the  right  to  use  all  patents,  patent  applications,  trademarks,  service marks,
trade  names,  trademark  registrations  and  applications  for registration,  service  mark
registrations  and  applications 
for registration,  domain  names  and  other  source
indicators,  copyrights  and copyrightable  works,  know-how,  trade  secrets,  software,
systems, procedures,  proprietary  or  confidential  information  and  all  other worldwide
intellectual property, industrial property and proprietary rights (collectively, “Intellectual
Property”) used and necessary in the conduct of their respective businesses, and all
(t)
such registered Intellectual Property is valid, subsisting, unexpired and enforceable; (ii)
to the knowledge of the Company, the Company and its subsidiaries’ conduct of their
respective  businesses  does  not  infringe,  misappropriate  or  otherwise  violate  any
Intellectual  Property  of  any  person;  (iii)  the  Company  and  its  subsidiaries  have  not
received any written notice of any claim relating to Intellectual Property; and (iv) to the
knowledge  of  the  Company,  the  Intellectual  Property  of  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries  is  not  being  infringed,  misappropriated  or  otherwise  violated  by  any
person.
15
(v)
(u) No  Undisclosed  Relationships.  N o relationship,  direct  or  indirect,  exists  between  or
among  the  Company  or any  of  its  subsidiaries,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  directors,
officers, shareholders or other affiliates of the Company or any of its subsidiaries, on the
other, that would be required under Item 404 of Regulation S-K to be described in a
registration statement on Form S-1 to be filed by the Company with the Commission or
that  would  be  required  to be  disclosed  in  a  prospectus  filed  pursuant  to  Canadian
Securities Laws and that is not so described in each of the Registration Statement, the
Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure  Package,  it  being  understood  that  director or
employee compensation and indemnification arrangements shall not be considered a
relationship for the purposes of this paragraph.
 
Investment Company Act. The  Company  is  not, and after giving effect to the offering
and  sale  of  the  Placement  Shares and  the  application  of  the  proceeds  thereof  as
described in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure
Package,  will not  be,  an  “investment  company”  or  an  entity  “controlled”  by  an
“investment company” within the meaning of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as
amended, and the rules and regulations of the Commission thereunder.
(w) Taxes.  The  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries have  timely  paid  all  material  Canadian
federal, provincial, municipal, local and non-Canadian taxes and other assessments of
a  similar  nature required  to  be  paid  and  due  whether  imposed  directly  or  through
withholding and whether or not such taxes are shown on a tax return (including  any
interest,  additions  to  tax  or  penalties)  and  have  timely filed  all  income  and  other
material  tax  returns  required  to  be  filed  in any  jurisdiction  through  the  date  hereof,
which  tax  returns  are  correct and  complete  in  all  material  respects;  and  except  as
otherwise  disclosed in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure Package, there is no tax deficiency that has been, or to the knowledge of the
Company are expected to be, asserted against the Company or any of its subsidiaries
or any of their respective properties or assets.
(x) Licenses and Permits. Except  as  set  forth in  each  of  the  Registration  Statement,  the
Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package, the Company and its Subsidiaries are the
registered owners of and possess, in good standing without default, all licenses, sub-
licenses, certificates,  rights  (including,  without  limitation,  surface  rights, access  rights
and  water  rights),  permits,  concessions,  instruments  and other  authorizations  or
approvals issued by, and have made all declarations and filings with, the appropriate
Canadian or U.S. federal, provincial, state, local or foreign governmental or regulatory
authorities that are necessary for the ownership or lease of the Mining Claims or the
conduct  of  their  respective  businesses  as  presently  conducted  in  respect of  the
Company’s  material  mineral  properties  as  described  in  each  of  the Registration
Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure  Package (collectively,  “Permits”),
except  where  the  failure  to  possess, maintain  in  good  standing  or  make  the  same
would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect; and except
as  described  in  each  of  the  Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the
Disclosure  Package,  neither  the  Company  nor  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  has  received
notice of any revocation, cancellation or modification of, or intention to revoke, cancel or
modify, any such Permit or has any reason to believe that any such Permit will not be
renewed in the ordinary course, except as would not have a Material Adverse Effect.
16
(y) No  Labour  Disputes.  Except  as  set  forth  in each  of  the  Registration  Statement,  the
Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure Package or as publicly disclosed by the Company
there is no ongoing labour disturbance by or dispute with employees of the Company or
any  of  its Subsidiaries  or,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Company,  is  contemplated  or
threatened  and  the  Company  is  not  aware  of  any  existing  or  imminent  labour
disturbance by, or dispute with, the employees of any of the Company’s or any of the
Company’s Subsidiaries’ principal suppliers, contractors or customers, except as would
not  have  a  Material  Adverse  Effect.  Neither  the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries
has  received  any  notice  of cancellation  or  termination  with  respect  to  any  current
collective bargaining agreement to which it is a party.
(z) Compliance  with  Mining  Laws. (i)  Except  as  set forth  in  each  of  the  Registration
Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the Disclosure  Package,  the  Company  and  its
Subsidiaries (x) are, and to the knowledge of the Company at all prior times were, in
compliance  in  all material  respects  with  any  and  all  applicable  Canadian  or  U.S.
federal, provincial,  state,  municipal,  local  and  foreign  laws,  rules,  regulations,
ordinances,  codes,  decisions  and  orders  relating  to  exploration,  mining and  related
activities (collectively, “Mining Laws”), and (y) have not received notice of any actual or
potential liability under or relating to any Mining Laws and have no knowledge of any
event or condition that would reasonably be expected to result in any such notice, and
(ii) except as disclosed in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure  Package  or  except  to  the  extent  a  provision  has  been  made in  the
Company’s financial statements, there are no costs or liabilities associated with Mining
Laws of or relating to the Company or its Subsidiaries, except in the case of each of (i)
and (ii) above, for any such failure to comply, or failure to receive required Permits, or
cost or liability, as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse
Effect;  and  (iii)  except  as  described  in  each  of  the  Registration Statement,  the
Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package, (x) there are no proceedings, including but
not limited to orders, rights, directives, units or judgments, that are pending, or that are
known to be contemplated, against the Company or any of its Subsidiaries under any
Mining Laws in which a governmental entity is also a party, except as would not have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect, and (y) the Company and its
Subsidiaries  are  not  aware  of  any non-compliance  or  potential  non-compliance  with
Mining  Laws,  or liabilities  or  other  obligations  under  Mining  Laws,  that  could
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
(aa) Compliance With Environmental Laws. Except as set forth in each of the Registration
Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and the  Disclosure  Package,  (i)  the  Company  and  its
Subsidiaries (x) are, and, to the knowledge of the Company, at all prior times were, in
compliance 
in all  material  respects  with  all  applicable  Canadian  or  U.S.  federal,
provincial,  state,  local  and  foreign  laws,  rules,  regulations,  ordinances, codes,
decisions  and  orders  relating  to  the  protection  of  human  health  or safety,  the
environment, natural resources, hazardous or toxic substances or wastes, pollutants or
contaminants (collectively, “Environmental Laws”), and (y) have not received notice of
any actual or potential liability under or relating to any Environmental Laws, including
for  the  investigation  or  remediation  of  any  disposal  or  release  of  hazardous  or  toxic
substances or wastes, pollutants or contaminants, and have no knowledge of any event
or condition that would reasonably be expected to result in any such notice, and (ii)
except as disclosed in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure  Package  or  except  to  the  extent  a  provision  has  been  made  in  the
Company’s  financial  statements,  there  are  no  costs  or  liabilities  associated  with
Environmental  Laws  of  or  relating  to  the  Company  or  its  Subsidiaries,  except  in  the
case of each of (i) and (ii) above, for any such failure to comply, or failure to receive
required permits, licenses or approvals, or cost or liability, as would not, individually or
in  the  aggregate,  have  a  Material  Adverse  Effect;  and  (iii)  except  as  would  not
reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in  a  Material  Adverse  Effect,  (x)  there  are  no
proceedings  that  are  pending,  or  that  are  known  to  be  contemplated,  against  the
Company  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  under  any  Environmental  Laws  in  which  a
governmental entity is also a party, (y) the Company and its Subsidiaries are not aware
of  any  issues  regarding  compliance  with  Environmental  Laws,  or  liabilities  or  other
obligations under Environmental Laws or concerning hazardous or toxic substances or
wastes, pollutants or contaminants, and (z) none of the Company and its Subsidiaries
anticipates material capital expenditures relating to any Environmental Laws.
17
(bb) Compliance with ERISA. (i) Each employee benefit plan, within the meaning of Section
3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended (“ERISA”),
fo r which  the  Company  or  any  member  of  its  “Controlled  Group”  (defined  as  any
organization  which  is  a  member  of  a  controlled  group  of  corporations within  the
meaning of Section 414 of the Code) would have any liability (each, a “Plan”) has been
maintained  in  compliance  with  its  terms and  the  requirements  of  any  applicable
statutes, orders, rules and regulations, including but not limited to ERISA and the Code;
(ii)  no prohibited transaction, within the meaning of Section 406 of ERISA or Section
4975  of  the  Code,  has  occurred  with  respect  to  any  Plan  excluding transactions
effected pursuant to a statutory or administrative exemption; (iii) no Plan is a defined
benefit pension plan subject to the funding rules of Section 412 of the Code or Section
302  of  ERISA;  (iv)  no “reportable  event”  (within  the  meaning  of  Section  4043(c)  of
ERISA) has occurred or is reasonably expected to occur; (v) each Plan that is intended
to  be  qualified  under  Section  401(a)  of  the  Code  is  so  qualified and  nothing  has
occurred,  whether  by  action  or  by  failure  to  act,  which would cause the  loss  of  such
qualification and (vi) neither the Company nor any member of the Controlled Group has
incurred,  nor  reasonably expects to incur, any liability under Title IV of ERISA (other
th a n contributions  to  the  Plan  or  premiums  to  the  Pension  Benefit  Guarantee
Corporation, in the ordinary course and without default) in respect of a Plan (including a
“multiemployer  plan”,  within  the  meaning  of  Section 4001(a)(3)  of  ERISA),  except  in
each case with respect to the events or conditions set forth in (i) through (vi) hereof, as
would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Material Adverse Effect.
(cc) Canadian  Accounting  and  Disclosure  Controls.  The  Company
is
in  material
compliance with the requirements, including the filing and certification requirements, of,
and has established and maintained disclosure controls and procedures and internal
control  over financial reporting as those terms are defined in, National Instrument 52-
109 – Certification of Disclosure in Issuer’s Annual and Interim Filings of the Canadian
Securities  Administrators.  Such disclosure  controls  and  procedures  have  been
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
Canadian  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (including,  for  greater  certainty,
IFRS following December 31, 2010). The Company maintains a system of disclosure
controls  and  procedures  that  is  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that
information  required  to  be  disclosed  by  the  Company  under  applicable  Canadian
Securities  Laws  is  recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported  within  the  time
periods specified under such laws and that information required to be disclosed by the
Company  under  such  laws  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  the  Company's
management,  including  its  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer,  as
appropriate,  to  allow  timely  decisions  regarding  required  disclosure  and  such
disclosure  controls  and  procedures  are  effective.  The  Company  is  not  aware  of  any
material weaknesses in such internal control over financial reporting.
18
(dd) United  States  Disclosure  Controls. The  Company  has established  and  maintains
disclosure controls and procedures as required by Rule l3a-15 or Rule 15d-15 under
the Exchange Act, which (a) are designed to ensure that material information relating to
the  Company, including  its  consolidated  Subsidiaries,  is  made  known  to  the
Company’s principal executive officer and its principal financial officer by others within
those entities, particularly during the preparation of the Registration Statement; (b) the
Company’s  certifying  officers  have evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s
disclosure  controls  and procedures as of its most recently completed fiscal year end
(such 
its  annual
management’s discussion and analysis and Annual Report on Form 40-F for the fiscal
year  most  recently  ended  the  conclusions  of  the  certifying officers  about  the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures based on their evaluations as
of the Evaluation Date and the disclosure controls and procedures are effective in all
material  respects  to  perform the functions for which they were established. Since the
Evaluation Date, there have been no significant changes in the Company’s disclosure
date, the  “Evaluation  Date”).  The  Company  presented
in
controls and procedures that are reasonably likely to affect the Company’s disclosure
controls.
(ee) United  States  Accounting  Controls. The  Company  and its  subsidiaries  maintain
systems  of  internal  accounting  controls sufficient  to  provide  reasonable  assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting principles,
including, but not limited to internal accounting controls sufficient to provide reasonable
assurance that (i) transactions are executed in accordance with management's general
or  specific authorizations;  (ii)  transactions  are  recorded  as  necessary  to  permit
preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  generally  accepted accounting
principles and to maintain asset accountability; (iii) access to assets is permitted only in
accordance with management's general or specific authorization; and (iv) the recorded
accountability  for  assets  is compared with the existing assets at reasonable intervals
and appropriate action is taken with respect to any differences. Except as disclosed in
each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package, to
the  knowledge  of  the  Company  there  are  no  material  weaknesses or  significant
deficiencies in the Company’s internal controls.
(ff) Mining Controls. The Company and its Subsidiaries apply a quality assurance program
and  quality  control measures  (collectively,  the  “QA/QC”)  to  provide  reasonable
assurance regarding the precision and accuracy of its assay data. The Company is not
aware of any material weaknesses in the QA/QC and maintains security measures that
are designed to provide reasonable assurance in the Company’s and its Subsidiaries’
sample  preparation,  sample  dispatches,  sample  security,  sample  splitting  and
reduction, data verification, and testing, assaying and analytical procedures.
19
(gg) Insurance. The Company and its Subsidiaries have insurance covering their respective
material  properties,  operations, personnel  and  businesses,  customary  for  a  mining
company  of  its  size;  and neither  the  Company  nor  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  has  (i)
received  notice from  any  insurer  or  agent  of  such  insurer  that  material  capital
improvements or other expenditures are required or necessary to be made in order to
continue such insurance or (ii) any reason to believe that it will not be able to renew its
existing insurance coverage as and when such coverage expires or to obtain similar
coverage at reasonable cost from similar insurers as may be necessary to continue its
business.
(hh) No  Unlawful  Payments.  Neither  the  Company nor  any  of  its  subsidiaries  (while
subsidiaries  of  the  Company)  nor,  to the  knowledge  of  the  Company,  any  of  its
subsidiaries (prior to being a subsidiary of the Company), any director, officer, agent,
employee, affiliate or other person associated with or acting on behalf of the Company
or any of its subsidiaries has (i) used any corporate funds for any unlawful contribution,
gift, entertainment or other unlawful expense relating to political activity; (ii) made any
direct  or  indirect  unlawful payment  to  any  foreign  or  domestic  government  official  or
employee  from corporate  funds;  (iii)  violated  or  is  in  violation  of  any  provision  of  the
in  compliance  with  applicable
financial
recordkeeping  and
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, the Bribery Act 2010 of the United Kingdom, the
Corruption  of  Foreign  Public  Officials  Act  (Canada)  or  any similar  such  law  or
regulation effective under Canadian law or any other law, rule or regulation of similar
purpose  and  scope  (collectively, “Anti-Corruption  Laws”);  or  (iv)  made  any  bribe,
rebate,  payoff, influence payment, kickback or other unlawful payment. The Company
has implemented and maintains in effect policies and procedures designed to ensure
compliance by the Company, its subsidiaries and any director, officer, agent, employee,
affiliate or other person associated with or acting on behalf of the Company or any of its
subsidiaries with Anti-Corruption Laws.
(ii) Compliance  with  Money  Laundering  Laws. The operations  of  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries (while subsidiaries of the Company), and to the Company's knowledge, its
subsidiaries (prior to being subsidiaries of the Company), those of its directors, officers,
employees, agents,  or  those  of  its  subsidiaries,  are  and  have  been  conducted  at  all
times 
reporting
requirements  of  the  Currency  and  Foreign  Transactions  Reporting  Act  of 1970,  as
amended,  Proceeds  of  Crime  (Money  Laundering)  and  Terrorist Financing  Act
(Canada), the money laundering statutes of all applicable jurisdictions, the rules and
regulations  thereunder  and  any  related  or similar  rules,  regulations  or  guidelines,
issued,  administered  or  enforced by  any  governmental  agency  (collectively,  the
“Money Laundering Laws”) and no action, suit or proceeding by or before any court or
governmental agency, authority or body or any arbitrator involving the Company or any
of  its  subsidiaries  with  respect  to  the  Money  Laundering Laws  is  pending  or,  to  the
knowledge  of 
threatened.  The Company  has  implemented  and
maintains  in  effect  policies  and  procedures designed  to  ensure  compliance  by  the
Company,  its  subsidiaries  and  any director,  office,  agent,  employee,  affiliate  or  other
person  associated with or acting on behalf of the Company or any of its subsidiaries
with Money Laundering Laws.
(jj) No Conflicts with Sanctions Laws. None of the Company, any of its subsidiaries or, to
the knowledge of the Company, any director, officer, agent, employee or affiliate of the
Company or any of its subsidiaries is currently the subject or the target of any sanctions
administered  or  enforced  by  the  U.S.  Government,  (including,  without  limitation,  the
Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Department of the Treasury), the United
Nations  Security  Council,  the  European  Union,  Her  Majesty’s  Treasury),  or  other
relevant sanctions authority (collectively, “Sanctions”), nor is the Company or any of its
subsidiaries located, organized or resident in a country or territory that is the subject of
Sanctions;  and  the  Company  will  not  directly  or  indirectly  use  the  proceeds  of  the
offering  of  the  Placement  Shares  hereunder,  or  lend,  contribute  or  otherwise  make
available  such  proceeds  to  any  subsidiary,  joint  venture  partner  or  other  person  or
entity  (i)  to  fund  any  activities  of  or  business  with  any  person,  or  in  any  country  or
territory, that, at the time of such funding, is the subject of Sanctions or (ii) in any other
manner that will result in a violation by any person (including any person participating
in  the  transaction,  whether  as  initial  purchaser,  advisor,  investor  or  otherwise)  of
Sanctions.
the  Company,
20
this  Agreement  and
(kk) Solvency. As of the date hereof, the Company, on a consolidated basis is Solvent. As
used in this paragraph, the term “Solvent” means, with respect to a particular date and
entity,  that  on  such  date  (i)  the  present  fair  market  value  (and  present fair  saleable
value) of the assets of the Company, on a consolidated basis, is not less than the total
amount required to pay the probable liability of the Company, on a consolidated basis,
of its total existing debts and liabilities (including contingent liabilities) as they become
absolute  and  matured;  (ii)  the  Company,  on  a  consolidated  basis,  is  able to  realize
upon  its  assets  and  pay  its  debts  and  other  liabilities, contingent  obligations  and
commitments as they mature and become due in the normal course of business; (iii)
assuming  consummation  of  the  issuance and  sale  of  the  Placement  Shares  as
contemplated  by 
the Prospectuses,  the  Company,  on  a
consolidated basis, does not have, intend to incur or believe that it will incur debts or
liabilities  beyond  its ability  to  pay  as  such  debts  and  liabilities  mature;  (iv)  the
Company, on a consolidated basis, is not engaged in any business or transaction, and
does not propose to engage in any business or transaction, for which its property would
constitute unreasonably small capital; and (v) the Company, on a consolidated basis, is
not  a  defendant  in  any  civil  action  that  could reasonably  be  expected  to  result  in  a
judgment that the  Company,  on  a consolidated basis, is or would become unable to
satisfy.
(ll) No Restrictions on Subsidiaries. No Subsidiary of the Company is currently prohibited,
directly or indirectly, under any agreement or other instrument to which it is a party or is
subject, from paying any dividends to the Company, from making any other distribution
on such Subsidiary’s capital stock or similar ownership interest, from repaying to the
Company any loans or advances to such subsidiary from the Company, except for any
such  restrictions  prescribed  under  applicable  law, contained  in  the  Credit  Facility  or
other credit or lending facility or as described in each of the Registration Statement, the
Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package.
(mm)No Broker’s Fees.  Neither  the  Company  nor  any  of its subsidiaries is a party to any
contract, agreement or understanding with any person (other than this Agreement) that
would give rise to a valid claim against them or any Agent for a brokerage commission,
finder’s fee or like payment in connection with the offering and sale of the Placement
Shares.
(nn) No  Stabilization.  The  Company  has  not taken,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  action
designed to or that could reasonably be expected to cause or result in any stabilization
or manipulation of the price of the Shares.
21
(oo) Forward-Looking  Statements.  N o forward-looking  statement  (within  the  meaning  of
Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act or as defined
under the Canadian Securities Laws, as applicable) included in any of the Registration
Statement, the Prospectuses and the Disclosure Package has as at the date of such
statement been made or reaffirmed without a reasonable basis or has been disclosed
other than in good faith.
(pp) Industry Statistical and Market Data. Nothing has come to the attention of the Company
that has caused the Company to believe that the industry statistical and market-related
data, if any, included in each of the Registration Statement, the Prospectuses and the
Disclosure  Package  is  not  based  on  or  derived  from  sources  that  are reliable  and
accurate in all material respects.
(qq) Canadian Reporting Issuer. The Company is a “reporting issuer” (or equivalent) in all of
the  Canadian  Qualifying Jurisdictions  under  Canadian  Securities  Laws,  has  filed
pursuant to such laws all documents required to be filed by it and is either listed on the
list of reporting issuers as not being in default or not on the list of defaulting reporting
issuers maintained by the Canadian Qualifying Authorities, as the case may be.
(rr) Purchases by the Agents.  The  Company  acknowledges and  agrees  that  the  Agents
have informed the Company that the Agents may, but are not required to, to the extent
permitted under the Securities Act, the Exchange Act, Canadian Securities Laws and
this  Agreement,  purchase and  sell  Shares  for  the  Agents’  own  accounts  and  for  the
accounts of their clients at the same time as sales of Placement Shares occur pursuant
to this Agreement.
(ss) No Registration Rights. Except as may be described in the Prospectuses, neither the
Company nor its Subsidiaries is party to any agreement that provides any person with
the right to require the Company or its Subsidiaries to register any securities for sale
under  the Securities  Act  or  Canadian  Securities  Laws  by  reason  of  the  filing  of  the
Registration Statement with the Commission or the issuance and sale of the Placement
Shares.
(tt) Prospectus Disclosure. The statements set forth in the Prospectuses under the captions
“Description of Share Capital” and “Description of Securities Being Distributed” insofar
as  they  purport  to constitute  a  summary  of  the  terms  of  the  Shares,  and  under  the
caption “Plan of Distribution,” insofar as they purport to describe the provisions of the
laws and documents referred to therein, are accurate and complete.
(uu) No Misstatement or Omission in an Issuer Free Writing Prospectus. Each Issuer Free
Writing  Prospectus,  as  of  the  Applicable Time  did  not  or  will  not  contain  an  untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which
they  were  made,  not  misleading;  provided,  however,  that  the  Company  makes no
representation or warranty with respect to any statement contained in any Issuer Free
Writing Prospectus in reliance upon and in conformity with written information furnished
to the Company by and through the Agents for use therein.
(vv) Conformity  of  Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus.  Each Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus
conformed  or  will  conform  in  all  material respects  with  the  requirements  of  the
Securities Act on the date of first use, and the Company has complied or will comply
with any filing requirements applicable to such Issuer Free Writing Prospectus pursuant
to the Securities Act. Each Issuer Free Writing Prospectus, as of its issue date and at all
subsequent times through the completion of the public offer and sale of the Placement
Shares, did not, does not and will not include any information that conflicted, conflicts or
will  conflict  with  the  information  contained  in  the  Registration  Statement  or  the
Prospectus,  including  any  document  incorporated  by  reference  therein  that  has  not
been  superseded  or  modified.  The  Company  has  not  made  any  offer  relating  to  the
Shares that would constitute an Issuer Free Writing Prospectus without the prior written
consent of the Agents. The Company has retained in accordance with the Securities
Act all Issuer Free Writing Prospectuses that were not required to be filed pursuant to
the Securities Act.
22
(ww)Compliance  With  Exchange  Requirements.  The  Shares are  registered  pursuant  to
Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act, and the Company has taken no action designed to,
or which to its knowledge is likely to have the effect of, terminating the registration of the
Shares pursuant to the Exchange Act nor has the Company received any notification
that  the  Commission  is  currently  contemplating  terminating  such registration.  The
Shares are currently listed on (i) the NYSE MKT under the trading symbol “BTG” and
(ii) the TSX under the trading symbol “BTO”. The Company has not, in the twelve (12)
months  preceding  the  date  hereof, received any notice from any Person to the effect
that the Company is not in compliance with the rules and regulations of the NYSE MKT
or  the  TSX. The  Company  is,  and  has  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  will  not  in  the
foreseeable future continue to be, in compliance with the rules and regulations of the
NYSE MKT and the TSX.
(xx) DTC Eligibility. The Company,  through  its  transfer agent, currently participates in the
DTC Fast Automated Securities Transfer (FAST) Program and the Placement Shares
can be transferred electronically to third parties via the DTC Fast Automated Securities
Transfer (FAST) Program.
(yy) Transfer Agent and Registrar. Computershare Trust Company of Canada at its principal
offices in Vancouver, British Columbia is the duly appointed registrar and transfer agent
of the Company with respect to the outstanding Shares.
(zz) Shell Company Status. The Company is not currently, and within the past three years
has not been, an issuer identified in Rule 144(i)(1) under the Securities Act.
8.          Covenants of the Company. The Company covenants and agrees with the Agents that:
(a) Prospectus and Registration Statement Amendments. After the date of this Agreement
and  during  the  period  in  which  a prospectus  relating  to  the  Placement  Shares  is
required  to  be  delivered  by the  Agents  under  Canadian  Securities  Laws  or  the
Securities  Act  (including in  circumstances  where  such  requirement  may  be  satisfied
pursuant  to  Rule 172  or  Rule  173(a)  under  the  Securities  Act),  (i)  the  Company  will
notify the  Agents  promptly  of  the  time  when  any  subsequent  amendment  to  the
Canadian  Base  Prospectus  or  the  Registration  Statement  has  been  filed  with any
Canadian Qualifying Authority or the Commission and has become effective or where a
receipt has been issued therefor, as applicable, or any subsequent supplement to the
U.S.  Prospectus  or  the  Canadian Prospectus has been filed (each, an “Amendment
Date”) and of any request by the Commission or any Canadian Qualifying Authority for
any amendment or supplement to the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses or for
additional information; (ii) the Company will file promptly all other material required to
be  filed  by  it  with  the  Commission  pursuant  to  Rule  433(d)  and  with  the  Canadian
Qualifying  Authorities;  (iii)  the  Company,  in  consultation  with  its  legal  advisors,  will,
upon the Agents’ request, consider preparing and filing with the Canadian Qualifying
Authorities and the Commission any amendments or supplements to the Registration
Statement  or  the  Prospectuses  that,  in  the  Agents’  reasonable  opinion,  may  be
necessary or advisable in connection with the distribution of the Placement Shares by
the Agents (provided, however that the failure of the Agents to make such request shall
not relieve the Company of any obligation or liability hereunder, or affect the Agents’
right  to  rely  on  the  representations  and  warranties  made  by  the  Company  in  this
Agreement); (iv) the Company will submit to the Agents a copy of any amendment or
supplement to the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses a reasonable period of
time  before  the  filing  thereof  and  will  afford  the  Agents  and  the  Agents’  counsel  a
reasonable opportunity to comment on any such proposed filing prior to such proposed
filing; and (v) the Company will furnish to the Agents at the time of filing thereof a copy
of  any  document  that  upon  filing  is  deemed  to  be  incorporated  by  reference  in  the
Registration  Statement  or  the  Prospectuses;  and  the  Company  will  cause  (i)  each
amendment or supplement to the U.S. Prospectus to be filed with the Commission as
required pursuant to General Instruction II.L of Form F-10 of the Rules and Regulations
or, in the case of any document to be incorporated therein by reference, to be filed with
the  Commission  as  required  pursuant  to  the  Exchange  Act,  within  the  time  period
prescribed and (ii) each amendment or supplement to the Canadian Prospectus to be
filed with the Canadian Qualifying Authorities as required pursuant to Canadian Shelf
Procedures or, in the case of any document to be incorporated therein by reference, to
be filed with the Canadian Qualifying Authorities as required pursuant to the Canadian
Securities Laws, within the time period prescribed.
23
(b) Notice of Stop Orders. The Company will advise the Agents, promptly after it receives
notice  thereof,  of  the  issuance  by  the Commission  or  the  Canadian  Qualifying
Authorities of any stop order or of any order preventing or suspending the use of the
Prospectuses or other prospectus in respect of the Shares, of any notice of objection of
the Commission  to  the  use  of  the  form  of  the  Registration  Statement  or  any post-
effective amendment thereto pursuant to Rule 401(g)(2) under the Securities Act, of the
suspension of the qualification of the Shares for offering or sale in the United States or
the Canadian Qualifying Jurisdictions, of the initiation or threatening of any proceeding
for any such purpose, or of any request by the Commission or the Canadian Qualifying
Authorities for the amending or supplementing of the form of the Registration Statement
or the Prospectuses or for additional information; and, in the event of the issuance of
any  such  stop  order  or of  any  such  order  preventing  or  suspending  the  use  of  the
Prospectuses 
in respect  of  the  Shares  or  suspending  any  such  qualification,  to
promptly use its commercially reasonable efforts to obtain the withdrawal of such order;
and in the event of any such issuance of a notice of objection, promptly to take such
commercially reasonable steps as may be necessary to permit offers and sales of the
Placement Shares by the Agents, which may include, without limitation, amending the
Registration  Statement  or  filing a  new  registration  statement,  at  the  Company’s
expense  (references  herein to  the  Registration  Statement  shall  include  any  such
amendment or new registration statement).
(c) Delivery  of  Prospectus;  Subsequent  Changes.  Within the  time  during  which  a
prospectus relating to the Shares is required to be delivered by the Agents under the
Securities  Act  (including  in circumstances  where  such  requirement  may  be  satisfied
pursuant  to  Rule  172 or  Rule  173(a)  under  the  Securities  Act)  or  the  Canadian
Securities Laws, the Company will comply with all requirements imposed upon it by the
Securities Act, by the Rules and Regulations and by the Canadian Securities Laws, as
appropriate and as from time to time in force, and will file or furnish on or before their
respective  due  dates  all  reports  required  to  be  filed  or  furnished  by  it  with  the
Commission pursuant to Sections 14(a), 14(c), 15(d) of the Exchange Act, if applicable,
or any other provision of or under the Exchange Act or with the Canadian Qualifying
Authorities  pursuant  to  the  Canadian  Securities  Laws,  as  appropriate.  If  during  such
period  any  event  occurs  as  a  result  of  which  the  Prospectuses  as  then  amended  or
supplemented  would  include  an  untrue  statement  of  material  fact  or  omit  to  state  a
material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances
then  existing,  not  misleading,  or  if  during  such  period  it  is  necessary  to  amend  or
supplement  the  Registration  Statement  or  the  Prospectuses  to  comply  with  the
Securities Act or the Canadian Securities Laws, the Company will immediately notify
the Agents to suspend the offering of Placement Shares during such period and the
Company will use commercially reasonable efforts to promptly amend or supplement
the  Registration  Statement  or  the  Prospectuses  (in  both  the  English  and  French
languages,  as  applicable)  (at  the  expense  of  the  Company)  so  as  to  correct  such
statement or omission or effect such compliance.
24
(d) NYSE MKT and TSX Filings. In connection with the offering and sale of the Placement
Shares, the Company (i) will file with the NYSE MKT all documents and notices, and
make all certifications, as may be required by the NYSE MKT and (ii) will file with the
TSX all documents and notices, and make all certifications, as may be required by the
TSX.
(e) Listing of Placement Shares. The Company will use commercially reasonable efforts to
cause the Placement Shares to be listed on the NYSE MKT and the TSX and to qualify
the  Placement  Shares  for  sale under  the  securities  laws  of  such  jurisdictions  in  the
Canadian Qualifying Jurisdictions and the United States as the Agents designate and
to continue such qualifications in effect so long as required for the distribution  of  the
Placement  Shares;  provided  that  the  Company  shall  not be  required  in  connection
therewith  to  qualify  as  a  foreign  corporation  or to file a general consent to service of
process in any jurisdiction.
(f)
Delivery of Registration Statement and Prospectuses. The Company will furnish to the
Delivery of Registration Statement and Prospectuses. The Company will furnish to the
Agents and their counsel (at the expense of the Company) copies of the Registration
Statement, 
the Prospectuses  (including  all  documents  incorporated  by  reference
therein), in both the English and French languages, as applicable, and all amendments
and supplements to the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses that are filed with
the  Commission  or  Canadian  Qualifying Authorities  during  the  period  in  which  a
prospectus relating to the Shares is required to be delivered under the Securities Act
(including all documents filed with the Commission during such period that are deemed
t o be  incorporated  by  reference  therein)  or  the  Canadian  Qualifying Authorities
(including  all  documents  filed  with  the  Canadian  Qualifying Authorities  during  such
period that are deemed to be incorporated by reference therein), in each case as soon
as reasonably practicable and in such quantities as the Agents may from time to time
reasonably  request provided, however, the Company shall not be required to furnish
any documents to the Agents that are available on SEDAR or EDGAR.
(g) Company Information. The Company will furnish to the Agents such information in its
possession as is reasonably requested by the Agents as necessary or appropriate to
fulfil  its  obligations  as  agent  pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  the  Securities  Act  and
Canadian Securities Laws.
25
(h) Earnings Statement. The Company will make generally available to its security holders
as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than 15 months after the end of the
Company’s  current fiscal quarter, an earnings statement covering a 12 month period
that satisfies the provisions of Section 11(a) of the Securities Act and Rule 158 of the
Rules and Regulations.
(i) Material  Non-public  Information.  The  Company covenants  that  it  will  not  issue  a
Placement Notice to either Agent in accordance with Section 2 hereof if the Company
is  in  possession  of material  non-public  information  regarding  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries,  taken  as  a  whole,  their  results  of  operations  or  prospects or  the
Company’s securities.
(j) Expenses.
(i)
The  Company,  whether  or  not  the  transactions  contemplated hereunder  are
consummated or this Agreement is terminated in accordance with Section 13, will
pay  all  expenses  incident  to  the  performance  of  its obligations  hereunder,
including but not limited to (i) the preparation, printing and filing of the Registration
Statement  and  each  amendment  and supplement  thereto,  of  each  of  the
Prospectuses  and  of  each  amendment  and supplement thereto and each Issuer
Free  Writing  Prospectus,  (ii)  the preparation,  issuance  and  delivery  of  the
Placement  Shares,  (iii)  all  fees and  disbursements  of  the  Company’s  counsel,
accountants  and  other advisors,  (iv)  the  qualification  of  the  Placement  Shares
under  securities laws  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Section  8(e)  of  this
Agreement, including  filing  fees  in  connection  therewith,  (v)  the  printing  and
delivery  to  the  Agents  of  copies  of  the  Prospectuses  and  any  amendments  or
(ii)
supplements thereto, and of this Agreement, (vi) the fees and expenses incurred in
connection with the listing or qualification of the Placement Shares for trading on
the  TSX  and  NYSE  MKT,  and  (vii)  the  filing  fees  and expenses  related  to  the
Commission,  the  Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities and  the  Financial  Industry
Regulatory Authority (including fees and disbursements of counsel to the Agents
incurred  in  connection  therewith). All  fees  and  expenses  are  to  be  paid  in  U.S.
dollars.
 
In  addition  to  any  fees  that  may  be  payable  to  the  Agents hereunder  and
regardless  of  whether  or  not  the  transactions  contemplated hereunder  are
consummated or this Agreement is terminated, the Company shall reimburse the
Agents for all of their reasonable expenses arising out of this Agreement (including
travel  and  related  expenses,  the  costs  of document  preparation,  production  and
distribution,  third  party  research and database services and the reasonable fees
and  disbursements  of Canadian and U.S. counsel to the Agents) within ten (10)
days  of  the presentation by the Agents to the Company of a reasonably detailed
statement  therefor.  In  no  event  shall  the  Agents  be  entitled  to  reimbursement  of
expenses  hereunder  to  the  extent  it  would  cause  the  Agents  to  receive  total
compensation in excess of eight percent (8.00%) of the total proceeds for the sale
of Placement Shares hereunder.
(k) Use  of  Proceeds.  The  Company  will  use  the  Net Proceeds  as  described  in  the
Prospectuses.
26
to
(l) Other  Sales.  Without  prior  written  notice  to  the Agents  (which  consent  shall  not  be
unreasonably withheld), the Company will not (A) directly or indirectly, offer to sell, sell,
announce the intention to sell, contract to sell, pledge, lend, grant or sell any option,
right or warrant to sell or any contract to purchase, purchase any contract or option to
sell  or  otherwise  transfer  or dispose  of  any  Shares  (other  than  the  Shares  offered
pursuant 
the provisions  of  this  Agreement)  or  securities  convertible  into  or
exchangeable for Shares, warrants or any rights to purchase or acquire, Shares or file
any registration statement under the Act with respect to any of the foregoing (other than
a registration statement on Form S 8), or (B) enter into any swap or other agreement or
any  transaction  that transfers  in  whole  or  in  part,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  of  the
economic consequence of ownership of the Shares, or any securities convertible into or
exchangeable or exercisable for or repayable with Shares, whether any such swap or
transaction described in clause (A) or (B) above is to be settled by delivery of Shares or
such other securities, in cash or otherwise, during the period beginning on the fifth (5th)
Business  Day immediately  prior  to  the  date  on  which  any  Placement  Notice  is
delivered by  the  Company  hereunder  and  ending  on  the  fifth  (5th)  Business  Day
immediately following the final Settlement Date with respect to Placement Shares sold
pursuant to such Placement Notice; and, except for offers to sell and sells conducted
pursuant to those agreements set forth on Schedule 8(k), without prior written notice to
the Agents (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld), the Company will not
directly or indirectly in any other “at the market” or continuous equity transaction offer to
sell, sell, contract to sell, grant any option to sell or otherwise dispose of any Shares
(other than the Placement Shares offered pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement)
or  securities convertible  into  or  exchangeable  for  Shares,  warrants  or  any  rights  to
purchase or acquire, Shares prior to the later of the termination of this Agreement and
the thirtieth (30th) day immediately following the final Settlement Date with respect to
Placement  Shares  sold  pursuant  to  such Placement  Notice;  provided,  however,  that
such notice requirement will not be applicable to the Company’s issuance or sale of (i)
Shares, restricted share units, options to purchase Shares or Shares issuable upon the
exercise of options, or settlement of restricted share units, pursuant to any employee or
director  (x)  stock  option  or  benefits  plan,  (y)  share ownership  plan  or  (z)  dividend
reinvestment  plan  (but  not  shares  subject to  a  waiver  to  exceed  plan  limits  in  its
dividend  reinvestment  plan)  of the  Company  whether  now  in  effect  or  hereafter
implemented,  (ii)  Shares issuable  upon  conversion  of  securities  or  the  exercise  of
warrants, options  or  other  rights  in  effect  or  outstanding  on  the  date  hereof,  and
disclosed in filings by the Company available on SEDAR and EDGAR or disclosed in
writing to the Agents and (iii) Shares or securities convertible into or exchangeable for
Shares  as  consideration  for  mergers, acquisitions,  other  business  combinations  or
strategic  alliances  occurring after the date of this Agreement which are not issued for
capital raising purposes.
(m) Change of Circumstances. During the term of this Agreement, the Company will, at any
time  during  a  fiscal  quarter  in  which the  Company  intends  to  deliver  a  Placement
Notice to the Agents or sell Placement Shares, advise the Agents immediately after it
has received notice or obtained knowledge thereof, of any information or fact that would
alter or affect any opinion, certificate, letter or other document provided to the Agents
pursuant to this Agreement.
(n) Due  Diligence  Cooperation.  The  Company  will cooperate  with  any  due  diligence
review conducted by the Agents or their agents, including, without limitation, providing
information  and  making available  documents  and  senior  corporate  officers,  as  the
Agents or their counsel may reasonably request; provided, however, that the Company
shall be required to make available senior corporate officers only (i) by telephone or at
the Company’s principal offices and (ii) during the Company’s ordinary business hours.
27
(o) Affirmation  of  Representations,  Warranties,  Covenants and  Other  Agreements.  Upon
commencement  of  the  offering  of  the Placement  Shares  under  this  Agreement  (and
upon  the  recommencement  of  the offering  of  the  Placement  Shares  under  this
Agreement following any termination of a suspension of sales hereunder), and at each
Applicable Time,  each  Settlement  Date  and  each  Amendment  Date.  The  Company
shall  be deemed to have affirmed each representation and warranty contained in this
Agreement.
(p) Required Filings Relating to Placement of Placement Shares. In each quarterly report,
annual information form or annual financial statements / annual report on Form 40-F or
20-F  filed  by  the Company  in  respect  of  any  quarter  in  which  sales  of  Placement
Shares  were made by the Agents under this Agreement, the Company shall set forth
with regard to such quarter the number of Placement Shares sold through the Agents
under  this  Agreement,  the  Net  Proceeds  received  by  the  Company  and the
compensation paid by the Company to the Agents with respect to sales of Placement
Shares pursuant to this Agreement. For so long as the Shares are listed on the TSX,
within  seven  (7)  calendar  days  after  the  end  of  each month  during  the  term  of  this
Agreement, the Company will, in addition to filing a Form 1 with the TSX, provide the
TSX with all other information it requires with respect to the Offering.
(q) Representation  Dates;  Certificate.  During  the  term of  this  Agreement  each  time  the
Company  (i)  files  the  Prospectuses relating  to  the  Placement  Shares  or  amends  or
supplements the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses relating to the Placement
Shares  by  means  of a  post-effective  amendment,  sticker,  or  supplement  but  not  by
means of incorporation of document(s) by reference to the Registration Statement or the
Prospectuses relating to the Placement Shares; (ii) files or amends an annual report on
Form  40-F  or  20-F;  or  (iii)  files  or  amends  interim financial  statements  on  Form  6-K
(each date of filing of one or more of the documents referred to in clauses (i) through (iii)
shall  be  a “Representation  Date”),  the  Company  shall  furnish  the  Agents  with  a
certificate, in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A within three (3) Trading Days of any
Representation Date. The requirement to provide a certificate under this Section 8(q)
shall be waived for any Representation Date occurring at a time at which no Placement
Notice is pending, which waiver shall continue until the earlier to occur of the date the
Company delivers  a  Placement  Notice  hereunder  (which  for  such  calendar  quarter
shall  be  considered  a  Representation  Date)  and  the  next  occurring Representation
Date; provided, however, that such waiver shall not apply for any Representation Date
on which the Company files its annual report on Form 40-F or 20-F. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, if the Company subsequently decides to sell Placement Shares following
a Representation Date when the Company relied on such waiver and did not provide
the Agents with a certificate under this Section 8(q), then before the Company delivers
the  Placement  Notice  or  the  Agents  sell  any  Placement  Shares,  the Company  shall
provide the Agents with a certificate, in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A, dated the
date of the Placement Notice.
 
Legal Opinions. Upon execution of this Agreement and within three (3) Trading Days of
(i) each Amendment Date; and (ii) each Representation Date with respect to which the
Company is obligated to deliver a certificate in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A for
which no waiver is applicable, the Company will furnish or cause to be furnished to the
Agents and to counsel to the Agents, (A) the written opinion and, in the case of Dorsey
&  Whitney  LLP,  a  negative  assurance  letter,  to the extent applicable, of (i) Dorsey &
Whitney  LLP,  US  counsel  for  the Company, and (ii) Lawson Lundell LLP, Canadian
counsel for the Company, or other counsel reasonably satisfactory to the Agents in form
and substance satisfactory to their counsel, acting reasonably, substantially in the form
agreed to by the Parties on the date hereof and modified as necessary to relate to the
Registration Statement and the Prospectuses as then amended or supplemented; (B) a
legal opinion of counsel to the Company to the effect that the French language version
of  the  Canadian Prospectus, together with each document incorporated for reference
therein (other  than  financial  statements  and  other  financial  data  contained  therein  or
omitted therefrom), is a complete and proper translation of the English version thereof;
(r)
and (C) an opinion of the Company’s auditors to the effect that the financial statements
and other financial data contained or incorporated by reference in the French language
version of the Canadian Prospectus, is a complete and proper translation of the English
version thereof, each dated the date the opinion is required to be delivered, in a form
and  substance satisfactory to the Agents and  their  counsel,  acting  reasonably,  or,  in
lieu  of such opinions, counsel last furnishing such opinion to the Agents may furnish
the Agents with a letter to the effect that the Agents may rely on such last opinion to the
same extent as though it was dated the date of such letter authorizing reliance (except
that  statements  in  such  last  opinion  shall  be deemed  to  relate  to  the  Registration
Statement and the Prospectuses as amended and supplemented to the time of delivery
of such letter authorizing reliance).
28
(s) Comfort Letters. Upon execution of this Agreement and within three (3) Trading Days of
(i) each Amendment Date; and (ii) each Representation Date with respect to which the
Company is obligated to deliver a certificate in the form attached hereto as Exhibit A for
which no waiver is applicable, the Company shall cause its independent accountants
reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Agents,  to  furnish  the  Agents letters  (the  “Comfort
Letters”)  dated  the  date  the  Comfort  Letter is  delivered,  in  form  and  substance
satisfactory  to  the  Agents,  acting reasonably,  (i)  confirming  that  they  are  registered
independent  public accountants  within  the  meaning  of  the  Securities  Act  and  are  in
compliance with the applicable requirements relating to the qualification of accountants
under Rule 2-01 of Regulation S-X of the Commission, (ii) stating, as of such date, the
conclusions and findings of such firm with respect to the financial information and other
matters  included  in  or  incorporated  by  reference  in  the  Registration Statement  and
Prospectuses as ordinarily covered by accountants’ “comfort letters” to underwriters in
connection  with  registered  public  offerings (the  first  such  letter,  the  “Initial  Comfort
Letter”)  and  (iii) updating the Initial Comfort Letter with any information which would
have been  included  in  the  Initial  Comfort  Letter  had  it  been  given  on  such  date and
modified as necessary to relate to the Registration Statement and the Prospectuses, as
amended and supplemented to the date of such letter.
 
Title Opinions. Upon execution of this Agreement and within three (3) Trading Days of
(i)  each  Amendment  Date,  (ii)  each time  the  Company  files  or  amends  an  annual
information form, annual financial statements, or an annual report on Form 40-F or 20-
F,  (iii)  any material  change  to  the  ownership  or  title  of  the  Company  to  the  Masbate
Mine,  the  Otjikoto  Mine,  the  La  Libertad  Mine  and  the  Fekola  Project  or (iv)  the
determination by the Company that any other property is material to the Company, the
Company  shall  cause  to  be  furnished  to  the  Agents  a title  opinion  in  respect  of  the
Masbate Mine, the Otjikoto Mine, the La Libertad Mine and the Fekola Project (or such
other material property), provided, however, that the Company shall not be required to
deliver  such opinion in respect of any project that is no longer considered material to
the  Company  or  if  during  such  period  the  Company  is  not  obligated  to deliver  a
certificate  in  the  form  attached  hereto  as  Exhibit  A  as  a  result of a waiver from such
requirement.
(t)
29
(u) Market  Activities.  The  Company  will  not,  directly or  indirectly,  (i)  take  any  action
designed to cause or result in, or that constitutes or might reasonably be expected to
constitute, the stabilization or manipulation of the price of any security of the Company
to facilitate the sale or resale of the Placement Shares or (ii) sell, bid for, or purchase
the  Shares,  or  pay  anyone  any  compensation  for  soliciting purchases  of  the  Shares
other than the Agents.
 
Insurance.  The  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries  shall maintain,  or  cause  to  be
maintained, insurance in such amounts and covering such risks as is reasonable and
customary for companies engaged in similar businesses in similar industries.
(v)
(w) Compliance  with  Laws.  The  Company  and  its Subsidiaries  shall  comply  with  all
federal,  state  and  local  or  foreign law,  rule,  regulation,  ordinance,  order  or  decree,
except where failure to so comply could not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect.  Furthermore,  the  Company  and  its  Subsidiaries  shall  maintain,  or
cause  to  be  maintained,  all  material  environmental  permits,  licenses  and other
authorizations required by foreign, federal, state and local law in order to conduct their
businesses  as  described  in  the  Prospectus,  and  the Company  and  its  Subsidiaries
shall  conduct  their  businesses,  or  cause their  businesses  to  be  conducted,  in
compliance  with  such  permits, licenses  and  authorizations  and  with  applicable
environmental laws, except where the failure to maintain or be in compliance with such
laws,  permits, licenses and other authorizations could not reasonably be expected to
have a Material Adverse Effect.
 
Investment Company Act. The Company will conduct its affairs in such a manner so as
to reasonably ensure that neither it nor the Subsidiaries will be or become, at any time
prior  to  the termination of this Agreement, an  “investment  company,”  as  such  term  is
defined  in  the  Investment  Company  Act,  assuming  no  change  in  the Commission’s
current interpretation as to entities that are not considered an investment company.
(y) Securities  Act  and  Exchange  Act.  The  Company  will use  commercially  reasonable
efforts  to  comply  with  all  requirements imposed  upon  it  by  the  NYSE  MKT,  the
Securities Act and the Exchange Act as from time to time in force, so far as necessary
to  permit  the continuance  of  sales  of,  or  dealings  in,  the  Placement  Shares  as
contemplated by the provisions hereof and the Prospectuses.
(z) Canadian Securities Laws. The Company will use commercially reasonable efforts to
comply  with  all  requirements  imposed upon  it  by  the  TSX  and  Canadian  Securities
Laws  as  from  time  to  time  in force, so far as necessary to permit the continuance of
sales  of,  or dealings  in,  the  Placement  Shares  as  contemplated  by  the  provisions
hereof and the Prospectuses.
(aa) No Offer to Sell. Other than a free writing prospectus (as defined in Rule 405 under the
Act) approved in advance by the Company and the Agents in each of their capacities
as  principal  or agent  hereunder,  neither  the  Agents  nor  the  Company  (including  its
agents and representatives, other than the Agents in each of their capacities as such)
will make, use, prepare, authorize, approve or refer to any written communication (as
(x)
defined in Rule 405 under the Act), required to be filed by it with the Commission, that
constitutes an offer to sell or solicitation of an offer to buy Shares hereunder.
30
(bb) Sarbanes-Oxley  Act.  The  Company  and  the Subsidiaries  will  use  commercially
reasonable  efforts  to  comply  with  all effective applicable provisions of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act.
(cc) Consent to the Agents’ Trading. The Company consents to the extent permitted under
the Securities Act, the Exchange Act, Canadian Securities Laws, the rules of the TSX
and  the  NYSE  MKT  and this  Agreement,  to  the  Agents  trading  in  the  Shares  of  the
Company:  (i) for the account of their clients at the same time as sales of Placement
Shares  occur  pursuant  to  this  Agreement;  and  (ii)  for  the  Agents’  own accounts
provided that no such purchase or sale shall take place while a Placement Notice is in
effect,  unless  the  Company  has  expressly  authorized or  consented  in  writing  to  any
such trades by the Agents.
(dd) Actively-Traded Security. The Company shall notify the Agents at any time the Shares
become  an  “actively-traded  security” exempted from the requirements of Rule 101 of
Regulation M under the Exchange Act by subsection (c)(1) of such rule. Furthermore,
the Company shall notify the Agents immediately by an email addressed to each of the
respective individuals from each of the Agents set forth on Schedule 1 attached hereto
if the Shares having once qualified for such exemption, cease to so qualify.
(ee) PFIC Status. For each taxable year after 2015 in which the Company determines it is a
“passive  foreign  investment  company” as  defined  in  Section  1297  of  the  Code,  the
Company  will  provide  to holders  of  Shares  that  are  U.S.  taxpayers  upon  written
request,  or  post  on the  Company’s  website,  the  required  information  to  enable  such
holders to make a qualified electing fund election under Section 1295 of the Code and
the  Treasury  Regulations  promulgated  thereunder,  and  will  satisfy  all requirements
described  therein  (which,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  shall include  providing  a  PFIC
Annual Information Statement).
9.          Additional Representations and Covenants of the Company.
(a)
Issuer Free Writing Prospectuses.
 
(i)
The  Company  represents  that  it  has  not  made,  and covenants  that,  unless  it
obtains the prior written consent of the Agents, it will not make any offer relating to
the Shares that would constitute an Issuer Free Writing Prospectus required to be
filed  by  it  with  the Commission  or  retained  by  the  Company  under  Rule  433;
except  as  set  forth in  a  Placement  Notice,  no  use  of  any  Issuer  Free  Writing
Prospectus has been consented to by the Agents. The Company agrees that it will
comply with  the  requirements  of  Rules  164  and  433  of  the  Securities  Act
applicable to any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus, including timely filing with  the
Commission or retention where required and legending.
(ii) The Company agrees that no Issuer Free Writing Prospectus, if any, will include
any  information  that  conflicts  with  the information  contained  in  the  Registration
Statement, including any document incorporated by reference therein that has not
been  superseded  or modified,  or  the  Prospectus.  In  addition,  no  Issuer  Free
Writing Prospectus,  if  any,  will  include  an  untrue  statement  of  a  material  fact  or
omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein, in light of
the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  made,  not  misleading; provided
however,  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  any  statements  or omissions  in  any
Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus  made  in  reliance  on  information  furnished  in
writing to the Company by the Agents expressly stating that such information is
intended for use therein.
31
(iii) The  Company  agrees  that  if  at  any  time  following  issuance of  an  Issuer  Free
Writing Prospectus any event occurred or occurs as a result of which such Issuer
Free  Writing  Prospectus  would  conflict  with the  information  in  the  Registration
Statement, including any document incorporated by reference therein that has not
been  superseded  or modified,  or  the  Prospectus  or  would  include  an  untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading,  the  Company  will  give  prompt  notice  thereof  to  the Agents  and,  if
requested by the Agents, will prepare and furnish without charge to the Agents an
Issuer Free Writing Prospectus or other document which will correct such conflict,
statement  or  omission;  provided, however,  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  any
statements or omissions in any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus made in reliance
on information furnished in writing to the Company by the Agents expressly stating
that such information is intended for use therein.
(b) Non-Issuer Free Writing Prospectus. The Company consents to the use by the Agents
of  a  free  writing  prospectus  that  (a)  is not  an  “Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus”  as
defined in Rule 433, and (b) contains only information describing the preliminary terms
of  the  Shares or  their  offering,  or  information  permitted  under  Rule  134  under  the
Securities Act; provided that the Agents covenants with the Company not to take any
action  that  would  result  in  the  Company  being  required  to  file with  the  Commission
under Rule 433(d) a free writing prospectus prepared by or on behalf of the Agents that
otherwise  would  not  be  required  to  be filed  by  the  Company  thereunder,  but  for  the
action of the Agents.
(c) Distribution  of  Offering  Materials.  The  Company has  not  distributed  and  will  not
distribute, during the term of this Agreement, any offering materials in connection with
the offering and sale of the Placement Shares other than the Registration Statement,
the Prospectuses or any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus reviewed and consented to by
the Agents and included in a Placement Notice (as described in clause (a)(i) above).
1 0 .          Conditions to the Agents’ Obligations. The obligations of the Agents hereunder with
respect  to  a  Placement  will  be  subject  to  the  continuing  accuracy  and  completeness  of  the
representations and warranties made by the Company herein and in the applicable Placement
Notices, to the due performance by the Company of its obligations hereunder, to the completion
by the Agents of a due diligence review satisfactory to the Agents in their reasonable judgment,
and to the continuing satisfaction (or waiver by the Agents in their sole discretion) of the following
additional conditions:
(a) Canadian Prospectus Supplement. The Canadian Prospectus Supplement shall have
been  filed  with  the  Canadian  Qualifying Authorities  under  the  Canadian  Shelf
Procedures  and  in  accordance  with this  Agreement,  all  requests  for  additional
information  on  the  part  of  the Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities  shall  have  been
complied  with  to  the satisfaction  of  the  Agents  and  the  Agents’  counsel  and  the
Exemption shall remain in full force and effect without amendment.
(b) Registration  Statement  Effective.  The  Registration Statement  shall  have  become
effective and shall be available for the sale of (i) all Placement Shares issued pursuant
to all prior Placements and not yet sold by the Agents and (ii) all Placement Shares
contemplated to be issued by the Placement Notice relating to such Placement.
32
(c) No  Material  Notices.  None  of  the  following  events shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing: (i) receipt by the Company of any request for additional information from the
Commission,  the  Canadian Qualifying  Authorities  or  any  other  federal  or  state  or
foreign  or  other governmental,  administrative  or  self-regulatory  authority  during  the
period  of  effectiveness  of  the  Registration  Statement  and  the Prospectuses,  the
response to which would require any amendments or supplements to the Registration
Statement  or  the  Prospectuses;  (ii)  the issuance  by  the  Commission,  the  Canadian
Qualifying  Authorities  or  any other  federal  or  state  or  foreign  or  other  governmental
authority of any stop order suspending the effectiveness of the Registration Statement
or the Prospectuses or the initiation of any proceedings for that purpose; (iii) receipt by
the Company of any notification with respect to the suspension of the qualification or
exemption from qualification of any of the Placement Shares for sale in any jurisdiction
or the initiation or threatening of any proceeding for such purpose; (iv) the occurrence of
a n y event  that  makes  any  statement  made  in  the  Registration  Statement  or  the
Prospectuses or any document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated therein by
reference untrue in any material respect or that requires the making of any changes in
the  Registration  Statement,  Prospectuses  or documents  so  that,  in  the  case  of  the
Registration Statement, it will not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit
to  state  any material  fact  required  to  be  stated  therein  or  necessary  to  make  the
statements  therein  not  misleading,  and  in  the  case  of  each  Prospectus,  it will  not
contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required
to  be  stated  therein  or  necessary  to  make  the statements  therein,  in  the  light  of  the
circumstances  under  which  they were  made,  not  misleading;  and  (v)  the  Company’s
reasonable  determination that  a  post-effective  amendment  to  the  Registration
Statement or Prospectuses would be appropriate.
(d) No  Misstatement  or  Material  Omission.  The  Agents shall  not  have  advised  the
Company that the Registration Statement or the Prospectuses, or any amendment or
supplement thereto, contains an untrue statement of fact that in the Agents’ opinion is
material, or omits to state a fact that in the Agents’ opinion is material and is required to
be stated therein or is necessary to make the statements therein not misleading.
(e) Material  Changes.  Except  as  contemplated  and appropriately  disclosed  in  the
Prospectuses,  or  disclosed  in  the  Company’s reports  filed  with  the  Commission  and
Canadian  Qualifying  Authorities,  in each  case  at  the  time  the  applicable  Placement
Notice is delivered, there shall not have been any material change, on a consolidated
basis, in the authorized share capital of the Company, or any development that causes
or could reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Effect, or a downgrading
in or withdrawal of the rating assigned to any of the Company’s securities by any rating
organization  or  a  public  announcement by  any  rating  organization  that  it  has  under
surveillance or review its rating of any of the Company’s securities, the effect of which,
in the sole judgment of the Agents (without relieving the Company of any obligation or
liability it may otherwise have), is so material as to make it impracticable or inadvisable
to proceed with the offering of the Placement Shares on the terms and in the manner
contemplated in the Prospectuses.
(f) Certificate.  The  Agents  shall  have  received  the certificate  required  to  be  delivered
pursuant to Section 8(q) on or before the date on which delivery of such certificate is
required pursuant to Section 8(q).
33
(i)
(g) Legal  Opinions.  The  Agents  shall  have  received  the opinions  of  counsel  to  be
delivered pursuant Section 8(r) on or before the date on which such delivery of such
opinions  are  required  pursuant  to Section  8(r).  In  addition,  the  Agents  shall  have
received the negative assurance letter of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP,
U.S. counsel to the Agents, on such dates.
(h) Comfort  Letters.  The  Agents  shall  have  received the  Comfort  Letter  required  to  be
delivered pursuant Section 8(s) on or before the date on which such delivery of such
letter is required pursuant to Section 8(s).
 
Title Opinions. The Agents shall have received the opinions to be delivered pursuant to
Section 8(t) on or before the date on which such delivery of such opinions is required
pursuant to Section 8(t).
(j) Approval for Listing; No Suspension. The Placement Shares shall have either been (i)
approved for listing, subject to notice of issuance, on the NYSE MKT and the TSX, or
(ii) the Company shall have filed an application for listing of the Placement Shares on
the  NYSE  MKT and  the  TSX  at  or  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  Placement  Notice.
Trading in the Shares shall not have been suspended on such markets.
(k) Other Materials. On each date on which the Company is required to deliver a certificate
pursuant  to  Section  8(q),  the  Company shall  have  furnished  to  the  Agents  such
further
appropriate 
information, certificates  and  documents  as  the  Agents  may
reasonably  request.  All  such certificates,  letters  and  other  documents  will  be  in
compliance with the provisions hereof. The Company will furnish the Agents with such
conformed copies of such certificates, letters and other documents as the Agents shall
reasonably request.
(l) Securities  Act  Filings  Made.  All  filings  with  the Commission  required  by  General
Instruction II.L of Form F-10, the Securities Act and required by the Canadian Qualifying
Authorities to have been filed prior to the issuance of any Placement Notice hereunder
shall have been made within the applicable time period prescribed for such filing  by
General Instruction II.L of Form F-10, the Securities Act and Canadian Securities Laws.
(m) No Termination Event. There shall not have occurred any event that would permit the
Agents to terminate this Agreement pursuant to Section 13(a).
(n) FINRA. If a filing with FINRA is required, FINRA shall not have objected to the fairness
or reasonableness of the terms or arrangements under this Agreement.
11.          Indemnification and Contribution.
(a) Company Indemnification. The Company will indemnify and hold harmless the Agents,
their  respective  directors, officers,  employees,  agents,  advisors  and  representatives
and each person, if any, who controls the Agents against any losses, claims, damages
o r liabilities,  joint  or  several,  to  which  the  Agents  or  controlling  person may  become
subject, under the Securities Act, the Canadian Securities Laws or otherwise, insofar
as such losses, claims, damages or liabilities (or actions in respect thereof) arise out of
or are based upon a misrepresentation as defined under Canadian Securities Laws or
an  untrue statement  or  alleged  untrue  statement  of  a  material  fact  contained  in  the
Registration Statement, the Prospectuses, the Disclosure Package, or any Issuer Free
Writing Prospectus or any “issuer information” filed or required to be filed pursuant to
Rule  433(d),  or  any  amendment  or  supplement  to  the  Registration  Statement,  the
Prospectuses  or  the  Disclosure  Package,  or  in  any  application  or  other  document
executed by or on behalf of the Company or based on written information furnished by
or on behalf of the Company filed in any jurisdiction in order to qualify the Placement
Shares under the securities laws thereof or filed with the Commission or the Canadian
Qualifying  Authorities,  or  arise  out  of  or  are  based  upon  the  omission  or  alleged
omission  to  state  in  the  Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectus,  the  Disclosure
Package,  or  any  Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus  or  any  “issuer  information”  filed  or
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 433(d), or any amendment or supplement to the
Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectus,  or  the  Disclosure  Package  or  in  any
application or other document executed by or on behalf of the Company or based on
written information furnished by or on behalf of the Company filed in any jurisdiction in
order to qualify the Placement Shares under the securities laws thereof or filed with the
Commission or the Canadian Qualifying Authorities a material fact required to be stated
in it or necessary to make the statements in it not misleading, and will reimburse the
Agents  for  any  reasonable  legal  expenses  of  counsel  for  the  Agents  and  one  set  of
local  counsel  in  each  applicable  jurisdiction  for  the  Agents,  and  for  other  expenses
reasonably incurred by the Agents in connection with investigating or defending any
such  action  or  claim  as  such  expenses  are  incurred;  provided,  however,  that  the
Company shall not be liable in any such case to the extent that any such loss, claim,
damage or liability arises out of or is based upon an untrue statement or alleged untrue
statement  or  omission  or  alleged  omission  made  in  the  Registration  Statement,  the
Prospectuses  or  the  Disclosure  Package  or  any  such  amendment  or  supplement
thereto,  in  reliance  upon  and  in  conformity  with  written  information  furnished  to  the
Company by and through the Agents expressly for use therein.
34
(b) Agents’ Indemnification.  The  Agents  severally  and not jointly will indemnify and hold
harmless  the  Company  and  its  directors and  each  officer  that  signed  the  Canadian
Prospectus  Supplement  or  the Registration  Statement  against  any  losses,  claims,
damages or liabilities to which the Company may become subject, under the Securities
Act, 
the Canadian  Securities  Laws  or  otherwise,  insofar  as  such  losses,  claims,
damages or liabilities (or actions in respect thereof) arise out of or are based upon a
misrepresentation as defined under Canadian Securities Laws or an untrue statement
or alleged untrue statement of a material fact contained in the Registration Statement
(or  any  amendments  thereto),  the Prospectuses  (or  any  amendment  or  supplement
thereto), the Disclosure Package or any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus, or arise out of
or are based upon the omission or alleged omission to state therein a material fact, in
the case of the Registration Statement or any amendment thereto, required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements therein not misleading and, in the case of
the Prospectuses or any supplement thereto, the Disclosure Package or the Issuer Free
Writing  Prospectus, necessary  to  make  the  statements  therein,  in  light  of  the
circumstances in which they were made, not misleading, in each case to the extent, but
only to the extent, that such untrue statement or alleged untrue statement or omission or
alleged  omission  was  made  in  the  Registration  Statement  (or any  amendments
thereto), the Prospectuses (or any amendment or supplement thereto), the Disclosure
Package,  or  any  Issuer  Free  Writing  Prospectus, in  reliance  upon  and  in  conformity
with written information furnished to the Company by and through the Agents expressly
for  use  therein;  and  will reimburse  the  Company  for  any  legal  or  other  expenses
reasonably incurred by the Company in connection with investigating or defending any
such action or claim as such expenses are incurred. The Company acknowledges that
the statements set forth (i) the list of Agents and their respective participation in the sale
of the Placement Shares; (ii) the sentences related to the Agents not authorizing any
other person to provide investors with different information; (iii) the paragraph related to
stabilization;  and  (iv)  the  sentence  related  to  the  decision  to  act  as  an  agent  in
connection  with  the  sale  of  Offered  Shares  in  the Prospectuses  constitute  the  only
information  furnished  in  writing  by  or  on behalf  of  the  Agents  for  inclusion  in  the
Prospectuses or any Issuer Free Writing Prospectus.
35
(c) Procedure. Promptly after  receipt  by  an indemnified party under subsection (a) or (b)
above of notice of the commencement of any action, such indemnified party shall, if a
claim  in respect  thereof  is  to  be  made  against  the  indemnifying  party  under  such
subsection, promptly notify such indemnifying party in writing of the institution of such
proceeding, and provide copies of all documents served on the indemnified party and
such  indemnifying  party  may,  at  its  option, assume  the  defense  of  such  proceeding,
including the employment of counsel reasonably satisfactory to such indemnified party
and payment of all fees and expenses; provided, however, that the failure to so notify
such indemnifying  party  shall  not  relieve  such  indemnifying  party  from  any liability
which such indemnifying party may have to any indemnified party or otherwise, except,
the indemnifying party’s liability will be reduced to the extent that such omission results
in  the  forfeiture  of  substantive rights  or  defenses  by  the  indemnifying  party.  (The
indemnified  party  or parties shall have the right to employ its or their own counsel in
any such case, but the fees and expenses of such counsel shall be at the expense of
such indemnified party or parties unless the employment of such counsel  shall  have
been authorized in writing by the indemnifying party in connection with the defense of
such proceeding or the indemnifying party shall not have, within a reasonable period of
time in light of the circumstances, employed counsel to defend such proceeding or such
indemnified  party  or  parties  shall  have  reasonably  concluded  that  there may  be
defenses available to it or them which are different from, additional to or in conflict with
those available to such indemnifying party (in which case such indemnifying party shall
not have the right to direct the defense of such proceeding on behalf of the indemnified
party or parties), in any of which events such fees and expenses shall be borne by such
indemnifying  party  and  paid  as  incurred  (it  being  understood, however,  that  such
indemnifying  party  shall  not  be  liable  to  the  expenses of  more  than  one  separate
counsel  (in  addition  to  any  local  counsel)  in any one proceeding or series of related
proceedings  in  the  same jurisdiction  representing  the  indemnified  parties  who  are
parties to such proceeding). No indemnifying party shall, without the written consent of
the indemnified party, effect the settlement or compromise of, or consent to the entry of
any judgment with respect to, any pending or threatened action or claim in respect of
which  indemnification  or  contribution  may  be sought  hereunder  (whether  or  not  the
indemnified  party  is  an  actual  or potential party to such action or claim) unless such
settlement, compromise  or  judgment  (i)  includes  an  unconditional  release  of  the
indemnified party from all liability arising out of such action or claim and (ii) does not
include a statement as to or an admission of fault, culpability or a failure to act, by or on
behalf of any indemnified party. No indemnifying party shall be liable for any settlement
of any action or claim affected without its written consent, which consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
(d) Contribution. If the indemnification provided for in this Section 11 is unavailable to or is
insufficient to hold harmless an indemnified party under subsection (a) or (b) above in
respect  of  any losses,  claims,  damages  or  liabilities  (or  actions  in  respect  thereof)
referred to therein, then each indemnifying party shall contribute to the amount paid or
payable  by  such  indemnified  party  as  a  result  of  such losses,  claims,  damages  or
liabilities (or actions in respect thereof) in such proportion as is appropriate to reflect the
relative benefits received by the Company on the one hand and the Agents on the other
from the offering of the Placement Shares. If, however, the allocation provided by the
immediately preceding sentence is not permitted by applicable law or if the indemnified
party  failed  to  give  the  notice  required  under  subsection  (c)  above,  then  each
indemnifying party shall contribute to such amount paid or payable by such indemnified
party in such proportion as is appropriate to reflect not only such relative benefits but
also the relative fault of the Company on the one hand and the Agents on the other in
connection  with  the  statements  or  omissions  which  resulted  in  such  losses,  claims,
damages  or  liabilities  (or  actions  in  respect  thereof),  as  well  as  any  other  relevant
equitable considerations. The relative benefits received by the Company on the one
hand and the Agents on the other shall be deemed to be in the same proportion as the
total  net  proceeds  from  the  Offering  (before  deducting  expenses)  received  by  the
Company,  bear  to  the  total  underwriting  discounts,  commissions  and  other  fees
received by the Agents. The relative fault shall be determined by reference to, among
other things, whether the untrue or alleged statement of a material fact or the omission
or  alleged  omission  to  state  a  material  fact  relates  to  information  supplied  by  the
Company on the one hand or the Agents on the other and the parties’ relative intent,
knowledge, access to information and opportunity to correct or prevent such statement
or omission. The Company and the Agents agree that it would not be just and equitable
if contributions pursuant to this subsection (d) were determined by pro rata allocation or
by  any  other  method  of  allocation  which  does  not  take  account  of  the  equitable
considerations referred to above in this subsection (d). The amount paid or payable by
an indemnified party as a result of the losses, claims, damages or liabilities (or actions
in respect thereof) referred to above in this subsection (d) shall be deemed to include
any  legal  or  other  expenses  reasonably  incurred  by  such  indemnified  party  in
connection with investigating or defending any such action or claim. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this subsection (d), the Agents shall not be required to contribute any
amount in excess of the amount by which the total price at which the Placement Shares
distributed  to  the  public  by  it  were  offered  to  the  public  exceeds  the  amount  of  any
damages  which  the  Agents  have  otherwise  been  required  to  pay  by  reason  of  such
untrue or alleged untrue statement or omission or alleged omission. No person guilty of
fraudulent misrepresentation (within the meaning of Section 11(f) of the Securities Act)
shall be entitled to contribution from any person who was not guilty of such fraudulent
misrepresentation.
36
(e) Obligations. The obligations of the Company under this Section 11 shall be in addition
to  any  liability  which  the  Company may  otherwise  have  and  shall  extend,  upon  the
same terms and conditions, to each person, if any, who controls the Agents within the
meaning of the Securities Act; and the obligations of the Agents under this Section 11
shall  be  in  addition  to  any  liability  which  the  Agents  may  otherwise  have and  shall
extend,  upon  the  same  terms  and  conditions,  to  each  officer  and director  of  the
Company and to each person, if any, who controls the Company within the meaning of
the Securities Act.
2
1
.          Representations  and  Agreements  to  Survive  Delivery.  All  representations  and
warranties  of  the  Company  herein  or  in  certificates  delivered  pursuant  hereto  shall  remain
operative and in full force and effect regardless of (i) any investigation made by or on behalf of
the Agents, any controlling persons, or the Company (or any of their respective officers, directors
or  controlling  persons),  (ii)  delivery  and  acceptance  of  the  Placement  Shares  and  payment
therefor or (iii) any termination of this Agreement.
37
13.          Termination.
(a) The Agents shall have the right to terminate this Agreement at any time by giving notice
as  hereinafter  specified  if  (i)  any Material  Adverse  Effect  has  occurred,  or  any
development  that  is reasonably  expected  to  cause  a  Material  Adverse  Effect  has
occurred  or  any other event has occurred which, in the sole judgment of the Agents,
may materially impair the Agents’ ability to proceed with the offering to sell the Shares,
(ii) the Company shall have failed, refused or been unable, at or prior to any Settlement
Date, to perform any agreement on its part to be performed hereunder, (iii) any other
condition of the Agents’ obligations hereunder is not fulfilled, (iv) if there has occurred
a n y material  adverse  change  in  the  financial  markets  in  the  United  States  or the
international financial markets, any outbreak of hostilities or escalation thereof or other
calamity  or  crisis  or  any  change  or development  involving  a  prospective  change  in
national  or  international political,  financial  or  economic  conditions,  in  each  case  the
effect  of which is such as to make it, in the judgment of the Agents, impracticable or
inadvisable to market the Placement Shares or to enforce contracts for the sale of the
Placement  Shares,  (v)  any  suspension  or  limitation  of trading  in  the  Shares  on  the
NYSE MKT or the TSX shall have occurred, or minimum or maximum prices for trading
have  been  fixed,  or  maximum  ranges for  prices  have  been  required,  by  any  of  said
exchanges  or  by  order  of  the Commission,  the  FINRA  or  any  other  governmental
authority,  or  a  material disruption  has  occurred  in  commercial  banking  or  securities
settlement or clearance services in the United States or in Canada, or (vi) any banking
moratorium  has  been  declared  by  U.S.  federal  or  New  York  authorities.  Any such
termination  shall  be  without  liability  of  any  party  to  any  other party  except  that  the
provisions  of  Section  8(j)  (Expenses),  Section  11 (Indemnification),  Section  12
(Survival of Representations), Section 13(f) (Termination), Section 19 (Applicable Law;
Consent to Jurisdiction) and Section 20 (Waiver of Jury Trial) hereof shall remain in full
force  and effect notwithstanding such termination. If the Agents elect to terminate this
Agreement  as  provided  in  this  Section  13(a),  the  Agents  shall  provide the  required
notice as specified in Section 14 (Notices).
(b) The Company shall have the right to terminate this Agreement in its sole discretion at
any time by giving ten (10) days’ notice as hereinafter specified. Any such termination
shall  be  without liability  of  any  party  to  any  other  party  except  that  the  provisions  of
Section 8(j), Section 11, Section 12, Section 13(f), Section 18 and Section 19 hereof
shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding such termination.
 
In addition to, and without limiting the Agents’ rights under Section 13(a), the Agents
shall have the right to terminate this Agreement in their sole discretion at any time after
the date of this Agreement by giving ten (10) days’ notice as hereinafter specified. Any
such termination shall be without liability of any party to any other party except that the
provisions of Section 8(j), Section 11, Section 12, Section 13(f), Section 18 and Section
19 hereof shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding such termination.
(d) Unless  previously  terminated  pursuant  to  this  Section  11, this  Agreement  shall
automatically terminate upon the earlier of (i) February 11, 2018 and (ii) the issuance
and sale of all the Placement Shares through the Agents on the terms and subject to
(c)
the conditions set forth herein; provided that any such termination shall in all cases be
deemed to provide that Section 8(i), Section 11, Section 12, Section 13(f), Section 18
and Section 19 shall remain in full force and effect.
38
(e) This  Agreement  shall  remain  in  full  force  and  effect unless  terminated  pursuant  to
Sections  13(a),  13(b),  13(c)  or  13(d)  above or otherwise by mutual agreement of the
parties; provided that any such termination by mutual agreement shall in all cases be
deemed to provide that Section 8(i), Section 11, Section 12, Section 13(f), Section 18
and Section 19 shall remain in full force and effect.
(f) Any termination of this Agreement shall be effective on the date specified in such notice
of  termination;  provided  that  such termination  shall  not  be  effective  until  the  close  of
business on the date of receipt of such notice by the Agents or the Company, as the
case may be. If such termination shall occur prior to the Settlement Date for any sale of
Placement  Shares,  such  Placement  Shares  shall  settle  in  accordance with  the
provisions of this Agreement.
 
In the event that the Company terminates this Agreement, as permitted under Section
13(b),  the  Company  shall  be  under  no  continuing obligation,  either  pursuant  to  this
Agreement or otherwise to utilize the services of the Agents in connection with any sale
of  securities  of  the Company  or  to  pay  any  compensation  to  the  Agents  other  than
compensation with respect to sales of Placement Shares subscribed on or before the
termination date and the Company shall be free to engage other placement agents and
underwriters  from  and  after  the  termination  date  with  no continuing  obligation  to  the
Agents.
(g)
1 4 .          Notices. All notices or other communications required or permitted to be given by any
party to any other party pursuant to the terms of this Agreement shall be in writing and if sent to
the Agents, shall be delivered to:
[redacted]
Canaccord Genuity Corp.
609 Granville Street, Suite 2100
Vancouver, BC V7Y 1H2
 
Attention:Gunnar Eggertson
Email:
 
-and-
 
HSBC Securities (Canada) Inc.
Suite 900, 70 York Street
Toronto, ON M5J 2S9
 
Attention:Jay Lewis
[redacted]
Email:
-and-
 
HSBC Securities (USA) Inc.
452 Fifth Avenue,
New York, New York, 10018
 
Attention:Adam Hendley and Jeff Nicklas
Email:
 
With a copy to:
 
Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP
595 Burrard Street, Suite 2600
Vancouver, BC V7X 1L3
 
Attention:Bob Wooder
Email:
[redacted]
[redacted]
39
[redacted]
-and-
 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
222 Bay Street, Suite 1750
Toronto, ON M5K 1JS
 
Attention:Riccardo Leofanti
Email:
 
or if sent to the Company, shall be delivered to:
 
B2Gold
Corp.
Suite 3100, 595 Burrard Street
PO Box
49143
Vancouver, BC V7X 1J1
 
Attention:Roger Richer
Email:
 
With a copy to:
 
Lawson Lundell LLP
925 West Georgia Street, Suite 1600
Vancouver, BC V6C 3L2
[redacted]
[redacted]
Attention:Stuart Breen
Email:
 
-and-
 
Dorsey & Whitney LLP
701 5th Avenue, Suite 6100
Seattle, WA 98104
 
Attention:Christopher Doerksen
Email:
[redacted]
Each party to this Agreement may change such address for notices by sending to the other party
to this Agreement written notice of a new address for such purpose. Each such notice or other
communication  shall  be  deemed  given  (i)  when  delivered  personally  or  by  e-mail  (with  an
original to follow) on or before 4:30 p.m., pacific time, on a Business Day or, if such day is not a
Business Day, on the next succeeding Business Day, (ii) on the next Business Day after timely
delivery to a nationally-recognized overnight courier, (iii) on the Business Day actually received if
deposited in the mail (certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid), and
(iv) if sent by email, on the Business Day on which receipt is confirmed by the individual to whom
the notice is sent, other than via auto-reply. For purposes of this Agreement, “Business Day” shall
mean any day on which the NYSE MKT and TSX are open for business.
1 5 .          Knowledge. All references in this Agreement to the knowledge of the Company means
the  actual  knowledge  of  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  the  Senior  Vice  President  and  Chief
Financial Officer of the Company, after making diligent inquiry of the appropriate officers or senior
employees  of  the  Company,  as  reasonably  necessary  to  inform  themselves  of  the  relevant
matters.
1 6 .          Successors and Assigns. This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of and be binding
upon the Company and the Agents and their respective successors and the affiliates, controlling
persons, officers and directors referred to in Section 11 hereof. References to any of either of the
parties contained in this Agreement shall be deemed to include the successors and permitted
assigns of such party. Nothing in this Agreement, express or implied, is intended to confer upon
any party other than the parties hereto or their respective successors and permitted assigns any
rights,  remedies,  obligations  or  liabilities  under  or  by  reason  of  this  Agreement,  except  as
expressly provided in this Agreement. Neither party may assign its rights or obligations under this
Agreement without the prior written consent of the other party, provided, however, that the Agents
may assign their rights and obligations hereunder to their respective affiliates without obtaining
the Company’s consent.
40
1 7 .          Adjustments for Stock Splits. The parties acknowledge and agree that all share related
numbers contained in this Agreement shall be adjusted to take into account any stock split, stock
dividend or similar event effected with respect to the Shares.
1 8 .          Entire Agreement; Amendment; Severability. This Agreement (including all schedules
and  exhibits  attached  hereto  and  placement  notices  issued  pursuant  hereto)  constitutes  the
entire  agreement  and  supersedes  all  other  prior  and  contemporaneous  agreements  and
undertakings, both written and oral, among the parties hereto with regard to the subject matter
hereof. Neither this Agreement nor any term hereof may be amended except pursuant to a written
instrument executed by the Company and the Agents. In the event that any one or more of the
provisions contained herein, or the application thereof in any circumstance, is held invalid, illegal
or  unenforceable,  the  validity,  legality  and  enforceability  of  any  such  provision  in  every  other
respect  and  of  the  remaining  provisions  contained  herein  shall  not  be  affected  or  impaired
thereby.
1 9 .          Applicable Law; Consent to Jurisdiction. This Agreement shall be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the laws of the Province of British Columbia and the federal laws
of  Canada  applicable  therein  without  regard  to  the  principles  of  conflicts  of  laws.  Each  party
hereby irrevocably submits to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Province of British
Columbia, for the adjudication of any dispute hereunder or in connection with any transaction
contemplated hereby, and hereby irrevocably waives, and agrees not to assert in any suit, action
or proceeding, any claim that it is not personally subject to the jurisdiction of any such court, that
such suit, action or proceeding is brought in an inconvenient forum or that the venue of such suit,
action  or  proceeding  is  improper.  Each  party  hereby  irrevocably  waives  personal  service  of
process and consents to process being served in any such suit, action or proceeding by mailing
a copy thereof (certified or registered mail, return receipt requested) to such party at the address
in effect for notices to it under this Agreement and agrees that such service shall constitute good
and sufficient service of process and notice thereof. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
limit in any way any right to serve process in any manner permitted by law.
2 0 .          Waiver of Jury Trial. The Company and the Agents hereby irrevocably waive any right
either  may  have  to  a  trial  by  jury  in  respect  of  any  claim  based  upon  or  arising  out  of  this
Agreement or any transaction contemplated hereby.
2 1 .          Absence of Fiduciary Duties. The parties acknowledge that they are sophisticated in
business and financial matters and that each of them is solely responsible for making its own
independent  investigation  and  analysis  of  the  transactions  contemplated  by  this  Agreement.
They further acknowledge that the Agents have not been engaged by the Company to provide,
and have not provided, financial advisory services in connection with the terms of the offering
and sale of the Shares nor have the Agents assumed at any time a fiduciary relationship to the
Company  in  connection  with  such  offering  and  sale.  The  parties  also  acknowledge  that  the
provisions  of  this  Agreement  fairly  allocate  the  risks  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby
among them in light of their respective knowledge of the Company and their respective abilities
to investigate its affairs and business in order to assure that full and adequate disclosure has
been  made  in  the  Registration  Statement  and  the  Prospectus  (and  any  amendments  and
supplements thereto). The Company hereby waives, to the fullest extent permitted by law, any
claims it may have against the Agents for breach of fiduciary duty or alleged breach of fiduciary
duty and agrees the Agents shall have no liability (whether direct or indirect) to the Company in
respect of such a fiduciary duty claim or to any person asserting a fiduciary duty claim on behalf
of or in right of the Company, including shareholders, employees or creditors of Company.
41
2 2 .          Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, each of
which shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same
instrument. Delivery of an executed Agreement by one party to the other may be made by email
transmission.
42
If the foregoing accurately reflects your understanding and agreement with respect to the matters
described herein please indicate your agreement by countersigning this Agreement in the space
provided below.
Very truly yours,
 
B2GOLD CORP.
 
 
By:   /s/ Michael Cinnamond
Name: Michael Cinnamond
Title: Senior VP Finance and CFO
ACCEPTED as of the date first-above written:
 
CANACCORD GENUITY CORP.
 
 
By:   /s/ Gunnar Eggertson
Name: Gunnar Eggertson
Title: Managing Director, Investment
Banking & Head of Mining - Canada
CANACCORD GENUITY INC.
 
 
By:   /s/ Dan Coyne
Name: Dan Coyne
Title: Senior Managing Director & Head of
U.S. Investment Banking
HSBC SECURITIES (CANADA) INC.
 
 
By:
/s/ Jay Lewis
Name:  Jay Lewis
Title:  Managing Director and Head of
            Equity Capital Markets
HSBC SECURITIES (USA) INC.
By:   /s/ Jeffrey Nicklas
Name: Jeffrey Nicklas
Title: Director of Equity 
          Capital Markets Americas
[Signature page to Equity Distribution Agreement]
The Authorized Representatives of the Company are as follows:
SCHEDULE 1
Name and Office / Title
E-mail Address
Telephone Numbers
Clive Johnson
Mike Cinnamond
[redacted]
[redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:
The Authorized Representatives of Canaccord are as follows:
Name and Office / Title
E-mail Address
Telephone Numbers
Gunnar Eggertson 
Managing Director, Investment
Banking & Head of Mining -
Canada
Ron Sedran 
Managing Director, ECM
Darren Hunter 
Managing Director, Global
Head Canadian Equity Trading
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:        [redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:        [redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:
The Authorized Representatives of HSBC are as follows:
Name and Office / Title
E-mail Address
Telephone Numbers
Jay Lewis 
Managing Director and Head of
Equity Capital Markets
Adam Hendley
Managing Director, Head of
Mining and Metals – US,
Canada and Latin America,
Global Banking and Markets
Jeff Nicklas
Director of Equity Capital
Markets Americas
[redacted]
[redacted]
[redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:        [redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:        [redacted]
Office:    [redacted]
Cell:        [redacted]
SCHEDULE 2
Subsidiaries
B2Gold Corp.
B2Gold Mining Investments Limited
B2Gold Namibia Minerals (Proprietary) Limited (Namibia)
(formerly Auryx Minerals Exploration (Proprietary) Limited
(Namibia))
B2Gold Namibia (Proprietary) Limited (Namibia) (formerly
Auryx Gold (Namibia) (Proprietary) Limited. (Namibia))
B2Gold Namibia Property (Proprietary) Limited (Namibia)
(formerly Auryx Property Holdings (Proprietary) Limited
(Namibia))
Central American Mine Holdings Limited
Central Asia Gold Limited
Central Sun Mining Investments Corp.
CGA Financing Company B.V.
CGA Financing Holding Company B.V.
Desarrollo Minero De Nicaragua, S.A.
Fekola S.A.
Filminera Resources Corporation
Mali Mining Investments Limited
Philippine Gold Limited
Philippine Gold Processing & Refining Corp.
Songhoi Resources SARL
Teal Exploration & Mining Investments Holdings (Pty) Ltd.
Teal Exploration & Mining Investments Holdings (Pty) Ltd.
Teal Namibia (B) Inc.
Zoom Minerals Holding Inc.
Jurisdiction of Incorporation
BC
Mauritius
Namibia
 
 
Namibia
 
Namibia
 
 
Belize
Bahamas
Cayman Islands
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
Nicaragua
Mali
Philippines
BVI
UK
Philippines
Mali
Mauritius Branch
South Africa
Barbados
Philippines
OFFICER’S CERTIFICATE
EXHIBIT A
I, [name of executive officer],  the [title of executive officer] of B2Gold Corp. (“Company”), a
company incorporated under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), do hereby certify
in such capacity and not in my personal capacity, on behalf of the Company pursuant to Section
8(q) of the Equity Distribution Agreement dated August 11, 2016 (the “Distribution Agreement”)
among  the  Company,  Canaccord  Genuity  Corp.,  Canaccord  Genuity  Inc.,  HSBC  Securities
(Canada) Inc. and HSBC Securities (USA) Inc. and without personal liability, that, to the best of
my knowledge that:
(i)          Except  as  set  forth  in  the  Registration  Statement,  the  Prospectuses  and  the  Disclosure
Package,  the  representations  and  warranties  of  the  Company  in  Section  7  of  the  Distribution
Agreement (A) to the extent such representations and warranties are subject to qualifications and
exceptions  contained  therein  relating  to  materiality  or  Material  Adverse  Effect,  are  true  and
correct on and as of the date hereof with the same force and effect as if expressly made on and
as of the date hereof, except for those representations and warranties that speak solely as of a
specific  date  and  which  were  true  and  correct  as  of  such  date,  and  (B)  to  the  extent  such
representations and warranties are not subject to any qualifications or exceptions, are true and
correct in all material respects, as of the date hereof as if made on and as of the date hereof with
the same force and effect as if expressly made on and as of the date hereof except for those
representations and warranties that speak solely as of a specific date and which were true and
correct as of such date; and
(ii)     The Company has complied with all agreements and satisfied all conditions on its part to be
performed or satisfied pursuant to the Distribution Agreement at or prior to the date hereof.
Date:
____________________________
By:
Name:
Title: