
6-K 1 tko6k_111605.htm PRESS RELEASE NOVEMBER 16, 2005 Taseko Re-Initiates Work on
Prosperity Copper-Gold Project
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, DC 20549
FORM 6-K
Report of Foreign Private Issuer 
Pursuant to Rule 13a-16 or 15d-16
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
CIK # 878518
As at November 16, 2005
TASEKO MINES LIMITED
800 West Pender Street, Suite 1020
Vancouver , British Columbia
Canada V6C 2V6
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant files or will file annual reports under cover Form 20-F or Form 40-F.
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by Regulation S-T Rule
Form 20-F...X.... Form 40-F.........
101(b)(1): ____
Note: Regulation S-T Rule 101(b)(1) only permits the submission in paper of a Form 6-K if submitted solely to provide
an attached annual report to security holders.
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is submitting the Form 6-K in paper as permitted by Regulation S-T Rule
101(b)(7): ____
Indicate by check mark whether by furnishing the information contained in this Form, the registrant is also thereby
furnishing the information to the Commission pursuant to Rule 12g3-2(b) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
If "Yes" is marked, indicate below the file number assigned to the registrant in connection with Rule 12g3-2(b): 82-
Yes ..... No .....
________
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be
signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
By: /s/ Jeffrey R. Mason
Director and Chief Financial Officer
Date: November 16, 2005
Print the name and title of the signing officer under his signature.
-------------------
Taseko Mines Limited 
1020 - 800 W Pender St.
Vancouver BC 
Canada V6C 2V6 
Tel 604 684 - 6365 
Fax 604 684 - 8092
Toll Free 1 800 667 - 2114
http://www.tasekomines.com
TASEKO RE-INITIATES WORK ON PROSPERITY COPPER-GOLD PROJECT
November 16, 2005, Vancouver, BC - Russell Hallbauer, President and CEO of Taseko Mines Limited (TSX Venture:
TKO; AMEX: TGB), announces that the Company has re-initiated work on its Prosperity Copper-Gold Project, located
125 kilometres southwest of the City of Williams Lake in south-central British Columbia. The Prosperity property hosts
a large porphyry copper-gold deposit amenable to large scale open pit mining. 
  
In the years prior to 2001, Taseko carried out extensive exploration, engineering, mine  planning,  environmental,  and
socio-economic  studies  on  the  Prosperity project.  Permitting  activity  included  two  years  in  the  British  Columbia
Environmental  Assessment  (BCEA)  process.  Early  in  2005,  with  the  price  outlook for  copper  and  gold  remaining  at
levels that are attractive for mine development, Taseko applied to the British Columbia Government to re-activate the
BCEA process. As a result, the BC Government has granted an extension order for the Prosperity Project Application
until  April  30,  2007.  This  extension allows  the  Company  to  collect  the  additional  information  which  is  required to
satisfy  the  Provincial  assessment  criteria  for  mine  development  as  well as  those  required  for  the  Canadian
Environmental  Assessment  Act  (CEAA). Taseko  has  maintained  communication  with  local  First  Nations  groups
regarding the  Prosperity  project  and  the  extension  to  the  process  timeline  provides the  opportunity  to  expand
consultation with these groups. 
  
Parallel to the permitting and consultation process, Taseko is reviewing previous feasibility studies and re-assessing
the project economics based on new technologies, concepts, and innovative approaches to mine development. This
includes re-examining optimal mining rates and mining equipment size, analyzing the economics of constructing and
operating  a  single  line  mill rather than multiple smaller lines, and evaluating the potential improvements which  could
be  realized  with  state  of  the  art  metallurgical  technologies such  as  large  tank  flotation  circuits  and  expert
computerized mill control systems. The Company is also reassessing major infrastructure plans, such as the power-
line  route,  to  determine  if  there  are  synergies  which  could be achieved with the other communities of interest in the
area. 
  
Taseko  Mines  Limited  is  a  copper-molybdenum  producer  with  projects  located in  British  Columbia.  Taseko  and  its
joint venture  partner  Ledcor  CMI  Ltd. successfully re-opened the Gibraltar copper-molybdenum mine in south-central
British Columbia in late 2004. In addition to the re-assessment of the Prosperity Project, several other key initiatives
are currently under consideration, including the development of a Copper Refinery at Gibraltar and the advancement of
the Harmony gold project. 
  
For further details on Taseko Mines Limited, please visit the Company's website at www.tasekomines.com or contact
Investor Services at (604) 684-6365 or within North America at 1-800-667-2114.
The TSX Venture Exchange and the American Stock Exchange have not approved or disapproved of the contents of
this press release.
------------
This release includes certain statements that may be deemed "forward-looking statements". All statements in this release, other than statements of
historical  facts,  that  address  estimated  resource  quantities,  grades and  contained  gold,  possible  future  mining,  exploration  and  development
activities,  are  forward-looking  statements.  Although  the  Company  believes the  expectations  expressed  in  such  forward-looking  statements  are
based on reasonable assumptions, such statements should not be in any way construed as guarantees of future performance and actual results or
developments  may differ  materially  from  those  in  the  forward-looking  statements.  Factors that  could  cause  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from
those  in  forward-looking statements  include  market  prices  for  metals,  the  conclusions  of  detailed feasibility  and  technical  analyses,  lower  than
expected  grades  and  quantities of  resources,  mining  rates  and  recovery  rates  and  the  lack  of  availability of  necessary  capital,  which  may  not  be
available to the Company on terms acceptable to it or at all. The Company is subject to the specific risks inherent in the mining business as well as
general economic and business conditions. For more information on the Company, Investors should review the Company's annual Form 20-F filing
with the United States Securities Commission and its home jurisdiction filings that are available at www.sedar.com.