
Quarterly Report 
30 June 2016 
 
 
Teranga Gold Corporation to Acquire
Gryphon Minerals via a Scheme of
Arrangement
Banfora Gold Project Shovel Ready
Burkina Faso Exploration Pipeline
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
HIGHLIGHTS
Teranga Gold Corporation to Acquire Gryphon Minerals
  Gryphon  Minerals  Limited  entered  into  a  Scheme  Implementation  Agreement  (SIA)  with  Teranga  Gold 
Corporation (Teranga) (TSX:TGZ) (ASX:TGZ) pursuant to which Teranga will acquire all of the ordinary shares of 
Gryphon (Gryphon Shares) by way of a scheme of arrangement under the Corporations Act between Gryphon and 
its shareholders (the Transaction).
  Under the SIA, each Gryphon Share will be exchanged for 0.169 common shares of Teranga (Teranga Shares) or
0.169 Teranga Shares in the form of ASX-listed CHESS Depositary Interests (CDIs).
  Based on the closing price of Teranga CDIs on Australian Securities Exchange (the  ASX) on 17 June 2016 (Date
the transaction was announced):
- 
-
-
the Transaction values each Gryphon Share at A$0.206; 
the Transaction implies a total equity value for Gryphon of approximately A$86 million on a fully-diluted 
basis; and 
the consideration received by Gryphon shareholders represents a 53% premium over the closing price of 
Gryphon Shares on  the  ASX  on  17  June  2016  and  a  premium of  45% over  the  20-day  volume  weighted 
average price (VWAP) ending on the same date.
  Closing of the Transaction is expected to occur during October 2016.
  Teranga owns and operates the Sabodala Gold mine, the only gold mine and mill in Senegal, West Africa. Located 
approximately 650km southeast of Dakar, the capital of Senegal, Sabodala has been in operation since 2009. As at 
31  December  2015  Teranga’s  total  proven  and  probable  open  pit  reserves  were  2.6  million  ounces  of  gold, 
including measured and indicated open pit resources of 4.4 million ounces of gold and inferred open pit mineral 
resources  of  0.94  million  ounces  of  gold.  The  Sabodala  Gold  mine  has  a  13.5  year  mine  life  based  on  current 
production and proven and probable reserves.
  Refer to TGZ June 2016 quarterly report for more information.
Exploration
  Banfora Gold Project
-  RC drilling undertaken focused on Fourkoura and Nogbele deposits for a total of 55 holes (4,297m) (Refer ASX
Announcement 13 July 2016)1.
-  Drilling targeted potential and probable ore extensions along strike and down-dip at the Fourkoura and Nogbele
deposits. Results received to date from Fourkoura Deposit include:
-  7m @ 12.8 g/t from 60 metres
-  8m @ 7.5 g/t from 47 metres
-  11m @ 5.3 g/t from 61 metres
-  8m @ 2.4 g/t from 40 metres
-  Auger  drilling  continued  and  focused  on the  Nogbele and  Fourkoura  areas  for  a  total of  663  holes  (4,309m),
with the most robust auger saprolite anomaly prioritised for RC drilling. Results remain pending.
-  A significant exploration program is currently underway with two rigs operating on double shift.
  Regional Burkina Faso: Golden Hill and Gourma Gold Projects - Exploration Pipeline Strategy
-  Exploration  at  the  Golden  Hill  Project  included  auger  drilling  at  Pourey /  C-Zone  in  preparation of  a maiden
drilling programme in the next field season.
-  Ground geophysics including IP and magnetics undertaken in the C-zone / Pourey areas in orde to better define
the mineralised trend.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  2
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Banfora Gold Project Development
The  Company  commenced  a  review  of  the  operating  and  capital  costs  for  the  2mtpa  heap  leach  start-up 
operation  in  line  with  recent  reductions  in  costs  in the  mining  industry.  This  work  was  put on  hold  after  the 
Company announced its proposed merger with Teranga (refer ASX Announcement of 20 June 2016).
The  operations  team  hosted  a  site  visit  for  key  Teranga  staff  as  part  of  their  due  diligence  review  process  in 
advance of entering into the Scheme Implementation Agreement.
The Company completed the construction and handover of a micro-dam to the community of Nanguelédougou, 
and a new request has been received from the village of Bavigué-ka for another micro-dam, confirming positive 
local support for the program. Three micro-dams have been constructed in a co-operative arrangement between 
Gryphon and the benefiting community.



Environmental & Social Responsibility
  Work  continued updating  documentation  for  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  compliance  at  Banfora. 
Feedback  was  received  from  the  IFC  regarding  updated  security  management  documentation  and  Gryphon’s 
approach to risk management.
Corporate
  Cash and Working Capital
-  At 30 June 2016 Gryphon held approximately $9.3 million in cash, plus approximately $3.8 million in listed
investments.
-  In July 2016, the Company completed a placement to the value of $4.4 million to Teranga at $0.206 per share 
to fund the start of a resource conversion drill program and plant optimisation studies required to complete a 
fully optimised and de-risked feasibility study by the first half of 2017 and to update the tailings storage facility 
design and resettlement action plan required as a result of the decision to move forward with a carbon-in-leach 
plant.
For more information, please contact:                                          For Media and Broker Enquiries: 
Steve Parsons                                                                                    Andrew Rowell / Luke Forrestal 
Managing Director                                                                            Cannings Purple 
+61 8 9287 4333                                                                               +61 400 466 226 / +61 400 411 479 144 
steve.parsons@gryphonminerals.com.au                                          arowell@canningspurple.com.au / 
                                                                                                           lforrestal@canningspurple.com.au
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  3
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Overview of Banfora Gold Project | Burkina Faso
The Banfora Gold Project (Banfora or the Project) is located in the south-west of Burkina Faso, West Africa. Burkina 
Faso is one of the largest gold producers in Africa and is located on some of the world’s most prolific greenstone belts 
(accounting for 22% of West Africa’s greenstone belt exposure). The country is already host to a number of producing 
mines  and  this  is  anticipated  to  increase  given  the  prospectivity  and  strong  Government  support  for  the  mining 
industry.
The Project includes exploration licenses covering over 1,000 square kilometres and a mining licence that covers 89 
square kilometres. These licences are located in a major gold district where world class gold deposits such as Tongon 
(4.2 Million oz Au), Syama (5 Million oz Au mined & 6.5 Million oz Au in resources) and Morila (6.5 Million oz Au) are 
also found. The Project has an enviable location being easily accessible by road in close proximity to the regional town 
of Banfora and the major city of Bobo-Dioulasso.  In addition, an existing hydro-power supply source and substation is 
located less than 100 kilometres to the south of the project site in Côte d’Ivoire, which can potentially be used to power 
future mining expansion and development.
Figure 1:  Banfora Gold Project | Burkina Faso
Teranga Gold Corporation to Acquire Gryphon Minerals Limited
On  20  June  2016  Gryphon  entered  into  a  Scheme  Implementation  Agreement  (the  SIA)  with  Teranga  Gold 
Corporation  (Teranga)  (TSX:TGZ)  (ASX:TGZ)  pursuant  to  which  Teranga  will  acquire  all  of  the  ordinary  shares  of 
Gryphon (Gryphon Shares) by way of a scheme of arrangement under the Corporations Act between Gryphon and its 
shareholders (the Transaction).  
 
Under the SIA, each Gryphon Share will be exchanged for 0.169 common shares of Teranga (Teranga Shares) or 0.169 
Teranga Shares in the form of ASX-listed CHESS Depositary Interests (CDIs).
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  4
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Based on the closing price of Teranga CDIs on Australian Securities Exchange (the ASX) on 17 June 2016:
 
 


the Transaction values each Gryphon Share at A$0.206;
the  Transaction  implies  a  total  equity  value  for  Gryphon  of  approximately  A$86  million  on  a  fully-diluted 
basis; and
the  consideration  received  by  Gryphon  shareholders  represents  a  53%  premium  over  the  closing  price  of 
Gryphon Shares on the ASX on 17 June 2016 and a premium of 45% over the 20-day volume weighted average 
price (VWAP) ending on the same date.
The number of Teranga Shares to be issued under the Transaction will be approximately 70.1 million, on the basis 
that all Gryphon performance rights will vest and be subject to the Transaction. 
 
Teranga  owns  and operates  the Sabodala  Gold  mine, the  only  gold  mine  and mill  in  Senegal,  West  Africa. Located 
approximately 650km southeast of Dakar, the capital of Senegal, Sabodala has been in operation since 2009. As at 31 
December  2015  Teranga’s  total  proven  and  probable  open  pit  reserves  were  2.6  million  ounces  of  gold,  including 
measured and indicated open pit resources of 4.4 million ounces of gold  and inferred open pit mineral resources of 
0.94  million  ounces  of  gold.  The  Sabodala  Gold  mine  has  a  13.5  year  mine  life  based  on  current  production  and 
proven and probable reserves. 
 
Steve Parsons, Managing Director of Gryphon stated: “We are very pleased to be joining forces with Teranga Gold 
Corporation  as  we  look  to  create  a  pre-eminent  West  African  mid-tier  gold  producer.  This  transaction  gives  an 
immediate uplift for Gryphon shareholders and provides significant exposure to Teranga’s Sabodala gold mine in 
Senegal. The combined company can leverage off its strong balance sheet and mining cash flows to help bring the 
3.6Moz Banfora Gold Project into development and production in the near term. The combination of the companies 
provides a great opportunity to leverage off the skill sets of both groups with Teranga’s mining and development 
team and Gryphon’s expertise and social licence to operate in Burkina Faso as well as its excellent track record on 
exploration and discovery”. 
 
"This acquisition is an exciting opportunity to add a second high quality gold asset to Teranga’s asset base to create 
a geographically diversified company with an enhanced gold production profile, progressing the company towards 
its  vision  of  becoming  a  mid-tier  West  African  producer,"  said  Richard  Young,  Teranga  President  and  Chief 
Executive Officer. "Banfora provides excellent optionality with attractive economics over a variety of development 
scenarios  along  a  highly  prospective  land  package  which  we  intend  to  purposefully  explore.  Banfora’s  similar 
mining  characteristics  to Sabodala  allow  us to  leverage our  experienced  mine  construction  and operating  teams 
with Gryphon’s mine development and exploration teams to successfully develop and operate the new mine. Adding 
Banfora to our low-cost Sabodala operation should position Teranga to produce around 300,000 oz per year with 
all-in sustaining cash costs below industry average. 
 
The SIA has been unanimously approved by the boards of directors of Gryphon and Teranga. The Transaction will be 
subject  to,  among  other  things,  Gryphon  shareholder  approval,  receipt  of  all  necessary  regulatory  and  Australian 
court  approvals  and  the  satisfaction  of  certain  other  conditions  customary  for  a  transaction  of  this  nature.    Full 
details of the conditions to the Transaction and all other material terms are in the SIA, a copy which was included in 
the ASX announcement dated 20 June 2016. 
 
The SIA  includes  customary  deal  protection  mechanisms,  including  no  shop  and  no talk  provisions,  matching  and 
notification  rights  in  the  event  of  a  competing  proposal,  and  a  mutual  reimbursement  fee  payable  by  Gryphon  or 
Teranga in specified circumstances. 
 
Closing of the Transaction is expected to occur during October 2016. 
 
The Gryphon Directors unanimously recommend that Gryphon shareholders vote in favour of the Transaction in the 
absence of a superior proposal and subject to an Independent Expert concluding that the Transaction is in the best 
interests of  Gryphon  shareholders.  On  the  same basis,  Gryphon  Directors  intend to  vote  the  Gryphon Shares  they 
hold or control at the time of the Gryphon shareholder meeting in favour of the Transaction.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  5
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Benefits to Gryphon Shareholders
Shareholders of Gryphon are expected to realize the following benefits from the Transaction: 
  Meaningful upfront premium to Gryphon shareholders (based on 17 June 2016 close prices of Teranga CDIs and 
Gryphon Shares on ASX) of 53%, and a 45% premium to the 20-day VWAP of Gryphon Shares on the same basis.
  Participation  in  a  multi-jurisdiction  mid-tier  gold  producer  with  combined  potential  for  ~300,000  ounces  of
annual gold production over a 15+ year mine life.
  Significant  exploration  potential  associated  with  the  combined  Sabodala,  Banfora,  Golden  Hill  and  Gourma
regions.
  Improved trading liquidity and capital markets access associated with the enhanced size of the combined group
and a listing in the mining centric TSX.
  Access to Teranga’s strong balance sheet and projected free cash flows from Sabodala to fund the development of
Banfora.
  Combines highly skilled development, mine production and exploration teams with proven track records in West
Africa.
  Ability to leverage board, management and social license to pursue further West African consolidation. 
  Choice of consideration as CDIs listed on the ASX or Teranga Shares listed on the TSX. 
 
Advisors
Gryphon’s  financial  advisor  is  Maxit  Capital  LP,  its  Australian  legal  counsel  is  King  &  Wood  Mallesons  and  its 
Canadian legal counsel is Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP.
Banfora Gold Project | Exploration
Highlights 
  A  RC  drill  program  was  completed  for  a total of 4,297m  and  55 holes  covering  along  strike  and down  plunge
depth extensions at the Fourkoura and Nogbele Deposits.
  The holes were focused on a number of high priority targets that could add immediate reserves to the current
mine inventory.
  The drill results for the first 11 holes at Fourkoura have been received and released (Refer ASX Announcement
13 July 2016)1.

Further  drilling  has  been  conducted  at  Nogbele  targeting  strike  extensions  of  existing  mineralisation  and 
infilling  high  grade  shoots  at  the  deposit.  Results  for  3470  m  of  drilling  are  currently  pending  and  will  be 
released at first opportunity.
  A review of the underground potential of high grade mineralisation at Nogbele North was undertaken indicating 
positive opportunity (Refer ASX Announcement 18 April 2016)1. Further drill testing is required to prove up the 
target at depth.
  A significant exploration program is currently underway with two rigs operating on double shift.
Phase 1 Drill Results
The  first  results  from  the  drilling  conducted  during  the  quarter  at  the  Fourkoura  deposit  indicated  excellent 
continuity  to  the  known  high  grade  shoot  and  indicated  several  areas  where  further  drilling  has  the  potential  to 
expand  the  current  pit  for  the  CIL  scenarios.  A  total  of  11  holes  for  827m  were  completed  at  Fourkorua.  Results 
received from the drilling included:
BNRC4567  7m @ 12.8 g/t from 60 metres
BNRC4564
8m @ 7.5 g/t from 47 metres
BNRC4563  11m @ 5.3 g/t from 61 metres
BNRC4561  8m @ 2.4 g/t from 40 metres
An auger drill program focused on strike extents of known mineralisation and untested soil mineralisation within the 
Nogbele and Fourkoura Deposit areas was  completed to focus RC targeting at Nogbele with a total of 4,309m was 
drilled for 663 holes during the quarter.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  6
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Follow  up  RC  drilling  conducted  at  Nogbele  along  strike  from  the  Tahiti  Deposit  intersected  strongly  sericite, 
carbonate, pyrite altered granite (G4 alteration type) associated with mafic dykes 180m further northwest along strike 
from  existing  resources/reserves  following  up  a  strong  and  gold  in  auger  anomaly.  Results  from  these  holes  and 
further drilling infilling existing high grade shoots at Nogbele North, West and Nangolo pits are currently pending and 
will be released when they are available.
A total of 158 drill samples from the Fourkoura program underwent test analysis involving cyanide leach with a fire 
assay  completed  on  the  tail  residue.  Assaying  was  conducted  on  entire  2kg  sample  to  assess  the  gold  deportment 
relationship to sampling size at the deposit and any possible upgrade with the coarse gold component. Results of this 
work await full interpretation but the initial results report a 13% increase in metal and grade vs the original fire assays 
from  the  program.  Results  of  the  resampling  will  be  taken  into  consideration  for  further  drilling/assaying  at  the 
Fourkoura deposit.
Underground Targeting Review
A review of the potential of the Nogbele North Deposit to host underground mining inventory for a CIL scenario was 
undertaken during the quarter. The review included a high level engineering review examining the potential extraction 
parameters and costs for the lode style high grade veins present at the deposit if continuity is proven at depth. Results 
indicated  that  there  is  potential  for  economic  extraction  by  narrow  vein  underground  mining  techniques  if  further 
drilling confirms the continuity of the currently shallow lodes at depth.
The  addition  of  economically  extractable  underground  material  would  have  a  significant  positive  impact  on  project 
economics for the CIL development scenario, increasing the mine life without further increase to the project footprint 
or  pre-production  capital  requirements.  Nogbele  North  is  adjacent  to  the  site  of  the  proposed  heap  leach  and  CIL 
processing facility.
Previously announced drill results at Nogbele North intersecting the high grade lode veins in current shallow drilling 
include (refer ASX announcement 15 May 20131):
Table 1: A selection of significant drill results from Nogbele North high grade veins
Hole
From
BNRC3691 
OPRC2250 
BNRC1085 
OPRC1698 
BNRCD1993 
OPRC2338 
OPRC2160 
OPRC1699 
BNRC4662 
BNRC3667 
BNRC2419 
BNRC0334 
BNRC4664 
BNRC3903
132 
8 
59 
32 
71 
14 
26 
30 
29 
68 
123 
35 
61 
19
Continued Exploration
To
140 
12 
63 
34 
74 
18 
30 
34 
39 
71 
125 
37 
64 
23
Interval
(m)
8 
4 
4 
2 
3 
4 
4 
4 
10 
3 
2 
2 
3 
4
Gold  
(g/t) 
10.85 
23.87 
25.75 
61.05 
41.86 
32.73 
33.04 
34.34 
14.74 
53.45 
94.29 
148.62 
120.53 
152.65
including 1m @ 296.40 g/t gold 
including 1m @ 358.01 g/t gold 
including 1m @ 569.01 g/t gold
A  significant  exploration  program  is  currently  underway  at  the  Banfora  Gold  Project  to  advance  the  project  for  the 
updated CIL development scenario due for release first half of 2017. Follow up drilling to extend the high grade lodes 
reported in the Fourkoura drill results is continuing with a multipurpose RC and a second DD rig currently operating 
on double shift. Drilling is targeting the extensions of the mineralisation at Fourkoura along strike and down plunge. 
Drilling will continue at Nogbele and Samavogo deposits when results are compiled from the phase 1 drilling which are 
still pending.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  7
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Work is also advancing on developing detailed exploration programs for the advanced regional targets at the end of 
rainy  season  (mid-October)  in  order  to  bring  further  potential  reserves  into  the  project  inventory.  The  company 
intends to begin resource drill programs at the Oahiri and Kafina Prospects as well as maiden RC testing of a number 
of other regional targets that have been advanced during the preceding low exploration spend period before the end of 
the calendar year. These potential targets are summarised below in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Multiple High Priority targets in close proximity to the proposed plant location at Nogbele
Banfora Gold Project - Operational
Site Works, Environmental & Social Responsibility (ESR)
The Company has maintained a low cost approach with minimal site works being undertaken during the period.   The 
Company did not conduct any substantial pre-construction works again this period.
The  site  team  completed  the  construction  and  handover  of  a  new  micro-dam  to  the  community  of  Nanguelédougou 
(refer  pictures  below),  and  a  new  request  has  been  received  from  the  village  of  Bavigué-ka  for  another  micro-dam, 
confirming  positive  local  support  for  the  program  which  has  seen  three  dams  built  to  date  in  co-operation  with  the 
communities themselves.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  8
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Picture 1 : Nanguelédougou Micro-Dam Construction
The  Company  continues  to  work  closely  with  the  impacted  communities  to  assist  with  minor  road  repairs  on  an  as 
required basis.
Gryphon  continues  to  maintain  a  positive  relationship  and  open  dialogue  with  local  communities  and  27  community 
visits to mining affected villages were conducted this period, as well as 12 visits with administrative authorities.
Local communities are keen to see the Project commence, which is a positive for Gryphon, and the recent development 
of  the  Teranga  acquisition  (refer  ASX  Announcement  of  20  June  2016)  has  been  generally  well  received  by  the 
communities and the administrations.
The Community Consultation Committee (CCC) continues to be the  primary platform for  communication, however no 
formal meeting was held this period. The community has been focussed on preparations for and conducting of mayoral 
elections in the region. A new mayor was announced late in the period, and meeting of introduction being planned for 
next period.
Gryphon supported a community celebration to open a new grain storage shed in Niankorodougou. With proper storage, 
families can store grains without spoiling during the harvest season.
Gryphon  supported  the  village  of  Samavogo  to  repair  a  borehole  pump,  and  contributed  to  the  construction  of  a 
teacher’s residence in Nadjengoala. Sports and culture days for children to celebrate the end of the school year were also 
supported in two schools in Niankorodougou.
Consultations  with  women  regarding  improving  stove  designs  progressed,  and  Gryphon  also obtained  input  from  the 
Department  of  Environment  to  determine  the  best  option  for  new  stoves.  As  part  of  the  RAP  program,  Gryphon 
proposes to use stoves available in Burkina Faso, nationally certified for safety, rather than manufacturing new stoves 
in-house.
The ESR Manager participated in the 2016 IFC Sustainability Exchange on behalf of Gryphon Minerals, which brought 
together  IFC  compliant  companies,  social  and  environmental  specialists,  and  investment  officers.  Gryphon  provided 
feedback  on  the  improvement  of  implementation  of  Performance  Standard  5  (Land  Acquisition  and  Involuntary 
Resettlement) and participated in a discussion regarding involving women in the mining sector.
Participation was valuable in terms of maintaining relationships, demonstrating continuity of the Banfora Gold Project 
and  commitment  to  IFC  Performance  Standards,  and  learning  about  and  benefiting  from  the  experiences  of  other 
mining companies working in complex situations in West Africa.
Preparation of Social Management Plans (SMPs), which will accompany the IFC compliant ESIA, continued. Ongoing 
feedback is being exchanged between the IFC and the ESR team, and the majority of SMP updates will be completed in-
house.
Work continued updating documentation for IFC compliance at Banfora. Feedback was received from the IFC regarding 
updated  security  management  documentation  and  Gryphon’s  approach  to  risk  management  and  engagement  of  the 
security force at the exploration camp in Niankorodougou.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  9
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
The  revised  grievance  mechanism  and  Réglement  Intérieur  (replacing  the  older  Code  of  Conduct)  received  positive 
feedback from the IFC.
The  Burkina  Faso  Ministry  for  Environment  and  Sustainable  Development  visited  the  exploration  camp  to  evaluate 
environmental compliance. Based on the visit and feedback from the ministry, Gryphon is assessing suggested areas of 
improvement such as improved disposal of biomedical waste from the clinic and storage of geology samples, as well as 
improved disposal systems for grey water, garbage, and used oil.
Ongoing daily activities of the water monitoring program continued as scheduled:
collection of data from the meteorological station and the rain monitoring stations;
 
  monitoring of the water table levels; 
  monitoring the river levels and flow; 
 

updating Hydata software system & back-ups.
downloading data collected by “divers” at measuring points; and
Burkina Faso Exploration Pipeline | Houndé Belt & Regional Projects
Golden Hill and Gourma Joint Venture (51% ownership with pathway to 80%)
Gryphon  and  Boss  Resources  (ASX:  BOE)  signed  a  binding  heads  of  agreement  to  establish  a  joint  venture  over  the 
Golden Hill and Gourma gold projects located in Burkina Faso, totalling over 1,750 km².  Refer to  ASX announcement 
dated 4 July 2014 for full terms of the agreement. In January 2016 Gryphon received a controlling 51% holding in the 
Joint Venture.
Gryphon  Minerals  continues  to  apply  proven  low-cost  exploration  techniques  to  explore  the  two  projects  using  an 
integrated exploration approach incorporating geology, regolith constrained geochemistry, geophysical interpretations, 
the use  of  remote  sensing  datasets  supported by  field  work  and  mapping.  This  low  cost  approach  will ultimately fast 
track  discoveries  and  mineral  inventories  across  the  large  land  holding  by  directing  higher  costs  activities  such  as 
drilling to those areas with the best chance of delivering economic mineral discoveries. Work during the quarter focused 
on mapping, prospecting and a small geophysical survey on the Golden Hill Project.
Gourma Gold Project
The Gourma Project is located within the Fada N'Gourma Greenstone Belt, 250km east of Ouagadougou and only 80 km 
south-southwest of Niger's largest gold mine Samira Hill (1.9Moz). The Project consists of six contiguous permits that 
cover a total area of approximately 1,300 km². It is accessible from the south off the Fada N'Gourma-Kantchari highway 
via a well maintained gravel road and from the west via a gravel road from the town of Gayeri.
Gryphon  has  undertaken  high  precision  drainage  geochemistry  from  which  results,  combined  with  robust 
understanding  of  the  geology  and  regolith  terrain  has  provided  clear  direction  and  focus  for  the  low  cost  work  the 
Company has been undertaking. The small efficient exploration team are rapidly working towards generating numerous 
high  quality  drill  targets  across  the  large  land  package  which  are  steadily  being  de-risked  ahead  of  drilling  through 
focused field activities including sub-surface test work using the company owned auger rig.
Gourma Shear Zone Targeting 
Gryphon  recently  added  two  further  Permits  at  the  Gourma  Project  which  now  extends  over  60km  of  a  gold  bearing 
crustal shear which has received very little modern exploration. Along the shear there are numerous artisanal workings 
and company generated robust and significant surface geochemical anomalies.
Recent work included auger testing beneath a number of soil anomalies. The best results were returned from the Djinta 
Prospect, where a peak auger assay of 25.7 g/t gold was returned from weathered bedrock as part of an 80m wide 
zone of anomalous saprolite at greater than 0.5 g/t gold. As the nearest auger line is 600m away the significance of these 
results is unknown and awaits further auger follow-up along strike during the next field season.
Gariaga-Diabatou Trend - Multiple Targets 
The Gariaga-Diabatou mineralised trend extends southwest onto the newly acquired Tyabo permit. There are numerous 
bedrock and eluvial gold workings along the trend, extending over a strike length exceeding 10km. Mineralisation on the 
trend  is  interpreted  to  be  on  the  eastern  flank  of  an  antiform  which  represents  a  bounding  shear  zone.  Quartz 
tourmaline veins are more common close to the interpreted contact.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  10
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
First pass drilling by Boss in 2012 returned best aircore results of 3m @ 11.3 g/t gold and 14m @ 2.1 g/t gold from 
Gariaga,  and  14m  @  2.1  g/t  gold  and  12m  @  2.8  g/t  gold  from  the  Diabatou  Prospects.  The  aircore  drilling  at 
Diabatou remained in saprolite to an end of hole depth of 80m (Refer to ASX : BOE Announcements on 4 December 
2012 and 30 January 2013).
Gariaga is hosted in mafic schist and extends to the southwest beyond a contact with metasediments. Common to both 
prospects  is  mineralisation  associated  with  quartz  tourmaline  veins.  The  metasediments  comprise  foliated  volcanic 
sandstone  and  phyllite,  carbonaceous  shale  and  deeply  weathered  feldspathic  semi-schist  with  lesser  amounts  of 
feldspar porphyroblastic schist. There is a quartz rich sandstone (quartz arenite) containing conglomeratic bands in the 
south west portion of the trend. Mineralisation in all three trends consists of grey, glassy to smokey quartz veins and 
disseminated  mineralisation  associated  with  shearing  and  silicified  zones.  This  style  of  mineralisation  represents  a 
highly prospective target for hosting broad zones of mineralisation. The disseminated and silicified zones are strongly 
associated with sericite and pyrite alteration with some malachite and chalcopyrite observed along the trend.
Foutouri, Lotto, Tambouana, Boutounou - Eastern Target Areas 
There  are  a  number of  prospects  with high  grade  surface  mineralisation  in the  east  and  southeast  of  the  project.  The 
Sefatendano and Tambouana Prospects are present in northwest striking structures within sheared and altered granite 
and in gabbro respectively. The high grade veins in the gabbro have historically returned peak rock chip results of up to 
42.4 g/t, 35.6 g/t and 12.2 g/t gold. The prospects are associated with strong gold-in-drainage responses. The Company 
has to date identified a four kilometre soil anomaly on the prospect. A first pass auger program has been completed on 
broad  spaced  lines  to  provide  first  pass  subsurface testing  of  the  soil  anomaly  returning  a  peak  of  462  ppb  gold.  The 
auger  lines  are  currently  400m  apart  and  additional  augering  and  a  maiden  drill  program  will  be  required  to  better 
evaluate the significance the results.
In the same area, the Lotto-Tampora Prospects have historically returned rock chips of up to 55.3 g/t, 19.7 g/t and 14.2 
g/t gold from laminated quartz veins including recent sampling by Gryphon has returned rock chips of up to 19.7 g/t 
gold (Refer to ASX Announcement on 17 February 2015)2.
Golden Hill Project
The  Golden  Hill  Project  is  the  most  advanced  of  all  the  projects  in  the  Joint  Venture  and  is  considered  particularly 
prospective  as  it  is  located  within the  highly  mineralised  Houndé  Greenstone  Belt.  This belt hosts the  majority of  the 
high  grade  discovered  gold  ounces  in  Burkina  Faso,  including  Semafo’s  (TSX,  OMF:  SMF)  Siou  Deposit  (reserves  of 
769,000oz @ 4.94 g/t gold) plus the high grade Yaramoko deposit owned by Roxgold (TSX.V: ROG) (790,000oz @ 17.15 
g/t gold).  The belt also hosts Semafo’s Mana Mine (6 Moz) and Endeavour Mining’s (TSX: EDV, ASX: EVR) 2Moz 2.0 
g/t Houndé deposit.  The Golden Hill Project straddles the same structure and stratigraphy that host these high grade 
deposits.
Limited field work was undertaken during the quarter with work focused on refining the geological interpretation and 
understanding through field mapping, data reviews as well as a small amount of geochemical sampling.  
 
Results from a small auger program comprising 89 holes completed south of the C-Zone Prospect and along strike of 
the A-Zone at the Pourey prospects returned results to 7.92g/t Au from residual clay. A ground magnetics and array of 
IP  was  undertaken  across  this  area  with  the  purpose  of  identifying  the  probable  strike  extensions  of  the  bedrock 
mineralisation ahead of a maiden drill program next field season.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  11
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Corporate
Cash and Working Capital
At the end of the quarter, Gryphon held  approximately $9.3 million in cash, plus approximately $3.8 million in listed 
investments.  The majority of the costs for the quarter were as follows:
-  Banfora Gold Project costs of $0.8 million which mainly comprised  camp costs, mining licence taxes and land
taxes, wages and artisanal miner management costs and ESR costs.
-  Exploration costs of $0.5 million across the Banfora, Golden Hill & Gourma Projects in Burkina Faso and minor 
costs in Mauritania prior to divestment.  Refer to exploration section for work performed during the quarter and 
note this number includes Ouagadougou office, geologist team and remote exploration camp costs.
-  Administration costs of $0.7 million which mainly comprises salaries and wages,  rent, legal, corporate  advisor
fees, travel and insurance payments.
-  Gryphon participated in the Tawana Resources NL rights issue for $0.1m at an issue price of $0.015 per share.
Gryphon  also  received  $0.5  million  for  its  research  and  development  refund  and  $0.2m  for  the  sale  of  Mauritanian 
assets.
For more information on cash movements during the quarter, refer to the 30 June 2016 Appendix 5B.
Placement
In  July  2016,  Gryphon  completed  a  placement  to  Teranga  whereby  Teranga  subscribed  for  21.2  million  fully  paid 
ordinary shares in Gryphon for a total consideration of A$4.4 million (Placement).   
 
The Placement price of A$0.206 per Gryphon share, which is equivalent to Teranga’s offer price for one Gryphon share 
as part of the Proposed Gryphon Acquisition, represents a premium to Gryphon’s closing share price on 15 July 2016 
and results in Teranga owning 5% of Gryphon’s issued and outstanding shares.   
 
The  funds  from  the  Placement  will  be  used  to  immediately  start  a  resource  conversion  drill  program  and  plant 
optimisation studies required to complete a fully optimised and de-risked feasibility study by the first half of 2017 and 
to update  the  tailings  storage  facility  design  and  relocation  action  plan  required  as  a  result of  the  decision to  move 
forward with a carbon-in-leach plant. 
 
 
 
Notes
1    For full details of exploration results refer to ASX announcement. Gryphon Minerals is not aware of any new information or data that materially
affects the information included in the said announcement.
Competent Persons Statement
The  information  in  this  report  that  relates  to  the  Exploration  Results  at  the  Company’s  Banfora  Gold  Project,  Burkina  Faso ,  the  Golden  Hill  and 
Gourma Projects, Burkina Faso and the Akjoujt project, Mauritania, is based on and fairly represents information which has been compiled by Mr Sam 
Brooks who is a member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists.  Mr Brooks has sufficient experience relevant to the styles of mineralisation and 
type of deposit under consideration and to the activity that is being undertaken to qualify as a Competent Person, as defined in the 2012 Edition of the 
“Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration  Results,  Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves”.  Mr  Brooks  is  a   full  time  employee  of  Gryphon 
Minerals and has consented to the inclusion of the matters in this report based on his information in the form and context in  which it appears. Some 
information was prepared and first disclosed under JORC Code 2004. It has not been updated since to comply with the JORC Code 2012 on the basis 
that the information has not materially changed since it was last reported.
The information in this report that relates to  the Mineral Resources at the  Nogbele and Fourkoura Deposits, Bur kina Faso is based on  information 
compiled by Mr Sam Brooks who is a member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists. Mr Brooks has sufficient experience r elevant to the styles of 
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which they are undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person, as defined in 
the  2012  Edition  of  the  “Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration  Results,  Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves”.  Mr  Broo ks  is  a  full  time 
employee of Gryphon Minerals and has consented to the inclusion of the matters in this report based on his information in the form and context in 
which it appears.
The  information  in  this  report  that  relates  to  the  Mineral  Resources  at  the  Stinger  and  Samavogo  Deposits,  Burkina  Faso  is  ba sed  on  information 
compiled by Mr Dmitry Pertel who is a member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists.  Mr Pertel has sufficient experience relevant to the styles of 
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which they are undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person, as defined in 
the  2012  Edition  of  the  “Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of  Exploration  Results,  Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves”.  Mr  Pert el  is  a  full  time 
employee of CSA Global Pty Ltd and has consented to the inclusion of the matters in this report based on his information in the form and context in 
which it appears. This information was prepared and first disclosed under JORC Code 2004. It has not been updated since to co mply with the JORC 
Code 2012 on the basis that the information has not materially changed since it was last reported.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  12
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Forward-Looking Statements
This announcement may contain “forward-looking statements”. Forward-looking statements are based on assumptions regarding Gryphon’s expected 
activities, events and/or strategic plans. Statements which are not based on historic or current facts may be forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements are based on current views, expectations and beliefs as at the dates they are expressed an d which are subject to various 
risks  and  uncertainties.  Actual  results  or  performance  could  be  materially  different  from  those  expressed  in,  or  implied  by,  these  forward-looking 
statements. The forward-looking statements contained in this presentation are not guarantees or assurances of future performance and involve known 
and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond the control of Gryphon, which may cause the actu al future activities, 
events or strategic plans to deliver results materially different from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
Gryphon  disclaims  any  responsibility  for  the  accuracy  or  completeness  of  any  forward-looking  statement.  Gryphon  disclaims  any  responsibility  to 
update or revise any forward-looking statement  to reflect any change in Gryphon’s financial condition, status or affairs or any change in the events, 
conditions  or  circumstances  on  which  a  statement  is  based,  except  as  required  by  law.  Investors  must  not  place  undue  reliance  on  these  forward-
looking statements.
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  13
Project
Banfora
Gourma Project
Golden Hill Project
Saboussiri
North-West Côte d’Ivoire
Wahgnion
Nogbele
Nianka
Dierisso
Nianka Nord
Zeguedougou
Nogbele Sud
Boutouanou
Diabatou
Tyara
Foutouri
Tyabo1
Kankandi1
Baniri
Intiedougou
Mougue
EL879
EL1074
Odienne
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
Mauritania
Mauritania
Côte d’Ivoire
Côte d’Ivoire
Review of the Quarter ending 30 June 2016
Appendix 1 | Gryphon Minerals Tenements
Mining Tenements held
Tenement
Location
Samaminkan (FNW)
Note 1: Tenements currently being transferred into Gryphon’s name at 30 June 2016.
Mining tenements acquired or disposed
Nil 
 
Beneficial percentage interests held in farm-in or farm-out agreements
Gourma Project- Boutouanou (51%), Diabatou (51%), Tyara  (51%), Foutouri  (51%) 
Golden Hill- Baniri  (51%), Intiedougou  (51%), Mougue  (51%) 
 
Beneficial percentage interests in farm-in or farm-out agreements acquired or disposed
Acquired 
Nil 
 
Disposed 
Nil
Gryphon Minerals Limited Quarterly Report  14
Non-Executive Chairman 
Mel Ashton 
 
Managing Director 
Stephen Parsons 
 
Non-Executive Directors 
Didier Murcia 
Bruce McFadzean 
 
Company Secretary 
Carl Travaglini 
 
Principal & Registered Office 
288 Churchill Avenue 
SUBIACO WA 6008 
Telephone: (08) 9287 4333 
Facsimile: (08) 9287 4334 
 
Share Registry 
Link Market Services Ltd 
Level4. Central Park 
152 St Georges Terrace 
PERTH WA 6000 
 
Auditors 
BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd 
38 Station Street 
SUBIACO WA 6008 
 
Bankers 
National Australia Bank 
50 St Georges Terrace 
PERTH WA 6000 
 
Stock Exchange Listing 
Australian Securities Exchange (“ASX”) 
Home Exchange: Perth, Western Australia 
 
Code: GRY 
 
Website Address 
www.gryphonminerals.com.au