
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-99
<SEQUENCE>106
<FILENAME>ex99-103form40_f.txt
<DESCRIPTION>EXHIBIT 99.103
<TEXT>
EXHIBIT 99.103
                                                                  --------------
A copy of this  preliminary  short  form  prospectus  has  been  filed  with the
securities regulatory authorities in each of the provinces of Canada but has not
yet  become  final  for  the  purpose  of the  sale of  securities.  Information
contained in this preliminary  short form prospectus may not be complete and may
have to be amended. The securities may not be sold until a receipt for the short
form prospectus is obtained from the securities regulatory authorities.
No  securities  regulatory  authority  has  expressed  an  opinion  about  these
securities and it is an offence to claim otherwise.
This short form  prospectus  constitutes a public  offering of these  securities
only in those  jurisdictions  where they may be  lawfully  offered  for sale and
therein only by persons permitted to sell such securities. These securities have
not been and will not be registered  under the United States  Securities  Act of
1933, as amended,  or any state securities laws.  Accordingly,  these securities
may not be  offered  or sold  within  the  United  States  and this  short  form
prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to
buy  any  of  these   securities   within  the  United  States.   See  "Plan  of
Distribution".
New Issue                                                        August 26, 2004
PRELIMINARY SHORT FORM PROSPECTUS
[ADVANTAGE LOGO]
$65,800,000
                        3,500,000 Subscription Receipts,
              each representing the right to receive one trust unit
and
$75,000,000
         7.50% Extendible Convertible Unsecured Subordinated Debentures
and
$50,000,000
         7.75% Extendible Convertible Unsecured Subordinated Debentures
Subscription Receipts
Advantage  Energy Income Fund (the "Trust" or "Advantage") is hereby  qualifying
for distribution 3,500,000 subscription receipts ("Subscription Receipts"), each
of which  will  entitle  the  holder  thereof  to  receive,  without  payment of
additional  consideration,  one trust unit ("Unit" or "Trust Unit") of the Trust
upon closing of the acquisition (the  "Acquisition") by Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd.
("AOG"),  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of the Trust,  of certain  petroleum  and
natural gas  properties and related assets  currently  owned by Anadarko  Canada
Corporation  ("Anadarko")  described in more detail under "Recent Developments -
Acquisition".  The  proceeds  from the sale of the  Subscription  Receipts  (the
"Escrowed  Funds") will be held by  Computershare  Trust  Company of Canada,  as
escrow agent (the "Escrow Agent"), and invested in short-term obligations of, or
guaranteed by, the Government of Canada (and other approved investments) pending
completion of the Acquisition. Upon the Acquisition being completed on or before
November 1, 2004, the Escrowed  Funds and the interest  thereon will be released
to the Trust  and the  Units  will be  issued  to the  holders  of  Subscription
Receipts.  The Trust will utilize the Escrowed  Funds and the proceeds  from the
sale of Debentures  described  below to pay a portion of the purchase  price for
the Acquisition.
<PAGE>
2
If the  closing of the  Acquisition  does not take  place by 5:00 p.m.  (Calgary
time) on November 1, 2004,  or if the  Acquisition  Agreement  or any  amendment
thereto  is  terminated  at any  earlier  time or if the Trust has  advised  the
Underwriters  or announced to the public that it does not intend to proceed with
the Acquisition (in any case, the "Termination  Time"),  holders of Subscription
Receipts  shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to the full  subscription
price therefor and their pro rata  entitlements to interest on such amount.  The
Escrowed Funds and interest  earned thereon will be applied  towards  payment of
such amount.
If the closing of the Acquisition  takes place prior to the Termination Time and
holders of Subscription  Receipts become entitled to receive Units, such holders
will be  entitled  to receive an amount per  Subscription  Receipt  equal to the
amount per Unit of any cash  distributions  for which record dates have occurred
during  the  period  from  the  date of  closing  of the  offering  to the  date
immediately preceding the date the Units are issued pursuant to the Subscription
Receipts. Accordingly, if the Acquisition closes on or before September 30, 2004
as currently contemplated,  holders of Subscription Receipts will become holders
of Units on or before September 30, 2004 and will be entitled, provided they are
the holders of record of Units received pursuant to the Subscription Receipts on
September 30, 2004, to receive the monthly  distribution  expected to be paid on
October 15, 2004 to  Unitholders of record on September 30, 2004. If the closing
of the Acquisition occurs after September 30, 2004, but on or before November 1,
2004, holders of record of Subscription  Receipts on the date they are exchanged
for Units will be entitled to receive a payment  equivalent to the  distribution
that will be paid by the Trust to Unitholders of record on September 30, 2004 or
any subsequent Unit distribution  record date (being on or about the last day of
each month) prior to such closing. See "Details of the Offering".
7.50% Debentures
The Trust is also hereby  qualifying for  distribution  75,000 7.50%  extendible
convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures (the "7.50% Debentures") of the
Trust at a price of $1,000 per Debenture.  The 7.50%  Debentures have an initial
maturity date of November 1, 2004 (the "Initial  Maturity Date"). If the closing
of the Acquisition  takes place by the Termination  Time, the maturity date will
be automatically extended from the Initial Maturity Date to October 1, 2009 (the
"7.50% Final Maturity Date").  If closing of the Acquisition does not take place
by the  Termination  Time,  the 7.50%  Debentures  will  mature  on the  Initial
Maturity Date. See "Details of the Offerings".
The  7.50%  Debentures  bear  interest  at  an  annual  rate  of  7.50%  payable
semi-annually  on April 1 and October 1 in each year  commencing  April 1, 2005.
The 7.50%  Debentures are redeemable by the Trust at a price of $1,050 per 7.50%
Debenture  after October 1, 2007 and on or before October 1, 2008 and at a price
of $1,025 per 7.50%  Debenture  after  October 1, 2008 and  before  maturity  on
October 1, 2009, in each case, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any.
See "Details of the Offerings".
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.50% Debenture Conversion Privilege
Each 7.50% Debenture will be convertible  into Units at the option of the holder
at any time prior to the close of business  on the  earlier of maturity  and the
business  day  immediately  preceding  the  date  specified  by  the  Trust  for
redemption of the 7.50%  Debentures,  at a conversion  price of $20.25 per Unit,
subject  to  adjustment  in  certain  events.  Holders  converting  their  7.50%
Debentures will receive accrued and unpaid interest thereon. Notwithstanding the
foregoing,  no  Debentures  may be  converted  during  the three  business  days
preceding April 1 and October 1, in each year,  commencing April 1, 2005, as the
registers of the Debenture Trustee will be closed during such periods.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.75% Debentures
The Trust is also hereby  qualifying for  distribution  50,000 7.75%  extendible
convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures (the "7.75% Debentures") of the
Trust at a price of $1,000 per Debenture.  The 7.75%  Debentures have an initial
maturity date of November 1, 2004. If the closing of the Acquisition takes place
by the Termination  Time, the maturity date will be automatically  extended from
the Initial Maturity Date to December 1, 2011 (the "7.75% Final Maturity Date").
If closing of the Acquisition  does not take place by the Termination  Time, the
7.75%  Debentures will mature on the Initial  Maturity Date. See "Details of the
Offerings".
<PAGE>
3
The  7.75%  Debentures  bear  interest  at  an  annual  rate  of  7.75%  payable
semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 in each year commencing June 1, 2005. The
7.75%  Debentures  are  redeemable  by the Trust at a price of $1,050  per 7.75%
Debenture  after December 1, 2007, and on or before December 1, 2008, at a price
of $1,025 per 7.75%  Debenture  after December 1, 2008 and on or before December
1, 2009 and at a price of $1,000 per 7.75%  Debenture after December 1, 2009 and
before  maturity  on  December 1, 2011,  in each case,  plus  accrued and unpaid
interest thereon, if any. See "Details of the Offerings".
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7.75% Debenture Conversion Privilege
Each 7.75% Debenture will be convertible  into Units at the option of the holder
at any time prior to the close of business  on the  earlier of maturity  and the
business  day  immediately  preceding  the  date  specified  by  the  Trust  for
redemption of the 7.75%  Debentures,  at a conversion  price of $21.00 per Unit,
subject  to  adjustment  in  certain  events.  Holders  converting  their  7.75%
Debentures will receive accrued and unpaid interest thereon. Notwithstanding the
foregoing,  no 7.75%  Debentures may be converted during the three business days
preceding June 1 and December 1, in each year,  commencing  June 1, 2005, as the
registers of the Debenture Trustee will be closed during such periods.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the  opinion  of  counsel,  subject  to the  qualifications  and  assumptions
discussed under the headings  "Canadian Federal Income Tax  Considerations"  and
"Eligibility for Investment", on the date of closing, the Subscription Receipts,
the Debentures and the Units issuable pursuant to the Subscription  Receipts and
on  conversion,  redemption  or maturity of the  Debentures,  will be  qualified
investments under the Income Tax Act (Canada) and the regulations thereunder for
trusts governed by registered  retirement savings plans,  registered  retirement
income  funds,  deferred  profit  sharing  plans  (except,  in the  case  of the
Debentures,  a  deferred  profit  sharing  plan to which  the  Trust  has made a
contribution) and registered education savings plans.
The issued and  outstanding  Units are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the
"TSX") under the trading symbol AVN.UN. On August 23, 2004, the last trading day
prior to the public  announcement  of the offering,  and on August 25, 2004, the
closing price of the Units on the TSX was $19.35 and $19.58,  respectively.  The
Trust has applied to list the  Subscription  Receipts,  the  Debentures  and the
Units  issuable  pursuant to the  Subscription  Receipts and on the  conversion,
redemption and maturity of the Debentures on the TSX. Listing will be subject to
the Trust  fulfilling all of the listing  requirements  of the TSX. The offering
price of the Subscription  Receipts and Debentures was determined by negotiation
between Advantage  Investment  Management Ltd. (the "Manager") and AOG on behalf
of the Trust,  and Scotia  Capital  Inc., on its own behalf and on behalf of BMO
Nesbitt Burns Inc.,  National Bank Financial Inc., RBC Dominion Securities Inc.,
CIBC World  Markets  Inc.,  FirstEnergy  Capital  Corp.  and Raymond  James Ltd.
(collectively, the "Underwriters").
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                         Net 
Proceeds
                           Price to the Public   Underwriters' Fee(1)   to the 
Trust(2)
                           -------------------   --------------------   
---------------
<S>                        <C>                   <C>                    <C>
Per Subscription Receipt   $             18.80   $               0.94   $       
17.86
         Total             $        65,800,000   $          3,290,000   $    
62,510,000
Per 7.50% Debenture        $             1,000   $                 40   $       
960
         Total             $        75,000,000   $          3,000,000   $    
72,000,000
Per 7.75% Debenture        $             1,000   $                 40   $       
960
         Total             $        50,000,000   $          2,000,000   $    
48,000,000
                           -------------------   --------------------   
---------------
Total                      $       190,800,000   $          8,290,000   $   
182,510,000
</TABLE>
Notes:
(1) The Underwriters'  fee with respect to the Subscription  Receipts is payable
    as to 50% upon the  closing of the  offering  and 50% on the  release of the
    Escrowed  Funds to the  Trust.  If the  Acquisition  is not  completed,  the
    Underwriters' fee with respect to the Subscription  Receipts will be reduced
    to the amount payable upon closing of the offering.
(2) Excluding  interest,  if any,  on the  Escrowed  Funds and before  deducting
    expenses of the offering  estimated to be $600,000,  which will be paid from
    the general funds of the Trust.
<PAGE>
4
The Underwriters,  as principals,  conditionally offer the Subscription Receipts
and the  Debentures,  subject to prior sale, if, as and when issued by the Trust
and delivered and accepted by the Underwriters in accordance with the conditions
contained in the Underwriting Agreement referred to under "Plan of Distribution"
and subject to approval of certain  legal  matters  relating to the  offering on
behalf  of the  Trust by  Burnet,  Duckworth  & Palmer  LLP and on behalf of the
Underwriters by Macleod Dixon LLP.
Scotia  Capital Inc.,  BMO Nesbitt Burns Inc.,  National Bank Financial Inc. and
RBC  Dominion   Securities  Inc.,  four  of  the   Underwriters,   are  indirect
wholly-owned  subsidiaries of Canadian  chartered banks which are lenders to the
Trust.  Consequently,  the Trust may be considered  to be a connected  issuer of
these  Underwriters  for the  purposes  of  securities  regulations  in  certain
provinces.  A portion of the net proceeds of this offering received by the Trust
will be used  to  reduce  the  indebtedness  of the  Trust  to such  banks.  See
"Relationship Among the Trust and Certain Underwriters" and "Use of Proceeds".
There is  currently  no  market  through  which  the  Subscription  Receipts  or
Debentures  may be sold and  purchasers  may not be able to resell  Subscription
Receipts or Debentures purchased under this short form prospectus.
Subscriptions for Subscription  Receipts and Debentures will be received subject
to rejection or allotment in whole or in part and the right is reserved to close
the subscription  books at any time without notice.  It is expected that closing
will occur on or about  September  14,  2004 or such other date as the Trust and
the Underwriters  may agree. The Subscription  Receipts will be represented by a
global  certificate  issued in registered  form to the Canadian  Depository  for
Securities   Limited  ("CDS")  or  its  nominee  under  the  book-based   system
administered  by CDS.  Certificates  for the aggregate  principal  amount of the
7.50%  Debentures and 7.75%  Debentures will be issued in registered form to CDS
and  will  be  deposited  with  CDS on the  date  of  closing.  No  certificates
evidencing the Subscription Receipts, 7.50% Debentures and 7.75% Debentures will
be  issued  to  subscribers  except  in  certain  limited   circumstances,   and
registration  will be made in the  depositary  service of CDS.  Subscribers  for
Subscription  Receipts and Debentures will receive only a customer  confirmation
from the  Underwriter or other  registered  dealer who is a CDS  participant and
from or through  whom a  beneficial  interest  in the  Subscription  Receipts or
Debentures is purchased.  Subject to applicable laws, the  Underwriters  may, in
connection with the offering,  effect  transactions  which stabilize or maintain
the market price of the  Subscription  Receipts,  the Units or the Debentures at
levels other than those that might  otherwise  prevail on the open  market.  See
"Plan of Distribution".
The  Subscription  Receipts,  the Units and the  Debentures  are not  "deposits"
within the meaning of the Canada Deposit Insurance  Corporation Act (Canada) and
are not  insured  under the  provisions  of that Act or any  other  legislation.
Furthermore,  the  Trust  is not a trust  company  and,  accordingly,  it is not
registered under any trust and loan company  legislation as it does not carry on
or intend to carry on the business of a trust company.
<PAGE>
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                
Page
<S>                                                                             
<C>
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING 
STATEMENTS ...................................       6
SELECTED 
ABBREVIATIONS ..............................................................    
7
DEFINITIONS ....................................................................
.....       7
NON-GAAP
MEASURES ...................................................................    
13
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY 
REFERENCE .................................................      14
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME 
FUND ........................................................      15
DESCRIPTION OF 
BUSINESS .............................................................      15
RECENT 
DEVELOPMENTS .................................................................  
16
INFORMATION CONCERNING THE 
ASSETS ...................................................      18
EFFECT OF THE ACQUISITION ON THE 
TRUST ..............................................      28
DESCRIPTION OF TRUST 
UNITS ..........................................................      30
EARNINGS 
COVERAGE ...................................................................    
31
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION OF THE 
TRUST ............................................      31
PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUME OF THE TRUST 
UNITS ...................................      33
RECORD OF CASH 
DISTRIBUTIONS ........................................................      33
USE OF 
PROCEEDS .....................................................................  
35
DETAILS OF THE 
OFFERINGS ............................................................      35
PLAN OF 
DISTRIBUTION ................................................................   
42
RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE TRUST AND CERTAIN 
UNDERWRITERS ...............................      44
INTEREST OF 
EXPERTS .................................................................      
44
CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX 
CONSIDERATIONS ..........................................      44
ELIGIBILITY FOR 
INVESTMENT ..........................................................      49
RISK 
FACTORS ........................................................................
50
MATERIAL 
CONTRACTS ..................................................................    
52
LEGAL 
PROCEEDINGS ................................................................... 
52
AUDITORS, TRANSFER AGENT AND 
REGISTRAR ..............................................      52
STATUTORY AND CONTRACTUAL RIGHTS OF RESCISSION AND STATUTORY RIGHTS OF 
WITHDRAWAL ...      52
AUDITORS' 
CONSENT ...................................................................     
53
AUDITORS' 
CONSENT ...................................................................     
53
AUDITORS' 
CONSENT ...................................................................
53
SCHEDULE "A" - UNAUDITED PROFORMA CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS             
A-1
SCHEDULE "B" - SCHEDULE OF REVENUES AND EXPENSES                                
B-1
SCHEDULE "C" - UNAUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
FOR
               THE NINE-MONTH PERIOD ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2003                   
C-1
CERTIFICATE OF THE TRUST                                                        
D-1
CERTIFICATE OF THE UNDERWRITERS                                                 
D-2
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
6
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain  statements  contained  in this  short form  prospectus,  and in certain
documents incorporated by reference into this short form prospectus,  constitute
forward-looking  statements.  These  statements  relate to future  events or the
Trust's future  performance.  All statements other than statements of historical
fact may be forward-looking  statements.  Forward-looking  statements are often,
but not  always,  identified  by the use of words such as "seek",  "anticipate",
"plan", "continue",  "estimate",  "expect", "may", "will", "project", "predict",
"potential",  "targeting",  "intend", "could", "might", "should",  "believe" and
similar   expressions.   These  statements  involve  known  and  unknown  risks,
uncertainties  and other  factors  that may cause  actual  results  or events to
differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements. The
Trust  and AOG  believe  the  expectations  reflected  in those  forward-looking
statements are reasonable but no assurance can be given that these  expectations
will prove to be correct and such  forward-looking  statements  included  in, or
incorporated by reference into, this short form prospectus  should not be unduly
relied  upon.  These  statements  speak  only as of the date of this  short form
prospectus  or as of  the  date  specified  in  the  documents  incorporated  by
reference into this short form prospectus, as the case may be.
In particular,  this short form  prospectus,  and the documents  incorporated by
reference, contain forward-looking statements pertaining to the following:
o     the timing of the closing of the proposed Acquisition;
o     the performance characteristics of the Trust's assets and the Assets;
o     oil and natural gas production levels;
o     the size of the oil and natural gas reserves;
o     projections  of market prices and costs and the related  sensitivities  of
      distributions;
o     supply and demand for oil and natural gas;
o     expectations regarding the ability to raise capital and to continually add
      to reserves through acquisitions and development;
o     treatment under governmental regulatory regimes; and
o     capital expenditures programs.
The actual  results  could differ  materially  from those  anticipated  in these
forward-looking  statements  as a result of the risk factors set forth below and
elsewhere in this short form prospectus:
o     volatility in market prices for oil and natural gas;
o     liabilities inherent in oil and natural gas operations;
o     uncertainties associated with estimating oil and natural gas reserves;
o     competition  for, among other things,  capital,  acquisitions of reserves,
      undeveloped lands and skilled personnel;
o     incorrect assessments of the value of acquisitions;
o     fluctuation in foreign exchange or interest rates;
o     stock market volatility and market valuations;
o     geological,   technical,   drilling  and  processing  problems  and  other
      difficulties in producing petroleum reserves; and
o     the other factors discussed under "Risk Factors".
Statements  relating  to  "reserves"  or  "resources"  are  deemed to be forward
looking  statements,  as they involve the implied  assessment,  based on certain
estimates and  assumptions,  that the  resources  and reserves  described can be
profitably  produced in the future.  Readers are  cautioned  that the  foregoing
lists of factors are not exhaustive. The forward looking statements contained in
this short form prospectus and the documents  incorporated  by reference  herein
are expressly  qualified by this cautionary  statement.  Neither the Trust,  the
Manager,  nor AOG  undertakes  any  obligation to publicly  update or revise any
forward-looking statements.
<PAGE>
7
SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS
In this  short  form  prospectus,  the  abbreviations  set forth  below have the
meanings indicated:
"bbl" means one barrel                    "boe/d"    means    barrels   of   oil
                                          equivalent per day
"bbls" means barrels
                                          "mbbls" means one thousand barrels
"bbls/d" means barrels per day
                                          "mboe" means one  thousand  barrels of
"bcf" means one billion cubic feet        oil equivalent
"boe" means barrels of oil equivalent.    "mmboe"  means one million  barrels of
A   barrel   of  oil   equivalent   is    oil equivalent
determined  by  converting a volume of
natural gas to barrels using the ratio    "mcf" means one thousand cubic feet
of six mcf to one barrel.  Boes may be
misleading,  particularly  if  used in    "mmcf" means one million cubic feet
isolation. The boe conversion ratio of
6  mcf:1  bbl is  based  on an  energy    "mmcf/d"  means one million cubic feet
equivalency      method      primarily    per day
applicable  at the burner tip and does
not represent a value  equivalency  at    "NGL" means natural gas liquids
the wellhead.
                                          "$m"  or  "m$"  means   thousands   of
                                          dollars
DEFINITIONS
In this  short form  prospectus,  the terms set forth  below  have the  meanings
indicated:
"7.50% Debentures" means the 7.50% extendible convertible unsecured subordinated
debentures of the Trust offered hereby;
"7.50% Final Maturity Date" means October 1, 2009;
"7.75% Debentures" means the 7.75% extendible convertible unsecured subordinated
debentures of the Trust offered hereby;
"7.75% Final Maturity Date" means December 1, 2011;
"8.25% Debentures" means the 8.25% convertible unsecured subordinated debentures
of the Trust due February 1, 2009;
"8.50% Notes" means the 8.50%  unsecured  subordinated  promissory  notes of AOG
issued on December 2, 2003;
"9.00% Debentures" means the 9.00% convertible unsecured subordinated debentures
of the Trust due August 1, 2008;
"9 3/8% Notes" means the 9 3/8% unsecured promissory notes of AOG issued on July
8, 2003;
"10.00%  Debentures"  means  the  10.00%  convertible   unsecured   subordinated
debentures of the Trust due November 1, 2007;
"10 3/8% Notes" means the 10 3/8%  unsecured  promissory  notes of AOG issued on
October 18, 2002;
"ABCA" means the Business  Corporations Act (Alberta),  R.S.A.  2000, c. B-9, as
amended, including the regulations promulgated thereunder;
"Acquisition"  means  the  acquisition  by  AOG,  pursuant  to  the  Acquisition
Agreement, of the Assets;
<PAGE>
8
"Acquisition  Agreement"  means the  Agreement of Purchase and Sale dated August
24, 2004 between  Anadarko and AOG pursuant to which Anadarko agreed to sell and
AOG agreed to purchase the Assets;
"AIF" means the Renewal Annual  Information Form of the Trust for the year ended
December 31, 2003 dated May 12, 2004;
"Anadarko" means Anadarko Canada  Corporation,  the managing partner of Anadarko
Canada Resources;
"AOG" means Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd., a corporation  incorporated under the ABCA
and a wholly-owned  subsidiary of the Trust. All references to "AOG", unless the
context otherwise  requires,  are references to Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd. and its
predecessors;
"ARC" means credits or rebates in respect of Crown  royalties  which are paid or
credited  by the Crown,  including  those  paid or  credited  under the  Alberta
Corporate Tax Act which are commonly known as "Alberta Royalty Credits";
"Assets"  means those  petroleum and natural gas  properties  and related assets
that the Trust will  indirectly  own following  completion  of the  Acquisition,
described in more detail under "Information Concerning the Assets";
"Business  Day"  means a day,  which  is not a  Saturday,  Sunday  or  statutory
holiday,  when  banks in the place at which any action is  required  to be taken
hereunder are generally open for the transaction of commercial banking business;
"Constant prices and costs" means prices and costs used in an estimate that are:
(a)   the issuer's  prices and costs as at the effective date of the estimation,
      held constant  throughout  the estimated  lives of the properties to which
      the estimate applies; and
(b)   if, and only to the extent that, there are fixed or presently determinable
      future  prices  or  costs  to  which  the  issuer  is  legally  bound by a
      contractual or other  obligation to supply a physical  product,  including
      those for an extension period of a contract that is likely to be extended,
      those  prices or costs  rather  than the prices and costs  referred  to in
      paragraph (a);
"Credit  Facilities"  has the  meaning  ascribed  thereto in Note 1 to the table
under "Consolidated Capitalization of the Trust";
"Debenture Trustee" means Computershare Trust Company of Canada or its successor
as trustee under the Indenture;
"Debentures" means collectively, the 7.50% Debentures and the 7.75% Debentures;
"Development  costs"  means costs  incurred to obtain  access to Reserves and to
provide facilities for extracting,  treating,  gathering and storing the oil and
gas from Reserves.  More specifically,  development costs,  including applicable
operating  costs  of  support  equipment  and  facilities  and  other  costs  of
development activities, are costs incurred to:
(a)   gain  access  to  and  prepare  well  locations  for  drilling,  including
      surveying  well   locations  for  the  purpose  of  determining   specific
      development drilling sites, clearing ground draining,  road building,  and
      relocating public roads, gas lines and power lines,  pumping equipment and
      wellhead assembly;
(b)   drill and equip development  wells,  development type  stratigraphic  test
      wells and service  wells,  including  the costs of  platforms  and of well
      equipment such as casing, tubing, pumping equipment and wellhead assembly;
<PAGE>
9
(c)   acquire,  construct and install production  facilities such as flow lines,
      separators, treaters, heaters, manifolds, measuring devices and production
      storage  tanks,  natural gas cycling and  processing  plants,  and central
      utility and waste disposal systems; and
(d)   provide improved recovery systems;
"Developed  Producing  Reserves"  are those  Reserves  that are  expected  to be
recovered  from  completion  intervals  open at the time of the estimate.  These
Reserves may be currently  producing or, if shut-in,  they must have  previously
been on production,  and the date of resumption of production must be known with
reasonable certainty;
"Developed  Reserves" are those  Reserves that are expected to be recovered from
existing  wells  and  installed  facilities  or,  if  facilities  have  not been
installed,  that would involve a low expenditure (for example,  when compared to
the cost of drilling a well) to put the Reserves on production;
"Development  well" means a well drilled inside the established limits of an oil
and gas reservoir,  or in close  proximity to the edge of the reservoir,  to the
depth of a stratigraphic horizon known to be productive;
"Escrow Agent" means  Computershare  Trust Company of Canada or its successor as
escrow agent under the Subscription Receipt Agreement;
"Escrowed Funds" means the proceeds from the sale of the Subscription Receipts;
"Exploration  costs" means costs incurred in identifying  areas that may warrant
examination  and in  examining  specific  areas  that  are  considered  to  have
prospects  that may contain oil and gas  Reserves,  including  costs of drilling
exploratory  wells and exploratory type  stratigraphic  test wells.  Exploration
costs may be incurred  both before  acquiring  the  related  property  and after
acquiring the property.  Exploration costs,  which include applicable  operating
costs of  support  equipment  and  facilities  and  other  costs of  exploration
activities, are:
(a)   costs of topographical,  geochemical,  geological and geophysical studies,
      rights of access to properties to conduct those studies,  and salaries and
      other  expenses of  geologists,  geophysical  crews and others  conducting
      those studies;
(b)   costs  of  carrying  and  retaining  unproved  properties,  such as  delay
      rentals, taxes (other than income and capital taxes) on properties,  legal
      costs for title defence, and the maintenance of land and lease records;
(c)   dry hole contributions and bottom hole contributions;
(d)   costs of drilling and equipping exploratory wells; and
(e)   costs of drilling exploratory type stratigraphic test wells;
"Forecast prices and costs" means future prices and costs that are:
(a)   generally acceptable as being a reasonable outlook of the future; and
(b)   if and only to the extent that, there are fixed or presently  determinable
      future  prices  or  costs  to  which  the  issuer  is  legally  bound by a
      contractual or other  obligation to supply a physical  product,  including
      those for an extension period of a contract that is likely to be extended,
      those  prices or costs  rather  than the prices and costs  referred  to in
      paragraph (a);
"Gross" means:
(a)   in relation to an issuer's interest in production or Reserves, its "issuer
      gross Reserves",  which are the issuer's  working interest  (operating and
      non-operating)  share before deduction of royalties and without  including
      any royalty interest of such issuer;
<PAGE>
10
(b)   in relation to wells, the total number of wells in which the issuer has an
      interest; and
(c)   in  relation  to  properties,  the total area of  properties  in which the
      issuer has an interest;
"Indenture"  means the trust  indenture to be dated as of the date of closing of
the offering between the Trust and the Debenture  Trustee governing the terms of
the Debentures;
"Initial Maturity Date" means November 1, 2004;
"Management  Agreement"  means  the  management,   advisory  and  administration
agreement dated May 24, 2001, as amended, among 925212 Alberta Ltd., the Manager
and the Trustee, on behalf of the Trust;
"Manager" means Advantage Investment Management Ltd., a corporation incorporated
under the ABCA;
"MarkWest"  means MarkWest  Resources  Canada Corp., a corporation  incorporated
under the ABCA which was acquired by AOG on December 2, 2003;
"Net" means:
(a)   in relation to an issuer's interest in production or Reserves, its "issuer
      gross Reserves",  which are the issuer's  working interest  (operating and
      non-operating)  share after  deduction  of royalty  obligations,  plus the
      issuer's royalty interest in production or Reserves;
(b)   in relation to wells,  the number of wells  obtained  by  aggregating  the
      issuer's working interest in each of its Gross wells; and
(c)   in relation  to the  issuer's  interest  in a property,  the total area in
      which the issuer has an interest  multiplied by the working interest owned
      by the issuer;
"Notes" means the 14% unsecured subordinated  promissory notes of AOG originally
issued on May 24, 2001;
"Oil and Natural Gas Properties" or "Properties"  means the working,  royalty or
other  interests of AOG in any petroleum  and natural gas rights,  tangibles and
miscellaneous interests,  including properties which may be acquired by AOG from
time to time;
"Permitted  Investments" means, with respect to up to 25% of the total assets of
the Trust (unless  otherwise  approved by AOG's board of directors  from time to
time):  (i) obligations  issued or guaranteed by the government of Canada or any
province of Canada or any agency or instrumentality thereof; (ii) term deposits,
guaranteed  investment   certificates,   certificates  of  deposit  or  bankers'
acceptances of or guaranteed by any Canadian  chartered bank or other  financial
institutions  (including  the Trustee and any  affiliate  of the  Trustee),  the
short-term  debt  or  deposits  of  which  have  been  rated  at  least A or the
equivalent by Standard & Poor's Corporation,  Moody's Investors Service, Inc. or
Dominion Bond Rating Service Limited; (iii) commercial paper rated at least A or
the equivalent by Dominion Bond Rating Service Limited  maturing within 180 days
after the date of  acquisition;  and (iv) trust  units and  limited  partnership
units in trusts and limited  partnerships which invest in energy related assets,
including all types of petroleum and natural gas and energy related assets,  and
including,  without  limitation,  facilities of any kind,  oil sands  interests,
coal,   electricity  or  power  generating  assets,  and  pipeline,   gathering,
processing and transportation assets;
"Petroleum  Substances"  means petroleum,  natural gas and related  hydrocarbons
(except coal) including,  without limitation,  all liquid hydrocarbons,  and all
other  substances,  including  sulphur,  whether  gaseous,  liquid  or solid and
whether hydrocarbon or not, produced in association with such petroleum, natural
gas or related hydrocarbons;
"Proved Reserves" are those Reserves that can be estimated with a high degree of
certainty to be recoverable.  There is believed to be at least a 90% probability
that the quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the estimated Proved
Reserves;
<PAGE>
11
"Probable  Reserves" are those  additional  Reserves that are less certain to be
recovered than Proved  Reserves.  It is equally likely that the actual remaining
quantities  recovered  will be greater or lesser  than the sum of the  estimated
Proved  plus  Probable  Reserves.  There is believed to be at least a 50 percent
probability that the quantities  actually recovered will equal or exceed the sum
of the estimated Proved plus Probable Reserves;
"Redemption Notes" means notes issued in certain circumstances  including by the
Trust on a redemption of Trust Units;
"Reserves" are estimated remaining quantities of oil and natural gas and related
substances anticipated to be recoverable from known accumulations,  from a given
date forward, based on
(a)   analysis of drilling, geological, geophysical and engineering data;
(b)   the use of established technology; and
(c)   specified  economic  conditions  which  are  generally  accepted  as being
      reasonable;
"Royalty" means the 95% interest in AOG's Petroleum  Substances within,  upon or
under  certain of its Oil and Natural  Gas  Properties  granted  pursuant to the
Royalty Agreement;
"Royalty  Agreement"  means the amended and restated royalty  agreement  entered
into  between AOG and the Trust dated as of December 1, 2003 and  providing  for
the creation of the Royalty;
"Settled  Amount"  means the amount of one  hundred  dollars in lawful  money of
Canada  paid by the  settlor  of the Trust to the  Trustee  for the  purpose  of
settling the Trust;
"Sproule" means Sproule Associates Limited, independent geological and petroleum
engineering consultants of Calgary, Alberta;
"Sproule Anadarko Report" means the independent engineering evaluation effective
July 1, 2004 of the oil,  NGL and natural  gas  Reserves  and the present  worth
value of these  Reserves for the oil, NGL and natural gas  interests of Anadarko
in the Assets  prepared by Sproule,  based on forecast and  constant  prices and
costs as at July 1, 2004;
"Subscription  Receipt  Agreement"  means the  agreement to be dated the date of
closing of the offering among the Trust,  the  Underwriters and the Escrow Agent
governing the terms of the Subscription Receipts;
"Subscription  Receipts"  means the  subscription  receipts of the Trust offered
hereby;
"Tax Act" means the Income Tax Act (Canada),  R.S.C.  1985, c. 1 (5th Supp),  as
amended, including the regulations promulgated thereunder;
"Trust" or "Advantage"  means Advantage Energy Income Fund, a trust  established
under the laws of Alberta pursuant to the Trust Indenture. All references to the
"Trust" or "Advantage", unless the context otherwise requires, are references to
Advantage Energy Income Fund, its predecessors, and its subsidiaries;
"Trustee"  means  Computershare  Trust Company of Canada or such other  trustee,
from time to time, of the Trust;
"Trust Indenture" means the trust indenture between  Computershare Trust Company
of Canada and AOG made as of April 17, 2001, supplemented as of May 22, 2002 and
amended and restated as of June 25, 2002, May 28, 2003 and May 26, 2004;
"TSX" means the Toronto Stock Exchange;
"Underwriters" means, collectively, Scotia Capital Inc., BMO Nesbitt Burns Inc.,
National Bank Financial Inc. RBC Dominion  Securities  Inc.,  CIBC World Markets
Inc., FirstEnergy Capital Corp. and Raymond James Ltd.;
<PAGE>
12
"Underwriting  Agreement"  means the  agreement  dated August 24, 2004 among the
Trust, AOG, the Manager and the Underwriters in respect of this offering;
"Undeveloped  Reserves" are those  Reserves  expected to be recovered from known
accumulations where a significant expenditure (for example, when compared to the
cost of drilling a well) is required to render them capable of production.  They
must fully meet the requirements of the Reserves  classification (eg., Proved or
Probable) to which they are assigned;
"United States" or "U.S." means the United States of America;
"Unitholders" means the holders from time to time of the Units; and
"Units" or "Trust Units" means trust units of the Trust.
Words importing the singular number only include the plural, and vice versa, and
words importing any gender include all genders.
All  dollar  amounts  set forth in this short form  prospectus  are in  Canadian
dollars, except where otherwise indicated.
<PAGE>
13
NON-GAAP MEASURES
In this  prospectus,  the Trust  uses the terms  "cash  flow",  "cash  flow from
operations" and "cash available for distribution" to refer to the amount of cash
available  for  distribution  to  Unitholders  and as  indicators  of  financial
performance.  "Cash flow",  "cash flow from  operations" and "cash available for
distribution"  are  not  measures  recognized  by  Canadian  generally  accepted
accounting  principles ("GAAP") and do not have standardized meanings prescribed
by GAAP. Therefore, "cash flow", "cash flow from operations" and "cash available
for  distribution"  of the  Trust  may not be  comparable  to  similar  measures
presented by other issuers,  and investors are cautioned that "cash flow", "cash
flow from  operations"  and "cash  available  for  distribution"  should  not be
construed as alternatives to net earnings,  cash flow from operating  activities
or other measures of financial  performance  calculated in accordance with GAAP.
All references to "cash flow" and "cash flow from  operations" are based on cash
flow before changes in non-cash working capital related to operating activities,
as  presented  in the  consolidated  financial  statements  of the  Trust.  Cash
available for distribution cannot be assured and future  distributions may vary.
The Trust uses such terms and,  particularly,  "cash available for distribution"
as an  indicator  of  financial  performance  because  such  terms are  commonly
utilized by investors to evaluate royalty trusts and income funds in the oil and
gas sector.  The Trust  believes  that "cash  available for  distribution"  is a
useful  supplemental  measure as it provides  investors with information of what
cash is  available  for  distribution  from  the  Trust to  Unitholders  in such
periods.
<PAGE>
14
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Information  has been  incorporated  by reference in this short form  prospectus
from  documents  filed with  securities  commissions  or similar  authorities in
Canada. Copies of the documents incorporated herein by reference may be obtained
on request without charge from the Vice  President,  Finance and Chief Financial
Officer of AOG at Suite 3100, 150 - 6th Avenue S.W.,  Calgary,  Alberta T2P 3H7,
telephone  (403)  261-8810.  For the  purpose of the  Province  of Quebec,  this
simplified  prospectus  contains  information  to be completed by consulting the
permanent  information record. A copy of the permanent information record may be
obtained  from the Vice  President,  Finance  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  of
Advantage at the above-mentioned address and telephone number.
The  following  documents  of the  Trust,  filed  with  the  various  securities
commissions or similar  authorities in the provinces of Canada, are specifically
incorporated  by  reference  into and form an  integral  part of this short form
prospectus:
1.    the Trust's  Renewal  Annual  Information  Form (the "AIF")  dated May 12,
      2004;
2.    the audited comparative consolidated financial statements of the Trust for
      the years ended  December 31, 2003 and 2002,  together  with the report of
      the auditors' thereon;
3.    management's  discussion  and  analysis  of  Advantage  for the year ended
      December 31, 2003;
4.    the  information  circular - proxy  statement of the Trust dated April 16,
      2004 relating to the annual and special  meeting of holders of Trust Units
      held on May 26, 2004 (excluding  those portions thereof which appear under
      the headings "Performance Chart" and "Corporate Governance"); and
5.    the unaudited interim comparative consolidated financial statements of the
      Trust and management's  discussion and analysis of the financial condition
      and  operations of the Trust as at and for the three and six month periods
      ended June 30, 2004 and 2003.
Any  material  change  reports  (excluding  confidential  reports),  comparative
interim financial statements and information circulars (excluding those portions
that are not  required  pursuant to National  Instrument  44-101 of the Canadian
Securities  Administrators  to be incorporated by reference herein) filed by the
Trust with the securities commissions or similar authorities in the provinces of
Canada  subsequent  to the date of this short form  prospectus  and prior to the
termination of this distribution shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference
in this short form prospectus.
Any statement contained in a document  incorporated or deemed to be incorporated
by  reference  herein  shall be  deemed to be  modified  or  superseded  for the
purposes of this short form prospectus to the extent that a statement  contained
herein or in any other  subsequently  filed document which also is, or is deemed
to be,  incorporated by reference  herein modifies or supersedes such statement.
The modifying or  superseding  statement  need not state that it has modified or
superseded a prior  statement or include any other  information set forth in the
document  that  it  modifies  or  supersedes.  The  making  of  a  modifying  or
superseding statement shall not be deemed an admission for any purposes that the
modified or superseded statement, when made, constituted a misrepresentation, an
untrue statement of a material fact or an omission to state a material fact that
is required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading
in light of the circumstances in which it was made. Any statement so modified or
superseded  shall  not be  deemed,  except  as so  modified  or  superseded,  to
constitute a part of this short form prospectus.
<PAGE>
15
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
Advantage Energy Income Fund,  Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd. and Advantage Investment
Management Ltd.
Advantage   Energy  Income  Fund  is  an  entity  that  provides   monthly  cash
distributions  to its  Unitholders.  Advantage was created under the laws of the
Province of Alberta  pursuant to the Trust  Indenture.  It is, for  Canadian tax
purposes,  an  open-ended  mutual  fund trust and is  categorized  as a "natural
resource  issuer" for the  purposes of Canadian  securities  laws.  The Trust is
administered by the Trustee. The beneficiaries of the Trust are the Unitholders.
AOG is an oil and natural  gas  exploitation  and  development  company  that is
wholly-owned  by the Trust.  It was originally  incorporated  in 1979 as Westrex
Energy Corp. ("Westrex").  Through a plan of arrangement under the ABCA, Westrex
merged with Search  Energy Inc. on December  31,  1996,  and changed its name to
Search Energy Corp. ("Search") on January 2, 1997.
Effective  May 24,  2001,  all of the issued and  outstanding  common  shares of
Search were  acquired by 925212  Alberta Ltd.  ("AcquisitionCo"),  a corporation
wholly-owned by the Trust.  Search and  AcquisitionCo  were then amalgamated and
continued as "Search Energy Corp.". On July 26, 2001, Search acquired all of the
shares of Due West Resources Inc. ("Due West"). Effective August 1, 2001, Search
and Due West were amalgamated and continued as "Search Energy Corp.".  Effective
January 1, 2002,  Search  acquired a number of natural  gas  properties  located
primarily in southern Alberta formerly  administered by Gascan Resources Ltd. On
June 26, 2002,  Search  changed its name to Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd. On November
18, 2002, AOG acquired all of the issued and outstanding  shares of Best Pacific
Resources  Ltd.  On  December  2, 2003,  AOG  acquired  MarkWest.  MarkWest  was
amalgamated with AOG on December 31, 2003.
In accordance  with the Management  Agreement,  the Manager has agreed to act as
manager of the Trust and AOG. The Manager is a  Canadian-owned  energy  advisory
management  corporation,  incorporated  on  March  19,  2001,  pursuant  to  the
provisions of the ABCA.
The head  office  of the  Trust  and the  Manager  and the head  office  and the
registered  office of AOG is  located  at Suite  3100,  150 - 6th  Avenue  S.W.,
Calgary,  Alberta,  T2P 3Y6. The registered  office of the Manager is located at
Suite 3700, 400 - 3rd Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 4H2.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Advantage Energy Income Fund
The  principal  undertaking  of the  Trust is to  indirectly  acquire  and hold,
through its wholly-owned subsidiary, AOG, interests in petroleum and natural gas
properties and assets related thereto.  The Trust's primary assets are currently
the common shares of AOG, the Royalty,  the Notes, the 10 3/8% Notes, the 9 3/8%
Notes and the 8.50% Notes.
In accordance  with the terms of the Trust  Indenture,  the Trust will make cash
distributions  to Unitholders of the interest income earned from the Notes,  the
10 3/8% Notes, the 9 3/8% Notes,  the 8.50% Notes,  royalty income earned on the
Royalty,  dividends  (if any)  received  on, and  amounts,  if any,  received on
redemption of, AOG's common shares,  non-voting shares and preferred shares, and
income and distributions  received from any Permitted Investments after expenses
and  capital  expenditures,  any cash  redemptions  of Trust  Units,  and  other
expenditures.
Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd.
AOG  is  actively  engaged  in  the  business  of  oil  and  gas   exploitation,
development,  acquisition  and  production in the Provinces of Alberta,  British
Columbia and Saskatchewan.
Advantage Investment Management Ltd.
Pursuant to the Management  Agreement,  the Manager has agreed to act as manager
of the Trust and AOG.  The board of directors of AOG has retained the Manager to
provide comprehensive management services and has
<PAGE>
16
delegated certain authority to the Manager to assist in the  administration  and
regulation  of the  day-to-day  operations  of the Trust  and AOG and  assist in
executive decisions which conform to the general policies and general principles
previously established by the board of directors of AOG. The Manager is entitled
to  designate  two  directors  to serve on the board of  directors  of AOG.  The
Manager also provides  executive officers to AOG, subject to the approval of the
board of directors of AOG.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Proposed Acquisition
Overview
On August 24, 2004,  AOG entered into the  Acquisition  Agreement  with Anadarko
providing for the  acquisition of the Assets for a purchase price (the "Purchase
Price") of approximately  $186,000,000 (subject to adjustment).  AOG has paid an
$18,600,000  deposit (the "Deposit") to Anadarko in connection with the proposed
acquisition.  The  Acquisition  is  expected  to close on or before the later of
September 30, 2004 and two Business Days  following  receipt of approvals  under
the Competition Act (Canada) or such other date as Anadarko and AOG may agree in
writing.  The  acquisition  will have an effective  date of July 1, 2004. AOG is
currently  conducting  a title and an  environmental  review in  respect  of the
Assets.
Concurrently  with the announcement of the  Acquisition,  the Trust announced an
increase  in  the  distributions   payable  on  the  Trust  Units.  See  "Recent
Developments - Distribution Announcement".
Assets
The  Assets  consist  of oil,  natural  gas and NGL  assets  located  in central
Alberta,  southern Alberta and southeast  Saskatchewan with production  weighted
approximately  49% light oil and NGLs,  40%  natural  gas and 11% heavy oil (23o
API), which are currently producing  approximately 6,250 boe/d, before deduction
of royalties owed to others (comprised of approximately  15,500 mcf/d of natural
gas,  3,138  bbl/d  of oil and 529  bbl/d  of  NGLs).  Approximately  60% of the
production  from the  properties  is  currently  operated by Anadarko  with nine
properties  representing  approximately 87% of current  production.  The Manager
believes that the Assets offer numerous low risk infill and development drilling
locations and optimization opportunities to enhance production and Reserves.
Approximately  8.5% of the  current  production  from the  Assets is  subject to
rights of first refusal. The Acquisition Agreement provides for an adjustment to
the Purchase Price to the extent that such rights of first refusal are exercised
prior to the closing of the  Acquisition.  Any excess funds  resulting  from the
exercise of rights of first refusal will be used to reduce bank indebtedness.
The Sproule  Anadarko Report assigned  approximately  13.9 million boe of Proved
and Probable Reserves to the Assets effective as at July 1, 2004.
Included in the Assets are approximately 80,000 net acres of undeveloped land at
an average 53%  working  interest  as well as a licensed  copy of  approximately
1,626 kilometres of 2D seismic data and 407 square kilometres of 3D seismic data
to assist the Trust in ongoing identification and evaluation of upside potential
associated with the Assets.
For more detail regarding the Assets,  see  "Information  Concerning the Assets"
and "Effect of the  Acquisition on the Trust" for additional  information on the
Assets.
Closing Conditions, Deposit and Liability Arrangements
Conditions to closing of the Acquisition under the Acquisition Agreement include
the following: the continued accuracy of representations and warranties; receipt
of customary  approvals under the  Competition Act (Canada);  and no substantial
physical  damage of the Assets  having  occurred  prior to closing  which would,
after deducting amounts Anadarko has agreed to pay and any insurance proceeds in
respect of such damages,  adversely  affect the value of the Assets by more than
$2,000,000.  In accordance with the terms of the Acquisition  Agreement,  if the
Acquisition is
<PAGE>
17
completed,  the  Deposit  will  be  credited  to  the  Purchase  Price.  If  the
Acquisition  does  not  occur  due to a  failure  of AOG  to  satisfy  specified
conditions to closing,  Anadarko  shall be entitled as its sole remedy to retain
the  Deposit.  If the  closing  does not occur due to a failure of  Anadarko  to
satisfy certain closing conditions, the Deposit will be returned to AOG.
In connection with the  Acquisition,  Anadarko has indemnified AOG in respect of
certain  liabilities  that are a direct result of the breach of the  Acquisition
Agreement,  including any breaches of the representations and warranties made by
Anadarko,  subject to certain  exceptions.  The aggregate  liability of Anadarko
under the  Acquisition  Agreement is limited to the Purchase  Price and Anadarko
shall not be liable to AOG unless the aggregate amount of such liability exceeds
a deductible  equal to 2% of the Purchase Price,  after which point, AOG will be
entitled to recover from  Anadarko only with respect to the amount which exceeds
such deductible.
AOG has indemnified Anadarko for certain liabilities that are a direct result of
the breach of the  Acquisition  Agreement by AOG including,  any breaches of the
representations  and  warranties  of AOG,  subject  to  certain  exceptions.  In
addition,  AOG has indemnified  Anadarko for all liabilities which relate to the
Assets which occur or accrue on or after July 1, 2004 and for all past,  present
and future environmental  liabilities,  in each case, subject to certain limited
exceptions.
Status of Unitholder Limited Liability Legislation
In May 2004 the  Alberta  legislature  passed  Bill 34,  which would enact a new
statute,  to be called the Income  Trusts  Liability  Act, to create a statutory
limitation on the liability of  unitholders of Alberta income trusts such as the
Trust.  The Bill received  Royal Assent on May 19, 2004 and came into force July
1,  2004.  The  legislation  provides  that  a  unitholder  will  not  be,  as a
beneficiary, liable for any act, default, obligation or liability of the trustee
that arises after the legislation comes into force.
Distribution Announcement
On August 24,  2004 the Trust  announced  that,  subject  to the  closing of the
Acquisition  on or before  September  30,  2004 its  distribution  to be paid on
November  15, 2004 for  Unitholders  of record on October 29, 2004 will be $0.25
per Trust Unit, being an increase of 8.7% from the previous  distribution  level
of $0.23 per Trust Unit.
Operational Update on the Nevis Property
The Trust's  Nevis  property is situated 50  kilometers  east of the City of Red
Deer Alberta. The majority of the production from this property has historically
consisted  of natural  gas from over 32 sections  of land with  varying  working
interests.  The Trust's primary  development target from the area is light crude
oil presently being produced from the Wabamun formation.  To develop the Wabamun
reservoir,  the Trust is primarily utilizing horizontal drilling. The horizontal
drilling  targets have been and will be guided by the use of existing 3D seismic
that  covers the  majority of the  property.  The Trust is also  proposing  that
portions of the  property  not  currently  covered  with 3D seismic will be shot
during the third  quarter,  with a program  covering in excess of 10 sections of
land.
During the first six months of 2004 the Trust drilled five horizontal oil wells,
one standing  horizontal  well, one vertical oil well, one vertical  natural gas
well and one dry vertical well,  all with a 100% working  interest to the Trust.
During the third quarter to date,  four  horizontal  oil wells and four vertical
oil wells have been drilled. These oil wells are expected to be on production by
the end of the third  quarter.  Two  additional  horizontal  wells are currently
drilling,  with an additional eight horizontal wells scheduled for the remainder
of the year. The Trust has acquired a 100% working  interest in an additional 16
sections of land through a successful  program of freehold  leasing,  crown land
acquisitions,  acreage swaps and a farmin  arrangement  and has extended the oil
bearing area an  additional  three miles to the  southeast  and to the southwest
from the  discovery  oil wells.  The drilling  program in the third  quarter has
satisfied the earning component of the farmin arrangement. Daily production from
the Nevis property is currently at 1,240 boe/d of which 360 boe/d was added from
three newly  drilled  horizontal  oilwells  brought into  production  during the
second quarter.
<PAGE>
18
Potential Transactions
The Trust continues to evaluate potential acquisitions of all types of petroleum
and  natural  gas  and  other  energy-related  assets  as  part  of its  ongoing
acquisition  program. The Trust is normally in the process of evaluating several
potential  acquisitions at any one time which  individually or together could be
material.  As of the date hereof,  other than as otherwise disclosed herein, the
Trust has not reached agreement on the price or terms of any potential  material
acquisitions.   The  Trust  cannot   predict   whether  any  current  or  future
opportunities  will  result  in one or  more  acquisitions  for  the  Trust.  In
addition, the Trust continues to review and evaluate opportunities to dispose of
or rationalize its non-core assets where favourable opportunities arise.
INFORMATION CONCERNING THE ASSETS
As the Trust does not currently own the Assets,  the following  information  has
been summarized from information obtained from Anadarko and other third parties.
While the Trust has no reason to believe the information is not accurate,  there
can be no assurances concerning the completeness or accuracy of such information
in respect of the Assets.
The Reserves  data for the Assets set forth below is based upon an evaluation by
Sproule with an effective date of July 1, 2004 contained in the Sproule Anadarko
Report.  The Reserves data summarizes the natural gas Reserves of the Assets and
the net present  values of future net revenue for these  Reserves using Constant
prices and costs and Forecast prices and costs.  References to production herein
indicate the relevant  party's working  interest share prior to the deduction of
royalties owned by others.  Except where otherwise indicated,  the Reserves data
conforms to the  requirements  of  National  Instrument  51-101 - Standards  of
Disclosure for Oil and Gas Activities ("NI 51-101").
All Reserves associated with the Assets are located in Canada and, specifically,
in the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan.
It should not be assumed that the estimates of future net revenues  presented in
the tables below  represent the fair market value of the  Reserves.  There is no
assurance  that the Constant or Forecast  prices and costs or other  assumptions
will be attained and variances could be material.
Reserves Data (Forecast Prices and Costs)
The following  tables provide  Reserves data and future net revenues  associated
with the Assets based on the Sproule  Anadarko  Report using Forecast prices and
costs.
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves
                  and Net Present Values of Future Net Revenue
                               as of July 1, 2004
Forecast Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                          
Reserves
                             
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------
                              Light and Medium                                  
Natural Gas
                                    Oil              Heavy Oil           Natural
Gas           Liquids               Boe
                             -----------------   -----------------   
-------------------   ---------------   -------------------
                              Gross      Net      Gross       Net      Gross    
Net      Gross     Net      Gross       Net
     Reserves Category        (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mmcf)    
(mmcf)    (mbbl)   (mbbl)    (mboe)     (mboe)
--------------------------   -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>        
<C>        <C>      <C>      <C>        <C>
Proved
   Developed Producing       3,757.8   3,110.3   1,254.6   1,149.0   16,424.2   
11,741.2    513.6    369.2    8,263.4    6,585.3
   Developed Non-Producing      45.6      42.4         -         -    1,262.0   
1,005.3     30.7     23.5      286.6      233.4
   Undeveloped                 641.9     593.1         -         -      145.3   
132.6      7.6      7.5      673.7      622.8
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
Total Proved                 4,445.3   3,745.8   1,254.6   1,149.0   17,831.6   
12,879.0    552.0    400.2    9,223.8    7,441.5
Probable                     2,725.8   2,366.6     261.4     237.8    8,517.2   
6,082.4    251.6    176.0    4,658.3    3,794.1
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
Total Proved Plus Probable   7,171.1   6,112.4   1,515.9   1,386.7   26,348.8   
18,961.5    803.6    576.2   13,882.1   11,235.6
                             =======   =======   =======   =======   ========   
========   ======   ======   ========   ========
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
19
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                          Net Present Values of 
Future Net Revenue(1)
                             
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------
                                Before Income Taxes Discounted at (%/year)      
After Income Taxes Discounted at (%/year)
                             -----------------------------------------------   
------------------------------------------------
                                0         5         10        15        20      
0         5         10        15        20
     Reserves Category         (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)     
(m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)
--------------------------   -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       
<C>        <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
Proved
   Developed Producing       148,447   126,868   112,172   101,382    93,042    
148,447   126,868   112,172   101,382    93,042
   Developed Non-Producing     5,289     4,646     4,134     3,717     3,370    
5,289     4,646     4,134     3,717     3,370
   Undeveloped                 9,506     7,912     6,644     5,610     4,751    
9,506     7,912     6,644     5,610     4,751
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
Total Proved                 163,242   139,299   122,740   110,446   100,867    
163,242   139,299   122,740   110,446   100,867
Probable                      83,422    59,541    45,762    36,922    30,808    
83,422    59,541    45,762    36,922    30,808
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
Total Proved Plus Probable   246,665   198,840   168,502   147,367   131,676    
246,665   198,840   168,502   147,367   131,676
                             =======   =======   =======   =======   =======   
========   =======   =======   =======   =======
</TABLE>
Note:
(1) The numbers shown are as represented in the Sproule Anadarko Report.  Slight
    differences may be due to rounding.
Total Future Net Revenue
(Undiscounted)
                               as of July 1, 2004
Forecast Prices and Costs(1)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                
Future Net
                                                                        Well    
Revenue                Future Net
    Reserves                               Operating   Development   Abandonment
Before      Income   Revenue After
    Category         Revenue   Royalties     Costs        Costs         Costs   
Income Taxes    Taxes    Income Taxes
------------------   -------   ---------   ---------   -----------   -----------
------------   ------   -------------
                       (m$)      (m$)        (m$)         (m$)          (m$)    
(m$)        (m$)         (m$)
<S>                  <C>       <C>         <C>         <C>           <C>        
<C>            <C>      <C>
Proved Reserves      362,300    72,077      115,000      10,598           -     
163,200        -        163,200
Proved Plus
Probable Reserves    545,900    104,800     176,300      14,999           -     
246,700        -        246,700
</TABLE>
Note:
(1) The numbers shown are as represented in the Sproule Anadarko Report.  Slight
    differences may be due to rounding.
Future Net Revenue
                               by Production Group
                               as of July 1, 2004
Forecast Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                
Future Net Revenue Before
                                                                                
Income Taxes
                                                                                
(discounted at 10%/year)
      Reserves Category                                     Production Group    
(m$)
-----------------------------  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------  
--------------------------
<S>                            <C>                                              
<C>
Proved Reserves                Light and Medium Crude Oil (including solution 
gas and other by-products)            53,387
                               Heavy Oil (including solution gas and other by-
products)                              7,441
                               Natural Gas (including  by-products  but 
excluding  solution gas from oil
                               wells)                                           
61,912
Proved Plus Probable Reserves  Light and Medium Crude Oil (including solution 
gas and other by-products)            75,248
                               Heavy Oil (including solution gas and other by-
products)                              9,354
                               Natural Gas (including  by-products  but 
excluding  solution gas from oil
                               wells)                                           
83,899
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
20
Reserves Data (Constant Prices and Costs)
The following  tables provide Reserves data and future net revenue of the Assets
based on the Sproule Anadarko Report using Constant prices and costs.
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves
                  and Net Present Values of Future Net Revenue
                               as of July 1, 2004
Constant Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                          
Reserves
                             
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------
                              Light and Medium                                  
Natural Gas
                                    Oil              Heavy Oil           Natural
Gas           Liquids               Boe
                             -----------------   -----------------   
-------------------   ---------------   -------------------
     Reserves Category        Gross      Net      Gross      Net      Gross     
Net      Gross     Net      Gross       Net
--------------------------   -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
                              (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mbbl)    (mmcf)    
(mmcf)    (mbbl)   (mbbl)    (mboe)     (mboe)
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>        
<C>        <C>      <C>      <C>        <C>
Proved
  Developed Producing        3,879.6   3,187.6   1,281.4   1,168.8   17,271.0   
12,310.4    522.4    373.5    8,561.9    6,781.7
  Developed Non-Producing       47.2      43.7         -         -    1,308.6   
1,047.6     31.3     24.0      296.6      242.3
  Undeveloped                  655.7     604.1         -         -      159.6   
145.9      7.7      7.6      690.1      636.0
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
Total Proved                 4,582.5   3,835.4   1,281.4   1,168.8   18,739.1   
13,503.9    561.5    405.1    9,548.6      7,660
Probable                     2,939.3   2,526.2     285.2     258.1    9,107.0   
6,483.9    258.4    179.3    5,000.7    4,044.3
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   --------   
--------   ------   ------   --------   --------
Total Proved Plus Probable   7,521.8   6,361.6   1,566.6   1,426.9   27,846.1   
19,987.8    819.9    584.5   14,549.3   11,704.3
=======   =======   =======   =======   ========   
========   ======   ======   ========   ========
</TABLE>
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                          Net Present Values of 
Future Net Revenue
                             
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------
                                Before Income Taxes Discounted at (%/year)      
After Income Taxes Discounted at (%/year)
                             -----------------------------------------------   
------------------------------------------------
Reserves Category               0         5         10        15        20      
0          5         10        15        20
--------------------------   -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
                               (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)     
(m$)       (m$)      (m$)      (m$)      (m$)
<S>                          <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>       
<C>        <C>       <C>       <C>       <C>
Proved
 Developed Producing         186,326   155,258   134,739   120,010   108,832    
186,326   155,258   134,739   120,010   108,832
 Developed Non-Producing       7,013     6,010     5,249     4,652     4,172    
7,013     6,010     5,249     4,652     4,172
 Undeveloped                  12,904    10,723     9,043     7,699     6,598    
12,904    10,723     9,043     7,699     6,598
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
Total Proved                 206,243   171,809   148,739   132,002   119,203    
206,243   171,809   148,739   132,002   119,203
Probable                     110,566    77,535    58,641    46,649    38,450    
110,566    77,535    58,641    46,649    38,450
                             -------   -------   -------   -------   -------   
--------   -------   -------   -------   -------
Total Proved Plus Probable   316,810   249,344   207,380   178,651   157,653    
316,810   249,344   207,380   178,651   157,653
                             =======   =======   =======   =======   =======   
========   =======   =======   =======   =======
</TABLE>
Total Future Net Revenue
                                 (Undiscounted)
                               as of July 1, 2004
Constant Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                
Future Net              Future Net
                                                                                
Revenue                 Revenue
                                                                        Well    
Before                   After
    Reserves                               Operating   Development   Abandonment
Income     Income       Income
    Category         Revenue   Royalties     Costs        Costs         Costs   
Taxes      Taxes        Taxes
------------------   -------   ---------   ---------   -----------   -----------
----------   ------     ----------
                       (m$)       (m$)        (m$)         (m$)         (m$)    
(m$)       (m$)         (m$)
<S>                  <C>       <C>         <C>         <C>           <C>        
<C>          <C>        <C>
Proved Reserves      424,000     90,307     115,000       10,560          -     
206,200       -         206,200
Proved Plus          650,300    135,300     179,000       14,946          -     
316,800       -         316,800
Probable Reserves
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
21
Future Net Revenue
                               by Production Group
                               as of July 1, 2004
Constant Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                                
Future Net Revenue
                                                                                
Before Income Taxes
                                                                                
(discounted at
                                                                                
10%/year)
Reserves Category                                  Production Group             
(m$)
-----------------   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------   
-------------------
<S>                                                                             
<C>
Proved Reserves     Light and Medium Crude Oil (including solution gas and other
by-products)             65,384
                    Heavy Oil (including solution gas and other by-products)    
10,762
                    Natural Gas (including by-products but excluding solution 
gas from oil wells)         72,594
Proved Plus         Light and Medium Crude Oil (including solution gas and other
by-products)             94,467
Probable Reserves   Heavy Oil (including solution gas and other by-products)    
13,373
                    Natural Gas (including by-products but excluding solution 
gas from oil wells)         99,539
</TABLE>
Pricing Assumptions
The  following  tables set forth the  benchmark  reference  prices  and  pricing
assumptions  used in preparing the Reserves data for the Assets and, in the case
of Forecast prices and costs, the inflation rate assumptions.
Summary of Pricing Assumptions
                               as of July 1, 2004
Constant Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                        Oil
                ---------------------------------------------------
                             Edmonton     Hardisty       Cromer
                   WTI       Par Price      Heavy        Medium       Natural 
Gas
                 Cushing    40(degrees)  12(degrees)  29.3(degrees)    AECO Gas 
Edmonton    Edmonton    Edmonton    Exchange
                Oklahoma        API          API           API          Price   
Propane     Butane     Pentanes      Rate
-------------   ---------   -----------  -----------  -------------  
------------  ----------  ----------  ----------  ----------
                ($US/bbl)   ($Cdn/bbl)    ($Cdn/bbl)   ($Cdn/bbl)    
($Cdn/mmbtu)  ($Cdn/bbl)  ($Cdn/bbl)  ($Cdn/bbl)  ($US/$Cdn)
<S>             <C>         <C>          <C>          <C>            <C>        
<C>         <C>         <C>         <C>
2004 (6 mths)     38.49        49.81        32.07         44.31          7.64   
31.18        37.13      51.02        0.75
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
22
Summary of Pricing and Inflation Rate Assumptions
                               as of July 1, 2004
Forecast Prices and Costs
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                      Oil
         -------------------------------------------------------------
                       Edmonton         Hardisty           Cromer      Natural 
Gas
                       Par Price          Heavy            Medium       AECO Gas
Edmonton  Inflation
   Year  WTI Nymex  40(degrees) API  12(degrees) API 29.3(degrees) API   Price  
Henry Hub     Butane     Rates   Exchange Rate
-------- ---------  ---------------  --------------- ----------------- 
------------  -----------  ---------- --------- -------------
          $US/bbl)    ($Cdn/bbl)       ($Cdn/bbl)       ($Cdn/bbl)      
($Cdn/mmbtu)  ($US/mmbtu) ($Cdn/bbl)   %/Year    ($US/$Cdn)
<S>      <C>        <C>              <C>             <C>               <C>      
<C>          <C>        <C>       <C>
Forecast
2004
(6 mths)   37.17        49.76            39.28            47.29           6.93  
6.52        39.53       1.5        0.750
2005       35.08        46.88            36.24            44.37           6.85  
6.28        36.85       1.5        0.750
2006       33.42        44.59            33.79            42.04           6.27  
5.78        34.71       1.5        0.750
2007       32.42        43.51            32.47            40.90           5.80  
5.36        33.62       1.5        0.750
2008       31.83        42.68            31.48            40.04           5.50  
5.13        32.79       1.5        0.750
2009       31.55        42.36            31.13            39.88           5.40  
5.02        32.58       1.5        0.750
2010       31.57        42.05            30.74            39.56           5.27  
4.95        32.26       1.5        0.750
2011       31.92        42.82            31.25            40.27           5.24  
4.91        32.83       1.5        0.750
2012       33.75        45.35            33.60            42.75           5.21  
4.89        35.01       1.5        0.750
2013       33.54        45.35            33.34            42.70           5.27  
4.92        34.88       1.5        0.750
2014       34.69        46.60            34.51            43.93           5.31  
4.99        35.97       1.5        0.750
2016+     +1.5%/yr     +1.5%/yr         +1.5%/yr         +1.5%/yr       +1.5%/yr
+1.5%/yr     +1.5%/yr     1.5        0.750
</TABLE>
Oil and Gas Properties
The following is a description  of the principal oil and natural gas  properties
to be acquired  by AOG  pursuant to the  Acquisition  Agreement.  The Assets are
focused in central  Alberta,  southern Alberta and southeast  Saskatchewan.  The
term "net",  when used to describe  Anadarko's  share of  production,  means the
aggregate of Anadarko's  working  interest  share before  deduction of royalties
owned by others.
Central Alberta
Brazeau River
The Brazeau River property is located approximately 30 miles west of the town of
Drayton Valley,  Alberta.  The property  produces sour light oil and natural gas
primarily  from  Devonian  aged  Nisku  pinnacle  reefs.  The  majority  of  the
production is from a non-operated  50% working  interest in the Nisku C, D and E
pools and a 17% working  interest in the Nisku A unit. Sweet natural gas is also
produced  from  eight  natural  gas  wells  out of  reservoirs  in either of the
Cretaceous aged Cardium,  Viking or Lower Mannville  Formations.  Major facility
interests  include a 25.7%  working  interest in the West Pembina Sour Gas Plant
and a 31.6% working  interest in the Brazeau River Gas Plant. The net production
from the  property  at July 1, 2004 was 1,222  boe/d  consisting  of 5,693 mcf/d
natural  gas,  63 bbl/d NGLs and 211 bbl/d of crude oil.  The  Sproule  Anadarko
Report assigned  Proved plus Probable  Reserves of 1,884 mboe to the property as
at July 1, 2004.
Open Lake
The Open Lake  property is located  approximately  20 miles north of the town of
Rocky Mountain House, Alberta. Anadarko operates and has a 100% working interest
in the Open Lake property.  Oil and natural gas production from this property is
multi-zoned from various Cretaceous and Jurassic  reservoirs  including the Rock
Creek,  Ellerslie,  Ostracod,  Viking,  Second  White  Specks  and  Belly  River
Formations.  The net production  from the property at July 1, 2004 was 716 boe/d
consisting  of 2,297 mcf/d  natural  gas,  135 bbl/d NGLs and 199 bbl/d of crude
oil. The Sproule Anadarko Report assigned Proved plus Probable Reserves of 1,342
mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
<PAGE>
23
Carstairs
The  Carstairs  property  is  situated in the town of  Carstairs,  Alberta.  The
property  produces from carbonates in the  Mississippian  aged Elkton Formation.
The property is operated by Anadarko  with a 70.8% (oil) and 62.7% (gas) working
interest in the East Crossfield  Elkton G Pool Unit #1. A 65.9% working interest
is held in the oil processing facility.  The net production from the property at
July 1, 2004 was  approximately 579 boe/d consisting of 2,533 mcf/d natural gas,
91 bbl/d NGLs and 63 bbl/d oil.  The  Sproule  Anadarko  Report  assigned  total
Proved plus Probable Reserves of 970 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Gull Lake
The Gull Lake property consists of production from a number of sections north of
the City of Red Deer,  Alberta.  The net  production  was 24 boe/d as of July 1,
2004 from  properties  with  reserves  assigned.  The  Sproule  Anadarko  Report
assigned total Proved plus Probable  reserves of 38 mboe. One newly drilled well
at a 50%  non-operated  working interest began producing late in May 2004. It is
currently  producing  1.3  mmcf/d of  natural  gas net to  Anadarko.  No reserve
assignments have been made to this well due to the early stage of production.
Fir
The Fir  property is located  approximately  40 miles  northwest  of the town of
Edson,  Alberta. This property is comprised of two wells with an average working
interest of 71%  producing  co-mingled  natural gas from  Triassic  aged Montney
Formations.  The property is operated by Anadarko with a 43.6% working  interest
in the compressor facility.  The net natural gas production from the property at
July 1, 2004 was 2,072 mcf/d.  The Anadarko Sproule Report assigned total Proved
plus Probable Reserves of 684 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Windfall
Windfall  is an area  consisting  of  certain  blocks  of  land  east of the Fir
property,  located  approximately 35 miles north of the town of Edson,  Alberta.
Light oil and natural gas is produced from a wide range of geological  intervals
with interests ranging from overriding  royalties to 100% working interest.  The
majority of the production is operated and originates  from the Cretaceous  aged
Gething  Formation.  Anadarko has a 100% working  interest in two gas compressor
facilities and a 50% working interest in a 2 phase separator. The net production
from the property at July 1, 2004 was 163 boe/d  consisting of 814 mcf/d natural
gas,  22  bbl/d of NGLs and 6 bbl/d  crude  oil.  The  Sproule  Anadarko  Report
assigned  total Proved plus Probable  Reserves of 437 mboe to the property as at
July 1, 2004.
Southern Alberta
Retlaw
The Retlaw  property  is  located  approximately  30 miles  north of the City of
Lethbridge.  It is a medium  gravity crude oil property  which is operated at an
average 40% working interest.  Production occurs from Cretaceous aged Glauconite
channels  defined  with 3D seismic.  There is a 50% working  interest in the oil
battery which includes water injection facilities. The net production as of July
1, 2004 is 367 boe/d  consisting  of 514 mcf/d of natural  gas and 282 bbls/d of
crude oil. The Sproule  Anadarko  Report  assigned  total  Proved plus  Probable
Reserves of 506 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Lost Lake
The Lost Lake  property is located  approximately  45 miles north of the City of
Lethbridge.  It is a heavy gravity  crude oil property  which as of July 1, 2004
had net  production  of 358 boe/d  consisting  of 117 mcf/d  natural gas and 338
bbls/d crude oil. Oil  production  occurs  primarily  from the  Cretaceous  aged
Glauconite  channels.  The working  interest in the property is 76% and 87.5% in
the oil battery  and water  injection  facility.  The  Sproule  Anadarko  Report
assigned Proved plus Probable Reserves of 601 mboe to the property as at July 1,
2004.
<PAGE>
24
Little Bow
The Little Bow property is located west of the Lost Lake property,  north of the
City of  Lethbridge.  The property  produces heavy gravity crude oil which as of
July 1, 2004 had net production of 265 boe/d  consisting of 185 mcf/d of natural
gas and 234 bbls/d of crude oil. It produces  from  Cretaceous  aged  Glauconite
channels.  The working  interest  is  operated  by  Anadarko at 63%.  Anadarko's
interest  in the oil  treating  and water  injection  facilities  is 68.1%.  The
Sproule  Anadarko Report  assigned total Proved plus Probable  Reserves of 1,226
mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Southeastern Saskatchewan
Midale
The Midale property is located north of the town of Midale,  Saskatchewan.  This
property produces primarily from the Ordovician aged Red River Formation.  Light
oil production occurs from more than a dozen pools within reservoirs which occur
as carbonate buildups in this formation.  Anadarko operates the property and has
an average working  interest of 76% in the area. A 100% working interest is held
in the oil battery. The net production from the property at July 1, 2004 was 602
bbl/d of crude oil.  The Sproule  Anadarko  Report  assigned  total  Proved plus
Probable Reserves of 1,145 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Steelman
The Steelman property is located south of the town of Browning, Saskatchewan and
has an average  working  interest  of 85%  consisting  of light oil  production.
Production  is taken from  Ordovician  aged Red River  Formation,  Devonian aged
Winnipegosis Formation and Mississippian aged Frobisher Formation.  Anadarko has
a 100% working  interest in the oil battery.  The net production at July 1, 2004
was 492 bbls/d of crude oil. The Sproule  Anadarko  Report assigned total Proved
plus Probable Reserves of 1,382 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Weyburn
The Weyburn property is located southeast of the town of Weyburn,  Saskatchewan.
This property consists of an extensive land base,  including  operated interests
adjacent to the CO2  miscible  flood as well as operated  interests  with active
area  partners.  Net  production  consisting  of 236  bbls/d of light  crude oil
originates primarily from the Mississippian aged Frobisher  Formation.  Anadarko
has a 100% working  interest in the sour battery.  The Sproule  Anadarko  Report
assigned  total Proved plus  Probable  Reserve of 528 mboe to the property as at
July 1, 2004.
Froude
The  Froude  property  is  located  approximately  two  miles  west  of  Froude,
Saskatchewan.  The operated  production  at an average  working  interest of 93%
occurs from the Ordovician Red River,  Devonian  Winnipegosis and  Mississippian
Frobisher formations.  Net production as of July 1, 2004 was 203 bbls/d of light
crude oil. Facilities are 100% owned. The Sproule Anadarko Report assigned total
Proved plus Probable Reserves of 669 mboe to the property as at July 1, 2004.
Undeveloped Reserves
The Proved  Undeveloped  Reserves by product type,  attributed to the Assets are
641.9 mbbl of light/medium  crude oil, 145.3 mmcf of natural gas and 7.6 mbbl of
NGL and the  Probable  Undeveloped  Reserves by product type  attributed  to the
Assets are 759.1 mmbl of  light/medium  crude oil and 126.6 mmcf of natural gas,
in each case as  estimated  in the  Sproule  Anadarko  Report,  based on company
interest Reserves and based on Forecast prices and costs.
AOG plans to continue pursuing  development  opportunities on the Assets such as
drilling,   completions,  and  facilities  upgrades  in  order  to  move  Proved
Undeveloped and Probable Reserves into Proved Developed Producing  Reserves.  In
instances  where land  rights are  expected to expire  within one year,  AOG may
engage in farmout
<PAGE>
25
arrangements,  which would likely  eliminate the  potential  expiry and possibly
result  in  some  Proved  Undeveloped  and  Probable  Reserves  becoming  Proved
Developed Producing Reserves.
Significant Factors and Uncertainties
The  process  of  evaluating   Reserves  is  inherently   complex.  It  requires
significant judgements and decisions based on available geological, geophysical,
engineering  and economic  data.  These  estimates may change  substantially  as
additional data from ongoing development  activities and production  performance
becomes  available and as economic  conditions  impacting oil and gas prices and
costs  change.  The  Reserve  estimates  contained  herein  are based on current
production  forecasts,  prices and economic  conditions.  AOG's Reserves and the
Reserves  set  forth in the  Sproule  Anadarko  Report  have been  evaluated  by
Sproule, an independent  engineering firm. These factors and assumptions include
among others:  (i)  historical  production in the area compared with  production
rates from analogous  producing  areas;  (ii) initial  production  rates;  (iii)
production  decline rates;  (iv) ultimate  recovery of Reserves;  (v) success of
future development activities;  (vi) marketability of production;  (vii) effects
of government  regulations;  and (viii) other government levies imposed over the
life of the Reserves.
As circumstances change and additional data becomes available, Reserve estimates
also change.  Estimates are reviewed and revised,  either upward or downward, as
warranted by the new information. Revisions are often required due to changes in
well performance,  prices,  economic  conditions and governmental  restrictions.
Revisions  to Reserve  estimates  can arise from  changes  in  year-end  prices,
reservoir performance and geologic conditions or production. These revisions can
be either positive or negative.
Future Development Costs
The following table sets forth  development  costs deducted in the estimation of
the future net revenue attributable to the Assets in the Sproule Anadarko Report
in the Reserve categories noted below.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                     Forecast Prices and Costs (m$)            Constant Prices 
and Costs (m$)
             -----------------------------------------------   
------------------------------
Year         Proved Reserves   Proved Plus Probable Reserves           Proved 
Reserves
             ---------------   -----------------------------   
------------------------------
               0%       10%          0%             10%              0%         
10%
             ------   ------   --------------   ------------   ---------------  
------------
<S>          <C>      <C>      <C>              <C>            <C>              
<C>
2004         10,340   10,098       13,662          13,398          10,340       
10,098
2005            147      134        1,227           1,118             145
132
2006              -        -            -               -               -       
-
2007              -        -            -               -               -       
-
2008              -        -            -               -               -       
-
Thereafter      111       20          111              20              75       
14
             ------   ------   --------------   ------------   ---------------  
------------
Total        10,598   10,252       14,999          14,536          10,560       
10,244
</TABLE>
The future development costs are capital expenditures required in the future for
the Assets to convert  Proved  Undeveloped  Reserves and Probable  Reserves into
Proved  Developed  Producing  Reserves.  AOG anticipates  using a combination of
internally  generated cash flow, debt and equity  financing to fund these future
development costs. Based on the commodity price and cost assumptions adopted for
both the Constant  prices and costs case and the Forecast prices and costs case,
all the expenditures  included in the future  development  costs are economic as
they enhance the net present values of the Proved Developed Reserves.
<PAGE>
26
Oil and Gas Wells
The following table sets forth the number and status of wells in which AOG will
acquire a working interest pursuant to the Acquisition.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                             Oil Wells                            Natural Gas 
Wells
               ------------------------------------      
-----------------------------------
                   Producing       Non-Producing(1)         Producing       Non-
Producing(1)
               -----------------   ----------------      ----------------   
----------------
                Gross(2)    Net    Gross        Net       Gross(2)    Net   
Gross        Net
               ---------   -----   -----       ----      ---------   ----   
-----       ----
<S>            <C>         <C>     <C>         <C>       <C>         <C>    <C> 
<C>
Alberta              155    88.2       6        4.7             88   21.2       
5        4.3
Saskatchewan          97    78.4      16       14.5              -      -       
-          -
               ---------   -----   -----       ----      ---------   ----   
-----       ----
Total                252   166.6      22       19.2             88   21.2       
5        4.3
               =========   =====   =====       ====      =========   ====   
=====       ====
</TABLE>
Notes:
(1) Non-Producing  wells means wells which have  encountered  and are capable of
producing  crude oil or natural gas but which are not  producing due to lack
    of available transportation facilities, available markets or other reasons.
(2) Gross wells include unit wells.
Properties with No Attributed Reserves
The following table sets out for the Assets the total land holdings of Proved
and unproved properties to be acquired by AOG. Approximately 18,213 net acres
will expire by August 2005.
Unproved
               Developed (Acres)      Properties (Acres)         Total (Acres)
               -----------------      ------------------      ------------------
                Gross       Net        Gross        Net        Gross        Net
               ------      -----      -------     ------      -------     ------
Alberta        12,524      9,138       85,682     34,667       98,206     43,805
Saskatchewan    1,081        832       63,667     44,168       64,448     45,000
               ------      -----      -------     ------      -------     ------
Total          13,605      9,970      149,349     78,835      162,654     88,805
               ======      =====      =======     ======      =======     ======
Costs Incurred
A total of $5.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively, in costs were incurred
in respect of the Assets for the year ended December 31, 2003 and the six months
ended June 30, 2004, as follows:
Six Months Ended            Year Ended
                               June 30, 2004           December 31, 2003
                              ----------------         -----------------
                                (unaudited)               (unaudited)
Property Acquisitions                    -                   341,635
Development Expenditures           559,527                 4,773,255
Exploration Expenditures                 -                         -
                                   -------                 ---------
Total                              559,527                 5,114,890
Exploration and Development Activities
The following  table sets forth the Gross and Net  exploratory  and  development
wells drilled on the Assets during the periods indicated.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                       Six Months Ended June 30, 2004      Year Ended December 
31, 2003
                       ------------------------------      
----------------------------
                          Gross                 Net          Gross              
Net
                          -----                 ---          -----              
---
<S>                       <C>                   <C>          <C>                
<C>
Light and Medium Oil          1                 0.4             11              
6.0
Natural Gas                   1                 0.5              -              
-
                          -----                 ---          -----              
---
Total                         2                 0.9             11
6.0
                          =====                 ===          =====              
===
</TABLE>
Production Estimates
<PAGE>
27
The following  table sets out the volume of production  estimated for the period
from July 1, 2004 to December 31, 2004 for the Assets, which is reflected in the
estimate  of  future  net  revenue  disclosed  in  the  tables  contained  under
"Information Concerning the Assets - Reserves Data".
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                   Light and
                  Medium Oil   Heavy Oil   Natural Gas   Natural Gas Liquids    
boe
                  ----------   ---------   -----------   -------------------   
-------
                   (bbls/d)     (bbls/d)     (mcf/d)           (bbls/d)        
(boe/d)
<S>               <C>          <C>         <C>           <C>                   
<C>
2004 (6 months)      3,008        652        14,012              459            
6,454
</TABLE>
Production History
The following  tables  summarize  certain  information in respect of production,
product  prices  received,  royalties  paid,  operating  expenses and  resulting
netback in respect of the Assets for the periods  indicated.  Current production
from the  Assets is  approximately  6,250  boe/d  consisting  of 15.5  mmcf/d of
natural gas, 3,138 bbls/d of crude oil and 529 bbls/d of NGLs.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                 Quarter Ended
                                          
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 2004                           
2003
                                          -----------------      
--------------------------------------
                                          June 30   Mar. 31      Dec. 31   Sept.
30   June 30   Mar. 31
                                          -------   -------      -------   
--------   -------   -------
<S>                                       <C>       <C>          <C>       <C>  
<C>       <C>
Average Daily Production
   Light and Medium Crude Oil (bbls/d)      3,054     3,396        3,540     
3,796      3,958     4,097
   Gas (mcf/d)                             14,619    15,149       15,921    
17,024     17,653    17,854
   NGL (bbls/d)                               485       551          774       
806        881       515
   Combined (boe/d)                         5,975     6,472        6,968     
7,440      7,782     7,588
Average Price Received
   Light and Medium Crude Oil ($/bbls)      44.17     40.14        34.94     
36.86      35.40     40.65
   Gas ($/mcf)                               7.16      6.90         5.72      
6.18       7.02      8.10
   NGL ($/bbls)                             38.93     36.69        24.16     
24.45      21.30     39.28
   Combined ($/boe)                         43.26     40.33        33.50     
35.61      36.35     43.67
Royalties
   Light and Medium Crude Oil ($bbls/d)      20.5%     23.0%        23.6%     
23.6%      21.8%     22.7%
   Gas (mcf/d)                               24.1%     26.2%        27.2%     
25.7%      24.8%     28.4%
   NGL (bbls/d)                              19.8%     25.7%        25.1%     
25.5%      24.4%     27.3%
   Combined (boe/d)                          21.9%     24.5%        25.1%     
24.5%      23.3%     25.5%
Operating expenses
   Combined ($/boe)                         11.44      9.04        10.55      
9.87       8.59      8.47
Netback Received
   Combined ($/boe)                         22.34     21.42        14.54     
17.00      19.30     24.09
</TABLE>
The following table indicates the average daily production from the important
fields associated with the Assets for the year ended December 31, 2003:
Crude Oil   Natural Gas     NGL       Total
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
                               (bbls/d)      (mcf/d)     (bbls/d)   (boe/d)
Central Alberta
Brazeau River                     233         6,773         161      1,523
Open Lake                         212         2,919         179        878
Carstairs                          67         2,012         153        555
Fir                                 1         1,757          49        343
Windfall                            6         1,344          16        246
Gull Lake                           1           103           4         22
Other                             133           990         191        489
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
Total Central Alberta             653        15,898         753      4,056
<PAGE>
28
Crude Oil   Natural Gas     NGL       Total
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
Southern Alberta
Retlaw                             352           392         13        430
Lost Lake                          405           210          1        441
Little Bow 4-25                    195           111          0        214
Little Bow 16-20                    67           370          1        130
Other                              207                        -        207
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
Total Southern Alberta           1,226         1,083         15      1,422
Southeast Saskatchewan
Midale                             678            57          -        688
Weyburn                            248             -          -        248
Froude                             218             -          -        218
Steelman                           605            66          -        616
Other                              218             3          -        219
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
Total Southeast Saskatchewan     1,967           126          -      1,988
                               ---------   -----------   --------   -------
Total                            3,846        17,107        768      7,465
                               =========   ===========   ========   =======
Note:
(1) Production numbers reflect total production  averaged over the course of the
    year.
EFFECT OF THE ACQUISITION ON THE TRUST
The following table sets out certain operational information for the Trust and
the Assets and certain pro forma combined operational information after giving
effect to the Acquisition.
Selected Pro Forma Combined Operational Information
Pro Forma
                                                   Trust    Assets     Combined
                                                  ------    ------    ---------
Average Daily Production (before royalties, for
the six months ended June 30, 2004)
   Crude oil and NGL (bbls/d)                      2,974     3,743      6,717
   Natural Gas (mcf/d)                            74,466    14,884     89,350
   Oil equivalent (boe/d)                         15,385     6,223     21,608
Average Daily Production(1)
(before royalties, for the year ended
December 31, 2003)
   Crude oil and NGL (bbls/d)                      2,756     4,614      7,370
   Natural gas (mcf/d)                            57,631    17,107     74,738
   Oil equivalent (boe/d)                         12,361     7,465     19,826
Proved Reserves(2)
(before royalties, as at December 31, 2003,
except the Assets which are as at July 1, 2004)
   Crude oil and NGL (mbbls)                       8,261     6,252     14,513
   Natural gas (bcf)                               184.4      17.8      202.2
   Oil equivalent (mboe)                          38,998     9,224     48,222
<PAGE>
29
Pro Forma
                                                   Trust    Assets     Combined
                                                  ------    ------    ---------
Proved plus Probable Reserves(2)
(before royalties, as at December 31, 2003,
except the Assets which are as at July 1, 2004)
   Crude oil and NGL (mbbls)                      13,697     9,491      23,188
   Natural gas (bcf)                               237.4      26.3       263.7
   Oil equivalent (mboe)                          53,271    13,882      67,153
Notes:
(1) Average daily  production for the Trust for the year ended December 31, 2003
    includes production from the properties acquired pursuant to the acquisition
    of MarkWest from the date of closing of such acquisition.
(2) Reserve  information  for the Assets is as at July 1, 2004,  using Sproule's
    July 1, 2004 price  forecast and the Trust's  Reserve  information  is as at
    December 31, 2003, using Sproule's December 31, 2003 price forecast.
Selected Pro Forma Consolidated Financial Information
Certain selected pro forma  consolidated  financial  information is set forth in
the following  tables.  Such information  should be read in conjunction with the
unaudited pro forma consolidated  financial statements of the Trust after giving
effect to the  Acquisition  as at and for the six months ended June 30, 2004 and
the year ended December 31, 2003 included in this short form prospectus.
The pro forma adjustments are based upon the assumptions  described in the notes
to the  unaudited pro forma  consolidated  financial  statements.  The pro forma
consolidated  financial statements are presented for illustrative  purposes only
and are not  necessarily  indicative of the operating or financial  results that
would  have  occurred  had  the  Acquisition  actually  occurred  at  the  times
contemplated  by the notes to the  unaudited  pro forma  consolidated  financial
statements or of the results expected in future periods.
The  information  presented  below and in the unaudited  pro forma  consolidated
financial  statements of the Trust assumes completion of the Acquisition and the
issuance of 3,500,000  Subscription  Receipts,  $75,000,000  aggregate principal
amount of 7.50% Debentures and $50,000,000  aggregate  principal amount of 7.75%
Debentures pursuant to the offering.
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                      As at and for the Six 
Months Ended June 30, 2004
                                                    
-----------------------------------------------------
                                                                                
Pro Forma
                                                          Trust(4)        
Assets(6)      Consolidated(7)
                                                    ------------------    
---------      ----------------
                                                    (stated in thousands of 
dollars, except unit amounts)
<S>                                                 <C>                   <C>   
<C>
Revenue - net(1)                                           86,887           
37,643           124,530
Net income                                                 18,734            
4,639            23,373
Funds from operations(2)                                   64,353           
24,056            88,409
Total assets                                              595,862          
183,198           779,060
Long term debt and working capital(3)                     186,380           
(5,910)          180,470
Equity                                                    288,675          
182,510           471,185
Units outstanding (thousands as at June 30, 2004)          39,952            
3,500            43,452
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
30
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                        For the Year Ended December 31, 2003
                           
--------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Pro Forma
                                             Adjustments                     Pro
Forma
                              Trust(4)     before Assets(5)   Assets(6)   
Consolidated(7)
                           -------------   ----------------   ---------   
---------------
                           (restated)(8)            (stated in thousands of 
dollars)
<S>                        <C>             <C>                <C>         <C>
Revenue - net(1)              137,584           33,172          80,058        
250,814
Net income                     44,024           10,061          13,475         
67,560
Funds from operations(2)       99,440           21,909          53,800        
175,149
</TABLE>
Notes:
(1) Revenue - net consists of gross revenue net of applicable royalties.
(2) Funds from  operations is before  changes in non-cash  working  capital.  As
    such,  it  is  not a  measure  recognized  by  Canadian  generally  accepted
    accounting  principles  ("GAAP")  and does not have a  standardized  meaning
    prescribed by GAAP. Therefore, funds from operations of the Trust may not be
    comparable to similar measures presented by other issuers, and investors are
    cautioned  that it should not be construed as an  alternative to net income,
    cash  flow  from  operating   activities  or  other  measures  of  financial
    performance calculated in accordance with GAAP.
(3) Long term debt and working capital includes bank  indebtedness,  all current
    liabilities (net of current assets) and hedging.
(4) The Trust's  financial  information for the year ended December 31, 2003 was
    obtained from the Trust's audited consolidated  financial statements for the
    year ended December 31, 2003 and as at and for the six months ended June 30,
    2004  was  obtained  from  the  Trust's  unaudited   consolidated  financial
    statements as at and for the six months ended June 30, 2004.
(5) See Note 2 to the unaudited pro forma  consolidated  financial  statement of
    operations for the year ended December 31, 2003 set forth herein.
(6) The Anadarko  properties  financial  information for the year ended December
    31, 2003 was  obtained  from the audited  schedules of revenues and expenses
    for the Assets for the year ended December 31, 2003 set forth herein and for
    the six months ended June 30, 2004 was obtained from the unaudited schedules
    of revenues  and  expenses  for the Assets for the six months ended June 30,
    2004 set forth herein,  and reflects the pro forma  adjustments  as noted in
    the Pro Forma Consolidated Financial Statements set forth herein.
(7) See the notes to the unaudited pro forma consolidated  financial  statements
    set forth herein for  assumptions and  adjustments.  The unaudited pro forma
    consolidated  financial  statements  may not be  indicative  of results that
    actually  would have  occurred  if the events  reflected  herein had been in
    effect on the dates indicated or of the results expected in future periods.
(8) Advantage's  consolidated  financial  statements for the year ended December
    31, 2003 have been  restated to reflect a change in  accounting  policy with
    respect to asset retirement obligations.  The change in policy is more fully
    described in Advantage's unaudited interim consolidated financial statements
    as at and for the three and six months ended June 30, 2004.
DESCRIPTION OF TRUST UNITS
Trust Units
An  unlimited  number of Trust Units may be created  and issued  pursuant to the
Trust  Indenture.  As at July 30, 2004,  40,080,956  Trust Units were issued and
outstanding. Each Trust Unit represents an equal fractional undivided beneficial
interest in any  distributions  from, and in any net assets of, the Trust in the
event of termination or winding up of the Trust. The beneficial interests in the
Trust are divided into  interests in two classes as follows:  (i)  described and
designated  as "Trust  Units",  which are  entitled  to the  rights,  subject to
limitations,  restrictions  and conditions set out in the Trust  Indenture;  and
(ii) described and designated as "Special  Voting Units",  which shall be issued
to a trustee  and shall be entitled to such number of votes at meetings of Trust
Unitholders  as is equal to the number of Trust Units reserved for issuance that
such Special Voting Units  represent,  such number of votes and any other rights
or  limitations  to be  prescribed by the board of directors of AOG. The Special
Voting  Units give AOG the  flexibility  to acquire  the  securities  of another
issuer in  consideration  for securities  which are ultimately  exchangeable for
Trust Units. There are currently no Special Voting Units outstanding.  All Trust
Units are of the same class with equal rights and privileges. Each Trust Unit is
transferable,   entitles   the  holder   thereof  to   participate   equally  in
distributions,  including  the  distributions  of net  income  and net  realized
capital gains of the Trust, and distributions on liquidation,  is fully paid and
non-assessable  and entitles  the holder  thereof to one vote at all meetings of
Trust Unitholders for each Trust Unit held.
<PAGE>
31
Cash Distributions
The  board of  directors  of AOG  intends  for the  Trust to make  monthly  cash
distributions.  Cash  distributions  will be made monthly to the  Unitholders of
record on the last day of each month  (unless such day is not a Business Day, in
which case the date of record shall be the next following Business Day; provided
that  December 31 shall  always be a date of record) and shall be payable on the
15th day of each month or, if such day is not a Business Day, the next following
Business Day or such other date as determined from time to time by the Trustee.
For additional  information  respecting the Trust Units,  including  information
respecting  Unitholders' limited liability,  cash distributions,  the redemption
right attached to the Trust Units,  meetings of  Unitholders,  and amendments to
the Trust Indenture,  see "Additional  Information  Respecting  Advantage Energy
Income Fund" at pages 29 through 35, inclusive, of the Trust's AIF.
EARNINGS COVERAGE
The earnings  coverage  ratios set forth below have been  prepared in accordance
with Canadian  disclosure  requirements.  These ratios have been prepared  using
financial  information  prepared in accordance with Canadian  generally accepted
accounting  principles.  The ratios and notes have been prepared for each of the
twelve month  periods  ended  December 31, 2003 and June 30, 2004,  after giving
effect to the offering of Subscription  Receipts and Debentures.  The ratios for
the twelve month  period  ended June 30, 2004 are based on  unaudited  financial
information.  Additional  information  is provided in the notes to the following
table.
Twelve Months Ended     Twelve Months Ended
                                    December 31, 2003         June 30, 2004
                                   -------------------     -------------------
Earnings coverage(1)(2)(3)(4)              5.0                     3.4
Notes:
(1) Earnings coverage is equal to net income before interest expense on all long
    term  debt,  including  the  Debentures,  the  8.25%  Debentures,  the 9.00%
    Debentures and the 10.00%  Debentures,  and before income taxes, all divided
    by interest  expense on all long term debt,  excluding the  Debentures,  the
    8.25%  Debentures,  the 9.00%  Debentures and the 10.00%  Debentures.  Under
    Canadian generally accepted accounting principles the 10.00% Debentures, the
    9.00%  Debentures and the 8.25%  Debentures are, and the Debentures will be,
    included in Unitholders' equity and the associated interest payments will be
    charged to equity.
(2) The Trust's  interest  requirements  amount to $6.4 million for the 12 month
    period  ended  December  31, 2003 and $5.7  million for the 12 month  period
    ended June 30, 2004. The Trust's earnings before interest and income tax for
    the 12 month  period  ended  December 31, 2003 and the 12 month period ended
    June 30,  2004 was  $32.2  million  and  $19.4  million,  respectively.  The
    earnings in the coverage ratios are not assumed to change as a result of net
    proceeds from the offering.
(3) If the  interest  from the  Debentures,  the  8.25%  Debentures,  the  9.00%
    Debentures and the 10.00% Debentures were included in interest expense,  the
    earnings  coverage  ratios  would  be 1.5 and less  than 1 (with a  coverage
    deficiency of $1.6 million) for the 12 month periods ended December 31, 2003
    and June 30, 2004,  respectively.  The Trust's interest  requirements  after
    giving effect to the issue of the  Debentures  amounted to $21.7 million for
    the 12 months ended  December  31, 2003 and $21.0  million for the 12 months
    ended June 30, 2004. The Trust's earnings before interest and income tax for
    the 12 months  ended  December  31,  2003 was $32.2  million  and for the 12
    months  ended June 30, 2004 was $19.4  million,  which is 1.5 times and less
    than one times Advantage's interest requirements for the respective periods.
(4) After  giving  effect  to  the  Acquisition  and if the  interest  from  the
    Debentures,  the 8.25%  Debentures,  the  9.00%  Debentures  and the  10.00%
    Debentures  were  included  in  interest  expense,  the pro  forma  earnings
    coverage ratio would be 2.4 times for the twelve month period ended December
    31, 2003.
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION OF THE TRUST
The following table sets forth the consolidated  capitalization  of the Trust as
at December  31,  2003 and as at June 30,  2004,  both  before and after  giving
effect to the offering and the Acquisition:
<PAGE>
32
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                       As at June 30, 2004 
before        As at June 30, 2004 after
                                                     giving effect to the  
offering    giving effect to the offering
     Designation                  As at                  and the Acquisition(4) 
and the Acquisition(1)(2)
(Authorized)           December 31, 2003                 (unaudited)       
(unaudited)
---------------------   ------------------------   
---------------------------------   -----------------------------
                                                   ($ thousands except unit 
amounts)
<S>                     <C>                        <C>                          
<C>
Bank Debt                      $   102,968                   $     161,707      
$     155,397(6)
   ($220 million)(1)
Unitholders' Equity
    Trust Units(3)(5)          $   302,496                   $     339,279      
$     401,789
   (unlimited)          (36,717,206 Trust Units)        (39,952,085 Trust Units)
(43,452,085 Trust Units)
10.00% Debentures              $    10,214                   $       6,756      
$       6,756
   ($55,000)
9.00% Debentures               $    30,000                   $      27,055      
$      27,055
   ($30,000)
8.25% Debentures               $    59,770                   $      32,585      
$      32,585
   ($60,000)
7.50% Debentures                   Nil                            Nil           
$      75,000
   ($75,000)
7.75% Debentures                   Nil                            Nil           
$      50,000
   ($50,000)
Special Voting Units               Nil                            Nil           
Nil
   (unlimited)
</TABLE>
Notes:
(1) Advantage has credit facilities (the "Credit  Facilities") which provide for
    a  $210  million  extendible  revolving  loan  facility  and a  $10  million
    operating loan facility.  The loan's  interest rate is based on either prime
    or bankers  acceptance  rates at the Trust's option subject to certain basis
    point or stamping fee  adjustments  ranging from 0% to 2.0% depending on the
    Trust's debt to cash flow ratio. The Credit Facilities are secured by a $250
    million floating charge demand debenture, a general security agreement and a
    subordination agreement from the Trust covering all assets and cash flows.
(2) Based on the issuance of 3,500,000  Subscription  Receipts (and the issue of
    3,500,000 Units pursuant thereto), $75,000,000 aggregate principal amount of
    7.50%  Debentures  and  $50,000,000  aggregate  principal  amount  of  7.75%
    Debentures   for  aggregate   gross  proceeds  of   $190,800,000   less  the
    Underwriters'  fee of $8,290,000  and expenses of the issue  estimated to be
    $600,000, the net proceeds from this issue are estimated to be $181,910,000,
    and which will be applied to satisfy a portion of the purchase  price of the
    Acquisition.
(3) In addition,  as at June 30, 2004,  295,000 incentive rights are outstanding
under the Trust's trust unit incentive rights plan.
(4) As  at  June  30,  2004,  Unitholders'  equity  of  the  Trust  incorporated
    Unitholders'  capital of  $339,279,000,  contributed  surplus of $1,036,000,
    accumulated  cash  distributions  up to June 30,  2004 of  $206,080,000  and
    accumulated income of $80,044,000.
(5) The amount  recorded  for the Trust  Units at  December  31,  2003  includes
    $19,592,000 for the accrual of the non-cash  performance  incentive  amounts
    which were  subsequently  settled  through the issuance of  1,099,104  Trust
    Units.
(6) Assumes net proceeds from the offering of $181,910,000  (net of costs of the
    offering of $600,000 and the  Underwriters'  commissions of $8,290,000)  and
    assuming a Purchase Price, net of adjustments, on closing of the Acquisition
    of $176,600,000.
<PAGE>
33
PRICE RANGE AND TRADING VOLUME OF THE TRUST UNITS
The  outstanding  Trust  Units are  traded on the TSX under the  trading  symbol
"AVN.UN".  The following  table sets forth the price range and trading volume of
the Trust Units as reported by the TSX for the periods indicated.
Period          High        Low        Volume
               --------------     ------     ------     ---------
2001
May 29 - 31(1)     $12.55     $12.30       117,537
               June               $12.40     $ 9.25     1,219,309
               Third Quarter      $10.50     $ 7.42     2,226,952
               Fourth Quarter     $ 8.40     $ 7.05     7,381,300
2002
First Quarter      $11.35     $ 7.91    11,207,717
               Second Quarter     $12.14     $10.00     7,006,294
               Third Quarter      $13.25     $10.40     7,350,914
               Fourth Quarter     $13.75     $11.65     7,582,352
2003
First Quarter      $15.59     $11.80     7,622,480
               Second Quarter     $16.95     $14.15     7,995,072
               Third Quarter      $17.15     $14.92     8,001,055
               Fourth Quarter     $17.95     $15.65     9,684,205
2004
First Quarter      $19.00     $16.01     7,666,480
               April              $19.84     $18.80     4,120,250
               May                $20.08     $19.05     3,367,746
               June               $19.37     $17.80     3,169,079
               July               $19.65     $18.63     2,095,637
               August 1 - 25      $19.68     $18.51     2,514,544
Note:
(1) The Trust Units commenced trading on the TSX on May 29, 2001.
On August 23, 2004, the last trading day prior to the public announcement of the
offering,  the closing price of the Trust Units on the TSX was $19.35. On August
25, 2004, the closing price of the Trust Units on the TSX was $19.58.
RECORD OF CASH DISTRIBUTIONS
The following is a summary of the  distributions  declared by Advantage from its
inception in May 2001 to August 25, 2004.
For the 2001 Period Ended   Distributions per Unit      Payment Date
     -------------------------   ----------------------   ------------------
June 30                     $0.28             July 16, 2001
              July 31                     $0.28            August 15, 2001
             August 31                    $0.22           September 17, 2001
            September 30                  $0.22            October 15, 2001
             October 31                   $0.15           November 15, 2001
            November 30                   $0.15           December 17, 2001
            December 31                   $0.15            January 15, 2002
                                          -----
     Total                                $1.45
<PAGE>
34
For the 2002 Period Ended   Distributions per Unit      Payment Date
     -------------------------   ----------------------   ------------------
January 31                   $0.15            February 15, 2002
            February 28                   $0.13             March 15, 2002
              March 31                    $0.13             April 15, 2002
              April 30                    $0.13              May 15, 2002
               May 31                     $0.13              June 17, 2002
              June 30                     $0.13              July 15, 2002
              July 31                     $0.13             August 15, 2002
             August 31                    $0.13           September 16, 2002
            September 30                  $0.13            October 15, 2002
             October 31                   $0.18            November 15, 2002
            November 30                   $0.18            December 16, 2002
            December 31                   $0.18            January 15, 2003
                                          -----
     Total                                $1.73
For the 2003 Period Ended   Distributions per Unit      Payment Date
     -------------------------   ----------------------   ------------------
January 31                   $0.18            February 18, 2003
            February 28                   $0.23             March 17, 2003
              March 31                    $0.23             April 15, 2003
              April 30                    $0.23              May 15, 2003
               May 31                     $0.23              June 16, 2003
              June 30                     $0.23              July 15, 2003
              July 31                     $0.23             August 15, 2003
             August 31                    $0.23           September 15, 2003
            September 30                  $0.23             October 15,2003
             October 31                   $0.23            November 17, 2003
            November 30                   $0.23            December 15, 2003
            December 31                   $0.23            January 15, 2004
                                          -----
     Total                                $2.71
For the 2004 Period Ended   Distributions per Unit      Payment Date
     -------------------------   ----------------------   ------------------
January 31                   $0.23            February 17, 2004
            February 29                   $0.23             March 15, 2004
              March 31                    $0.23             April 15, 2004
              April 30                    $0.23              May 17, 2004
               May 31                     $0.23              June 15, 2004
              June 30                     $0.23              July 15, 2004
              July 31                     $0.23             August 16, 2004
            August 31(1)                  $0.23           September 15, 2004
                                          -----
     Total                                $1.84
Note:
(1) The Trust  announced  on August 17,  2004 that a  distribution  of $0.23 per
    Trust Unit will be paid on September  15, 2004 to  Unitholders  of record on
    August 31, 2004.
On August 24, 2004 the Trust  announced that subject to closing the  Acquisition
on or before September 30, 2004, the monthly  distribution of distributable cash
to be paid on  November  15, 2004 to  Unitholders  of record on October 29, 2004
will be $0.25 per Unit.
The Trust intends to make cash  distributions  on the 15th day of each month (or
the first  Business Day  thereafter)  to holders of Trust Units of record on the
immediately preceding record date.
Accordingly,  if the  Acquisition  closes on or  before  September  30,  2004 as
currently contemplated,  holders of Subscription Receipts will become holders of
Units on or before  September  30,  2004 and will be  entitled  as  Unitholders,
provided  they are the  holders  of record  of Units  received  pursuant  to the
Subscription Receipts on September 30, 2004, to receive the monthly distribution
expected to be paid on October 15, 2004 to Unitholders of
<PAGE>
35
record on September  30, 2004.  If the closing of the  Acquisition  occurs after
September  30,  2004,  but on or before  November 1, 2004,  holders of record of
Subscription  Receipts on the date they are exchanged for Units will be entitled
to receive a payment  equivalent  to the  distribution  that will be paid by the
Trust to  Unitholders  of record on September  30, 2004 or any  subsequent  Unit
distribution record date (being on or about the last day of each month) prior to
such closing. See "Details of the Offering".
USE OF PROCEEDS
The net proceeds to the Trust from the sale of the Subscription Receipts and the
Debentures  hereunder are estimated to be $181,910,000  after deducting the fees
of $8,290,000  payable to the  Underwriters  and the  estimated  expenses of the
issue of $600,000. The net proceeds of the offering will be used by the Trust to
pay the purchase price of the  Acquisition and to repay  indebtedness  under the
Credit Facilities.  See "Recent  Developments" and "Relationship Among the Trust
and Certain Underwriters".
DETAILS OF THE OFFERINGS
Subscription Receipts
The following is a summary of the material attributes and characteristics of the
Subscription  Receipts.  This  summary  does not purport to be  complete  and is
subject to, and  qualified  in its  entirety  by,  reference to the terms of the
Subscription Receipt Agreement.
At closing, a certificate  representing the Subscription Receipts will be issued
in registered form to CDS or its nominee,  CDS & Co., and will be deposited with
CDS on the closing date of this offering pursuant to the book-entry only system.
Unless the book-entry  only system is terminated,  and except in certain limited
circumstances, owners of beneficial interests in Subscription Receipts shall not
receive a certificate for subscription  receipts or, unless  requested,  for the
Trust Units issuable on the exchange of the  Subscription  Receipts.  Beneficial
interests in Subscription  Receipts will generally be represented solely through
the  book-entry  only system and such  interests  will be  evidenced by customer
confirmations of purchase from the Underwriters.
The  Escrowed  Funds  will be  delivered  to and held by the  Escrow  Agent  and
invested in  short-term  obligations  of, or  guaranteed  by, the  Government of
Canada (and other approved  investments) pending the closing of the Acquisition.
Provided that the closing of the Acquisition  occurs by 5:00 p.m. (Calgary time)
on November 1, 2004, the Escrowed Funds and the interest  earned thereon will be
released  to the Trust and the Units will be issued to  holders of  Subscription
Receipts  who will  receive,  without  payment of  additional  consideration  or
further action, one Unit for each Subscription Receipt held.
Forthwith  upon the  closing  of the  Acquisition,  the Trust will  execute  and
deliver to the Escrow  Agent a notice  thereof,  and will issue and  deliver the
Units to the Escrow Agent.  Contemporaneously  with the delivery of such notice,
the Trust will issue a press release specifying that the Units have been issued.
If the  closing of the  Acquisition  does not take  place by 5:00 p.m.  (Calgary
time) on November 1, 2004, the  Acquisition is terminated at any earlier time or
the Trust has advised the  Underwriters  or announced to the public that it does
not  intend to  proceed  with the  Acquisition  (in any case,  the  "Termination
Time"),  holders of Subscription Receipts shall be entitled to receive an amount
equal to the full subscription price therefor and their pro rata entitlements to
interest on such amount.  The Escrowed Funds and interest earned thereon will be
applied toward payment of such amount.
If the closing of the Acquisition  takes place prior to the Termination Time and
holders of  Subscription  Receipts  become entitled to receive Units pursuant to
the Subscription Receipt Agreement,  holders of record of Subscription  Receipts
on the date they are  exchanged  for Units will be entitled to receive an amount
per Subscription  Receipt equal to the amount per Unit of any cash distributions
for which record dates have occurred  during the period from the date of closing
of the offering to the date immediately  preceding the date the Units are issued
pursuant to the Subscription Receipts (the "Special Interest"). All or a portion
of this amount will be  satisfied  by the payment by the Escrow Agent to holders
of  Subscription  Receipts  of  interest  earned  on  the  Escrowed  Funds.  The
difference,  if any, between the amount of interest earned on the Escrowed Funds
and the Special Interest will be paid by the Trust.
<PAGE>
36
If holders of Subscription Receipts become entitled to receive Units, the Escrow
Agent and the Trust will pay such  amounts to holders of record of  Subscription
Receipts on the date they are  exchanged  for Units on the later of the date the
Units are issued and the date such  distribution(s) is paid to Unitholders.  For
greater certainty,  if the closing of the Acquisition takes place on a date that
is a Unit distribution  record date, holders of record of Subscription  Receipts
on such date  shall not be  entitled  as such to receive a payment in respect of
the cash  distribution  for such record  date but shall  instead be deemed to be
holders of record of Units on such date and will be entitled as  Unitholders  to
receive such monthly distribution.
Accordingly,  if the  Acquisition  closes on or  before  September  30,  2004 as
currently contemplated,  holders of Subscription Receipts will become holders of
Units on or before  September  30,  2004 and will be  entitled  as  Unitholders,
provided  they are the  holders  of record  of Units  received  pursuant  to the
Subscription Receipts on September 30, 2004, to receive the monthly distribution
expected to be paid on October 15, 2004 to  Unitholders  of record on  September
30, 2004. If the closing of the Acquisition occurs after September 30, 2004, but
on or before November 1, 2004, holders of record of Subscription Receipts on the
date  they are  exchanged  for  Units  will be  entitled  to  receive  a payment
equivalent to the distribution  that will be paid by the Trust to Unitholders of
record on September 30, 2004 or any  subsequent  Unit  distribution  record date
(being on or about the last day of each month) prior to such closing.
Under the Subscription  Receipt Agreement,  original  purchasers of Subscription
Receipts  under  the  offering  will  have a  contractual  right  of  rescission
following  the  issuance  of Units to such  purchaser  upon the  exchange of the
Subscription  Receipts to receive the amount paid for the Subscription  Receipts
if this short form prospectus  (including  documents  incorporated by reference)
and any  amendment  contains a  misrepresentation  or is not  delivered  to such
purchaser,  provided such remedy for rescission is exercised  within 180 days of
closing of the offering.
Holders of Subscription  Receipts are not  Unitholders.  Holders of Subscription
Receipts are entitled only to receive  Units on surrender of their  Subscription
Receipts to the Escrow  Agent or to a return of the  subscription  price for the
Subscription  Receipts  together  with  any  payments  in  lieu of  interest  or
distributions, as applicable, as described above.
Debentures
The offering of Debentures  consists of 75,000 7.50% Debentures and 50,000 7.75%
Debentures,  each at a price of $1,000 per Debenture. The following is a summary
of the material attributes and  characteristics of the Debentures.  This summary
does not purport to be complete and is subject to, and qualified in its entirety
by, reference to the terms of the Indenture referred to below.
General
The Debentures will be issued under the Indenture. The Debentures authorized for
issue  immediately will be limited in aggregate  principal amount to $75,000,000
7.50% Debentures and $50,000,000 7.75% Debentures.  The Trust may, however, from
time to time,  without the consent of the holders of the  Debentures but subject
to the limitations  described  herein,  issue additional  debentures of the same
series  or of a  different  series  under  the  Indenture,  in  addition  to the
Debentures offered hereby. The Debentures will be issuable only in denominations
of $1,000 and integral multiples thereof.
The 7.50%  Debentures  will be dated as of the closing  date of the offering and
will have an initial  maturity  date of November 1, 2004.  If the closing of the
Acquisition  takes place by the  Termination  Time in all  material  respects as
contemplated   in  the  Acquisition   Agreement,   the  maturity  date  will  be
automatically extended from the Initial Maturity Date to October 1, 2009. If the
closing of the  Acquisition  does not take place by the  Termination  Time,  the
7.50% Debentures will mature on the Initial Maturity Date.
The  7.50%  Debentures  will bear  interest  from the date of issue at 7.50% per
annum,  which will be payable  semi-annually in arrears on April 1 and October 1
in each year,  commencing  with April 1, 2005. The first  interest  payment will
include interest accrued from the closing of the offering to but excluding April
1, 2005.
<PAGE>
37
The 7.75%  Debentures  will be dated as of the closing  date of the offering and
will have an initial  maturity  date of November 1, 2004.  If the closing of the
Acquisition  takes place by the  Termination  Time in all  material  respects as
contemplated   in  the  Acquisition   Agreement,   the  maturity  date  will  be
automatically  extended  from the Initial  Maturity Date to December 1, 2011. If
the closing of the Acquisition does not take place by the Termination  Time, the
7.75% Debentures will mature on the Initial Maturity Date.
The  7.75%  Debentures  will bear  interest  from the date of issue at 7.75% per
annum,  which will be payable  semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1
in each year,  commencing  with June 1, 2005.  The first  interest  payment will
include  interest accrued from the closing of the offering to but excluding June
1, 2005.
The principal amount of the Debentures will be payable in lawful money of Canada
or, at the option of the Trust and subject to applicable regulatory approval, by
payment  of Units  as  further  described  under  "Payment  upon  Redemption  or
Maturity" and "Redemption and Purchase".  The interest on the Debentures will be
payable  in lawful  money of Canada  including,  at the  option of the Trust and
subject to applicable  regulatory approval, in accordance with the Unit Interest
Payment Obligation as described under "Interest Payment Option".
The Debentures  will be direct  obligations of the Trust and will not be secured
by any mortgage,  pledge,  hypothec or other charge and will be  subordinated to
other liabilities of the Trust as described under "Subordination". Other than as
described  herein,  the  Indenture  will not restrict  the Trust from  incurring
additional  indebtedness  for  borrowed  money or from  mortgaging,  pledging or
charging its properties to secure any indebtedness.
Conversion Privilege
The 7.50%  Debentures will be convertible at the holder's option into fully paid
and  non-assessable  Units at any time prior to 5:00 p.m.  (Calgary time) on the
earlier of the maturity date, being the Initial Maturity Date or the 7.50% Final
Maturity Date, as  applicable,  and the business day  immediately  preceding the
date  specified  by the  Trust for  redemption  of the  7.50%  Debentures,  at a
conversion  price of $20.25 per Unit (the  "7.50%  Conversion  Price"),  being a
conversion  rate of  49.3827  Units for each  $1,000  principal  amount of 7.50%
Debentures.  No adjustment will be made for distributions on Units issuable upon
conversion  or  for  interest  accrued  on  7.50%  Debentures   surrendered  for
conversion;  however,  holders  converting  their 7.50%  Debentures will receive
accrued and unpaid interest  thereon.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing,  no 7.50%
Debentures may be converted during the three business days preceding April 1 and
October 1 in each  year,  commencing  April 1,  2005,  as the  registers  of the
Debenture Trustee will be closed during such periods.
The 7.75%  Debentures will be convertible at the holder's option into fully paid
and  non-assessable  Units at any time prior to 5:00 p.m.  (Calgary time) on the
earlier of the maturity date, being the Initial Maturity Date or the 7.75% Final
Maturity Date, as  applicable,  and the business day  immediately  preceding the
date  specified  by the  Trust for  redemption  of the  7.75%  Debentures,  at a
conversion  price of $21.00 per Unit (the  "7.75%  Conversion  Price"),  being a
conversion  rate of  47.6190  Units for each  $1,000  principal  amount of 7.75%
Debentures.  No adjustment will be made for distributions on Units issuable upon
conversion  or  for  interest  accrued  on  7.75%  Debentures   surrendered  for
conversion;  however,  holders  converting  their 7.75%  Debentures will receive
accrued and unpaid interest  thereon.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing,  no 7.75%
Debentures may be converted  during the three business days preceding June 1 and
December  1 in each  year,  commencing  June 1, 2005,  as the  registers  of the
Debenture Trustee will be closed during such periods.  "Conversion  Price" means
the 7.50%  Conversion  Price in  respect of the 7.50%  Debentures  and the 7.75%
Conversion Price in respect of the 7.75% Debentures.
Subject to the provisions thereof, the Indenture will provide for the adjustment
of the Conversion  Price in certain  events  including:  (a) the  subdivision or
consolidation of the outstanding Units; (b) the distribution of Units to holders
of Units by way of  distribution  or otherwise other than an issue of securities
to holders of Units who have elected to receive  distributions  in securities of
the Trust in lieu of receiving cash  distributions  paid in the ordinary course;
(c) the  issuance of options,  rights or warrants to holders of Units  entitling
them to acquire Units or other  securities  convertible  into Units at less than
95% of the then  current  market  price (as defined  below under  "Payment  upon
Redemption or Maturity") of the Units;  and (d) the  distribution to all holders
of  Units of any  securities  or  assets  (other  than  cash  distributions  and
equivalent distributions in securities paid in lieu of cash distributions in the
ordinary course). There will be no adjustment of the Conversion Price in respect
of any event described in (b), (c) or (d) above if the holders of the Debentures
are allowed to participate as though they had converted their  Debentures
<PAGE>
38
prior to the  applicable  record date or effective  date.  The Trust will not be
required to make  adjustments  in the  Conversion  Price  unless the  cumulative
effect of such adjustments would change the conversion price by at least 1%.
The term  "current  market  price" will be defined in the  Indenture to mean the
weighted  average  trading price of the Units on the TSX for the 20  consecutive
trading  days  ending on the fifth  trading  day  preceding  the date  fixed for
redemption or the maturity date, as the case may be.
In the case of any  reclassification  or capital  reorganization  (other  than a
change resulting from  consolidation or subdivision) of the Units or in the case
of any consolidation, amalgamation or merger of the Trust with or into any other
entity, or in the case of any sale or conveyance of the properties and assets of
the  Trust as,  or  substantially  as, an  entirety  to any other  entity,  or a
liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Trust, the terms of the conversion
privilege shall be adjusted so that each holder of a Debenture shall, after such
reclassification,  capital reorganization,  consolidation, amalgamation, merger,
sale, conveyance, liquidation, dissolution or winding up, be entitled to receive
the  number  of Units or other  securities  or  property  such  holder  would be
entitled to receive if on the effective date thereof,  it had been the holder of
the  number of Units  into  which the  Debenture  was  convertible  prior to the
effective date of such reclassification, capital reorganization,  consolidation,
amalgamation, merger, sale, conveyance, liquidation, dissolution or winding up.
No  fractional  Units will be issued on any  conversion  but in lieu thereof the
Trust shall satisfy fractional  interests by a cash payment equal to the current
market price of any fractional interest.
Redemption and Purchase
The 7.50%  Debentures will not be redeemable on or before October 1, 2007. After
October 1, 2007 and prior to maturity,  the 7.50%  Debentures may be redeemed in
whole or in part from  time to time at the  option of the Trust on not more than
60 days and not less than 30 days prior notice,  at a redemption price of $1,050
per 7.50%  Debenture  after October 1, 2007 and on or before October 1, 2008 and
at a redemption  price of $1,025 per 7.50%  Debenture  after October 1, 2008 and
before maturity (each a "7.50%  Redemption  Price"),  in each case, plus accrued
and unpaid interest thereon, if any.
The 7.75% Debentures will not be redeemable on or before December 1, 2007. After
December 1, 2007 and prior to maturity,  the 7.75% Debentures may be redeemed in
whole or in part from  time to time at the  option of the Trust on not more than
60 days and not less than 30 days prior notice,  at a redemption price of $1,050
per 7.75% Debenture after December 1, 2007 and on or before December 1, 2008, at
a redemption  price of $1,025 per 7.75%  Debenture after December 1, 2008 and on
or  before  December  1,  2009 and at a  redemption  price of  $1,000  per 7.75%
Debenture after December 1, 2009 and before  maturity (each a "7.75%  Redemption
Price"),  in each case,  plus  accrued  and  unpaid  interest  thereon,  if any.
"Redemption  Price"  means the 7.50%  Redemption  Price in  respect of the 7.50%
Debentures and the 7.75% Redemption Price in respect of the 7.75% Debentures.
In the case of redemption of less than all of the Debentures,  the Debentures to
be redeemed will be selected by the Debenture  Trustee on a pro rata basis or in
such other  manner as the  Debenture  Trustee  deems  equitable,  subject to the
consent of the TSX.
The Trust will have the right to purchase Debentures in the market, by tender or
by private contract.
Payment upon Redemption or Maturity
On redemption or at maturity, the Trust will repay the indebtedness  represented
by the  Debentures by paying to the Debenture  Trustee in lawful money of Canada
an amount equal to the aggregate Redemption Price of the outstanding  Debentures
which are to be redeemed or the principal  amount of the outstanding  Debentures
which  have  matured,  as the case may be,  together  with  accrued  and  unpaid
interest thereon. The Trust may, at its option, on not more than 60 days and not
less than 40 days prior notice and subject to  applicable  regulatory  approval,
elect to satisfy its  obligation to pay the  Redemption  Price of the Debentures
which are to be redeemed or the principal  amount of the  Debentures  which have
matured,  as the case may be, by issuing Units to the holders of the Debentures.
Any  accrued and unpaid  interest  thereon  will be paid in cash.  The number of
Units to be issued will be
<PAGE>
39
determined  by  dividing  the  aggregate  Redemption  Price  of the  outstanding
Debentures  which are to be redeemed or the principal  amount of the outstanding
Debentures which have matured,  as the case may be, by 95% of the current market
price on the date fixed for redemption or the maturity date, as the case may be.
Although  the Trust will have the option to satisfy  its  obligation  to pay the
principal  amount of the Debentures due on the Initial  Maturity Date by issuing
Trust Units, if the Acquisition is not completed prior to the Termination  Time,
the Trust  currently  intends to repay the amounts  due on the Initial  Maturity
Date with cash. No fractional Units will be issued on redemption or maturity but
in lieu thereof the Trust shall satisfy  fractional  interests by a cash payment
equal to the current market price of any fractional interest.
Subordination
The  payment of the  principal  of, and  interest  on,  the  Debentures  will be
subordinated  in right of payment,  as set forth in the Indenture,  to the prior
payment  in full of all Senior  Indebtedness  of the Trust and  indebtedness  to
trade creditors of the Trust. "Senior Indebtedness" of the Trust will be defined
in the  Indenture as the  principal of and premium,  if any, and interest on and
other amounts in respect of all  indebtedness of the Trust (whether  outstanding
as at the date of the Indenture or thereafter incurred), other than indebtedness
evidenced by the  Debentures  and all other  existing and future  debentures  or
other instruments of the Trust which, by the terms of the instrument creating or
evidencing the indebtedness,  is expressed to be pari passu with, or subordinate
in right of payment to, the Debentures.
The  Indenture  will provide that in the event of any  insolvency  or bankruptcy
proceedings, or any receivership,  liquidation,  reorganization or other similar
proceedings relative to the Trust, or to its property or assets, or in the event
of any proceedings for voluntary liquidation, dissolution or other winding-up of
the Trust, whether or not involving insolvency or bankruptcy, or any marshalling
of the  assets  and  liabilities  of the  Trust,  then  those  holders of Senior
Indebtedness,  including  any  indebtedness  to trade  creditors,  will  receive
payment in full before the holders of Debentures will be entitled to receive any
payment or distribution of any kind or character,  whether in cash,  property or
securities,  which may be payable or deliverable in any such event in respect of
any of the Debentures or any unpaid interest accrued thereon. The Indenture will
also provide  that the Trust will not make any  payment,  and the holders of the
Debentures  will  not be  entitled  to  demand,  institute  proceedings  for the
collection  of, or  receive  any  payment  or benefit  (including,  without  any
limitation,  by set-off,  combination  of accounts or realization of security or
otherwise in any manner  whatsoever) on account of  indebtedness  represented by
the Debentures (a) in a manner inconsistent with the terms (as they exist on the
date of issue) of the Debentures or (b) at any time when an event of default has
occurred under the Senior  Indebtedness and is continuing and the notice of such
event of  default  has been  given by or on  behalf  of the  holders  of  Senior
Indebtedness  to the Trust,  unless the Senior  Indebtedness  has been repaid in
full.
The Debentures  will also be  effectively  subordinate to claims of creditors of
the  Trust's  subsidiaries  except to the extent the Trust is a creditor of such
subsidiaries  ranking  at least  pari  passu  with  such  other  creditors.  The
Debentures will also be subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in
full of all indebtedness under the Credit Facilities.
Priority over Trust Distributions
The Trust Indenture provides that certain expenses of the Trust must be deducted
in calculating the amount to be distributed to the Unitholders. Accordingly, the
funds required to satisfy the interest payable on the Debentures, as well as the
amount payable upon redemption or maturity of the Debentures or upon an Event of
Default (as defined below),  will be deducted and withheld from the amounts that
would otherwise be payable as distributions to Unitholders.
Change of Control of the Trust
Within 30 days  following  the  occurrence  of a change of  control of the Trust
involving the acquisition of voting control or direction over 66 2/3% or more of
the Units (a "Change of  Control"),  the Trust will be required to make an offer
in writing to purchase all of the Debentures  then  outstanding  (the "Debenture
Offer"),  at a price equal to 101% of the principal  amount thereof plus accrued
and unpaid interest (the "Debenture Offer Price").
<PAGE>
40
The Indenture  contains  notification  and repurchase  provisions  requiring the
Trust to give written  notice to the  Debenture  Trustee of the  occurrence of a
Change of  Control  within 30 days of such  event  together  with the  Debenture
Offer.  The Debenture  Trustee will  thereafter  promptly mail to each holder of
Debentures  a  notice  of the  Change  of  Control  together  with a copy of the
Debenture Offer to repurchase all the outstanding Debentures.
If 90% or more of the aggregate  principal amount of the Debentures  outstanding
on the date of the giving of notice of the Change of Control have been  tendered
to the Trust pursuant to the Debenture  Offer, the Trust will have the right and
obligation to redeem all the remaining  Debentures at the Debenture Offer Price.
Notice of such  redemption  must be given by the Trust to the Debenture  Trustee
within 10 days  following  the  expiry of the  Debenture  Offer,  and as soon as
possible  thereafter,  by the Debenture Trustee to the holders of the Debentures
not tendered pursuant to the Debenture Offer.
Interest Payment Option
The Trust may elect,  from time to time, to satisfy its obligation to pay all or
any part of the interest on the Debentures (the "Interest  Obligation"),  on the
date it is  payable  under  the  Indenture  (an  "Interest  Payment  Date"),  by
delivering sufficient Units to the Debenture Trustee to satisfy all or the part,
as the case may be, of the Interest  Obligation in accordance with the Indenture
(the "Unit Interest  Payment  Election").  The Indenture will provide that, upon
such election, the Debenture Trustee shall (a) accept delivery from the Trust of
Units,  (b) accept bids with  respect to, and  consummate  sales of, such Units,
each as the Trust  shall  direct in its  absolute  discretion,  (c)  invest  the
proceeds of such sales in short-term permitted government securities (as defined
in the Indenture)  which mature prior to the applicable  Interest  Payment Date,
and use  the  proceeds  received  from  such  permitted  government  securities,
together with any proceeds from the sale of Units not invested as aforesaid,  to
satisfy the Interest  Obligation,  and (d) perform any other action  necessarily
incidental thereto.
The Indenture  will set forth the procedures to be followed by the Trust and the
Debenture  Trustee in order to effect the Unit Interest Payment  Election.  If a
Unit Interest Payment Election is made, the sole right of a holder of Debentures
in respect of interest will be to receive cash from the Debenture Trustee out of
the  proceeds  of the sale of Units (plus any amount  received by the  Debenture
Trustee  from  the  Trust   attributable  to  any  fractional   Units)  in  full
satisfaction of the Interest Obligation,  and the holder of such Debentures will
have no further recourse to the Trust in respect of the Interest Obligation.
Neither  the  Trust's  making  of the Unit  Interest  Payment  Election  nor the
consummation  of sales of Units will (a) result in the holders of the Debentures
not being entitled to receive on the applicable Interest Payment Date cash in an
aggregate amount equal to the interest payable on such Interest Payment Date, or
(b) entitle  such holders to receive any Units in  satisfaction  of the Interest
Obligation.
Events of Default
The  Indenture  will  provide  that an event of default  ("Event of Default") in
respect  of the  Debentures  will  occur  if any one or  more  of the  following
described  events has occurred and is continuing with respect of the Debentures:
(a) failure for 10 days to pay interest on the Debentures  when due; (b) failure
to pay  principal or premium,  if any, on the  Debentures  when due,  whether at
maturity,  upon redemption,  by declaration or otherwise;  (c) certain events of
bankruptcy,  insolvency  or  reorganization  of the Trust  under  bankruptcy  or
insolvency laws; or (d) default in the observance or performance of any material
covenant or condition of the  Indenture  and  continuance  of such default for a
period  of 30 days  after  notice in  writing  has been  given by the  Debenture
Trustee to the Trust  specifying such default and requiring the Trust to rectify
the same. If an Event of Default has occurred and is  continuing,  the Debenture
Trustee  may, in its  discretion,  and shall upon request of holders of not less
than 25% of the principal  amount of Debentures  then  outstanding,  declare the
principal of and interest on all  outstanding  Debentures to be immediately  due
and payable.  In certain  cases,  the holders of more than 50% of the  principal
amount of the Debentures then  outstanding  may, on behalf of the holders of all
such  Debentures,  waive any Event of Default and/or cancel any such declaration
upon such terms and conditions as such holders shall prescribe.
Certain  Events of Default  under the Indenture may only be Events of Default in
relation to a  particular  series of  debentures  in which case such  provisions
would apply only in relation to such series.
<PAGE>
41
Offers for Debentures
The Indenture will contain provisions to the effect that if an offer is made for
the Debentures which is a take-over bid for Debentures within the meaning of the
Securities  Act  (Alberta) and not less than 90% of the  Debentures  (other than
Debentures  held at the date of the take-over bid by or on behalf of the offeror
or  associates  or  affiliates  of the offeror) are taken up and paid for by the
offeror,  the offeror  will be entitled  to acquire the  Debentures  held by the
holders of  Debentures  who did not accept the offer on the terms offered by the
offeror.
Modification
The  rights of the  holders  of the  Debentures  as well as any other  series of
debentures  that may be issued under the Indenture may be modified in accordance
with the terms of the Indenture.  For that purpose,  among others, the Indenture
will contain certain provisions which will make binding on all Debenture holders
resolutions  passed at  meetings  of the  holders  of  Debentures  by votes cast
thereat  by  holders  of not less  than 66 2/3% of the  principal  amount of the
Debentures  present at the  meeting or  represented  by proxy,  or  rendered  by
instruments  in  writing  signed by the  holders of not less than 66 2/3% of the
principal  amount of the Debentures  then  outstanding.  In certain  cases,  the
modification will, instead or in addition,  require assent by the holders of the
required percentage of Debentures of each particularly affected series.
Limitation on Issuance of Additional Debentures
The Indenture will provide that the Trust shall not issue additional convertible
debentures  of  equal  ranking  if  the  principal  amount  of  all  issued  and
outstanding  convertible debentures of the Trust exceeds 25% of the Total Market
Capitalization  of the Trust  immediately  after the issuance of such additional
convertible  debentures.  "Total Market  Capitalization"  will be defined in the
Indenture as the total principal amount of all issued and outstanding debentures
of the Trust which are convertible at the option of the holder into Units of the
Trust  plus the  amount  obtained  by  multiplying  the  number  of  issued  and
outstanding   Units  of  the  Trust  (including   Trust  Units   represented  by
Subscription  Receipts) by the current market price of the Units on the relevant
date.
Limitation on Non-Resident Ownership
AOG may, at any time and from time to time, in its sole discretion, request that
the  Debenture   Trustee  make  reasonable   efforts,   as  practicable  in  the
circumstances,  to obtain declarations as to beneficial ownership of Debentures,
perform  residency  searches of holders of Debentures and beneficial  holders of
Debentures  mailing  address lists and take such other steps specified by AOG to
determine or estimate as best possible the residence of the beneficial owners of
Debentures.  If at any  time  the  board  of  directors  of  AOG,  in  its  sole
discretion,  determines  that it is in the best interest of the Trust,  AOG may:
(i) require the  Debenture  Trustee to refuse to accept a  subscription  for the
Debentures  from,  or issue or  register a transfer  of Trust Units to, a person
unless the person provides a declaration to AOG that the Debentures to be issued
or   transferred  to  such  person  will  not  when  issued  or  transferred  be
beneficially  owned by a non-resident of Canada;  (ii) to the extent practicable
in the  circumstances,  send a notice to  registered  holders of the  Debentures
which are beneficially owned by non-residents of Canada, chosen in inverse order
to the order of  acquisition or  registration  of such  Debentures  beneficially
owned by  non-residents  of Canada or in such other  manner as AOG may  consider
equitable and  practicable,  requiring them to sell their  Debentures  which are
beneficially  owned by  non-residents  of Canada or a specified  portion thereof
within a specified period of not less than 60 days. If the holders of Debentures
receiving such notice have not sold the specified  number of such  Debentures or
provided  AOG  with   satisfactory   evidence  that  such   Debentures  are  not
beneficially  owned by non-residents  within such period,  AOG may, on behalf of
such registered holder of Debentures,  sell such Debentures and, in the interim,
suspend  the  rights  attached  to such  Debentures;  and (iii)  take such other
actions as the board of directors of AOG determines, in its sole discretion, are
appropriate  in the  circumstances  that  will  reduce  or limit  the  number of
Debentures  held by  non-residents  to ensure  that the Trust is not  maintained
primarily for the benefit of non-residents of Canada.
Book-Entry System for Debentures
The Debentures will be issued in "book-entry only" form and must be purchased or
transferred   through  a  participant  in  the  depository  service  of  CDS  (a
"Participant"). On the closing date of the offering, the Debenture Trustee will
<PAGE>
42
cause the  Debentures  to be delivered to CDS and  registered in the name of its
nominee.   The  Debentures  will  be  evidenced  by  a  single  book-entry  only
certificate.  Registration  of interests in and transfers of the Debentures will
be made only through the depository service of CDS.
Except as described  below, a purchaser  acquiring a beneficial  interest in the
Debentures (a "Beneficial Owner") will not be entitled to a certificate or other
instrument  from  the  Debenture  Trustee  or CDS  evidencing  that  purchaser's
interest therein, and such purchaser will not be shown on the records maintained
by CDS, except through a Participant. Such purchaser will receive a confirmation
of purchase from the Underwriter or other registered dealer from whom Debentures
are purchased.
Neither the Trust nor the  Underwriters  will assume any liability  for: (a) any
aspect of the records  relating to the  beneficial  ownership of the  Debentures
held by CDS or the payments  relating thereto;  (b) maintaining,  supervising or
reviewing  any  records  relating  to the  Debentures;  or  (c)  any  advice  or
representation  made by or with respect to CDS and  contained in this short form
prospectus and relating to the rules  governing CDS or any action to be taken by
CDS or at the  direction of its  Participants.  The rules  governing CDS provide
that it acts as the  agent and  depositary  for the  Participants.  As a result,
Participants  must look solely to CDS and Beneficial  Owners must look solely to
Participants  for the payment of the  principal  and interest on the  Debentures
paid by or on behalf of the Trust to CDS.
As indirect holders of Debentures,  investors should be aware that they (subject
to the situations  described below):  (a) may not have Debentures  registered in
their name; (b) may not have physical  certificates  representing their interest
in the  Debentures;  (c) may not be able to sell the Debentures to  institutions
required by law to hold physical  certificates  for securities they own; and (d)
may be unable to pledge Debentures as security.
The  Debentures  will be issued to  Beneficial  Owners in fully  registered  and
certificate form (the "Debenture  Certificates")  only if: (a) required to do so
by applicable law; (b) the book-entry only system ceases to exist; (c) the Trust
or CDS advises the  Debenture  Trustee that CDS is no longer  willing or able to
properly  discharge  its  responsibilities  as  depositary  with  respect to the
Debentures  and the Trust is unable to  locate a  qualified  successor;  (d) the
Trust,  at its option,  decides to terminate the book-entry  only system through
CDS; or (e) after the  occurrence  of an Event of Default  (as defined  herein),
provided that Participants  acting on behalf of Beneficial Owners  representing,
in the  aggregate,  more  than  25% of the  aggregate  principal  amount  of the
Debentures  then  outstanding  advise CDS in writing that the  continuation of a
book-entry  only  system  through CDS is no longer in their best  interest,  and
provided further that the Debenture  Trustee has not waived the Event of Default
in accordance with the terms of the Indenture.
Upon the occurrence of any of the events described in the immediately  preceding
paragraph,  the  Debenture  Trustee  must  notify  CDS,  for  and on  behalf  of
Participants and Beneficial Owners, of the availability through CDS of Debenture
Certificates.  Upon surrender by CDS of the single certificate  representing the
Debentures and receipt of instructions from CDS for the new  registrations,  the
Debenture  Trustee  will  deliver  the  Debentures  in  the  form  of  Debenture
Certificates  and  thereafter  the Trust  will  recognize  the  holders  of such
Debenture Certificates as debentureholders under the Indenture.
Interest on the  Debentures  will be paid  directly to CDS while the  book-entry
only system is in effect. If Debenture Certificates are issued, interest will be
paid by cheque  drawn on the Trust and sent by  prepaid  mail to the  registered
holder  or by such  other  means as may  become  customary  for the  payment  of
interest.  Payment  of  principal,  including  payment  in the  form of Units if
applicable,  and the interest due, at maturity or on a redemption  date, will be
paid directly to CDS while the book-entry only system is in effect. If Debenture
Certificates are issued, payment of principal,  including payment in the form of
Units if applicable, and interest due, at maturity or on a redemption date, will
be paid upon  surrender  thereof  at any office of the  Debenture  Trustee or as
otherwise specified in the Indenture.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Pursuant to the Underwriting  Agreement,  the Trust has agreed to issue and sell
an aggregate of 3,500,000  Subscription  Receipts,  an aggregate of 75,000 7.50%
Debentures and an aggregate of 50,000 7.75% Debentures to the Underwriters,  and
the Underwriters  have severally agreed to purchase such  Subscription  Receipts
and
<PAGE>
43
Debentures  on September 14, 2004, or such other date as may be agreed among the
parties to the Underwriting Agreement. Delivery of the Subscription Receipts and
Debentures  is  conditional  upon payment on closing of $18.80 per  Subscription
Receipt by the  Underwriters to the Escrow Agent and $1,000 per Debenture by the
Underwriters to the Trust.  The Underwriting  Agreement  provides that the Trust
will  pay  the  Underwriters'   fee  of  $0.94  per  Subscription   Receipt  for
Subscription  Receipts  issued and sold by the Trust and $40 per  Debenture  for
Debentures  issued and sold by the Trust,  for an  aggregate  fee payable by the
Trust of $8,290,000,  in consideration for their services in connection with the
offering.  The  Underwriters'  fee in respect of the  Subscription  Receipts  is
payable as to 50% upon the closing of the  offering  and 50% upon closing of the
Acquisition.  If the  Acquisition  is not  completed  by November  1, 2004,  the
Underwriters' fee in respect of the Subscription Receipts will be reduced to the
amount payable upon closing of the offering. The Underwriters' fee in respect of
the Debentures is payable on closing of the offering.  The terms of the offering
were  determined by  negotiation  between AOG and the Manager,  on behalf of the
Trust,  and  Scotia  Capital  Inc.,  on its own  behalf  and on behalf the other
Underwriters.
The obligations of the Underwriters under the Underwriting Agreement are several
and not joint,  and may be terminated at their discretion upon the occurrence of
certain stated events.  The obligations of the Trust and the Underwriters  under
the Underwriting Agreement to complete the purchase and sale of the Subscription
Receipts and  Debentures  will  terminate  automatically  if the  Acquisition is
terminated or the Trust has advised the  Underwriters or announced to the public
that it does not intend to proceed with the Acquisition. If an Underwriter fails
to purchase the  Subscription  Receipts or the Debentures  that it has agreed to
purchase,  the other  Underwriters  may, but are not obligated to, purchase such
Subscription Receipts or Debentures. The Underwriters are, however, obligated to
take  up and  pay  for  all  Subscription  Receipts  and  Debentures  if any are
purchased under the  Underwriting  Agreement.  The  Underwriting  Agreement also
provides  that the  Trust  and AOG will  indemnify  the  Underwriters  and their
directors,   officers,  agents,   shareholders  and  employees  against  certain
liabilities and expenses.
Except in certain  limited  circumstances,  the  Subscription  Receipts  and the
Debentures  will be issued in  "book-entry  only" form and must be  purchased or
transferred through a participant in the depository service of CDS. See "Details
of the  Offering  -  Subscription  Receipts"  and  "Details  of the  Offering  -
Book-Entry System for Debentures".
The Trust has been advised by the  Underwriters  that,  in  connection  with the
offering,  the Underwriters may effect  transactions  that stabilize or maintain
the market price of the  Subscription  Receipts,  the Units or the Debentures at
levels other than those that might  otherwise  prevail in the open market.  Such
transactions, if commenced, may be discontinued at any time.
The Trust has agreed that, subject to certain  exceptions,  it will not offer or
issue,  or enter into an  agreement to offer or issue,  Units or any  securities
convertible or exchangeable into Units for a period of 90 days subsequent to the
closing  date of the offering  without the consent of Scotia  Capital  Inc.,  on
behalf of the Underwriters, which consent may not be unreasonably withheld.
The Trust has applied to list  Subscription  Receipts,  7.50% Debentures and the
7.75%  Debentures  offered  hereunder  and the Units  issuable  pursuant  to the
Subscription  Receipts  and on the  conversion,  redemption  and maturity of the
Debentures on the TSX.  Listing will be subject to the Trust  fulfilling  all of
the listing requirements of the TSX.
The  Subscription  Receipts  and the  Debentures  offered  hereby  and the Units
issuable pursuant to the Subscription Receipts and on conversion,  redemption or
maturity  of the  Debentures  (the  "Securities")  have not been and will not be
registered under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "U.S.
Securities  Act"),  or  any  state  securities  laws,  and,   accordingly,   the
Subscription  Receipts and the  Debentures may not be offered or sold within the
United States or to U.S.  persons (as such term is defined in Regulation S under
the U.S.  Securities Act). Each Underwriter has agreed that it will not offer or
sell the Subscription  Receipts or Debentures within the United States or to, or
for the account of,  United  States  persons,  and will not conduct any directed
selling efforts in the United States (as such term is defined in Regulation S to
the U.S. Securities Act) or any other jurisdiction outside of Canada.
<PAGE>
44
RELATIONSHIP AMONG THE TRUST AND CERTAIN UNDERWRITERS
Four of the  Underwriters,  are direct or indirect wholly owned  subsidiaries of
four of the lenders of the Trust pursuant to the Credit Facilities. Accordingly,
the Trust may be  considered  a connected  issuer of Scotia  Capital  Inc.,  BMO
Nesbitt Burns Inc.,  National Bank  Financial  Inc. and RBC Dominion  Securities
Inc. under applicable securities laws.
As at June 30, 2004, approximately $161,707,000 was outstanding under the Credit
Facilities.  See  "Consolidated  Capitalization  of the Trust".  The Trust is in
compliance  with  all  material  terms of the  agreement  governing  the  Credit
Facilities  and none of the lenders under the Credit  Facilities  has waived any
breach by the Trust of that agreement since its execution. Neither the financial
position of the Trust nor the value of the security under the Credit  Facilities
has changed substantially since the indebtedness under the Credit Facilities was
incurred.
The decision to distribute  the  Subscription  Receipts and  Debentures  offered
hereunder  and the  determination  of the  terms of the  distribution  were made
through  negotiations  primarily  between  the Manager and AOG, on behalf of the
Trust,  and  Scotia  Capital  Inc.  on its own behalf and on behalf of the other
Underwriters.  The  lenders  under  the  Credit  Facilities  did  not  have  any
involvement  in such  decision or  determination,  but have been  advised of the
issuance and terms thereof.  As a consequence  of this issuance,  Scotia Capital
Inc.,  BMO Nesbitt  Burns Inc.,  National Bank  Financial  Inc. and RBC Dominion
Securities Inc. will receive their respective share of the Underwriters' fee. In
addition,  the Trust currently intends to utilize any proceeds from the offering
not used for the  Acquisition to repay a portion of its  indebtedness  under the
Credit Facilities.
INTEREST OF EXPERTS
Certain  legal  matters  relating to the offering will be passed upon by Burnet,
Duckworth  & Palmer  LLP on behalf of the  Trust,  and by  Macleod  Dixon LLP on
behalf of the Underwriters.  As at the date hereof,  the partners and associates
of Burnet, Duckworth & Palmer LLP, as a group and Macleod Dixon LLP, as a group,
each own,  directly or  indirectly,  less than 1% of the Trust  Units.  Reserves
estimates  contained herein and in the AIF,  incorporated by reference into this
short form prospectus,  are based upon a reports prepared by Sproule.  As of the
date hereof, the principles of Sproule,  as a group,  beneficially own, directly
or indirectly, less than 1% of the Trust Units.
CANADIAN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
In the  opinion  of  Burnet,  Duckworth  &  Palmer  LLP and  Macleod  Dixon  LLP
(collectively,  "Counsel"), the following summary fairly describes the principal
Canadian  federal  income tax  considerations  pursuant to the Tax Act generally
applicable  to a subscriber  who acquires  Subscription  Receipts or  Debentures
pursuant  to the  offering  and who,  for  purposes  of the Tax Act,  holds  the
Subscription  Receipts,  the  Debentures  and the Units  issued  pursuant to the
Subscription  Receipts or on the  conversion,  redemption  or  repayment  of the
Debentures  (collectively,  the  "Securities")  as capital property and deals at
arm's  length  with the  Trust and the  Underwriters.  Generally  speaking,  the
Securities  will be considered to be capital  property to a holder  provided the
holder does not hold the  Securities  in the course of carrying on a business of
trading  or  dealing  in  securities  and has not  acquired  them in one or more
transactions  considered  to be an  adventure  in the  nature of trade.  Certain
holders  who might not  otherwise  be  considered  to hold their  Securities  as
capital  property  may,  in  certain  circumstances,  be  entitled  to have such
Securities  (other than  Subscription  Receipts)  treated as capital property by
making the election  permitted by subsection  39(4) of the Tax Act. This summary
is not applicable to: (i) a holder that is a "financial institution", as defined
in the Tax Act for  purposes  of the  mark-to-market  rules;  (ii) a  holder  an
interest in which would be a "tax shelter investment" as defined in the Tax Act;
or (iii) a holder that is a "specified financial  institution" as defined in the
Tax Act. Any such holder  should  consult its own tax advisor with respect to an
investment in the Securities.
This summary is based upon the provisions of the Tax Act in force as of the date
hereof and  Counsel's  understanding  of the  current  published  administrative
practices of the Canada Revenue Agency ("CRA"). Except for specifically proposed
amendments  (the "Proposed  Amendments")  to the Tax Act that have been publicly
announced  by the federal  Minister of Finance  prior to the date  hereof,  this
summary does not take into account or anticipate  changes in the income tax law,
whether by legislative,  governmental or judicial action, nor any changes in the
administrative  practices  of the CRA.  This  summary is not  exhaustive  of all
Canadian  federal  income tax  considerations  nor does it take into account any
provincial,   territorial  or  foreign  tax  considerations   arising  from  the
acquisition, ownership or
<PAGE>
45
disposition of the Securities.  Except as otherwise  indicated,  this summary is
based on the assumption  that all  transactions  described  herein occur at fair
market value.
This  summary is of a general  nature only and is not intended to be, nor should
it be  construed  to be,  legal or tax advice to any  prospective  purchaser  or
holder of  Securities,  and no  representations  with  respect to the income tax
consequences  to any  prospective  purchaser  or holder are made.  Consequently,
prospective  holders should consult their own tax advisors with respect to their
particular circumstances.
Taxation of Holders of Subscriptions Receipts Resident in Canada
No gain or loss will be realized by a holder on the issuance of a Unit  pursuant
to a Subscription Receipt. However, if the Acquisition is completed prior to the
Termination Time, the holder of a Subscription Receipt, in addition to receiving
a Unit in exchange therefor,  will be entitled to receive an amount equal to the
distributions that the holder would have received on such Unit had the Unit been
issued to the holder on the date of closing of this offering.  Counsel is of the
view that the  treatment  of this  additional  amount is  unclear  and it should
either be included as income or  characterized  as a purchase price  adjustment.
Counsel is advised  that the Trust will treat such amount as  consideration  for
use of money.  The cost of any Units  acquired must be averaged with the cost of
any other Units held by the Unitholder held as capital property to determine the
adjusted cost base of each Unit held.
In the event the Acquisition  does not close before the  Termination  Time or if
the  Acquisition  is  terminated  at an earlier  time,  holders of  Subscription
Receipts  will be required to include their  proportionate  share of interest on
the Escrowed Funds in computing their income for purposes of the Tax Act.
A disposition or deemed disposition by a holder of a Subscription Receipt, other
than on the exchange  thereof for a Unit,  but including on the repayment of the
issue price thereof by the Trust in the event the  Acquisition  is not completed
before the  Termination  Time, will generally  result in the holder  realizing a
capital  gain (or  capital  loss)  equal to the amount by which the  proceeds of
disposition  are greater (or less) than the  aggregate of the holder's  adjusted
cost base thereof and any reasonable  costs of disposition.  In the event that a
holder  becomes  entitled to the repayment of the issue price of a  Subscription
Receipt as a consequence of the Acquisition not becoming  effective prior to the
Termination  Time,  any amount  that is paid to the holder by the Trust as or on
account of interest  will be included in the holder's  income and excluded  from
the holder's proceeds of disposition.
One-half  of any  capital  gain  realized  by the holder will be included in the
holder's  income  under  the Tax Act for the year of  disposition  as a  taxable
capital  gain.  One-half of any capital  loss  realized  on a  disposition  of a
Subscription  Receipt may be deducted  against taxable capital gains realized by
the holder in the year of disposition,  in the three preceding taxation years or
in any  subsequent  taxation  year,  to the extent  and under the  circumstances
described in the Tax Act.
A capital  gain  realized  by a holder who is an  individual  may give rise to a
liability for  alternative  minimum tax. A holder that is throughout  the year a
"Canadian-controlled  private  corporation"  (as  defined in the Tax Act) may be
liable  to pay an  additional  refundable  tax of 6 2/3% on  certain  investment
income, including interest and taxable capital gains.
Taxation of Holders of Subscriptions Receipts Not Resident in Canada
No gain or loss will be realized by a holder on the issuance of a Unit  pursuant
to a Subscription Receipt. However, if the Acquisition is completed prior to the
Termination Time, the holder of a Subscription Receipt, in addition to receiving
a Unit in exchange therefor,  will be entitled to receive an amount equal to the
distributions that the holder would have received on such Unit had the Unit been
issued to the holder on the date of closing of this offering. Counsel is advised
that  the  Trust  will  be  withholding  for  Canadian  withholding  tax on such
additional  amounts at the rate of 25%,  unless  such rate is reduced  under the
provisions of a tax treaty between Canada and the  Unitholder's  jurisdiction of
residence.  Counsel is advised that where a unitholder is resident in the United
States and entitled to claim the benefit of the  Canada-US  Tax  Convention  the
Trust will be withholding at a rate of 10%.
In the event the Acquisition  does not close before the  Termination  Time or if
the  Acquisition  is  terminated  at an earlier  time, a holder of  Subscription
Receipts who is not resident or deemed to be resident in Canada will be subject
<PAGE>
46
to  withholding  tax on such  holder's  proportionate  share of  interest on the
Escrowed  Funds which is paid or  credited  to such  holders at the rate of 25%,
unless such rate is reduced under the  provisions of a tax treaty between Canada
and the holder's  jurisdiction  of  residence.  A holder  resident in the United
States who is entitled to claim the benefit of the Canada-US Tax Convention will
generally  be  entitled  to have the rate of  withholding  reduced to 10% of the
amount of any interest paid or credited. If and to the extent the Escrowed Funds
are invested in  obligations  of, or  guaranteed  by, the  Government of Canada,
interest on such obligations  that is paid or credited to a non-resident  holder
of Subscription Receipts will not be subject to Canadian tax.
A disposition or deemed disposition of Subscription  Receipts will not give rise
to any  capital  gains  subject  to tax under the Tax Act to a holder who is not
resident  or deemed to be  resident  in Canada  provided  that the  Subscription
Receipts are not "taxable  Canadian  property" of the holder for the purposes of
the Tax Act.  Generally,  Subscription  Receipts  will not  constitute  "taxable
Canadian  property" to a non-resident  holder at the time of the  disposition or
deemed  disposition  thereof unless (i) the holder uses or holds or is deemed to
use or hold the  Subscription  Receipts  (or the Trust Units  issuable  pursuant
thereto)  in, or in the course of,  carrying on a business  in Canada,  (ii) the
Subscription  Receipts  (or the  Trust  Units  issuable  pursuant  thereto)  are
"designated  insurance  property"  of the holder for purposes of the Tax Act, or
(iii) the holder,  persons  with whom the holder  does not deal at arm's  length
(within the  meaning of the Tax Act) or the holder  together  with such  persons
owned  25% or  more  of the  Units  at  any  time  during  the  60-month  period
immediately preceding the disposition.
Taxation of Holders of Debentures Resident in Canada
A holder of Debentures  that is a  corporation,  partnership,  unit trust or any
trust of which a corporation or a partnership is a beneficiary  will be required
to include in  computing  its income  for a taxation  year all  interest  on the
Debentures that accrues to it to the end of the particular taxation year or that
has become receivable or is received by it before the end of that taxation year,
except to the extent that such  interest was included in computing  the holder's
income for a preceding taxation year.
Any other holder will be required to include in computing  income for a taxation
year all interest on the Debentures that is received or receivable by the holder
in that  taxation  year  (depending  upon the method  regularly  followed by the
holder in computing income), except to the extent that the interest was included
in the holder's income for a preceding  taxation year. In addition,  such holder
will be required to include in computing income for a taxation year any interest
that accrues to the holder on the Debenture to the end of any "anniversary  day"
(as  defined in the Tax Act) in that year to the extent  such  interest  was not
otherwise included in the holder's income for that year or a preceding year.
A holder of a Debenture who  exchanges  the Debenture for Units  pursuant to the
conversion  privilege  will be  considered to have disposed of the Debenture for
proceeds of  disposition  equal to the aggregate of the fair market value of the
Units  so  acquired  at the  time of the  exchange  and the  amount  of any cash
received in lieu of any fractional Unit.
The cost to the  holder of the  Units so  acquired  will be equal to their  fair
market value at the time of the exchange and must be averaged  with the adjusted
cost base of all other Units held at that time as capital property by the holder
for the purpose of calculating the adjusted cost base of each such Unit.
If the Trust  redeems a Debenture  prior to maturity or repays a Debenture  upon
maturity and the holder does not exercise the conversion privilege prior to such
redemption or  repayment,  the holder will be considered to have disposed of the
Debenture for proceeds of disposition equal to the amount received by the holder
(other than the amount  received or deemed to be received as  interest)  on such
redemption  or  repayment.  Generally a premium paid on redemption or repurchase
prior to maturity will be deemed to be interest. If the holder receives Units on
redemption or repayment, the holder will be considered to have received proceeds
of  disposition  equal to the fair market value of the Units so received and the
amount of any cash  received  in lieu of any  fractional  Unit.  The cost to the
holder of the Units so received  will be equal to their fair market value at the
time of the  exchange and must be averaged  with the  adjusted  cost base of all
other Units held at that time as capital  property by the holder for the purpose
of calculating the adjusted cost base of each such Unit.
<PAGE>
47
On any  disposition  or deemed  disposition  a Debenture as  described  above or
otherwise,  the holder thereof will generally realize a capital gain (or capital
loss) equal to the amount by which the  proceeds  of  disposition  (adjusted  as
described  below) are  greater  (or less)  than the  aggregate  of the  holder's
adjusted cost base of the Debenture and any reasonable costs of the disposition.
Upon such a disposition or deemed  disposition of a Debenture,  interest accrued
thereon to the date of  disposition  or other wise deemed to be received will be
included in computing the holder's income,  except to the extent such amount was
otherwise included in the holder's income, and will be excluded in computing the
holder's proceeds of disposition of the Debenture.
One-half  of any  capital  gain  realized  by the holder will be included in the
holder's  income  under  the Tax Act for the year of  disposition  as a  taxable
capital  gain.  One-half of any capital  loss  realized  on a  disposition  of a
Debenture may be deducted  against  taxable capital gains realized by the holder
in the year of  disposition,  in the three  preceding  taxation  years or in any
subsequent taxation year, to the extent and under the circumstances described in
the Tax Act.
A capital  gain  realized  by a holder who is an  individual  may give rise to a
liability for  alternative  minimum tax. A holder that is throughout  the year a
"Canadian-controlled  private  corporation"  (as  defined in the Tax Act) may be
liable to pay an  additional  refundable  tax of 6 2/3% on certain  investment
income, including interest and taxable capital gains.
Taxation of Holders of Debentures Not Resident in Canada
A holder of a Debenture  who is not  resident or deemed to be resident in Canada
will  generally  be subject to  Canadian  withholding  tax at the rate of 25% on
interest paid or credited pursuant to the Debenture, unless such rate is reduced
under  the   provisions  of  a  tax  treaty  between  Canada  and  the  holder's
jurisdiction of residence. A holder of a Debenture resident in the United States
who is  entitled  to claim the  benefit of the  Canada-US  Tax  Convention  will
generally  be  entitled  to have the rate of  withholding  reduced to 10% of the
amount of any  interest  paid or credited.  Any premium paid on a redemption  or
repurchase of Debentures prior to maturity will be deemed to be interest paid or
credited and subject to withholding tax.
A  disposition  or deemed  disposition  of a Debenture,  whether on  conversion,
redemption, or otherwise, will not give rise to any capital gains subject to tax
under the Tax Act to a holder who is not  resident  or deemed to be  resident in
Canada  provided  that (i) the holder  does not hold or use and is not deemed to
hold or use the Debenture in the course of carrying on business in Canada;  (ii)
the  Debenture  is not a  "designated  insurance  property"  of the  holder  for
purposes of the Tax Act; and (iii) the Debenture  does not otherwise  constitute
"taxable  Canadian  property"  to the holder  within the meaning of the Tax Act.
Generally,  a Debenture will not otherwise  constitute taxable Canadian property
to a non-resident  holder at the time of the  disposition or deemed  disposition
thereof  unless the holder,  persons with whom the holder does not deal at arm's
length  (within  the  meaning of the Tax Act) or the holder  together  with such
persons  owned 25% or more of the Units at any time during the  60-month  period
immediately preceding the disposition.
If a Debenture is sold or transferred  by a  non-resident  holder to a purchaser
that is  resident  in Canada at a time when  interest  has  accrued  and remains
unpaid  on  the  Debenture,  the  portion  of the  purchase  or  transfer  price
attributable to such accrued  interest will be deemed to be interest,  and there
will be liability on the part of the purchaser to remit  withholding tax on such
demand interest (and any other amounts deemed to be interest) under the Tax Act.
The computation of the amount of interest which is deemed to have been paid on a
transfer  of  Debentures,  including  a  conversion,  is  complex,  and in  some
circumstances unclear.  Non-resident sellers or transferors of Debentures should
consult their own advisors as to whether any withholding obligation applies.
Status of the Trust
Based upon  representations  made by the Manager, in the opinion of Counsel, the
Trust  presently  qualifies  as a "mutual fund trust" as defined by the Tax Act,
and this summary assumes that the Trust will continue to so qualify.  Counsel is
advised by the Manager that it is intended that the  requirements  necessary for
the Trust to qualify as a mutual  fund trust will  continue to be  satisfied  so
that the Trust will continue to qualify as a mutual fund trust at all
<PAGE>
48
times  throughout  its  existence.  In the event  that the Trust  were not to so
qualify,  the income tax  considerations  would in some  respects be  materially
different from those described herein.
Taxation of the Trust
The Trust is  required to include in its income for each  taxation  year all net
realized  capital  gains,  dividends,  accrued  interest and amounts  accrued in
respect of the Royalty. The Trust may deduct in respect of each taxation year an
amount not exceeding  20% of the total issue  expenses of the offering and other
offerings of its Units or debt  obligations  (subject to  proration  for a short
taxation year) to the extent that those  expenses were not otherwise  deductible
in  a  preceding   year,   and  may  also  deduct   reasonable   management  and
administration  fees incurred by it in the year.  The Trust may also deduct,  in
computing  its  income  from all  sources  for a  taxation  year,  an amount not
exceeding 10.00% on a declining balance basis of its cumulative Canadian oil and
gas property  expense  ("COGPE")  account at the end of that year,  prorated for
short taxation years.
To the  extent  that the Trust has any  income  for a  taxation  year  after the
inclusions and deductions  outlined above, the Trust will be permitted to deduct
all amounts of income which are paid or become  payable by it to  Unitholders in
the year.  An amount will be  considered  payable to a Unitholder  in a taxation
year only if it is paid in the year by the Trust or the  Unitholder  is entitled
in the year to enforce payment of the amount.  Counsel is advised that the Trust
intends to deduct,  in  computing  its  income,  the full amount  available  for
deduction  in  each  year to the  extent  of its  taxable  income  for the  year
otherwise determined.  As a result of such deduction from income, it is expected
that the Trust will not be liable for any  material  amount of tax under the Tax
Act; however no assurances can be given in this regard.
Under the Trust  Indenture,  income received by the Trust may be used to finance
cash redemptions of Trust Units. Further, it is possible that income received by
the  Trust  will  be used to  repay  the  principal  amount  of any  outstanding
indebtedness  (including the Debentures and the Redemption Notes).  Accordingly,
such income so utilized will not be payable to holders of the Trust Units by way
of cash  distributions.  In such  circumstances,  such  income may be payable to
holders  of Trust  Units  in the form of  additional  Trust  Units  ("Reinvested
Units").
Taxation of Unitholders Resident in Canada
Each  Unitholder is required to include in computing his income for a particular
taxation year the portion of the net income of the Trust that is paid or payable
to the Unitholder in that taxation year,  whether or not the amount was actually
paid to the Unitholder in that year.  Income of a Unitholder from the Units will
be considered  to be income from property and not resource  income (or "resource
profits") for purposes of the Tax Act. Any loss of the Trust for purposes of the
Tax Act cannot be allocated to, or treated as a loss of a Unitholder.
Reinvested Units issued to a Unitholder in lieu of a cash distribution will have
a cost equal to the fair market  value of such units and will be  averaged  with
the adjusted cost base of all other Units held by the Unitholder at that time as
capital property in order to determine the adjusted cost base of each Unit.
Any  amounts  paid or  payable  by the  Trust to a  Unitholder  in excess of the
Unitholder's  share of the  income of the Trust and the  non-taxable  portion of
capital  gains made payable to  Unitholders  in the year will  generally  not be
included in the income of the  Unitholder but will reduce the adjusted cost base
of such Unitholder's Trust Units. To the extent that the adjusted cost base to a
holder of a Trust Unit would  otherwise be less than nil,  the  negative  amount
will be deemed to be a capital gain of the  Unitholder  from the  disposition of
the Trust Unit in the year in which the negative amount arises.  The non-taxable
portion  of  capital  gains of the  Trust  that is paid or made  payable  to the
Unitholder in a year will not be included in computing the  Unitholder's  income
for the year and will not reduce the adjusted cost base to the Unitholder of the
Trust Units.
An actual or deemed  disposition  (other than in a tax deferred  transaction) of
Units by a Unitholder, whether on a redemption or otherwise, will give rise to a
capital  gain (or  capital  loss)  equal to the amount by which the  proceeds of
disposition  (excluding  any amount  payable by the Trust  which  represents  an
amount that must otherwise be included in the  Unitholder's  income as described
above) are greater than (or less than) the  aggregate of the adjusted  cost base
of the Units to the Unitholder  plus any reasonable  costs  associated  with the
disposition.  One-half  of  any  capital  gain  realized  by a  Unitholder  on a
disposition of a Unit will be included in the Unitholder's income under the
<PAGE>
49
Tax Act for the year of disposition as a taxable  capital gain.  One-half of any
capital loss realized on a disposition of a Unit may be deducted against taxable
capital  gains  realized by the  Unitholder in the year of  disposition,  in the
three preceding taxation years or in any subsequent taxation year, to the extent
and under the circumstances described in the Tax Act.
Taxable  capital gains  realized by a Unitholder  who is an individual  may give
rise to alternative minimum tax depending on such Unitholder's circumstances.  A
Unitholder that throughout the relevant year is a  "Canadian-controlled  private
corporation"  as  defined  in the  Tax Act may be  liable  to pay an  additional
refundable tax of 6 2/3% on certain investment income, including taxable capital
gains.
A redemption of Units in consideration  for cash, Notes or Redemption  Notes, as
the case may be, will be a disposition of such Units for proceeds of disposition
equal to the  amount  of such  cash or the fair  market  value of such  Notes or
Redemption  Notes,  as the  case  may  be,  less  any  portion  thereof  that is
considered  to be a  distribution  out of the  income  of the  Trust.  Redeeming
Unitholders will consequently realize a capital gain, or sustain a capital loss,
depending  upon whether such proceeds  exceed,  or are exceeded by, the adjusted
cost base of the Units so redeemed.  The receipt of Notes or Redemption Notes in
substitution for Units may result in a change in the income tax characterization
of  distributions.  Holders  of  Notes or  Redemption  Notes  generally  will be
required to include in income  interest  that is received or  receivable or that
accrues (depending on the status of the Unitholder as an individual, corporation
or trust) on the Notes or  Redemption  Notes.  The cost to a  Unitholder  of any
property  distributed to a Unitholder by the Trust will be deemed to be equal to
the fair market value of such property at the time of distribution.  Unitholders
should consult with their own tax advisors as to the  consequences  of receiving
Notes or Redemption Notes on a redemption.
Taxation of Unitholders Not Resident in Canada
Any  distribution  of income of the Trust to a Unitholder who is not resident or
deemed  to  be  resident  in  Canada  will  generally  be  subject  to  Canadian
withholding  tax at the rate of 25%,  unless  such  rate is  reduced  under  the
provisions of a tax treaty between Canada and the  Unitholder's  jurisdiction of
residence.  A Unitholder  resident in the United States who is entitled to claim
the benefit of the Canada-US Tax Convention will be entitled to have the rate of
withholding reduced to 15% of the amount of any income distributed.  Pursuant to
the Proposed Amendments, the Trust will, beginning in 2005, also be obligated to
withhold on all capital distributions to non-residents at the rate of 15%. Where
a  non-resident  sustains a capital loss on a disposition of Units such loss may
reduce the non-resident's tax liability in respect of capital distributions.
A  disposition  or  deemed  disposition  of a Unit,  whether  on  redemption  or
otherwise,  will not give rise to any capital gains subject to tax under the Tax
Act to a holder who is not resident or deemed to be resident in Canada  provided
that the  Units  are not  "taxable  Canadian  property"  of the  holder  for the
purposes of the Tax Act. Units will not be considered  taxable Canadian property
to such a holder  unless:  (a) the holder holds or uses, or is deemed to hold or
use the Units in the course of carrying on business in Canada; (b) the Units are
"designated  insurance  property" of the holder for purposes of the Tax Act; (c)
at any time during the 60 month period immediately  preceding the disposition of
the  Units the  holder or  persons  with whom the  holder  did not deal at arm's
length or any combination thereof,  held 25% or more of the issued Units; or (d)
the Trust is not a mutual fund trust for the purposes of the Tax Act on the date
of disposition.
Interest  paid or credited on notes to a  non-resident  Unitholder  who receives
notes or  redemption  notes on a redemption of Units will be subject to Canadian
withholding  tax at a rate  of  25%,  unless  such  rate is  reduced  under  the
provisions  of an  applicable  tax treaty.  A Unitholder  resident in the United
States who is  entitled  to claim the benefit of the  Canada-US  Tax  Convention
generally will be entitled to have the rate of withholding reduced to 10% of the
amount of such interest.
ELIGIBILITY FOR INVESTMENT
Provided the Trust qualifies as a mutual fund trust, the Subscription  Receipts,
the Debentures and the Units issuable pursuant to the Subscription  Receipts and
on  conversion,  redemption  or maturity  of the  Debentures  will be  qualified
investments  under the Tax Act for  trusts  governed  by  registered  retirement
savings plans, registered retirement income funds, deferred profit sharing plans
("DPSPs") (except, in the case of the Debentures,  a DPSP to which the
<PAGE>
50
Trust  has  made  a  contribution)   and  registered   education  savings  plans
(collectively,  the "Plans") provided that in the case of Subscription Receipts,
the  Trust  deals at arm's  length  with  each  person  who is an  annuitant,  a
beneficiary,  an employee or  subscriber  under the  governing  plan of the plan
trust for such  plans.  If the Trust  ceases to qualify as a mutual  fund trust,
Subscription  Receipts,  the Debentures  and the Units issuable  pursuant to the
Subscription  Receipts  and  on  conversion,   redemption  or  maturity  of  the
Debentures  will  cease to be  qualified  investments  for  Plans.  Adverse  tax
consequences  may  apply  to a Plan,  or an  annuitant  thereunder,  if the Plan
acquires or holds property that is not a qualified investment for the Plan.
Where a Plan receives  Notes or Redemption  Notes as a result of a redemption of
Units,  such Notes may not be qualified  investments  for the Plan under the Tax
Act depending  upon the  circumstances  at the time, and this could give rise to
adverse consequences to the Plan or the annuitant thereunder. Accordingly, Plans
that own Units should consult their own advisors before deciding to exercise the
redemption rights thereunder.
Provided the Trust restricts its holdings in foreign  property within the limits
provided in the Tax Act and provided the Trust qualifies as a mutual fund trust,
the Subscription Receipts, the Debentures and the Units issuable pursuant to the
Subscription  Receipts  and  on  conversion,   redemption  or  maturity  of  the
Debentures  will not be  foreign  property  for  Plans  (other  than  registered
education savings plans),  registered  pension plans or other persons subject to
tax under Part XI of the Tax Act.  Registered  education  savings  plans are not
subject to tax under Part XI of the Tax Act.
See also "Risk Factors - Consequences of Loss of Mutual Fund Trust Status".
RISK FACTORS
An  investment  in the  securities  of  Advantage  is subject to certain  risks.
Investors  should  carefully  consider the risks described under "Risk Factors",
beginning on page 50 of the AIF as well as the following risk factors:
Possible Failure to Realize Anticipated Benefits of Acquisitions
The Trust is proposing to complete the Acquisition to strengthen its position in
the oil and  natural  gas  industry  and to create  the  opportunity  to realize
certain  benefits  including,   among  other  things,  potential  cost  savings.
Achieving the benefits of these and future  acquisitions  the Trust may complete
depends  in  part  on  successfully   consolidating  functions  and  integrating
operations,  procedures and personnel in a timely and efficient  manner, as well
as the Trust's and AOG's ability to realize the anticipated growth opportunities
and synergies from combining the acquired  businesses and operations  with those
of the Trust. The integration of acquired  businesses requires the dedication of
substantial  management effort, time and resources which may divert management's
focus and resources  from other  strategic  opportunities  and from  operational
matters during this process.  The integration  process may result in the loss of
key employees  and the  disruption  of ongoing  business,  customer and employee
relationships  that may  adversely  affect the  Trust's  ability to achieve  the
anticipated benefits of these and future acquisitions.
Possible Failure to Complete the Acquisition
The  Acquisition is subject to normal  commercial  risk that the Acquisition may
not  be  completed  on  the  terms  negotiated  or at  all.  If  closing  of the
Acquisition  does not take place by the  Termination  Time, the Escrow Agent and
the Trust  will  repay to holders of  Subscription  Receipts,  commencing  on or
before the second Business Day following the  Termination  Time, an amount equal
to the issue price therefor plus a pro rata share of the interest  earned on the
Escrowed Funds and the Debentures will mature on the Initial Maturity Date.
Operational and Reserves Risks Relating to the Assets
The risk factors set forth in the Trust's AIF and in this short form  prospectus
relating to the oil and natural gas business and the  operations and Reserves of
the Trust  apply  equally in respect of the Assets  that the Trust is  acquiring
pursuant  to  the  Acquisition.   In  particular,   the  Reserves  and  recovery
information contained in the Sproule Anadarko Report in respect of the Assets is
only an estimate and the actual  production from and ultimate  Reserves of those
properties may be greater or less than the estimates contained in such report.
<PAGE>
51
Market for Securities
There is  currently no market  through  which the  Subscription  Receipts or the
Debentures  may be sold and  purchasers  may not be able to resell  Subscription
Receipts or Debentures purchased under this short form prospectus.  There can be
no assurance  that an active  trading  market will develop for the  Subscription
Receipts or the  Debentures  after the offering,  or if  developed,  that such a
market will be sustained at the price level of the offering.
Prior Ranking Indebtedness; Absence of Covenant Protection
The  Debentures  will  be  subordinate  to all  Senior  Indebtedness  and to any
indebtedness of creditors of the Trust.  The Debentures will also be effectively
subordinate  to claims of  creditors of the Trust's  subsidiaries  except to the
extent the Trust is a creditor of such subsidiaries  ranking at least pari passu
with such other creditors.
Other than as described herein,  the Indenture will not limit the ability of the
Trust to incur additional debt or liabilities (including Senior Indebtedness) or
to make distributions. The Indenture does not contain any provision specifically
intended to protect holders of the Debentures in the event of a future leveraged
transaction  involving  the Trust.  However,  the Trust  Indenture,  among other
things,  restricts  the  Trust's  level  of  indebtedness,   provides  operating
investment  guidelines,  mandates the making of distributions  and specifies the
nature of its business.
Changes in Accounting Standards Applicable to Convertible Debentures
For 2005 and future years,  the amounts  outstanding  for the Debentures will be
classified  as  liabilities  and the  interest  cost on the  Debentures  will be
included as interest expense in the determination of net income.
Consequences of Loss of Mutual Fund Trust Status
If the Trust no longer  qualified  as a mutual  fund  trust or such  status  was
successfully   challenged  by  a  relevant  tax   authority,   certain   adverse
consequences  may arise for the Trust and  Unitholders.  Some of the significant
consequences of losing mutual fund trust status are as follows:
o     The  Trust  would be taxed on  certain  types  of  income  distributed  to
      Unitholders,  including  income  generated  by the  royalties  held by the
      Trust.  Payment  of this  tax  may  have  adverse  consequences  for  some
      Unitholders, particularly Unitholders that are not residents of Canada and
      residents of Canada that are otherwise exempt from Canadian income tax.
o     The  Trust  would  cease  to be  eligible  for the  capital  gains  refund
      mechanism  available  under  Canadian tax laws if it ceased to be a mutual
      fund trust.
o     Trust Units held by  Unitholders  that are not  residents  of Canada would
      become taxable  Canadian  property.  These  non-resident  holders would be
      subject to Canadian  income tax on any gains  realized on a disposition of
      Trust Units held by them.
o     The Trust Units would not constitute qualified  investments for Plans. If,
      at the end of any month,  one of these Plans hold Trust Units that are not
      qualified  investments,  the Plan  must pay a tax  equal to 1% of the fair
      market value of the Trust Units at the time the Trust Units were  acquired
      by the Plan.  An RRSP or RRIF holding  non-qualified  Trust Units would be
      subject to taxation on income  attributable to the Trust Units. If an RESP
      holds non-qualified  Trust Units, it may have its registration  revoked by
      the Canada Revenue Agency.
o     The  Trust  would  no  longer  be  exempt  from  the  application  of  the
      alternative minimum tax provisions of the Tax Act.
In addition, the Trust may take certain measures in the future to the extent the
Trust  believes  them  necessary  to maintain its status as a mutual fund trust.
These measures could be adverse to certain holders of Trust Units.
<PAGE>
52
MATERIAL CONTRACTS
The  material  contracts  entered  into or to be  entered  into by the  Trust in
connection with the offering are as follows:
(a)   the  Subscription  Receipt  Agreement  referred  to under  "Details of the
      Offering - Subscription Receipts";
(b)   the Indenture  referred to under  "Details of the Offering - Debentures";
      and
(c)   the Underwriting Agreement referred to under "Plan of Distribution".
Copies of each of the  foregoing  agreements  (in draft form prior to closing in
the  case  of the  Subscription  Receipt  Agreement  and the  Indenture)  may be
inspected  during regular  business hours at the offices of the Trust,  at 3100,
150 - 6th Avenue S.W., Calgary,  Alberta, T2P 3Y7 until the expiry of the 30-day
period following the date of the final short form prospectus.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
There are no outstanding  legal  proceedings  material to the Trust to which the
Trust is a party or in respect of which any of its properties  are subject,  nor
are there any such proceedings known to be contemplated.
AUDITORS, TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
The auditors of the Trust are KPMG LLP, Chartered Accountants, Suite 1200, 205 -
5th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta T2P 4B9.
The transfer agent and registrar for the Units,  the  Subscription  Receipts and
Debentures is Computershare  Trust Company of Canada at its principal offices in
Calgary, Alberta and Toronto, Ontario.
STATUTORY AND CONTRACTUAL RIGHTS OF RESCISSION AND
                         STATUTORY RIGHTS OF WITHDRAWAL
Securities legislation in certain of the provinces of Canada provides purchasers
with the right to withdraw from an agreement to purchase securities.  This right
may be exercised  within two business days after receipt or deemed  receipt of a
prospectus  and  any  amendment.   In  several  of  the  provinces,   securities
legislation  further  provides a purchaser  with remedies for  rescission or, in
some  jurisdictions,  damages if the  prospectus  and any  amendment  contains a
misrepresentation  or is not  delivered  to the  purchaser,  provided  that  the
remedies for  rescission or damages are  exercised by the  purchaser  within the
time limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the purchaser's province.
The  purchaser  should  refer to any  applicable  provisions  of the  securities
legislation of the province in which the purchaser  resides for the  particulars
of these rights or consult with a legal advisor.
In addition,  original purchasers of Subscription Receipts will have the benefit
of a contractual right of rescission exercisable following the issuance of Units
to such purchasers. See "Details of the Offering - Subscription Receipts".
<PAGE>
53
AUDITORS' CONSENT
The Board of Directors of Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd.
We have read the short form  preliminary  prospectus of Advantage  Energy Income
Fund (the  "Trust")  dated  August 26,  2004  relating  to the sale and issue of
subscription  receipts  and  extendible   convertible   unsecured   subordinated
debentures  of the Trust.  We have complied  with  Canadian  Generally  Accepted
Standards for an auditor's involvement with offering documents.
We consent to the use, through incorporation by reference in the above mentioned
short form preliminary prospectus, of our report to the Unitholders of the Trust
on the consolidated balance sheets of the Trust as at December 31, 2003 and 2002
and the consolidated  statements of income and accumulated income and cash flows
for each of the years then ended. Our report is dated April 7, 2004.
(signed) KPMG LLP
Chartered Accountants
Calgary,                                                                  Canada
August 26, 2004
AUDITORS' CONSENT
The Board of Directors of Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd.
We have read the short form  prospectus  of  Advantage  Energy  Income Fund (the
"Trust")  dated  o,  2004  relating to the sale and issue of  subscription
receipts and extendible  convertible  unsecured  subordinated  debentures of the
Trust.  We have  complied  with  Canadian  Generally  Accepted  Standards for an
auditor's  involvement  with  offering  documents.
We consent to the use in the above-mentioned short form prospectus of our report
to the  directors  of  Advantage  Oil & Gas Ltd. on the schedule of revenues and
expenses for the  Acquired  Assets for the year ended  December  31,  2003.  Our
report is dated August 24, 2004.
Chartered Accountants
Calgary,                                                                  Canada
o, 2004
AUDITORS' CONSENT
We have read the short form  prospectus  of  Advantage  Energy  Income Fund (the
"Trust") dated o,  2004 relating to the  qualification for distribution of
3,500,000 subscription receipts each representing the right to receive one trust
unit of the Trust,  $75,000,000 principal amount of 7.50% extendible convertible
unsecured subordinated  debentures of the Trust and $50,000,000 principal amount
of 7.75% extendible convertible unsecured subordinated  debentures of the Trust.
We have  complied with Canadian  generally  accepted  standards for an auditor's
involvement with offering documents.
We consent to the use through  incorporation by reference in the above-mentioned
short form  prospectus  of our report to the  directors  of  MarkWest  Resources
Canada Corp.  ("MarkWest")  on the balance  sheet of MarkWest as at December 31,
2002 and the  statements  of earnings and retained  earnings  (deficit) and cash
flows for the year then ended. Our report is dated November 12, 2003.
Chartered Accountants
Calgary,                                                                  Canada
o, 2004
<PAGE>
A-1
SCHEDULE "A"
              UNAUDITED PROFORMA CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
<PAGE>
A-2
The Board of Directors of Advantage Oil & Gas Ltd.
We have read the accompanying  unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet of
Advantage  Energy Income Fund (the "Fund") as at June 30, 2004 and unaudited pro
forma consolidated statement of operations for the six months then ended and for
the year ended December 31, 2003, and have performed the following procedures:
1.    Compared the figures in the columns captioned "Advantage" to the unaudited
      consolidated  financial statements of the Fund as at June 30, 2004 and for
      the  six  months  then  ended,  and  the  audited  consolidated  financial
      statements  of the Fund for the year ended  December 31, 2003, as restated
      and described in the  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements as at
      June 30, 2004 and for the six months then ended,  respectively,  and found
      them to be in agreement.
2.    Compared the figures in the columns  captioned  "Acquired  Assets " to the
      unaudited schedule of revenues and expenses of the Acquired Assets for the
      six months  ended June 30, 2004 and the audited  schedule of revenues  and
      expenses of the Acquired Assets for the year ended December 31, 2003.
3.    Compared the figures in the columns captioned  "MarkWest" to the unaudited
      financial  statements of MarkWest  Resources  Canada Corp. as at September
30,  2003  and  for  the  nine  months  then  ended  and to the  unaudited
      accounting  records of MarkWest Resources Canada Corp. for the period from
      October 1, 2003 to December 2, 2003 and found them to be in agreement.
4.    Made enquiries of certain officials of the Company who have responsibility
      for financial and accounting matters about:
(a)   The basis for determination of the pro forma adjustments; and
(b)   Whether the pro forma consolidated financial statements comply as to
            form in all material  respects with the  securities  regulations  of
            various provinces.
The officials:
(a)   described  to us  the  basis  for  determination  of the  pro  forma
            adjustments, and
(b)   stated that the pro forma consolidated  financial  statements comply
            as to form in all material respects with the securities  regulations
            of various provinces.
5.    Read the notes to the pro forma  consolidated  financial  statements,  and
      found  them  to  be  consistent   with  the  basis  described  to  us  for
      determination of the pro forma adjustments.
6.    Recalculated the application of the pro forma adjustments to the aggregate
      of the  amounts in the other  columns as at June 30,  2004 and for the six
      months then ended, and for the year ended December 31, 2003, and found the
      amounts  in  the  column   captioned  "Pro  Forma   Consolidated"   to  be
      arithmetically correct.
A  pro  forma  financial  statement  is  based  on  management  assumptions  and
adjustments,  which are  inherently  subjective.  The foregoing  procedures  are
substantially  less than either an audit or a review,  the objective of which is
the expression of assurance with respect to  management's  assumptions,  the pro
forma  adjustments,  and the  application  of the  adjustments to the historical
financial information.  Accordingly, we express no such assurance. The foregoing
procedures would not necessarily reveal matters of significance to the pro forma
consolidated financial statements, and we therefore make no representation about
the  sufficiency  of the  procedures  for  the  purposes  of a  reader  of  such
statements.
Chartered Accountants
Calgary, Canada
August o, 2004
<PAGE>
A-3
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
                       PROFORMA CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
                                   (unaudited)
                             (thousands of dollars)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                  Advantage      Pro Forma      
Pro Forma
                                                June 30, 2004   Adjustments     
Consolidated
                                                -------------   -----------
---------   ------------
<S>                                             <C>             <C>           
<C>         <C>
Assets
Current assets
   Accounts receivable                          $      35,988   $         -     
$    35,988
Property and equipment                                532,101       183,198   
(note 2a)        715,299
Goodwill                                               27,773             -     
27,773
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
                                                $     595,862   $   183,198     
$    779,060
                                                =============   ===========     
============
Liabilities
Current liabilities
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities     $      41,248   $         -     
$    41,248
   Cash distributions payable to Unitholders            9,189             -     
9,189
   Hedging liability                                   10,224             -     
10,224
   Bank indebtedness                                  161,707        (5,910)  
(note 2a)        155,797
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
                                                      222,368        (5,910)    
216,458
Capital lease obligation                                1,885             -     
1,885
Asset retirement obligations                           14,477         6,598   
(note 2a)         21,075
Future income taxes                                    68,457             -     
68,457
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
                                                      307,187           688     
307,875
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
Unitholders' Equity
Unitholders' capital                                  339,279        62,510   
(note 2a)        401,789
Convertible debentures                                 66,396       125,000   
(note 2a)        191,396
Contributed surplus                                     1,036             -     
1,036
Accumulated income                                     88,044        (5,000)  
(note 2a)         83,044
Accumulated cash distributions                       (206,080)            -     
(206,080)
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
                                                      288,675       182,510
471,185
                                                -------------   -----------     
------------
                                                $     595,862   $   183,198     
$    779,060
                                                =============   ===========     
============
</TABLE>
see  accompanying  notes  to the  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  financial
statements
<PAGE>
A-4
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
                  PROFORMA CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
                             (thousands of dollars)
                                   (unaudited)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                                                 Acquired
                                                Advantage         Assets
                                               Six Months      Six Months
                                                  Ended           Ended        
Pro Forma                 Pro Forma
                                              June 30, 2004   June 30, 2004   
Adjustments               Consolidated
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------   ---------   ------------
<S>                                           <C>             <C>             
<C>           <C>         <C>
Revenue
   Petroleum and natural gas sales            $     108,017   $      48,640   $ 
-               $    156,657
   Royalties, net of Alberta Royalty Credit         (21,130)        (10,997)    
(32,127)
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------               ------------
                                                     86,887          37,643     
-                    124,530
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------               ------------
Expenses
   Operating                                         16,538          13,130     
-                     29,668
   General and administrative                         1,634               -     
-                      1,634
   Stock-based compensation                           1,036               -     
-                      1,036
   Interest                                           2,677               -     
(112)  (note 2c)          2,565
   Management fees                                    1,055               -     
368   (note 2d)          1,423
   Non-cash performance incentive                     2,900               -     
-                      2,900
   Unrealized hedging loss                           10,224               -     
-                     10,224
   Depletion, depreciation and accretion             41,001               -     
19,417   (note 2e)         60,418
                                              -------------   -------------
-----------               ------------
                                                     77,065          13,130     
19,673                    109,868
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------               ------------
Income before taxes                                   9,822          24,513     
(19,673)                    14,662
Taxes
   Future income tax recovery                        (9,542)              -     
-                     (9,542)
   Income and capital taxes                             630               -     
201   (note 2f)            831
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------               ------------
                                                     (8,912)              -     
201                     (8,711)
                                              -------------   -------------   
-----------               ------------
Net income                                    $      18,734   $      24,513   $ 
(19,874)              $     23,373
                                              =============   =============   
===========               ============
Net income per trust unit (note 2g)
   Basic                                                                        
$       0.36
   Diluted                                                                      
$       0.36
</TABLE>
see  accompanying  notes  to the  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  financial
statements
<PAGE>
A-5
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
                  PROFORMA CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF OPERATIONS
                             (thousands of dollars)
                                   (unaudited)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
                                           MarkWest                   Acquired
                            Advantage    Nine Months      MarkWest     Assets   
Acquired
                           Year ended       Ended      October 1 to   Year Ended
MarkWest   Assets Pro
                          December 31,  September 30,   December 2,  December 
31,    ProForma     Forma                 Pro Forma
                             2003            2003          2003          2003   
Adjustments  Adjustments            Consolidated
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------  --------- ------------
                          (restated)
<S>                       <C>           <C>            <C>           <C>        
<C>          <C>          <C>       <C>
Revenue
 Petroleum and natural
   gas sales              $    166,075  $      37,695  $      8,884  $
104,809  $         -  $         -            $    317,463
 Royalties, net of
   Alberta Royalty Credit      (28,491)       (11,263)       (2,144)      
(24,751)           -            -                 (66,649)
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
                               137,584         26,432         6,740        
80,058            -            -                 250,814
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
Expenses
 Operating                      25,618          7,641         1,884        
25,310            -            -                  60,453
 General and
   administrative                3,216          1,787           784             
-            -            -                   5,787
 Interest                        6,378          1,822             -             
-       (3,592)        (284) (note 2c)        4,324
 Management fees                 1,679              -             -             
-          355          821  (note 2d)        2,855
 Non-cash performance
   incentive                    19,592              -             -             
-            -            -                  19,592
 Depletion, depreciation
   and accretion                54,027         15,295         5,144             
(1,448)      40,325  (note 2e)      113,343
 Other                               -            151             -             
-            -            -                     151
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
                               110,510         26,696         7,812        
25,310       (4,685)      40,862                 206,505
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
Income (loss) before
   taxes                        27,074           (264)       (1,072)       
54,748        4,685      (40,862)                 44,309
Taxes
Future income tax
 recovery                      (18,203)        (7,143)            -             
-            -            -                 (25,346)
Income and capital taxes         1,253            431             -             
-            -          411  (note 2f)        2,095
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
                               (16,950)        (6,712)            -             
-            -          411                 (23,251)
                          ------------  -------------  ------------  
------------  -----------  -----------            ------------
Net income                $     44,024  $       6,448  $     (1,072) $     
54,748  $     4,685  $   (41,273)           $     67,560
                          ============  =============  ============  
============  ===========  ===========            ============
Net income per trust unit
 (note 2g)
 Basic                                                                          
1.26
 Diluted                                                                        
1.26
</TABLE>
see  accompanying  notes  to  the  unaudited  pro forma consolidated   financial
statements
<PAGE>
A-6
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
Notes to Pro Forma Consolidated Financial Statements
Six months Ended June 30, 2004 and Year Ended December 31, 2003 (unaudited)
1.   Basis of Presentation
On August 24, 2004  Advantage  Oil & Gas Ltd.  entered into an agreement to
     acquire  properties from Anadarko Canada Corporation  ("Acquired  Assets").
     The acquisition is expected to close on September 30, 2004.
On December 2, 2003,  Advantage  Oil & Gas Ltd.  acquired all of the issued
     and outstanding shares of MarkWest Resources Canada Corp.  ("MarkWest") for
     cash consideration of $97 million.
The accompanying unaudited pro forma consolidated financial statements have
     been prepared by management of Advantage  Energy Income Fund  ("Advantage")
     in accordance with Canadian generally accepted  accounting  principles.  In
     the opinion of management the pro forma consolidated  financial  statements
     include  all  material  adjustments  necessary  for  fair  presentation  in
     accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles.
These pro forma  consolidated  financial  statements  may not be indicative
     either of the  results  that  actually  would have  occurred  if the events
     reflected  herein  had been in  effect  on the  dates  indicated  or of the
     results which may be obtained in the future.
The  unaudited pro forma  consolidated  balance sheet of Advantage has been
     prepared based on the unaudited  consolidated balance sheet of Advantage as
     at June 30,  2004.  The  unaudited  pro  forma  consolidated  statement  of
     operations  for the six-month  period ended June 30, 2004 has been prepared
     from:
o    The  unaudited  consolidated  statement of operations of Advantage for
          the six-month period ended June 30, 2004; and
o    The unaudited schedule of revenues and expenses of the Acquired Assets
          for the six-month  period ended June 30, 2004.
The unaudited pro forma  consolidated  statement of operations for the year
     ended December 31, 2003 has been prepared from:
o    The audited consolidated  statement of operations of Advantage for the
          year ended December 31, 2003;
o    The audited  schedule of revenues and expenses of the Acquired  Assets
          for the year ended December 31, 2003; and
o    The  unaudited  statement of earnings of MarkWest  for the  nine-month
          period ended September 30, 2003;
o    The unaudited  accounting  information of MarkWest for the period from
          October 1, 2003 to December 1, 2003.
Advantage's  financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2003 have
     been  restated to reflect a change in  accounting  policy  with  respect to
     asset  retirement  obligations.  This change in  accounting  policy is more
     fully  described in the  unaudited  consolidated  financial  statements  of
     Advantage  as at and for the  six-month  period  ended June 30,  2004.  The
     restated  amounts are  reflected  in the pro forma  consolidated  financial
     statements.
<PAGE>
A-7
2.   Pro forma transactions and assumptions
The pro forma  consolidated  balance  sheet gives  effect to the  following
     transactions  and  assumptions  as if they had  occurred on June 30,  2004,
     while the pro forma consolidated statements of operations for the six month
     period  ended June 30,  2004 and the year  ended  December  31,  2003 gives
     effect  to the  following  transactions  and  assumptions  as if  they  had
     occurred on January 1, 2004 and January 1, 2003 respectively:
(a)  The   acquisition  of  the  Acquired  Assets  by  Advantage  for  cash
          consideration of $186,000,000  before purchase price adjustments.  The
          acquisition is being accounted for under the purchase method.
The acquisition is to be financed  through the issuance of $50,000,000
          of 7.75% and $75,000,000 of 7.50% subordinated  convertible debentures
          and the  issuance of 3.5 million  Trust Units at a price of $18.80 per
          unit. Associated  underwriters' fees related to convertible debentures
          of $5,000,000 are included in accumulated income. Excess proceeds over
          the purchase price of the Acquired  Assets will be used to reduce bank
          debt.
(b)  The operations from the MarkWest acquisition  described in note 1 have
          been included in the  statement of  operations of Advantage  beginning
          December 2, 2003. As a result,  the pro forma  statement of operations
          for the year ended  December 31, 2003 has been adjusted to reflect the
          operations  of MarkWest  for the period from  January 1 to December 1,
          2003.
(c)  Interest  expense  has been  calculated  by applying  applicable  bank
          interest rates for the period to the reduction in bank debt due to the
          proceeds from the financing exceeding the expected purchase price.
(d)  Management  fees have been adjusted to reflect the additional  expense
          associated with the increase in operating income.
(e)  Depletion and  depreciation  has been  determined  using the full cost
          method  of  accounting  based  on  combined  proved  reserves,  future
          development  costs,  production volumes and the costs of acquiring the
          Acquired Assets and MarkWest.  Accretion  expense has been adjusted to
          reflect the additional asset retirement obligation associated with the
          Acquired Assets and MarkWest.
(f)  Current  taxes  have  been  adjusted  to  reflect   changes  in  large
          corporation  tax. It is assumed that any additional  future income tax
          effect  resulting  from the pro  forma  adjustments  will be offset by
          additional deductions to the Trust.
(g)  Pro forma  basic per unit  amounts are based on the  weighted  average
          number  of  Advantage  units  outstanding  for  the  period  plus  the
          additional units issued pursuant to the prospectus.  Pro forma diluted
          per unit amounts are based on the weighted  average  number of diluted
          Advantage units  outstanding for the period plus the additional  units
that would be issued on the conversion of the  convertible  debentures
          referenced under 2 (a).
<PAGE>
B-1
SCHEDULE "B"
                        SCHEDULE OF REVENUES AND EXPENSES
<PAGE>
B-2
Schedule of Revenues and Expenses of the
ACQUIRED ASSETS
For the year ended December 31, 2003
<PAGE>
B-3
AUDITORS' REPORT
To the Board of Directors of Advantage Oil and Gas Ltd.
At the request of Advantage  Energy  Income Fund we have audited the schedule of
revenues  and expenses of the  Acquired  Assets for the year ended  December 31,
2003.  This financial  information  is the  responsibility  of  management.  Our
responsibility  is to express an opinion on this financial  information based on
our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with Canadian  generally  accepted auditing
standards.  Those standards  require that we plan and perform an audit to obtain
reasonable  assurance  whether  the  financial  information  is free of material
misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting
the amounts and disclosures in the financial information. An audit also includes
assessing the  accounting  principles  used and  significant  estimates  made by
management,  as well as  evaluating  the overall  presentation  of the financial
information.
In our opinion,  this financial  information  presents  fairly,  in all material
respects,  the revenues  and expenses of the Acquired  Assets for the year ended
December 31, 2003.
Chartered Accountants
Calgary, Canada
August 24, 2004
<PAGE>
B-4
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
Schedule of Revenues and Expenses of the Acquired Assets
=======================================================================
                                    Six-month period        Year ended
                                     ended June 30,        December 31,
                               -------------------------
                                   2004          2003          2003
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      (unaudited)
Revenue                        $48,639,651   $57,561,573   $104,809,129
Royalties                      (10,996,552)  (13,768,361)   (24,751,107)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                37,643,099    43,793,212     80,058,022
Operating Costs                (13,129,975)  (12,139,884)   (25,309,551)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Operating Income               $24,513,124   $31,653,328   $ 54,748,471
=======================================================================
See accompanying notes to schedule of revenues and expenses.
<PAGE>
B-5
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
Notes to Schedule of Revenues and Expenses of the Acquired Assets
Year ended December 31, 2003
(Information for the six months ended June 30, 2004 is unaudited)
================================================================================
1.    Basis of presentation:
Pursuant to an agreement  dated August 24, 2004,  Advantage  Energy Income
      Fund ("Advantage"),  through its wholly-owned subsidiary,  Advantage Oil &
      Gas  Ltd.,  acquired  interests  in  certain  petroleum  and  natural  gas
      properties   ("Acquired   Assets")   from  Anadarko   Canada   Corporation
      ("Anadarko").
The schedule of revenue and expenses for selected  properties includes the
      operations of the acquired properties of Anadarko.
The schedule of revenue and expenses for the acquired  properties includes
      only  revenues,  royalties and operating  costs  applicable to the working
      interest of Anadarko for the acquired properties.
The  schedule of revenue and expenses  for  selected  properties  does not
      include  any  provision  for  the   depletion   and   depreciation,   site
      restoration,  future capital costs,  impairment of unevaluated properties,
      general  and  administrative  costs  and  income  taxes  for the  selected
      properties  as these amounts are based on the  consolidated  operations of
      Anadarko of which the selected properties form only a part of.
2.    Significant accounting policies:
(a)   Revenue:
Revenue from the sale of oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas is
            recognized  at the time the  product is produced  and sold.  Pricing
            used in the schedule of revenues and expenses is the current  market
            price net of transportation costs.
(b)   Royalties:
Royalties are recorded at the time the product is produced and sold.
            Royalties  are   calculated  in  accordance   with  the   applicable
            regulations  or the  terms of  individual  royalty  agreements.
(c)   Operating costs:
Operating  costs  include  amounts  incurred  to  bring  the oil and
            natural gas to the  surface,  gather,  process,  treat and store the
            product in the field.
<PAGE>
C-1
SCHEDULE "C"
      UNAUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP. FOR
                 THE NINE-MONTH PERIOD ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2003
<PAGE>
C-2
Financial Statements of
MARKWEST RESOURCES
CANADA CORP.
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
<PAGE>
C-3
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Balance Sheet
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
===============
                                                                 September 30,  
December 31,
                                                                      2003      
2002
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                 (unaudited)
<S>                                                             <C>             
<C>
Assets
Current assets:
   Cash                                                         $            -  
$   3,345,099
   Accounts receivable                                               7,581,616  
5,238,507
   Prepaids and other current assets                                   456,463  
574,714
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                     8,038,079  
9,158,320
Deferred financing costs                                               168,195  
319,571
Property, plant and equipment (note 3)                             156,396,341  
142,334,142
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                $  164,602,615  
$ 151,812,033
================================================================================
===============
Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
Current liabilities:
   Cash, less outstanding cheques                               $    2,969,853  
$           -
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities                         14,651,559  
9,948,858
   Current portion of capital lease obligations (note 5)               312,499  
-
   Advances from parent (note 6)                                    51,210,654  
16,265,710
   Current portion of long-term debt (note 4)                       21,000,000  
-
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    90,144,565  
26,214,568
Long-term debt (note 4)                                                      -  
53,000,000
Capital lease obligations (note 5)                                   2,129,543  
-
Provision for future site restoration (note 7)                       1,585,203  
1,159,212
Future income tax                                                   38,217,486  
45,360,728
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                    41,932,232  
125,734,508
Shareholders' equity:
   Share capital (note 8)                                           28,542,263  
28,542,263
   Retained Earnings (deficit)                                       3,983,555  
(2,464,738)
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    32,525,818  
26,077,525
Commitments (note 9)
Subsequent events (note 11)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                $  164,602,615  
$ 151,812,033
================================================================================
===============
</TABLE>
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
<PAGE>
C-4
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Statement of Earnings and Retained Earnings (deficit)
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
===============
                                                                 Nine months
                                                                    ended       
Year ended
                                                                 September 30,  
December 31,
                                                                     2003       
2002
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                  (unaudited)
<S>                                                             <C>             
<C>
Revenue:
   Petroleum and natural gas revenue                            $   37,649,367  
$  41,747,575
   Royalties, net of Alberta Royalty Tax Credit                    (11,262,603) 
(10,026,021)
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    26,386,764  
31,721,554
Other income                                                            46,237  
33,967
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                    26,433,001  
31,755,521
Expenses:
   Production                                                        7,641,336  
7,244,966
   General and administrative                                        1,787,330  
2,629,180
   Depletion, depreciation, amortization and site restoration       15,295,368  
21,248,038
   Interest expense                                                  1,821,428  
1,596,929
   Other                                                               151,375  
1,079,330
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    26,696,837  
33,798,453
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
Loss before income taxes                                              (263,836) 
(2,042,932)
Income taxes:
   Current tax expense (recovery)                                      431,113  
(160,291)
   Future tax recovery                                              (7,143,242) 
(2,445,256)
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    (6,712,129) 
(2,605,547)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
Net earnings for the period                                          6,448,293  
562,615
Deficit, beginning of period                                        (2,464,738) 
(3,027,353)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
Retained earnings (deficit), end of period                      $    3,983,555  
$  (2,464,738)
================================================================================
===============
</TABLE>
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
<PAGE>
C-5
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Statement of Cash Flows
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
===============
                                                                  Nine months
                                                                    ended       
Year ended
                                                                 September 30,  
December 31,
                                                                     2003       
2002
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                 (unaudited)
<S>                                                             <C>             
<C>
Cash provided by (used in):
Net earnings for the period                                     $    6,448,293  
$     562,615
Items not affecting cash:
   Depreciation, depletion and amortization and site
     restoration                                                    15,295,368  
21,248,048
Future income taxes                                              (7,143,242) 
(2,445,256)
   Amortization of deferred financing costs                            151,376  
1,079,330
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                    14,751,795  
20,444,737
Net change in non-cash working capital items                         2,267,667  
2,265,829
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                    17,019,462  
22,710,566
Investing activities:
   Property, plant and equipment additions                         (28,776,848) 
(25,490,063)
   Proceeds on disposition of property, plant and equipment          2,579,439  
-
   Abandonment expenditures                                           (103,183) 
(5,151)
   Change in capital accrual                                           210,176  
(1,637,235)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
                                                                   (26,090,416) 
(27,132,449)
Financing activities:
   Repayment of long-term debt                                     (32,000,000) 
-
   Advances from parent                                             34,944,944  
5,646,530
   Decrease in capital lease obligations                              (188,942) 
-
   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
                                                                     2,756,002  
5,646,530
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
(Decrease) increase in cash                                         (6,314,952) 
1,224,647
Cash, beginning of period                                            3,345,099  
2,120,452
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
Cash, end of period                                             $   (2,969,853) 
$   3,345,099
================================================================================
===============
Supplementary information:
================================================================================
===============
Interest paid on long-term debt                                 $    1,726,896  
$   2,692,095
Income taxes paid (received)                                          (199,369) 
(500,783)
Non-cash items:
   Assets acquired under capital lease                               2,630,984  
-
================================================================================
===============
</TABLE>
See accompanying notes to financial statements.
<PAGE>
C-6
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
Nature of operations:
MarkWest Resources Canada Corp. (the "Company")  explores for and produces
      oil  and  natural  gas  and  is a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  MarkWest
      Hydrocarbons, Inc.
1.    Significant accounting policies:
(a)   Cash:
Cash  consists  of the  balance  with  the  bank,  cash on hand  and
            short-term  investments with a maturity of three months or less when
            purchased.
(b)   Property, plant and equipment:
The Company  follows the full cost method of accounting  for oil and
            gas  operations,  whereby all costs of exploring for and  developing
            oil and gas properties and related  reserves are  capitalized.  Such
            costs  include  land  acquisition   costs,  cost  of  drilling  both
            productive and non-productive  wells, and geological and geophysical
            expenses and related  overhead.  Proceeds of disposition are applied
            against the cost pools with no gain or loss recognized  expect where
            the  disposition  results  in a  significant  change  in the rate of
            depletion.
The  carrying  value  is  limited  to  the  recoverable   amount  as
            determined  by  estimating  the  future  net  revenues  from  proven
            properties  (based on period  end prices and costs) and the value of
            unproven  properties (at the lower of cost and net realizable value)
            less  estimated   future  site   restoration   costs,   general  and
            administrative expenses and financing costs.
Capitalize costs,  excluding costs relating to unproven  properties,
            are depleted using the unit-of-production  method based on estimated
            proven  reserves of oil and gas before  royalties as  determined  by
            independent  petroleum  engineers.  For  purposes  of the  depletion
            calculation,  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  production  are
            converted to a common unit-of-measure.  Other assets are depreciated
            on a  straight-line  basis over the  estimated  service lives of the
assets.
Assets under  capital lease are recorded at the present value of the
            lease payments at the inception of the lease.
(c)   Provision for future site restoration:
The Company  estimates its future site  restoration  and abandonment
            costs  for  its  oil  and  gas   properties.   The  costs  represent
            management's best estimate of the future restoration and abandonment
            costs based upon current  legislation  and industry  practices.  The
            total estimated costs are being provided for on a unit-of-production
            basis. The annual provision is included in amortization  expense and
            actual site restoration  costs are charged to the liability  account
            as incurred.
<PAGE>
C-7
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
1.    Significant accounting policies (continued):
(d)   Joint ventures:
Certain of the Company's activities are conducted jointly with other
            parties.   These   financial   statements   reflect  the   Company's
            proportionate interest in such activities.
(e)   Financial instruments:
The  Company's  financial  instruments  are  comprised  of  accounts
            receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities,  advances from
            parent, long term debt and commodity instruments (note 10). The fair
            value  of the  financial  instruments  approximates  their  carrying
            amount. A significant  portion of the Company's accounts  receivable
            is  from  oil  and  gas  companies.  Although  collection  of  these
            receivables  could be influenced by economic factors  affecting this
            industry, the risk of significant loss is considered remote.
(f)   Income taxes:
The Company  follows the liability  method of accounting  for income
            taxes.  Under this method,  the Company  records future income taxes
            for the affect of any  differences  between the  accounting  and the
            income  tax basis of an asset or  liability  using  income tax rates
            substantially  enacted on the balance  sheet  date.  The effect of a
            change in income  tax rates on the  future  income  tax  assets  and
            liabilities is recognized in income in the period of the change.
(g)   Measurement uncertainty:
The amount recorded for depletion and depreciation of capital assets
            and the  provision  for future site  restoration  costs are based on
            estimates.  The ceiling  test  calculation  is based on estimates of
            proven reserves,  production rates, oil and bas prices, future costs
            and other relevant assumptions. By their nature, these estimates are
            subject to measurement  uncertainty  and the effect on the financial
            statements  from change in such estimates in future periods could be
significant.
3.    Property, plant and equipment:
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
========
Accumulated       Net 
book
September 30, 2003                          Cost         depreciation        
value
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
<S>                                     <C>             <C>               <C>
Petroleum and natural gas properties
   and equipment                        $ 197,741,457   $   44,074,741    $ 
153,666,716
Furniture and equipment                       370,806          206,392          
164,414
Assets under capital lease                  2,630,984           65,773        
2,565,211
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
                                        $ 200,743,247   $   44,346,906    $ 
156,396,341
================================================================================
========
</TABLE>
<PAGE>
C-8
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
3. Property, plant and equipment:
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
========
Accumulated       Net 
book
                                            Cost         depreciation        
value
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
<S>                                     <C>             <C>               <C>
Petroleum and natural gas properties
   and equipment                        $ 171,592,526   $   29,430,588    $ 
142,161,938
Furniture and equipment                       322,328          150,124          
172,204
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------
$ 171,914,854   $   29,580,712    $ 
142,334,142
================================================================================
========
</TABLE>
Costs for unproven  properties  of  $41,427,431  at September 30, 2003 and
      $48,420,924  at December 31, 2002 have been  excluded  from the  depletion
      calculation. During the nine month period ended September 30, 2003 and the
      year ended  December 31, 2002,  the Company  capitalized no overhead costs
      related  to  exploration  and   development   activities  and  capitalized
      $1,409,182 and $2,251,374 of interest expense respectively.
Month-end  prices of $33.51  (December 31, 2002 - $33.49/bbl)  for oil and
      $5.69/mcf  (December 31, 2002 - $5.66/mcf)  for gas resulted in no ceiling
      test deficiency at September 30, 2003 or December 31, 2002.
4.    Long-term debt:
On May,  24, 2002,  the Company  amended its credit  agreement  ("Canadian
      Credit  Facility") with various  financial  institutions  for an amount of
      US$35,000,000.  This  facility is a component of the overall debt facility
      of the parent company,  MarkWest Hydrocarbons,  Inc. ("Parent") of Denver,
      Colorado.  The overall amount of the Parent's facility ("Credit Facility")
      is US$60,000,000.
Available  borrowings  under  the  Credit  Facility  are  determined  by a
      borrowing  base that is determined by the value of the proved  reserves of
      oil  and  as  owned  by  the  Parent   (directly  or  indirectly   through
      subsidiaries,  including MarkWest Resources Canada Corp.), and also on the
      working  capital of the Parent,  the level of which is  determined  by NGL
      product accounts  receivable and inventory  levels.  The borrowing base on
      proved  reserves is  calculated  semi-annually,  while  borrowing  base on
      working capital is calculated  monthly.  Actual  borrowing  limits for the
      Credit  Facility  may be less  than  US$60,000,000,  depending  on  proved
      reserves, working capital levels, and financial covenants. The Company had
      outstanding borrowings of C$21,000,000, or approximately US$15,551,000, at
      September 30, 2003 and C$53,000,000,  or approximately  US$33,758,000,  at
      December 31, 2002 of the US$35,000,000 available.
<PAGE>
C-9
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
4.    Long-term debt (continued):
The Canadian Credit Facility  permits  MarkWest  Resources Canada Corp. to
      borrow  money  at a  rate  equal  to the  London  Interbank  Offered  Rate
      ("LIBOR") plus an applicable  margin of between 1.75% and 2.75% based on a
      certain  leverage ratio,  which is determined as the ratio of total funded
      debt to EBITDA. Funds can also be borrowed at the Canadian Prime Rate plus
      an applicable  margin of between 0.375% and 1.375%,  based on the leverage
      ratio.  There  is a fee on the  unused  portion  of  the  Canadian  Credit
      Facility  of between  0.25% and 0.50%  based on the  leverage  ratio.  The
      weighted  average  interest rate was 5.64% for the period ended  September
      30, 2003 and 5.02% for the year ended December 31, 2002.
The Credit  Facility is a revolving  facility,  with a maturity and expiry
date of August 9, 2004. The entire outstanding principal balance is due in
      full on this date. The Credit Facility is  collateralized  by a first lien
      on substantially all the Company's assets.
5.    Capital lease obligations:
Future  minimum  annual lease payments at September 30, 2003 (December 31,
      2002 - $nil) consists of the following:
==============================================================
                                                     September 30,
                                                         2003
      --------------------------------------------------------------
2004                                           $      443,220
      2005                                                  443,220
      2006                                                  443,220
      2007 and thereafter                                 1,474,395
      --------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          2,804,055
Less amounts representing interest at 5.5%            362,013
      --------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          2,442,042
Current portion                                       312,499
--------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     $    2,129,543
      ==============================================================
Interest of $69,603  relating to capital lease  obligations is included in
      interest expense for the period ended September 30, 2003.
6.    Advances from parent:
The advances from parent bear interest at 7% per annum,  are due on demand
      and are unsecured.
<PAGE>
C-10
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
7.    Provision for future site restoration:
==========================================================================
                                                September 30,   December 31,
                                                     2003           2002
      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
Balance, beginning of period              $   1,159,212   $    222,958
      Current period provisions                       529,174        941,405
      Current period expenditures                    (103,183)        (5,151)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                $   1,585,203   $  1,159,212
      ==========================================================================
The  provision  for  future  site  restoration  costs is  recorded  in the
      statement  of  income  as  component  of   depletion,   depreciation   and
      amortization expense and on the balance sheet as a long-term liability.
8.    Share capital:
(a)   Authorized:
Unlimited number of common shares without nominal or par value
(b)   Issued:
====================================================================
            As at September 30, 2003                 Number of
            and December 31, 2002                      shares        Amount
            --------------------------------------------------------------------
Class A common shares                   26,933,363     $ 28,542,263
            ====================================================================
9.    Commitments:
The Company has  committed to certain  payments for office space over the
      next four years as follows:
==========================================================================
                                                                   September 30,
                                                                       2003
      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
2004                                                         $    188,352
      2005                                                              188,352
      2006                                                              188,352
      2007                                                              125,568
      ==========================================================================
<PAGE>
C-11
MARKWEST RESOURCES CANADA CORP.
Notes to Financial Statements
Nine months ended September 30, 2003
================================================================================
10.   Commodity instruments:
Derivative  commodity  instruments  may be used  from  time to time by the
      Company to manage its  exposure  to price  risks  relating  to natural gas
      prices.  The  Company's  policy  is to not  utilize  derivative  commodity
      instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
Realized  gains and losses on  derivative  instruments  used as hedges are
      recognized in income in the period that the hedge is settled.
The Company had the following natural gas hedge agreements  outstanding at
      September 30, 2003:
<TABLE>
<CAPTION>
================================================================================
==========
                      Volume         Price
Type                 (gj/day)        ($/gj)                        Term
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------
<S>                  <C>           <C>             <C>
Fixed price             2,462            4.62       January 1 2003 to December 
31, 2003
Fixed price             2,462            4.82      January 1, 2003 to December 
31, 2003
Fixed price             1,758            4.65      January 1, 2004 to December 
31, 2004
Fixed price             1,758            4.87      January 1, 2004 to December 
31, 2004
Costless collar         2,462       4.09-5.24      January 1, 2003 to December 
31, 2003
Costless collar         1,758       4.10-5.25      January 1, 2004 to December 
31, 2004
Basis swap              6,330      Nymex/AECO         April 1, 2003 to October 
31, 2003
Basis swap              5,275      Nymex/AECO         April 1, 2003 to October 
31, 2003
================================================================================
==========
</TABLE>
The unrealized  loss on these contracts was $3,271,534 as at September 30,
      2003 and $4,117,199 as at December 31, 2002.
Subsequent to September 30, 2003, the Company entered into one natural gas
      hedge for the period  November 1, 2003 to March 31, 2004  totalling  2,109
      gj/day with a price based on Nymex/AECO.
11.   Subsequent events:
Effective October 1, 2003, all of the shares of the Company were purchased
      by Advantage Energy Income Fund for total consideration of $102.5 million.
<PAGE>
D-1
CERTIFICATE OF THE TRUST
Dated:  August 26, 2004
This short form prospectus,  together with the documents  incorporated herein by
reference,  constitutes  full,  true and plain  disclosure of all material facts
relating to the securities  offered by this short form prospectus as required by
the securities  legislation of each of the Provinces of Canada.  For the purpose
of the Province of Quebec,  this simplified  prospectus,  as supplemented by the
permanent  information record,  contains no misrepresentation  that is likely to
affect the value or the market price of the securities to be distributed.
ADVANTAGE ENERGY INCOME FUND
                          BY: ADVANTAGE OIL & GAS LTD.
(signed) Kelly I. Drader                    (signed) Peter A. Hanrahan
      President and Chief Executive Officer       Vice President, Finance and
                                                  Chief Financial Officer
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(signed) Ronald A. McIntosh                 (signed) Rodger A. Tourigny
      Director                                    Director
<PAGE>
D-2
CERTIFICATE OF THE UNDERWRITERS
Dated: August 26, 2004
To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  information  and  belief,  this  short  form
prospectus,  together  with the  documents  incorporated  herein  by  reference,
constitutes  full,  true and plain  disclosure of all material facts relating to
the  securities  offered  by this  short  form  prospectus  as  required  by the
securities  legislation  of each of the Provinces of Canada.  For the purpose of
the  Province  of Quebec,  to our  knowledge,  this  simplified  prospectus,  as
supplemented by the permanent information record,  contains no misrepresentation
that is likely to affect the value or the market price of the  securities  to be
distributed.
SCOTIA CAPITAL INC.
By: (signed) Steven Kroeker
BMO NESBITT BURNS INC.                          NATIONAL BANK FINANCIAL INC.
By: (signed) Jason J. Zabinsky                     By: (signed) David M. Vetters
RBC DOMINION SECURITIES INC.
By: (signed) Craig E. Kelly
CIBC WORLD MARKETS INC.
By: (signed) Arthur N. Korpach
FIRSTENERGY CAPITAL CORP.                          RAYMOND JAMES LTD.
By: (signed) Nicholas J. Johnson               By: (signed) Edward J. Bereznicki
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>