
10-K 1 atw-singlesource10k2014.htm FORM 10-K FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER
30, 2014 ATW-Single Source 10K 2014
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20549
Form 10-K
ý
or
¨
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from __________________________________to
__________________________________
Commission File Number 1-13167
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
74-1611874
Texas
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
organization)
 
15011 Katy Freeway, Suite 800 Houston,
Texas
(Address of principal executive offices)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code: (281) 749-7800
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
(Zip Code)
77094
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Title of each class
Name of each exchange on which
registered
Common Stock $1.00 par value
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
New York Stock Exchange
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405
of the Securities Act.    Yes  ý    No  ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
Section 15(d) of the Act.    Yes  ¨    No  ý
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15 (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filings requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes  ý    No  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such
files).    Yes  ý    No  ¨
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K
(§229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the
registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in
Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K ¨.
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See definitions of “large accelerated filer”,
“accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer ý
 
 
¨  (Do not check if a Smaller Reporting
Company)
Accelerated filer
Smaller Reporting Company¨
Non-accelerated filer
¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Act).    Yes  ¨    No  ý
The aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates
computed by reference to the price at which our Common Stock, $1.00 par value, was last sold,
or the average bid and asked price of such Common Stock, as of March 31, 2014 was $3.2
billion.
The number of shares outstanding of our Common Stock, $1.00 par value, as of November 5,
2014: 64,357,556.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
(1) Proxy Statement for 2015 Annual Meeting of Shareholders - Referenced in Part III of this
report.
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC.
Form 10-K
For the Year Ended September 30, 2014
Table of Contents
 
 
Part I.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II.
Item 1.
Item 1A. Risk Factors
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4.
Properties
Legal Proceedings
Mine Safety Disclosure
Business
Item 5.
Item 6.
Market for the Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters,
and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Selected Financial Data
Page
4
13
23
23
23
23
24
26
Item 7.
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Item 8.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Management's Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Report of Independent Registered Accounting Firm
Consolidated Statements of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders' Equity
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Financial Statements
Changes In and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and
Financial Disclosure
Item 9.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Item 9B. Other Information
Part III.
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Item 11. Executive Compensation
Item 12.
Item 13.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and
Related Stockholder Matters
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director
Independence
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Part IV.
 
  Signatures
Item 15. Exhibits
28
43
44
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
67
67
67
68
68
68
68
68
69
2
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Statements included in this Form 10-K regarding future financial performance, capital sources
and results of operations and other statements, other than statements of historical fact, that
address activities, events or developments that we expect, believe or anticipate will or may occur
in the future are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities
Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Such statements are those
concerning strategic plans, expectations and objectives for future operations and performance.
When used in this report, the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “intends,”
“estimates,” “projects,” “could,” “should,” “may,” or similar expressions are intended to be among
the statements that identify forward-looking statements.
Such statements are subject to numerous risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are beyond
our ability to control, including, but not limited to:
•prices of oil and natural gas and industry expectations about future prices;
•
•
•
•market conditions and level of activity in the drilling industry and the global economy in general;
•the operational risks involved in drilling for oil and gas;
•the highly competitive and volatile nature of our business;
our ability to enter into, and the terms of, future drilling contracts, including contracts for our
newbuild units and for rigs whose contracts are expiring;
•the impact of governmental or industry regulation, both in the United States and internationally;
the termination or renegotiation of contracts by customers or payment or other delays by our
customers;
the risks of and disruptions to international operations, including political instability and the
impact of terrorist acts, acts of piracy, embargoes, war or other military operations;
•our ability to obtain and retain qualified personnel to operate our vessels;
•unplanned downtime and repairs on our rigs;
•timely access to spare parts, equipment and personnel to maintain and service our fleet;
•customer requirements for drilling capacity and customer drilling plans;
•the adequacy of sources of liquidity for us and for our customers;
•changes in tax laws, treaties and regulations;
•the risks involved in the construction, upgrade, and repair of our drilling units; and
such other risks discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K and in our other reports
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC.
Forward-looking statements are made based upon management’s current plans, expectations,
estimates, assumptions and beliefs concerning future events impacting us and therefore involve
a number of risks and uncertainties. We caution that forward-looking statements are not
guarantees and that actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in the
forward-looking statements. Undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking
statements, which are applicable only on the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to revise or
update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the
date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
•
3
PART I
ITEM 1.BUSINESS
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. (which together with its subsidiaries is identified as the “Company,” “we,”
“us” or “our,” except where stated or the context requires otherwise) is a global offshore drilling
contractor engaged in the drilling and completion of exploratory and developmental oil and gas
wells. We currently own a diversified fleet of 13 mobile offshore drilling units located in the United
States ("U.S.") Gulf of Mexico, the Mediterranean Sea, offshore West Africa, offshore Southeast
Asia and offshore Australia and we are constructing two ultra-deepwater drillships for delivery in
fiscal years 2015 through 2016. We were founded in 1968 and are headquartered in Houston,
Texas with support offices in Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates and the
United Kingdom.
We report our offshore contract drilling operation as a single reportable segment: Offshore
Contract Drilling Services. The mobile offshore drilling units and related equipment comprising
our offshore rig fleet operate in a single, global market for contract drilling services and are often
redeployed globally due to changing demands of our customers, which consist largely of major
integrated oil and natural gas companies and independent oil and natural gas companies. The
offshore drilling markets where we currently operate, including the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, the
Mediterranean Sea, offshore West Africa, offshore Southeast Asia and offshore Australia, are rich
in hydrocarbon deposits and thus offer the potential for high drilling activity over the long-term.
OFFSHORE DRILLING EQUIPMENT
Each type of drilling rig is uniquely designed for different purposes and applications, for
operations in different water depths, bottom conditions, environments and geographical areas,
and for different drilling and operating requirements. We classify rigs with the ability to operate in
5,000 feet of water or greater as deepwater rigs and rigs with the ability to operate in 7,500 feet of
water or greater as ultra-deepwater rigs. The following descriptions of the various types of drilling
rigs we own or are constructing illustrate the diversified range of applications of our rig fleet.
Ultra-Deepwater Drillships
Drillships are self-propelled vessels, shaped like conventional ships and are the most mobile of
the major rig types. Our high-specification drillships currently under construction are dynamically-
positioned, which allows them to maintain position without anchors through the use of their
onboard propulsion and station-keeping systems. Drillships typically have greater load capacity
than semisubmersible rigs, which enables them to carry more supplies on board, often making
them better suited for drilling in remote locations where resupply is more difficult. Drillships are
designed to operate in greater water depths than bottom support drilling rigs. Drillships are a
subset of floating rigs or floaters.
Semisubmersible Rigs
Semisubmersible rigs can be either dynamically-positioned, which renders them self-propelled
similar to drillships, or moored.  They typically have two hulls, the lower of which is capable of
being flooded. Drilling equipment is mounted on the main hull. After the drilling unit is towed to
location, the ballast tanks in the lower hull are flooded, lowering the entire drilling unit to its
operating draft, and the drilling unit is then either anchored in place (conventionally moored
drilling unit) or maintains position through the use of onboard propulsion and station-keeping
systems (dynamically-positioned drilling unit). On completion of operations, the lower hull is
deballasted, raising the entire drilling unit to its towing draft. Similar to drillships, this type of
drilling unit is designed to operate in greater water depths than bottom supported drilling rigs.
Semisubmersibles also operate in more severe sea conditions than other types of drilling units.
Semisubmersible rigs are also a subset of floating rigs or floaters.
Jackup Drilling Rigs
A jackup drilling rig consists of a single hull supported by at least three legs positioned on the
sea floor. It is typically towed to the well site and once on location, its legs are lowered to the sea
floor and the unit is raised out of the water by jacking the hull up the legs. Jackup drilling units
typically operate in water depths no greater than 500 feet.
4
The following table presents our rig fleet as of November 1, 2014, all of which are wholly owned:
Rig Name
Rig Type
Atwood Achiever
Drillship
Construction
Completed/Last Upgraded
(Calendar Year)
 construction completed 2014 12,000
Water Depth
Rating (feet)
Atwood Advantage  Drillship
Atwood Condor
Atwood Osprey
Atwood Eagle
Atwood Falcon
Atwood Hunter
Atwood Mako
Atwood Manta
Atwood Orca
Atwood Beacon
Atwood Aurora
Atwood Southern
Cross(1)
(1)Currently cold-stacked and not actively marketed.
Semisubmersible
 Semisubmersible
 Semisubmersible
 Semisubmersible
 Semisubmersible
 Jackup
 Jackup
 Jackup
 Jackup
 Jackup
Semisubmersible
construction completed 2013 12,000
 construction completed 2012 10,000
 construction completed 2011 8,200
 5,000
 upgraded 2002
 5,000
 upgraded 2012
 upgraded 2014
 5,000
 construction completed 2012 400
 construction completed 2012 400
 construction completed 2013 400
 construction completed 2003 400
 construction completed 2009 350
upgraded 2006
2,000
In addition to the above drilling units, we are in the process of constructing two additional
drillships. The following table presents our current newbuild projects as of November 1, 2014:
Rig Name  Rig Type
Shipyard
Scheduled Delivery
Date
Expected
Cost
(in millions)
Water Depth
Rating
(feet)
635
12,000
$ 635
12,000
Drillship
DSME
Drillship
DSME
June 30, 2016
September 30,
2015
Atwood
Admiral
Atwood
Archer
The Atwood Admiral and Atwood Archer are DP-3 dynamically-positioned, dual derrick, ultra-
deepwater drillships rated to operate in water depths up to 12,000 feet and are currently under
construction at the DSME shipyard in South Korea. These drillships will have enhanced
technical capabilities, including two seven-ram BOPs, three 100-ton knuckle boom cranes, a
165-ton active heave “tree-running” knuckle boom crane and 200 person accommodations. As of
September 30, 2014, we had approximately $950 million of total remaining firm commitments
related to the construction of these two drillships.
Maintaining high equipment utilization and revenue efficiency through the industry cycles is a
significant factor in generating cash flow to satisfy current and future obligations and has been
one of our primary performance excellence initiatives. We had a 97% available utilization rate in
fiscal year 2014 for our in-service rigs, while our available utilization rate for in-service rigs
averaged approximately 96% during the past five fiscal years. See "Item 6: Selected Financial
Data" for further discussion on in-service rigs and the calculation of available utilization rates.
As of November 1, 2014, our twelve in-service rigs had approximately 84% and 53% of our
available rig days contracted for fiscal years 2015 and 2016, respectively. The Atwood Southern
Cross is currently cold-stacked and not actively marketed.
5
The following table presents information regarding the contract status of our drilling units as of
November 1, 2014:
Percentage Location at
Rig Name
of FY 2014
Revenues
November 1,
Customer
Contract Status at November 1,
2014
2014
ULTRA-DEEPWATER SEMISUBMERSIBLES AND DRILLSHIPS:
Atwood
Advantage
11%
Atwood
Achiever
2%
U.S. Gulf of
Mexico
Enroute to
Northwest
Africa
Noble Energy Inc.
("Noble")
Kosmos Energy
Ltd. ("Kosmos")
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Noble which extends to April
2017.
The rig was delivered in
September 2014 and is
mobilizing to Northwest Africa
to commence a drilling program
with Kosmos which extends to
December 2017.
The rig is under construction in
South Korea with scheduled
delivery in September 2015.
The rig is under construction in
South Korea with scheduled
delivery in June 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Shell which extends to
November 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Chevron which extends to May
2017.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Woodside which extends to
August 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Apache which extends to
January 2015. Following this
program, the rig will commence
a drilling program with Murphy
which extends to April 2015.
Subsequent to that program, the
rig will commence a drilling
program with BHP Billiton
which extends to March 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
CNOOC Africa which extends
to mid-November 2014.
Atwood
Admiral
Atwood
Archer
Atwood
Condor
Atwood
Osprey
N/A
South Korea   None
N/A
South Korea   None
16%
15%
U.S. Gulf of
Mexico
Offshore
Australia
DEEPWATER SEMISUBMERSIBLES:
Atwood
Eagle
12%
Offshore
Australia
Atwood
Falcon
12%
Offshore
Australia
Atwood
Hunter
5%
Offshore
Equatorial
Guinea
Shell Offshore Inc.
("Shell")
Chevron Australia
Pty. Ltd.
("Chevron")
Woodside Energy
Ltd. ("Woodside")
Apache Energy
Ltd.
("Apache")/Murphy
Australia WA-481-
P Oil PTY LTD
("Murphy")/BHP
Billiton Petroleum
Pty., Limited
("BHP Billiton")
CNOOC Africa
Limited ("CNOOC
Africa")
JACKUPS:
Atwood Mako   5%
Atwood
Manta
6%
Atwood Orca   5%
Atwood
Aurora
6%
Offshore
Thailand
Offshore
Thailand
Offshore
Thailand
Offshore
Cameroon
Salamander
Energy (Bualuang)
 
Limited
("Salamander")
CEC International,
Ltd. ("CEC")
Mubadala
Petroleum
("Mubadala")
Addax Petroleum
Cameroon Limited
("Addax")
5%
Offshore Italy  ENI S.p.A ("ENI")
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Salamander which extends to
mid-November 2014.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
CEC which extends to
December 2015.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Mubadala which extends to
February 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
Addax which extends to
September 2016.
The rig is currently working
under a drilling program with
ENI which extends to January
2016.
Atwood
Beacon
OTHER:
Atwood
Southern
Cross
6
N/A
Malta
None
The rig is currently cold-stacked
and is not being actively
marketed.
Our contract backlog at September 30, 2014 was approximately $3.0 billion, representing an
approximate 21% decrease compared to our contract backlog of $3.8 billion at September 30,
2013. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors—Our current backlog of contract drilling revenue may not be
ultimately realized” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations—Market Outlook—Contract Backlog” in Item 7 of this Form 10-K.
INDUSTRY TRENDS
Our industry is subject to intense price competition and volatility. Periods of high demand and
higher day rates are often followed by periods of low demand and lower day rates. Offshore
drilling contractors can build new drilling rigs, mobilize rigs from one region of the world to
another, “idle” or scrap rigs (taking them out-of-service) or reactivate idled rigs in order to adjust
the supply of existing equipment in various markets to meet demand. The market for drilling
services is typically driven by global hydrocarbon demand and changes in actual or anticipated
oil and gas prices. Generally, sustained high energy prices result in higher cash flow generation
by exploration and production companies. This trend is typically accentuated in periods of lower
overall industry utilization and day rates. This can translate into increased exploration and
production spending by these oil and gas companies, which in turn results in increased drilling
activity and demand for services like ours.
Our customers are increasingly demanding newer, higher specification drilling rigs to perform
contract drilling services either as a response to increased technical challenges or for the safety,
reliability and efficiency typical of the newer, more capable rigs. This trend is commonly referred
to as the bifurcation of the drilling fleet. Bifurcation is occurring in both the jackup and floater rig
classes and is evidenced by the higher specification drilling rigs operating at generally higher
overall utilization levels and day rates than the lower specification or standard drilling rigs. As the
offshore drilling sector continues to construct and deliver a larger number of newer, higher
specification drilling units, we expect lower specification units to experience reduced overall
utilization and day rates leading to a significant number of rigs being either warm or cold-stacked
or scrapped.
Floating drilling rigs are outfitted with highly sophisticated subsea well control equipment. The
number of original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) vendors manufacturing and servicing this
equipment is limited and their ability to service the drilling industry on a timely basis is
challenged. Demand for trained service personnel for subsea well control equipment has sharply
increased and delivery times for this equipment have lengthened, driven by the significant
increase in the number of rigs under construction, related to increased maintenance and testing
requirements following the Macondo incident.
Offshore drilling market fundamentals have significantly deteriorated over the past year. Activity,
measured by the level of capital expenditures incurred by the exploration and production
companies, has slowed from previous years, particularly for floating drilling rigs.  In addition,
international oil prices have declined significantly from mid-year levels due to lower-than-
expected global oil demand growth and increased supply from U.S. unconventional sources.
Generally, a prolonged lower oil price environment restrains increases in exploration and
development drilling investment. See "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations-Market Outlook" of this Form 10-K. 
DRILLING CONTRACTS
We obtain the contracts under which we operate our units either through direct negotiation with
customers or by submitting proposals in competition with other contractors. Our contracts vary in
their terms and rates depending on the nature of the operation to be performed, the duration of
the work, the amount and type of equipment and services provided, the geographic areas
involved, market conditions and other variables.
The initial term of contracts for our units has ranged from the length of time necessary to drill one
well to several years. It is not unusual for contracts to contain renewal provisions, which in time of
weak market conditions are usually at the option of the customer, and in strong market conditions
are usually mutually agreeable.
Generally, contracts for drilling services specify a basic rate of compensation computed on a day
rate basis. Contracts generally provide for a reduced day rate payable when operations are
interrupted by equipment failure and subsequent repairs, field moves, adverse weather
conditions or other factors beyond our control. Some contracts also provide for revision of the
specified day rates in the event of material changes in certain items of cost. Any period during
which a rig is not earning a full operating day rate because of the above conditions or because
the rig is idle and not on contract will have an adverse effect on operating profits. An over-supply
of drilling rigs in any market area can adversely affect our ability to employ our drilling units in
these market areas.
For any long rig moves outside of in-field relocations, we may obtain from our customers either a
lump sum or a day rate as mobilization compensation for services performed and expenses
incurred during the period in transit. In a weaker market environment, we may not fully recover
our relocation costs or receive any mobilization compensation. However, in a stronger market
environment, we are generally able to obtain full reimbursement of relocation costs plus a partial
or full day rate as
7
mobilization compensation. We can give no assurance that we will receive full or partial recovery
of any future relocation costs beyond those for which we have already contracted.
Certain of our contracts may be canceled upon specified notice at the option of the customer
upon payment of an early termination fee, which is typically a percentage of the full operating rate
over the remainder of the contract term. Contracts also customarily provide for either automatic
termination or termination at the option of the customer in the event of total loss of the drilling rig,
if a rig is not delivered to the customer, if a rig does not pass acceptance testing within the period
specified in the contract, if drilling operations are suspended for extended periods of time by
reason of excessive rig downtime for repairs, or other specified conditions, including force
majeure or failure to meet minimum performance criteria. Early termination of a contract may
result in a rig being idle for an extended period of time.
Operation of our drilling equipment is subject to the offshore drilling requirements of petroleum
exploration companies and agencies of local or foreign governments. These requirements are, in
turn, subject to changes in government policies, global demand and prices for petroleum and
petroleum products, proved reserves and production in relation to such demand and the extent by
which such demand can be met from onshore sources.
The majority of our contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, but occasionally all or a portion of
a contract is payable in local currency. To the extent there is a local currency component in a
contract, we attempt to match similar revenue in the local currency to the operating costs paid in
the local currency such as local labor, shore base expenses, and local taxes, if any, in order to
minimize foreign currency fluctuation impact.
INSURANCE AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Our operations are subject to the usual hazards associated with the drilling of oil and gas wells,
such as blowouts, explosions and fires. In addition, our equipment is subject to various risks
particular to our industry which we seek to mitigate by maintaining insurance. These risks
include, among others, leg damage to jackups during positioning, capsizing, grounding, collision
and damage from severe weather conditions. Any of these risks could result in damage or
destruction of drilling rigs and oil and gas wells, personal injury and property damage,
suspension of operations or environmental damage through oil spillage or extensive,
uncontrolled fires. Therefore, in addition to general business insurance policies, we maintain the
following insurance relating to our rigs and rig operations, among others: hull and machinery,
protection and indemnity, mortgagee’s interest, cargo, war risks, casualty and liability (including
excess liability) and, in certain instances, we may carry loss of hire. Our casualty and liability
insurance policies are subject to self-insured deductibles. With respect to hull and machinery, we
maintain a deductible of $5 to $7.5 million per occurrence. For general and marine third-party
liabilities, we generally maintain a $1 million per occurrence deductible on personal injury
liability for crew claims. Our rigs are insured at values ranging from book value, for the cold-
stacked rigs, to estimated market value, for our in-service rigs. In addition, the Atwood Advantage
and Atwood Condor are jointly insured against up to $150 million of damage as a result of a U.S.
Gulf of Mexico windstorm. We maintain a $10 million deductible under our U.S. Gulf of Mexico
windstorm insurance.
We believe that we are adequately insured against normal and foreseeable risks in our
operations in accordance with industry standards; however, such insurance may not be adequate
to protect us against liability from all consequences of well disasters, marine perils, extensive fire
damage, and damage to the environment or disruption due to terrorism. To date, we have not
experienced difficulty in obtaining insurance coverage, although we can provide no assurance as
to the future availability of such insurance or the cost thereof. The occurrence of a significant
event against which we are not adequately insured could have a material adverse effect on our
financial position. See “Operating hazards increase our risk of liability; we may not be able to
fully insure against all of these risks.” in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K.
CUSTOMERS
Due to the relatively limited number of customers for which we can perform operations at any
given time, our business operations are subject to certain associated risks. The loss of, or a
decrease in the drilling programs of, these customers may adversely affect our revenues and,
therefore, our results of operations and cash flows. Our revenues from individual customers that
accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues in fiscal year 2014 are indicated below:
Customer
Apache Energy Ltd.
Shell Offshore Inc.
Chevron Australia Pty. Ltd.
Noble Energy Inc.
8
Percentage of
Revenues
18%
15%
15%
14%
In addition, we have certain customers that make up a significant portion of our accounts
receivable at September 30, 2014, as indicated in the table below:
Customer
Apache Energy Ltd.
Shell Offshore Inc.
Chevron Australia Pty. Ltd.
Noble Energy Inc.
Percentage
of Accounts
Receivable
12%
10%
14%
14%
See Item 1A. "Risk Factors - Our business relies heavily on a limited number of customers and a
limited number of drilling units and the loss of a significant customer, the loss of a rig, significant
downtime for our rigs, or the inability of our customers to perform could materially and adversely
impact our business" of this Form 10-K.
COMPETITION
The offshore drilling industry is very competitive, with no single offshore drilling contractor being
dominant. We compete with a number of offshore drilling contractors for work, which varies by job
requirements and location. Many of our competitors are substantially larger than we are and
possess appreciably greater financial and other resources and assets than we do. Our
competitors include, among others, the six members of our self-determined peer group including
Diamond Offshore Drilling, Inc., Ensco plc, Noble Corporation, Rowan Companies plc, Seadrill
Limited, and Transocean Ltd.
Technical capability, location, rig availability and price competition are generally the most
important factors in the offshore drilling industry; however, when there is high worldwide
utilization of equipment, rig availability and suitability become more important factors in securing
contracts than price. Other competitive factors include work force experience, efficiency and
condition of equipment, safety performance, reputation and customer relations. We believe that
we compete favorably with respect to these factors. See Item 1A. "Risk Factors - Our industry is
subject to intense price competition and volatility" of this Form 10-K.
INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS
During our 46 year history, the majority of our drilling units have operated outside of United
States waters, and we have conducted drilling operations in most of the major offshore
exploration areas of the world. In the two fiscal years prior to 2013, at least 95% of our contract
revenues were derived from foreign operations. In fiscal year 2013, 83% of our contract revenues
were derived from foreign operations as a result of our newest ultra-deepwater, semisubmersible
drilling rig, the Atwood Condor, having operated in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico for the entire fiscal
year. In fiscal year 2014, 70% of our contract revenues were derived from foreign operations as a
result of our newest ultra-deepwater drillship, the Atwood Advantage being delivered from the
shipyard in December 2013 and operating in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico during the fiscal year. For
information relating to the contract revenues and long-lived assets attributable to specific
geographic areas of operations, see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8
of this Form 10-K.
For information about risk associated with our foreign operations, see Item 1A, “Risk Factors—
Our international operations may involve risks not generally associated with domestic
operations.” and “A change in tax laws in any country in which we operate could result in higher
tax expense” of this Form 10-K.
EMPLOYEES
As of November 1, 2014, we had approximately 1,905 personnel engaged, including those
through labor contractors or agencies. In connection with our foreign drilling operations, we are
often required by the host country to hire a substantial percentage of our work force in that
country and, in some cases, these employees are represented by foreign unions. To date, we
have experienced little difficulty in complying with such requirements, and our drilling operations
have not been significantly interrupted by strikes or work stoppages. Our success also depends
to a significant extent upon the efforts and abilities of our executive officers and other key
management personnel. There is no assurance that these individuals will continue in such
capacity for any particular period of time. See Item 1A. "Risk Factors - Failure to obtain and retain
key personnel could impede our operations" of this Form 10-K.
9
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
Our operations are subject to a variety of U.S. and foreign environmental regulations and to
international environmental conventions. We monitor environmental regulation in each country in
which we operate and, while we have experienced an increase in general environmental
regulation, we do not believe compliance with such regulations will have a material adverse
effect upon our business or results of operations. Past environmental issues, such as the
Macondo incident, have led to higher drilling costs, greater regulation a more difficult and lengthy
well permitting process and, in general, have adversely affected decisions of oil and gas
companies to drill in certain areas.
In the United States as well as in other jurisdictions in which we operate, laws and regulations
applicable to our operations include those that (i) require the acquisition of permits to conduct
regulated activities; (ii) restrict the types, quantities and concentration of various substances that
can be released into the environment in connection with operations; (iii) limit or prohibit drilling
activities in certain protected areas; (iv) require remedial measures to mitigate pollution from
former and ongoing operations, such as requirements to plug abandoned wells; (v) impose
specific safety and health criteria addressing worker protection; and (vi) impose substantial
liabilities for pollution resulting from drilling and production operations. Any failure to comply with
these laws and regulations may result in the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal
penalties, the imposition of corrective or remedial obligations and the issuance of orders
enjoining performance of some of our operations. Laws and regulations protecting the
environment have become more stringent, and may in some cases impose strict liability,
rendering a person liable for environmental damage without regard to negligence or fault on the
part of such person. Some of these laws and regulations may expose us to liability for the
conduct of or conditions caused by others or for acts which were in compliance with all
applicable laws at the time they were performed. The application of these requirements or the
adoption of new requirements could have a material adverse effect on our financial position,
results of operations or cash flows. We believe all of our rigs satisfy current environmental
requirements and certifications, if any, required to operate in the jurisdictions where they currently
operate, but can give no assurance that in the future they will satisfy new environmental
requirements or certifications, if any, or that the costs to satisfy such requirements or
certifications, if any, would not materially affect our financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
The description below of U.S. federal environmental laws and regulations is based upon those
currently in effect. In addition to federal laws, state and local environmental laws apply to our
operations. As a result of the Macondo incident, legislation and regulations have been proposed
that could affect applicable liability limits under existing U.S. environmental laws and regulations.
If and when any such changes are adopted by legislation or regulation, we will be able to better
assess its impact on us. While laws can vary widely from one jurisdiction to another, each of the
laws and regulations described below addresses environmental issues generally similar to those
addressed by laws in most of the other jurisdictions in which we operate.
The U.S. Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, commonly referred to as the Clean Water
Act, prohibits the discharge of specified substances into waters of the United States without a
permit. The regulations implementing the Clean Water Act require permits to be obtained by an
operator before specified exploration activities occur. Offshore facilities must also prepare plans
addressing spill prevention control and countermeasures. Violations of monitoring, reporting and
permitting requirements or other provisions of the Clean Water Act can result in the imposition of
administrative, civil and criminal penalties or remedial or mitigation measures.
The U.S. Oil Pollution Act of 1990, or OPA, and related regulations impose a variety of
requirements on “responsible parties” related to the prevention of oil spills and liability for
damages resulting from such spills. Few defenses exist to the strict liability imposed by OPA, and
the liability could be substantial. Failure to comply with ongoing requirements or inadequate
cooperation in the event of a spill could subject a responsible party to civil or criminal
enforcement action. OPA assigns joint and several, strict liability, without regard to fault, to each
liable party for all containment and oil removal costs and a variety of public and private damages
including, but not limited to, the costs of responding to a release of oil, natural resource damages,
and economic damages suffered by persons adversely affected by an oil spill.
10
The U.S. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, or
CERCLA, also known as the “Superfund” law, imposes liability without regard to fault or the
legality of the original conduct on some classes of persons that are considered to have
contributed to the release of a “hazardous substance” into the environment. Such persons
include the owner or operator of a facility or vessel from which a release occurred and companies
that disposed of or arranged for the transport or disposal of the hazardous substances found at a
particular site. Persons who are or were responsible for releases of hazardous substances under
CERCLA may be subject to joint and several liabilities for the cost of cleaning up the hazardous
substances that have been released into the environment, for damages to natural resources, and
for the costs of certain health studies. CERCLA also authorizes the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (the “EPA”) and, in some instances, third parties to act in response to threats
to the public health or the environment and to seek to recover from the responsible classes of
persons the costs they incur. It is also not uncommon for third parties to file claims for personal
injury and property damage allegedly caused by the hazardous substances released into the
environment. We generate materials in the course of our operations that may be regulated as
hazardous substances.
The U.S. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”) governs the management of
wastes, including the treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous wastes. RCRA imposes
stringent operating requirements, and liability for failure to meet such requirements, on a person
who is either a “generator” or “transporter” of hazardous waste or an “owner” or “operator” of a
hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facility. RCRA specifically excludes from the
definition of hazardous waste drilling fluids, produced waters, and other wastes associated with
the exploration, development, or production of crude oil and natural gas. A similar exemption is
contained in many of the state counterparts to RCRA, leaving such excluded wastes to be
regulated as solid waste. As a result, a substantial portion of RCRA's requirements do not apply
to us as our operations generate minimal quantities of hazardous wastes (i.e., industrial wastes
such as solvents, waste compressor oils, etc.). However, a petition is currently before the EPA to
revoke the oil and natural gas exploration and production exemption. Any repeal or modification
of this or similar exemption in similar state statutes, would increase the volume of hazardous
waste we are required to manage and dispose of, and would cause us, as well as our
competitors, to incur increased operating expenses with respect to our U.S. operations.
The federal Clean Air Act regulates emissions of various air pollutants through air emissions
standards, construction and operating permitting programs and the imposition of other
compliance requirements.  These laws and regulations may require us to obtain and strictly
comply with stringent air permit requirements or utilize specific equipment or technologies to
control emissions of certain pollutants.  Compliance with these requirements could increase our
costs of development and production.
OTHER GOVERNMENTAL REGULATION
Our operations are subject to various international conventions, laws and regulations in the
countries in which we operate, including laws and regulations relating to the importation of and
operation of drilling units, currency conversions and repatriation, oil and gas exploration and
development, taxation of offshore earnings and earnings of expatriate personnel, environmental
protection, the use of local employees and suppliers by foreign contractors and duties on the
importation and exportation of drilling units and other equipment. Governments in some foreign
countries have become increasingly active in regulating and controlling the ownership of
concessions and companies holding concessions, the exploration for oil and gas and other
aspects of the oil and gas industries in their countries. In some areas of the world, this
governmental activity has adversely affected the amount of exploration and development work
done by major oil and gas companies and may continue to do so. Operations in less developed
countries can be subject to legal systems that are not as mature or predictable as those in more
developed countries, which can lead to greater uncertainty in legal matters and proceedings.
Our newest active ultra-deepwater drillship the Atwood Advantage, and our newest active ultra-
deepwater, semisubmersible drilling rig, the Atwood Condor, are currently in the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico under contract with Noble and Shell respectively, as of the fourth quarter of fiscal year
2014. Our U.S. operations are subject to various U.S. laws and regulations, including drilling
safety rules and workplace safety rules put in place by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
("BOEM") and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (“BSEE”), which are
designed to improve drilling safety by strengthening requirements for safety equipment, well
control systems, and blowout prevention practices for offshore oil and gas operations, and to
improve workplace safety by reducing the risk of human error. Implementation of new BOEM or
BSEE guidelines or regulations may subject us to increased costs or limit the operational
capabilities of our U.S. based rigs and could materially and adversely affect our financial
position, results of operations or cash flows. In addition, the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health
Act ("OSHA") and other similar laws and regulations govern the protection of the health and
safety of employees. Please see Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Government regulation and
environmental risks could reduce our business opportunities, expose us to liability and increase
our costs” of this Form 10-K.
11
We believe we are in compliance in all material respects with the health, safety and other
regulations affecting the operation of our rigs and the drilling of oil and gas wells in the
jurisdictions in which we operate. Historically, we have made significant capital expenditures and
incurred additional expenses to ensure that our equipment complies with applicable local and
international health and safety regulations. Although such expenditures may be required to
comply with these governmental laws and regulations, such compliance has not, to date,
materially adversely affected our earnings, cash flows or competitive position.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the
SEC. Our SEC filings are available to the public over the internet at the SEC’s web site at
http://www.sec.gov. Our website address is www.atwd.com. We make available free of charge on
or through our website our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, and
current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act as soon as reasonably practicable after we
electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. We have adopted a Code of
Business Conduct and Ethics and a Code of Ethics for the Chief Executive Officer and Senior
Financial Officers which are available on our website. We intend to satisfy the disclosure
requirement regarding any changes in or waivers from our codes of ethics by posting such
information on our website or by filing a Form 8-K for such event. Unless stated otherwise,
information on our website is not incorporated by reference into this report or made a part hereof
for any purpose. You may also read and copy any document we file at the SEC’s Public
Reference Room at 100 F Street NE, Washington, DC 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room and copy charges.
12
ITEM 1A.RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider the following risk factors in addition to the other information
included in this Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties may affect our business, financial
position, results of operations or cash flows, as well as an investment in our common stock.
Our business depends on the level of activity in the oil and natural gas industry, which is
significantly impacted by the volatility in oil and natural gas prices.
Our business depends on the conditions of the offshore oil and natural gas industry. Demand for
our services depends on oil and natural gas industry exploration and production activity and
expenditure levels, which are directly affected by trends in oil and natural gas prices. Oil and
natural gas prices, and market expectations regarding potential changes to these prices,
significantly affect oil and natural gas industry activity. Higher oil and natural gas prices do not
necessarily translate into increased activity because demand for our services is typically driven
by our customers’ expectations of future commodity prices. Oil and natural gas prices have
historically been volatile and are impacted by many factors beyond our control, including:
•the demand for oil and natural gas;
•the cost of exploring for, developing, producing and delivering oil and natural gas;
•the strength of the global economy;
•expectations about future prices;
the ability of The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) to set and maintain
production levels and pricing;
•the level of production by OPEC and non-OPEC countries;
•domestic and international tax policies;
political and military conflicts in oil producing regions or other geographical areas or acts of
terrorism in the U.S. or elsewhere;
•technological advances;
•the development and exploitation of alternative fuels;
•local and international political, economic and weather conditions; and
environmental and other laws and governmental regulations regarding exploration and
development of oil and natural gas reserves.
•
•
•
The level of offshore exploration, development and production activity and the price for oil and
natural gas is volatile and is likely to continue to be volatile in the future. A decline in the
worldwide demand for oil and natural gas or prolonged low oil or natural gas prices in the future
would likely result in reduced exploration and development of offshore areas and a decline in the
demand for our services. Even during periods of high oil prices, companies exploring for oil and
gas may cancel or curtail programs, or reduce their levels of capital expenditures for exploration
and production for a variety of reasons. These factors could cause our revenues and margins to
decline, reduce day rates and utilization of our rigs and limit our future growth prospects and,
therefore, could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and
cash flows.
Our industry is subject to intense price competition and volatility.
The contract drilling business is highly competitive with numerous industry participants. Drilling
contracts are traditionally awarded on a competitive bid basis. Price competition is often the
primary factor in determining which qualified contractor is awarded a job, although rig availability,
the quality and technical capability of service and equipment and safety record are also factors.
We compete with a number of offshore drilling contractors, many of which are substantially larger
than we are and which possess appreciably greater financial and other resources and assets
than we do.
The industry in which we operate historically has been volatile, marked by periods of low
demand, excess rig supply and low day rates, followed by periods of high demand, low rig
availability and increasing day rates. Periods of excess rig supply intensify the competition in the
industry and often result in rigs being idled. We may be required to idle additional rigs or to enter
into lower-rate contracts in response to market conditions in the future. Presently, there are
numerous recently constructed ultra-deepwater vessels and high-specification jackups that have
entered the market and more are under contract for construction. Many of these units do not have
drilling contracts in place. The entry into service of these new units has increased and will
continue to increase rig supply and could curtail a strengthening, or trigger a reduction, in day
rates and utilization as rigs are absorbed into the active fleet. The deepwater market has recently
seen a decrease in marketed utilization which may lead to lower day rates in the future. Any
further increases in construction of new units may increase the negative impact on day rates and
utilization. In addition, rigs
13
may be relocated to markets in which we operate, which could result in or exacerbate excess rig
supply which may lower day rates in those markets.
Lower utilization and day rates in one or more of the regions in which we operate would
adversely affect our revenues and profitability. Prolonged periods of low utilization and day rates
could also result in the recognition of impairment charges on certain of our drilling rigs if future
cash flow estimates, based upon information available to management at the time, indicate that
the carrying value of these rigs may not be recoverable.
Our business relies heavily on a limited number of customers and a limited number of drilling
units and the loss of a significant customer, the loss of a rig, significant downtime for our rigs, or
the inability of our customers to perform could materially and adversely impact our business.
Our customer base includes a small number of major and independent oil and gas companies as
well as government-owned oil companies. In fiscal year 2014, four customers each accounted for
over 10% of our operating revenues: Apache Energy Ltd. - 18%, Shell Offshore Inc. - 15%,
Chevron Australia Pty. Ltd. - 15% and Noble Energy Inc. - 14%. The contract drilling business is
subject to the usual risks associated with having a limited number of customers for our services.
Further, consolidation among oil and natural gas exploration and production companies may
reduce the number of available customers. Our business and results of operations could be
materially and adversely affected if any of our major customers terminate their contracts with us,
fail to renew our existing contracts, refuse to award new contracts to us or experience difficulties
in obtaining financing to fund their drilling programs. In addition, we currently have only 13
drilling units, of which only 12 are currently in operation and actively marketed. As a result, if any
one or more of our drilling units were idled for a prolonged period of time or if a customer were
unable to perform due to liquidity or solvency issues, our business and results of operations
could be materially and adversely affected.
High levels of capital expenditures will be necessary to keep pace with the bifurcation of the
drilling fleet.
The market for our services is characterized by continual and rapid technological developments
that have resulted in, and will likely continue to result in, substantial improvements in the
functionality and performance of rigs and equipment. Our customers are increasingly demanding
the services of newer, higher specification drilling rigs. This results in a bifurcation of the drilling
fleet for both the jackup and floater rig classes and is evidenced by the higher specification
drilling rigs generally operating at higher overall utilization levels and day rates than the lower
specification or standard drilling rigs. In addition, a significant number of lower specification rigs
are being stacked. As a result of this bifurcation, a high level of capital expenditures will be
required to maintain and improve existing rigs and equipment and purchase and construct newer,
higher specification drilling rigs to meet the increasingly sophisticated needs of our customers.
If we are not successful in acquiring or building new rigs and equipment or upgrading our
existing rigs and equipment in a timely and cost-effective manner, we could lose market share. In
addition, current competitors or new market entrants may develop new technologies, services or
standards that could render some of our services or equipment obsolete, which could have a
material adverse effect on our operations.
Rig upgrade, repair and construction projects are subject to risks, including delays, cost
overruns, and failure to secure drilling contracts.
As of November 1, 2014, there were 72 ultra-deepwater drillships and semisubmersibles under
construction for delivery through calendar year 2020 and 142 newbuild jackup rigs under
construction with expected delivery dates through calendar year 2017. As a result, shipyards and
third-party equipment vendors are under significant resource constraints to meet delivery
obligations. Such constraints may lead to delivery and commissioning delays and/or equipment
failures and/or quality deficiencies. Furthermore, new drilling rigs may face start-up or other
operational complications following completion of construction work or other unexpected
difficulties including equipment failures, design or engineering problems that could result in
significant downtime at reduced or zero day rates or the cancellation or termination of drilling
contracts.
As of November 1, 2014, we had two ultra-deepwater drillships under construction. Both of our
drillships currently under construction do not have long-term drilling contracts in place. We may
also commence the construction of additional rigs for our fleet from time to time without first
obtaining drilling contracts covering any such rig. Our failure to secure drilling contracts for rigs
under construction, including our remaining uncontracted newbuild drillships, prior to delivery
from the shipyard could adversely affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Since 2010, we have invested or committed to invest over $4.5 billion in the expansion of our
fleet, including ultra-deepwater and jackup rigs. Depending on available opportunities, we may
construct additional rigs for our fleet in the future. In addition, we incur significant upgrade,
refurbishment and repair expenditures on our fleet from time to time. Some of these expenditures
are
14
•
•
unplanned. These projects are subject to risks of delay or cost overruns inherent in any large
construction project resulting from numerous factors, including the following:
•shortages of equipment, materials or skilled labor;
unscheduled delays in the delivery of ordered materials and equipment and failure of third-party
equipment to meet quality and/or performance standards;
•unanticipated actual or purported change orders;
•unanticipated increases in the cost of equipment, labor and raw materials, particularly steel;
damage to shipyard facilities or construction work in progress or delays in construction, resulting
from fire, explosion, flooding, severe weather, terrorism, war or other armed hostilities;
•difficulties in obtaining necessary permits or in meeting permit conditions;
•design and engineering problems;
•client acceptance delays;
•political, social and economic instability, war and civil disturbances;
•delays in customs clearance of critical parts or equipment;
•financial or other difficulties or failures at shipyards and suppliers;
•claims of force majeure events;
•disputes with shipyards and suppliers;
•work stoppages and other labor disputes; and
•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations impacting overall cost.
Both of our rigs currently under construction are located at a single shipyard and any such events
that affect the shipyard may impact all of our rigs under construction. Delays in the delivery of rigs
being constructed or undergoing upgrade, refurbishment or repair may result in delay in contract
commencement, resulting in a loss of revenue to us and may cause our customers to seek to
terminate or shorten the terms of their contract under applicable late delivery clauses, if any. In
the event of termination of one of these contracts, we may not be able to secure a replacement
contract on as favorable terms, if at all. The estimated capital expenditures for rig upgrades,
refurbishments and construction projects could materially exceed our planned capital
expenditures. Moreover, our rigs undergoing upgrade, refurbishment and repair may not earn a
day rate during the period they are out-of-service.
Our business may experience reduced profitability if our customers terminate or seek to
renegotiate our drilling contracts.
Currently, our contracts with customers are day rate contracts, in which we charge a fixed amount
per day regardless of the number of days needed to drill the well. During depressed market
conditions, a customer may no longer need a rig that is currently under contract or may be able to
obtain a comparable rig at a lower day rate. Customers may seek to renegotiate the terms of their
existing drilling contracts or avoid their obligations under those contracts. In addition, certain of
our contracts may be canceled upon specified notice at the option of the customer upon payment
of an early termination fee, which is typically a majority of the full operating rate over the
remainder of the contract term. Contracts also customarily provide for either automatic termination
or termination at the option of the customer in the event of total loss of the drilling rig, if a rig is not
delivered to the customer, if a rig does not pass acceptance testing within the period specified in
the contract, if drilling operations are suspended for extended periods of time by reason of
excessive rig downtime for repairs, or other specified conditions, including force majeure or
failure to meet minimum performance criteria. Early termination of a contract may result in a rig
being idle for an extended period of time. Our revenues may be adversely affected by customers’
early termination of contracts, especially if we are unable to re-contract the affected rig within a
short period of time. The termination or renegotiation of a number of our drilling contracts could
adversely affect our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Our business will be adversely affected if we are unable to secure contracts on economically
favorable terms.
The drilling markets in which we compete frequently experience significant fluctuations in the
demand for drilling services, as measured by the level of exploration and development
expenditures, and the supply of capable drilling equipment. We have two contracts that will
expire during fiscal year 2015 with no immediate follow-on work currently scheduled. Our ability
to renew these contracts or obtain new contracts and the terms of any such contracts will depend
on market conditions. We may be unable to renew our expiring contracts or obtain new contracts
for the rigs under contracts that have expired or been terminated, and the day rates under any
new contracts may be substantially below the existing day rates, which could materially reduce
our revenues and profitability. We can, as we have done in the past, relocate drilling rigs from
one geographic area to another, but only when such moves are economically justified, or we can
idle rigs temporarily to save operating expenses and reduce rig supply. If demand
15
for our rigs declines, rig utilization and day rates are generally adversely affected, which in turn,
would adversely affect our revenues.
Our current backlog of contract drilling revenue may not be ultimately realized.
As of September 30, 2014, our contract drilling backlog was approximately $3.0 billion for future
revenues under firm commitments. We may not be able to perform under these contracts due to
events beyond our control, and our customers may seek to cancel or renegotiate our contracts for
various reasons, including those described above. In addition, some of our customers could
experience liquidity or solvency issues or could otherwise be unable or unwilling to perform
under the contract, which could ultimately lead a customer to go into bankruptcy or to otherwise
encourage a customer to seek to repudiate, cancel or renegotiate a contract. Our inability or the
inability of our customers to perform under our or their contractual obligations may have a
material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our customers may be unable or unwilling to indemnify us.
Consistent with standard industry practice, we typically obtain contractual indemnification from
our customers whereby they agree to protect and indemnify us for liabilities resulting from various
hazards associated with the drilling industry, including liabilities resulting from pollution or
contamination originating below the surface of the water. Enforcement of these contractual rights
to indemnification may be limited by public policy or applicable law and, in any event, may not
adequately cover our losses from such incidents. We can provide no assurance, however, that
our customers will be willing or financially able to meet these indemnification obligations. Also,
we may choose not to enforce these indemnities because of business reasons.
Operating hazards increase our risk of liability; we may not be able to fully insure against all of
these risks.
Our operations are subject to various operating hazards and risks, including:
•well blowouts, loss of well control and reservoir damage;
•fires and explosions;
•catastrophic marine disaster;
•adverse sea and weather conditions;
•mechanical failure;
•navigation errors;
•collision;
•oil and hazardous substance spills, containment and clean up;
•lost or stuck drill strings;
•equipment defects;
•security breaches of our information systems or other technological failures;
•labor shortages and strikes;
•damage to and loss of drilling rigs and production facilities; and
•war, sabotage, terrorism and piracy.
These risks present a threat to the safety of personnel and to our rigs, cargo, equipment under
tow and other property, as well as the environment. Our operations and those of others could be
suspended as a result of these hazards, whether the fault is ours or that of a third party. In certain
circumstances, governmental authorities may suspend drilling operations as a result of these
hazards, and our customers may cancel or terminate their contracts. Third parties may have
significant claims against us for damages due to personal injury, death, property damage,
pollution and loss of business if such event were to occur in our operations.
Our offshore drilling operations are also subject to marine hazards, either at offshore sites or
while drilling equipment is under tow, such as vessel capsizings, sinkings, collisions or
groundings. In addition, raising and lowering jackup drilling rigs, flooding semisubmersible
ballast tanks and drilling into high-pressure formations are complex, hazardous activities, and we
can encounter problems.
We have had accidents in the past due to some of the hazards described above. Because of the
ongoing hazards associated with our operations:
•we may experience accidents;
•our insurance coverage may prove inadequate to cover our losses;
•our insurance deductibles may increase; or
16
•
our insurance premiums may increase to the point where maintaining our current level of
coverage is prohibitively expensive or we may be unable to obtain insurance at all.
We maintain insurance coverage against casualty and liability risks and have renewed our
primary insurance program through June 30, 2015. Certain risks, however, such as pollution,
reservoir damage and environmental risks generally are not fully insurable. Although we believe
our insurance is adequate, our policies and contractual indemnity rights may not adequately
cover all losses or may have exclusions of coverage for certain losses. We do not have
insurance coverage or rights to indemnity for all risks. In addition, we may be unable to renew or
maintain our existing insurance coverage at commercially reasonable rates or at all. If a
significant accident or other event occurs and is not fully covered by insurance or contractual
indemnity, it could adversely affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
There is no assurance that our insurance coverage will be available or affordable and, if
available, whether it will be adequate to cover future claims that may arise. Additionally, there is
no assurance that those parties with contractual obligations to indemnify us will necessarily be
financially able or willing to indemnify us against all these risks.
The U.S. Gulf of Mexico experiences hurricanes and other extreme weather conditions on a
relatively frequent basis.  In recent years, hurricanes have caused damage to a number of rigs in
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.  As a result, insurance companies have reduced the nature and amount
of insurance coverage available for losses arising from named windstorm damage in the U.S.
Gulf of Mexico and have increased the costs of such coverage.  Our current windstorm insurance
policy for the Atwood Condor and Atwood Advantage has a policy limit of $150 million and a per
occurrence deductible of $10 million. Our limited windstorm insurance coverage exposes us to a
significant level of risk if the Atwood Condor or Atwood Advantage were to experience significant
damage or loss related to severe weather conditions caused by hurricanes or tropical storms in
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.
Our drilling contracts provide for varying levels of indemnification from our customers and in most
cases may require us to indemnify our customers. Under offshore drilling contracts, liability with
respect to personnel and property is customarily assigned on a “knock-for-knock” basis, which
means that we and our customers assume liability for our respective personnel and property.
However, in certain cases we may have liability for damage to our customer’s property and other
third-party property on the rig. Our customers typically assume responsibility for and indemnify us
from any loss or liability resulting from pollution or contamination, including clean-up and removal
and third-party damages, arising from operations under the contract and originating below the
surface of the water, including as a result of blow-outs or cratering of the well. In some drilling
contracts, however, we may have liability for third-party damages resulting from such pollution or
contamination caused by our gross negligence, or, in some cases, ordinary negligence, subject
to negotiated caps. We generally indemnify the customer for legal and financial consequences of
spills of industrial waste and other liquids originating from our rigs or equipment above the
surface of the water.
The above description of our insurance program and the indemnification provisions of our drilling
contracts is only a summary and is general in nature. Our insurance program and the terms of our
drilling contracts may change in the future. In addition, the indemnification provisions of our
drilling contracts may be subject to differing interpretations, and enforcement of those provisions
may be limited by public policy and other considerations.
Drilling contracts with national oil companies may expose us to greater risks than we normally
assume in drilling contracts with non-governmental customers.
Contracts with national oil companies are often non-negotiable and may expose us to greater
commercial, political and operational risks than we assume in other contracts, such as exposure
to materially greater environmental liability and other claims for damages (including
consequential damages) and personal injury related to our operations, or the risk that the contract
may be terminated by our customer without cause on short-term notice, contractually or by
governmental action, under certain conditions that may not provide us an early termination
payment, collection risks and political risks. In addition, our ability to resolve disputes or enforce
contractual provisions may be negatively impacted with these contracts. While we believe that
the financial, commercial and risk allocation terms of these contracts and our operating
safeguards mitigate these risks, we can provide no assurance that the increased risk exposure
will not have an adverse impact on our future operations or that we will not increase the number
of rigs contracted to national oil companies with commensurate additional contractual risks.
Our long-term contracts are subject to the risk of cost increases, which could adversely impact
our profitability.
In periods of rising demand for offshore rigs, a drilling contractor generally would prefer to enter
into well-to-well or other short-term contracts less than one year in duration that would allow the
contractor to profit from increasing day rates, while customers with reasonably definite drilling
programs would typically prefer long-term contracts in order to maintain day rates at a consistent
level. Conversely, in periods of decreasing demand for offshore rigs, a drilling contractor
generally would prefer long-term contracts to preserve day rates and utilization, while customers
generally would prefer well-to-well or other short-term contracts that would allow the customer to
benefit from the decreasing day rates. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014, a majority
of our revenue was derived from long-term day rate contracts greater than one year in duration,
and substantially all
17
of our backlog as of September 30, 2014 was attributable to long-term day rate contracts. As a
result, our inability to fully benefit from increasing day rates in an improving market may limit our
profitability.
In general, our costs increase as the business environment for drilling services improves and
demand for oilfield equipment and skilled labor increases. While many of our contracts include
cost escalation provisions that allow changes to our day rate based on stipulated cost increases
or decreases, the timing and amount earned from these day rate adjustments may differ from our
actual increase in costs. Additionally, if our rigs incur idle time between contracts, we typically do
not remove personnel from those rigs because we utilize the crew to prepare the rig for its next
contract. During times of reduced activity, reductions in costs may not be immediate as portions
of the crew may be required to prepare our rigs for stacking, after which time the crew members
are assigned to active rigs or dismissed. Moreover, as our rigs are mobilized from one
geographic location to another, the labor and other operating and maintenance costs can vary
significantly. In general, labor costs increase primarily due to higher salary levels and inflation.
Equipment maintenance expenses fluctuate depending upon the type of activity the unit is
performing and the age and condition of the equipment. Contract preparation expenses vary
based on the scope and length of contract preparation required and the duration of the firm
contractual period over which such expenditures are amortized.
A change in tax laws in any country in which we operate could result in higher tax expense.
We conduct our worldwide operations through various subsidiaries. Tax laws and regulations are
highly complex and subject to interpretation. Consequently, we are subject to changing tax laws,
treaties and regulations in and between countries in which we operate. Our income tax expense
is based on our interpretation of the tax laws in effect at the time the expense was incurred. Tax
legislation is proposed from time to time which could, among other things, limit our ability to defer
the taxation of non-U.S. income and would increase current tax expense. A change in tax laws,
treaties or regulations, or in the interpretation thereof, could result in a materially higher tax
expense or a higher effective tax rate on our worldwide earnings.
We file periodic tax returns that are subject to review and audit by various revenue agencies in
the jurisdictions in which we operate. Taxing authorities may challenge any of our tax positions.
We are currently contesting tax assessments that could have a material impact on our financial
statements and we may contest future assessments where we believe the assessments are in
error. Determinations by such authorities that differ materially from our recorded estimates,
favorably or unfavorably, may have a material impact on our financial position, results of
operations or cash flows.
Government regulation and environmental risks could reduce our business opportunities and
increase our costs.
We must comply with extensive government regulation in the form of international conventions,
federal, state and local laws and regulations in jurisdictions where our vessels operate and are
registered. These conventions, laws and regulations govern oil spills, including oil spill
prevention, and matters of environmental protection, worker health and safety, and the manning,
construction and operation of vessels, and vessel and port security. We believe that we are in
material compliance with all applicable environmental, health and safety and vessel and port
security laws and regulations as currently in effect. We are not a party to any pending
governmental litigation or similar proceeding, and we are not aware of any threatened
governmental litigation or proceeding which, if adversely determined, would have a material
adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, failure to
comply with these laws and regulations or the occurrence of an incident such as an oil spill may
result in the assessment of administrative, civil and even criminal penalties, the imposition of
remedial obligations and other damages, the denial or revocation of permits or other
authorizations and the issuance of injunctions that may limit or prohibit our operations or afford
our customers the right to terminate or seek to renegotiate their drilling contracts to our detriment.
Some of these laws and regulations impose strict and, with limited exceptions, joint and several
liability. In addition, compliance with environmental, health and safety and vessel and port
security laws increases our costs of doing business. Further, the offshore drilling industry
depends on demand for services from the oil and natural gas exploration, development and
production industry, and, accordingly, we also are directly affected by the adoption of laws and
regulations that, for economic, environmental or other policy reasons, curtail exploration and
development drilling for oil and natural gas.
Environmental, health and safety and vessel and port security laws change frequently, and we
may not be able to anticipate such changes or the impact of such changes. There is no
assurance that we can avoid significant costs, liabilities and penalties imposed as a result of
governmental regulation in the future. Changes in laws or regulations regarding offshore oil and
gas exploration, development and production activities, the cost or availability of insurance, and
decisions by customers, governmental agencies or other industry participants could reduce
demand for our services or increase our costs of operations, which could have a negative impact
on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, but we cannot reasonably or reliably
estimate that such changes will occur, when they will occur or if they will impact us. Such
changes can occur quickly within a region, similar to the increases in regulatory requirements in
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico following the Macondo well incident in April 2010, which may impact both
the affected region and global utilization and day rates and we may not be able to respond
quickly, or at all, to mitigate such changes.
18
Failure to comply with the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act or foreign anti-bribery legislation
could have an adverse impact on our business.
The U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”) and similar anti-bribery laws in other
jurisdictions, including the United Kingdom Bribery Act 2010, generally prohibit companies and
their intermediaries from making improper payments to foreign officials for the purpose of
obtaining or retaining business. We operate in many parts of the world that have experienced
governmental corruption to some degree and, in certain circumstances, strict compliance with
anti-bribery laws may conflict with local customs and practices and impact our business.
Although we have programs in place covering compliance with anti-bribery legislation, any
failure to comply with the FCPA or other anti-bribery legislation could subject us to civil and
criminal penalties or other sanctions, which could have a material adverse effect on our
business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows. We could also face fines,
sanctions and other penalties from authorities in the relevant foreign jurisdictions, including
prohibition of our participating in or curtailment of business operations in those jurisdictions and
the seizure of rigs or other assets.
Our international operations may involve risks not generally associated with domestic operations.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from operations outside the United States. Our
operations are subject to risks inherent in conducting business internationally, such as:
•legal and governmental regulatory requirements;
•difficulties and costs of staffing and managing international operations;
•political, social and economic instability;
•terrorist acts, piracy, kidnapping, extortion, war and civil disturbances;
•language and cultural difficulties;
•potential vessel seizure, expropriation or nationalization of assets or confiscatory taxation;
•import-export quotas or other trade barriers;
•renegotiation, nullification or modification of existing contracts;
•difficulties in collecting accounts receivable and longer collection periods;
•foreign and domestic monetary policies;
•work stoppages;
•complications associated with repairing and replacing equipment in remote locations;
•limitations on insurance coverage, such as war risk coverage, in certain areas;
•wage and price controls;
•assaults on property or personnel, including kidnappings;
travel limitations or operational problems caused by public health issues, epidemics or security
threats;
•imposition of currency exchange controls;
•solicitation by governmental officials for improper payments or other forms of corruption;
•currency exchange fluctuations and devaluations; or,
potentially adverse tax consequences, including those due to changes in laws or interpretation
of existing laws.
Our non-U.S. operations are subject to various laws and regulations in certain countries in which
we operate, including laws and regulations relating to the import and export, equipment and
operation of drilling units, currency conversions and repatriation, oil and gas exploration and
development, and taxation of offshore earnings and earnings of expatriate personnel.
Governments in some foreign countries have become increasingly active in regulating and
controlling the ownership of concessions and companies holding concessions, the exploration
for oil and gas and other aspects of the oil and gas industries in their countries, including local
content requirements for participating in tenders for certain drilling contracts. Many governments
favor or effectively require the awarding of drilling contracts to local contractors or require foreign
contractors to employ citizens of, or purchase supplies from, a particular jurisdiction. In addition,
government action, including initiatives by OPEC, may continue to cause oil or gas price
volatility. In some areas of the world, this governmental activity has adversely affected the
amount of exploration and development work by major oil companies and may continue to do so.
Operations in less developed countries can be subject to legal systems which are not as mature
or predictable as those in more developed countries, which can lead to greater uncertainty in
legal matters and proceedings.
Some of our drilling contracts are partially payable in local currency. Those amounts may exceed
•
•
our local currency needs, leading to the accumulation of excess local currency, which, in certain
instances, may be subject to either temporary blocking or other difficulties converting to U.S.
dollars. Excess amounts of local currency may be exposed to the risk of currency exchange
losses.
19
The shipment of goods, services and technology across international borders subjects us to
extensive trade and other laws and regulations. Our import and export activities are governed by
unique customs laws and regulations in each of the countries where we operate. Moreover, many
countries, including the U.S., control the import and export of certain goods, services and
technology and impose related import and export recordkeeping and reporting obligations, the
laws and regulations related to which are complex and constantly changing. These laws and
regulations may be enacted, amended, enforced or interpreted in a manner materially impacting
our operations. Shipments may be delayed and denied import or export for a variety of reasons,
some of which are outside our control and such delays or denials could cause unscheduled
operational downtime. Any failure to comply with these applicable legal and regulatory
obligations also could result in criminal and civil penalties and sanctions, such as fines,
imprisonment, debarment from government contracts, seizure of shipments and loss of import
and export privileges.
In the past, these conditions or events have not materially affected our operations. However, we
cannot predict whether any such conditions or events might develop in the future. Also, we
organized our subsidiary structure and our operations, in part, based on certain assumptions
about various foreign and domestic tax laws, currency exchange requirements and capital
repatriation laws. While we believe our assumptions are correct, there can be no assurance that
taxing or other authorities will reach the same conclusion. If our assumptions are incorrect, or if
the relevant countries change or modify such laws or the current interpretation of such laws, we
may suffer adverse tax and financial consequences, including the reduction of cash flow
available to meet required debt service and other obligations. Any of these factors could
materially adversely affect our international operations and, consequently, our business, financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our information technology systems are subject to cybersecurity risks and threats.
We depend on information technology systems to conduct our operations, including critical
systems on our drilling units, and these systems are subject to risks associated with cyber
incidents or attacks. Due to the nature of cyber attacks, breaches to our systems could go
unnoticed for a prolonged period of time. These cybersecurity risks could disrupt our operations
and result in downtime, loss of revenue or the loss of critical data as well as result in higher costs
to correct and remedy the effects of such incidents. If our systems for protecting against cyber
incidents or attacks prove to be insufficient and an incident were to occur, it could have a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. Insurance
for losses related to cybersecurity attacks is an emerging insurance product and we do not carry
insurance for losses due to cybersecurity attacks.
Our business is subject to war, sabotage, terrorism and piracy, which could have an adverse
effect.
It is unclear what impact the current U.S. military campaigns or possible future campaigns will
have on the energy industry in general, or us in particular, in the future. Uncertainty surrounding
retaliatory military strikes or a sustained military campaign may affect our operations in
unpredictable ways, including changes in the insurance markets, disruptions of fuel supplies and
markets, particularly oil, and the possibility that infrastructure facilities, including pipelines,
production facilities, refineries, electric generation, transmission and distribution facilities, could
be direct targets of, or indirect casualties of, an act of terror. War or risk of war may also have an
adverse effect on the economy.
Acts of war, sabotage, terrorism, piracy and social unrest, brought about by world political events
or otherwise, have caused instability in the world’s financial and insurance markets in the past
and may continue to do so in the future. Such acts could be directed against companies such as
ours and could also adversely affect the oil, gas and power industries and restrict their future
growth. Insurance premiums could increase and coverage may be unavailable in the future.
Failure to obtain and retain key personnel could impede our operations.
We depend to a significant extent upon the efforts and abilities of our executive officers and other
key management personnel. There is no assurance that these individuals will continue in such
capacity for any particular period of time. The loss of the services of one or more of our executive
officers or other personnel could adversely affect our operations.
We require highly skilled personnel to operate our drilling rigs and provide technical services and
support for our business worldwide. Historically, competition for the labor required for drilling
operations and construction projects, has intensified as the number of rigs activated, added to
worldwide fleets or under construction increased, leading to shortages of qualified personnel in
the industry and creating upward pressure on wages and higher turnover. We may experience
increased competition for the crews necessary to operate our rigs. If increased competition for
labor were to intensify in the future, we may experience increases in costs or reductions in
experience levels which could impact operations. The shortages of qualified personnel or the
inability to obtain and retain qualified personnel could also negatively affect the quality, safety
and timeliness of our work.
20
Significant part or equipment shortages, supplier capacity constraints, supplier production
disruptions, supplier quality and sourcing issues or price increases could increase our operating
costs, decrease our revenues and adversely impact our operations.
Our operations rely on a significant supply of capital and consumable spare parts and equipment
to maintain and repair our fleet. We also rely on the supply of ancillary services, including supply
boats and helicopters. Certain high specification parts and equipment we use in our operations
may be available only from a small number of suppliers, manufacturers or service providers, or in
some cases must be sourced through a single supplier, manufacturer or service provider. A
disruption in the deliveries from such third-party suppliers, manufacturers or service providers,
capacity constraints, production disruptions, price increases, quality control issues, recalls or
other decreased availability of parts and equipment could adversely affect our ability to meet our
commitments to customers, adversely impact our operations and revenues, delay our rig
upgrade, repair or construction projects, or increase our operating costs.
Unionization efforts and labor regulations in certain countries in which we operate could
materially increase our costs or limit our flexibility.
Certain of our employees and contractors in international markets are represented by labor
unions and work under collective bargaining or similar agreements, which are subject to periodic
renegotiation. Efforts may be made from time to time to unionize portions of our workforce. In
addition, we may in the future be subject to strikes or work stoppages and other labor disruptions.
Additional unionization efforts, new collective bargaining agreements or work stoppages could
materially increase our costs, reduce our revenues or limit our flexibility.
Climate change legislation or regulations restricting emissions of greenhouse gases could result
in increased operating costs and reduced demand for the oil and natural gas we produce.
There is a concern that emissions of greenhouse gases (“GHG”) may alter the composition of the
global atmosphere in ways that affect the global climate. Climate change, including the impact of
global warming, may create physical and financial risk. Physical risks from climate change
include an increase in sea level and changes in weather conditions. Given the maritime nature of
our business, we do not believe that physical climate change is likely to have a material adverse
effect on us. Financial risks relating to climate change are likely to arise from increasing
legislation and regulation, as compliance with any new rules could be difficult and costly.
U.S. federal legislation has been proposed in Congress to reduce GHG emissions, but to date
efforts to pass federal legislation limiting GHG emissions have not been successful, though it is
possible that such legislation may be enacted in the U.S. in the future. In addition, the EPA has
undertaken new efforts to collect information regarding GHG emissions and their effects. EPA
adopted rules requiring the reporting of GHG emissions from specified large GHG emission
sources in the U.S. on an annual basis, as well as certain onshore and offshore oil and natural
gas production facilities on an annual basis. The EPA also has begun adopting and
implementing regulations to restrict emissions of GHGs under existing provisions of the federal
Clean Air Act, one of which requires a reduction in emissions of GHGs from motor vehicles and
the other of which established a permitting requirement for emissions of GHGs from certain large
stationary sources. Foreign jurisdictions are also addressing climate changes by legislation or
regulation. The adoption of legislation and regulatory programs to reduce emissions of GHGs
could require us to incur increased energy, environmental and other costs and capital
expenditures to comply. Consequently, legislation and regulatory programs to reduce emissions
of GHGs could have an adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations or
cash flows.
Adverse impacts upon the oil and gas industry relating to climate change may also affect us as
demand for our services depends on the level of activity in offshore oil and natural gas
exploration, development and production. Although we do not expect that demand for oil and gas
will lessen dramatically over the short term, concerns about climate change may reduce the
demand for oil and gas in the long term. In addition, increased regulation of GHG may create
greater incentives for use of alternative energy sources. Any long term material adverse effect on
the oil and gas industry may have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of
operations or cash flows, but we cannot reasonably or reliably estimate if it will occur, when it will
occur or that it will impact us.
We are subject to the anti-takeover provisions of our constitutive documents and Texas law.
Holders of the shares of an acquisition target often receive a premium for their shares upon a
change of control. Texas law and provisions of constitutive documents could have the effect of
delaying or preventing a change of control and could prevent holders of our common stock from
receiving such a premium. For example, Texas law prohibits us from engaging in a business
combination with any shareholder for three years from the date that person became an affiliated
shareholder by beneficially owning 20% or more of our outstanding common stock, in the
absence of certain board of director or shareholder approvals.
21
•
In addition, under our By-laws, special meetings of shareholders may not be called by anyone
other than our Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board of Directors, our President and
Chief Executive Officer, or the holders of at least 10% of the shares of our capital stock entitled to
vote at such meeting.
Covenants in our debt agreements restrict our ability to engage in certain activities.
Our debt agreements restrict our ability to, among other things:
•incur, assume or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain stock;
pay dividends or distributions or redeem, repurchase or retire our capital stock or subordinated
debt;
•make loans and other types of investments;
•incur liens;
•restrict dividends, loans or asset transfers from our subsidiaries;
•sell or otherwise dispose of assets, including capital stock of subsidiaries;
•consolidate or merge with or into, or sell substantially all of our assets to, another person;
•acquire assets or businesses;
•enter into transactions with affiliates; and
•enter into new lines of business.
In addition, our revolving credit facility contains various financial covenants that impose a
maximum leverage ratio of 4.0 to 1.0, a debt to capitalization ratio of 0.5 to 1.0, a minimum
interest expense coverage ratio of 3.0 to 1.0 and a minimum collateral maintenance of 150% of
the aggregate amount outstanding under the Credit Facility. Our ability to meet these covenants
or requirements may be affected by events beyond our control, and there can be no assurance
that we will satisfy such covenants and requirements in the future. Such restrictions may limit our
ability to successfully execute our business plans, which may have adverse consequences on
our operations.
We may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service all of our indebtedness, and may be
forced to take other actions to satisfy our obligations under our indebtedness, which may not be
successful.
Our ability to make scheduled payments on or to refinance our debt obligations depends on our
financial position, results of operations and cash flows, which is subject to prevailing economic
and competitive conditions and to certain financial, business and other factors beyond our
control. We may not be able to maintain a level of cash flows from operating activities sufficient to
permit us to pay the principal, premium, if any, and interest on our indebtedness.
If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service obligations, we
may be forced to reduce or delay investment decisions and capital expenditures, or to sell assets,
seek additional capital or restructure or refinance our indebtedness. Our ability to restructure or
refinance our debt will depend on the condition of the capital markets and our financial position at
such time. Any refinancing of our debt could be at higher interest rates and may require us to
comply with more onerous covenants, which could further restrict our business operations. The
terms of existing or future debt instruments may restrict us from adopting some of these
alternatives. In addition, any failure to make payments of interest and principal on our outstanding
indebtedness on a timely basis would likely result in a reduction of our credit rating, which could
harm our ability to incur additional indebtedness. In the absence of such operating results and
resources, we could face substantial liquidity problems and might be required to dispose of
material assets or operations to meet our debt service and other obligations. Our existing debt
agreements restrict our ability to dispose of assets and use the proceeds from the disposition. We
may not be able to consummate those dispositions or to obtain the proceeds that we could
realize from them and these proceeds may not be adequate to meet any debt service obligations
then due. These alternative measures may not be successful and may not permit us to meet our
scheduled debt service obligations. If we breach our covenants under our senior secured
revolving credit facility and seek a waiver, we may not be able to obtain a waiver from the
required lenders. If this occurs, we would be in default under our senior secured revolving credit
facility, the lenders could exercise their rights and we could be forced into bankruptcy or
liquidation. See “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Revolving Credit Facility.”
22
ITEM 1B.UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 2.PROPERTIES
Our property consists primarily of mobile offshore drilling rigs and ancillary equipment. Nine
(Atwood Aurora, Atwood Beacon, Atwood Condor, Atwood Eagle, Atwood Falcon, Atwood
Hunter, Atwood Mako, Atwood Manta and Atwood Osprey) of our rigs are pledged under our
senior secured revolving credit facility. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources—Revolving Credit
Facility” in Item 7 of this Form 10-K.
We lease our office at our corporate headquarters in the United States and own or lease support
offices in Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom.
We incorporate by reference in response to this item the information set forth in Item 1, Item 7 and
Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
ITEM 3.LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
We have certain actions, claims and other matters pending as discussed and reported in Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. As of September 30,
2014, we were also involved in a number of lawsuits which have arisen in the ordinary course of
business and for which we do not expect the liability, if any, resulting from these lawsuits to have
a material adverse effect on our current consolidated financial position, results of operations or
cash flows. We cannot predict with certainty the outcome or effect of any of these matters
described above or any such other proceeding or threatened litigation or legal proceedings.
There can be no assurance that our beliefs or expectations as to the outcome or effect of any
lawsuit or other matters will prove correct and the eventual outcome of these matters could
materially differ from management’s current estimates.
ITEM 4.MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURE
Not applicable.
23
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “ATW”. As of
November 5, 2014, there were approximately 71 record owners of our common stock. Our board
of directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of common stock, payable
on January 13, 2015 to shareholders of record on January 6, 2015. We have not paid cash
dividends historically. On November 5, 2014, the closing price of our shares as reported by the
NYSE was $37.55 per share. The declaration of future dividends is at the discretion of our board
of directors and subject to our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and other
factors and restrictions under applicable law and our debt instruments.
The following table sets forth the range of high and low sales prices per share of common stock
as reported by the NYSE for the periods indicated. 
 
Quarters Ended
December 31
March 31
June 30
September 30
Under our long-term incentive plans, employees may elect to have us withhold shares to satisfy
minimum statutory federal, state and local tax withholding obligations arising from the vesting of
restricted stock awards and exercise of stock options. When we withhold these shares, we are
required to remit to the appropriate taxing authorities the market price of the shares withheld,
which could be deemed a purchase of shares by us on the date of withholding. During the
quarter ended September 30, 2014, we withheld the following shares to satisfy tax withholding
obligations:
Fiscal 2013
 Low
 $43.21
 46.18
 43.91
 51.84
Fiscal 2014
Low
$50.29
44.88
45.33
42.55
High
 $58.46
 53.54
 53.90
 53.00
High
 $50.18
 55.49
 56.71
 59.49
Period
Average
Price
July 1 - July 31, 2014
 $53.00
August 1 - August 31, 2014
 48.82
September 1 - September 30, 2014
 —
Total
 $49.23
Information concerning securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans is
incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year
covered by this Form 10-K.
508
  4,587
  —
  5,095
No. of
Shares
24
Performance Graph
Below is a comparison of five-year cumulative total returns among Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and the
center for research in security prices ("CRSP") index for the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stock
markets, and our self-determined peer group of drilling companies. Total returns assume that
$100 was invested in each on September 30, 2009, dividends, if any, were reinvested and a
September 30 fiscal year end.
CRSP Total Returns Index for:
Atwood Oceanics, Inc.
NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq Stock Markets (U.S.
Companies)
Self-determined Peer Group
Fiscal Year Ended September 30,
2009
  2010
100.0   86.3
2011
  97.4
2013
2012
 2014
  128.9   156.1  123.9
100.0   112.1   112.7   146.3   171.6  201.6
100.0   88.1
77.2
97.2
105.8  75.1
Our self-determined peer group (weighted according to market capitalization) is as follows:
Diamond Offshore Drilling, Inc., Ensco plc, Noble Corporation, Rowan Companies plc, Seadrill
Limited and Transocean Ltd.
The performance graph above is furnished and not filed for purposes of Section 18 of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and will not be incorporated by reference into any registration
statement filed under the Securities Act of 1933 unless specifically identified therein as being
incorporated therein by reference. The performance graph is not soliciting material subject to
Regulation 14A.
25
ITEM 6.SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Selected financial data for each of the last five fiscal years is presented below:
(In thousands, except per
share amounts, fleet data and
ratios)
STATEMENTS OF
OPERATIONS DATA:
Total revenues
Contract drilling costs and
reimbursable expenses
Depreciation
General and administrative
Gain (loss) on sale of
equipment
Other, net
Operating income
Other (expense) income
Tax provision
At or For the Years Ended September 30,
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
$1,173,953  $1,063,663  $787,421
$645,076
$650,562
(562,353 )  (458,925 )  (347,179 )  (223,565 )  (252,427 )
(147,358 )  (117,510 )  (70,599 )  (43,597 )  (37,030 )
)  (49,776 )  (44,407 )  (40,620 )
 (61,461
)  (56,786
34,139
(971
)  (457
)  153
485
1,864
 438,784
 (41,491
 (56,471
—
 429,471
)  (24,670
)  (54,577
—
 319,410
(5,000
 328,660
)  1,370
322,340
)
)  (6,106
)  (41,133 )  (53,173 )  (62,983 )
)  (2,361
)  (3,813
$5.31
 $5.24
$340,822
Net Income
PER SHARE DATA:
  
Earnings per common share:   
Basic
Diluted
Average common shares
outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
FLEET DATA:
Rig count (at end of period)
All rigs
In-service rigs (1)
Utilization rate - full (2)
All rigs
In-service rigs (1)
Utilization rate - available (3)
All rigs
In-service rigs (1)
BALANCE SHEET DATA:
Cash
Working capital
Property and equipment, net
Total assets
Total debt
Shareholders' equity (4)
Ratio of current assets to
current liabilities
64,240
 65,074
  
  
 13
 12
  
 83
 94
  
 85
 97
  
 $80,080
 330,430
 3,967,028
 4,507,228
 1,742,122
 2,555,524
2.97
26
$350,224
  
  
 $5.38
 $5.32
$272,171
  
  
 $4.17
 $4.14
$271,674
  
  
 $4.20
 $4.15
$256,996
  
  
 $3.99
 $3.95
65,073
 65,845
  
  
 13
 11
% 83
% 100
% 84
% 100
$88,770
 296,888
 3,164,724
 3,657,266
 1,263,232
 2,207,371
65,267
 65,781
  
  
 11
 9
64,754
 65,403
  
  
 10
 7
64,391
 65,028
  
  
 9
 9
% 75
% 96
% 78
% 100
% 61
% 91
% 63
% 95
% 87
% 87
% 88
% 88
%
%
%
%
$180,523
 266,534
$295,002
 301,608
$77,871
 232,887
 2,537,340  1,887,321  1,343,961
 2,943,762  2,375,391  1,724,440
 830,000
 1,939,422  1,652,787  1,370,134
230,000
520,000
2.89
2.69
2.89
3.85
(2)
(3)
In-service rigs exclude idled rigs which are not actively marketed. See "Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Market Outlook" for
further discussion of idled rigs. During fiscal year 2014, there were approximately three
months of planned out of service time related to the Atwood Hunter.
Full utilization rate is calculated by dividing the actual number of days a rig was under contract
during the year by 365 days.
Available utilization rate is calculated by dividing the actual number of days a rig was under
contract during the period by the number of days a rig was available to be under contract
during the period, which excludes out of service time for planned shipyard projects between
contracts.
Our board of directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of common
stock, payable on January 13, 2015 to shareholders of record on January 6, 2015. Historically
we have not paid dividends.
(1)
(4)
27
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is intended to assist in understanding our financial position at
September 30, 2014 and 2013 and our results of operations for each of the fiscal years for the
three year period ended September 30, 2014 and should be read in conjunction with the
accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and
uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-
looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under Item 1A “Risk
Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. See “Forward-Looking Statements”.
•
OVERVIEW
Financial and operating results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2014, include:
Record operating revenues totaling $1.17 billion on 3,839 operating days as compared to
operating revenues of $1.06 billion on 3,718 operating days for the fiscal year ended
September 30, 2013;
Net income of $341 million as compared to net income of $350 million for the fiscal year ended
September 30, 2013;
Diluted earnings per share of $5.24 as compared to diluted earnings per share of $5.32 for the
fiscal year ended September 30, 2013;
Net cash provided by operating activities of $443 million as compared to net cash provided by
operating activities of $432 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2013;
•Debt to capitalization ratio of 41% at September 30, 2014.
•
•
•
MARKET OUTLOOK
Industry Conditions
The level of activity in the offshore drilling industry, which affects the drilling sector’s profitability,
is cyclical and highly dependent on the capital expenditure spending patterns of exploration and
production (“E&P”) companies. E&P company capital expenditure budgets are influenced by the
price of oil and gas, company-specific cash flow levels, historical project returns and other capital
allocation strategies. After a multi-year increase in E&P spending on drilling programs, we are
witnessing a significant slowdown in E&P spending in 2014. This slowdown is a result of several
influencing factors, including the lack of recent exploration success, an inability to generate
investment returns beyond their cost of capital and shareholder demands to restrain E&P
spending in favor of greater dividends. The result of the slowdown has been a delay or
cancellation of previously anticipated floater-based drilling programs, leading to a material
reduction in new drilling contract awards for floaters in 2014, as compared to recent years. In
addition, the rapid increase in U.S. unconventional oil production, weaker global oil demand
growth expectations and a stronger dollar has resulted in a steep decline in oil prices since mid-
2014. Further decreases in oil prices, or anticipated decreases in oil prices, may lead to further
reductions in capital expenditures by E&P companies on drilling programs, which in turn could
adversely affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The supply and demand balance between floating drilling rigs and suitable drilling contracts is
being further eroded as drilling companies continue to take delivery of newer, more capable
floaters which were ordered earlier in the cycle. As a result, a lower percentage of marketed
floaters are being re-contracted, especially among the older, less capable floaters and lower day
rates are being contracted across all classes of floaters. Customers continue to prefer newer,
high specification floaters over the older, less capable rigs, especially for drilling programs with a
high degree of technical complexity or operating in more remote geological basins. This
bifurcation of utilization and day rates across different generations of floaters has been especially
detrimental to the older, less capable floaters resulting in rigs being idled or scrapped.
Similar to the floater market, the jackup market is now beginning to experience an unfavorable
supply and demand imbalance due to the delivery of newbuild jackups from shipyards. Certain
markets, especially in Southeast Asia, which is closer to the shipyards constructing the majority
of newbuild jackups, are particularly susceptible to oversupply and to lower utilization and day
rates. While high specification jackup rigs continue to experience higher levels of utilization and
day rates than less capable jackup rigs, the risk of further market weakness created by the supply
and demand imbalance is expected to continue through 2015 given the high number of newbuild
jackups scheduled for delivery during this period.
28
The slower growth in capital expenditures by E&P companies, the current level of offshore
drilling activity, together with the large backlog of rigs under construction, has continued to create
capacity constraints in the global offshore rig equipment supply chain. As a result, equipment
delivery lead times have lengthened and remain challenging, thus leading to delayed newbuild
rig deliveries.
Ultra-deepwater and Deepwater Rig Markets
Industry-wide, the percentage of marketed ultra-deepwater rigs under contract decreased to 94%,
while the percentage of marketed deepwater rigs under contract reduced slightly to 88%. As of
November 1, 2014, 72 ultra-deepwater floaters were under construction with scheduled for
deliveries through January 2020. Forty-seven of these newbuild ultra-deepwater floaters were
contracted, including 29 under long-term contracts with Petrobras that are primarily being
constructed in shipyards located in Brazil. The number of new ultra-deepwater rig deliveries
peaks in 2015 with 24 scheduled to be delivered in 2015. An additional 41 units are scheduled
for delivery in 2016 and beyond. As of November 1, 2014, two of the 7 newbuild rigs scheduled
to be delivered in 2014 were uncontracted and 14 of the 24 scheduled to be delivered in 2015
were uncontracted. With 84% of ultra-deepwater rigs operating in deepwater and mid-water water
depths (i.e., well below their maximum water depths), demand for deepwater rigs and older, less
capable ultra-deepwater rigs may be negatively impacted by the increased supply of newer ultra-
deepwater rigs. This may result in the older, less capable rigs having to price more aggressively
to avoid displacement by the newer, more capable rigs, leading to generally lower day rates for
the ultra-deepwater and deepwater rig markets.
Our Ultra-deepwater and Deepwater Rigs
The Atwood Achiever, a dynamically positioned, ultra-deepwater drillship, is currently mobilizing
to its first location offshore Northwest Africa and is contracted through approximately December
2017.
The Atwood Advantage, a dynamically positioned, ultra-deepwater drillship, is operating in the
U.S. Gulf of Mexico and is contracted through April 2017. The rig arrived in the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico in early March 2014 and commenced drilling operations in late April 2014.
The Atwood Condor, a dynamically-positioned, ultra-deepwater semisubmersible, is operating in
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and is contracted through November 2016. The Atwood Osprey, an ultra-
deepwater semisubmersible, is operating offshore Australia and is contracted through May 2017.
The Atwood Eagle and Atwood Falcon, both deepwater semisubmersibles, are operating
offshore Australia and are contracted through August 2016 and March 2016, respectively. The
Atwood Hunter, a deepwater semisubmersible, is currently operating in Equatorial Guinea and is
contracted through mid-November 2014.
The Atwood Admiral and Atwood Archer are DP-3 dynamically-positioned, dual derrick, ultra-
deepwater drillships rated to operate in water depths up to 12,000 feet, and are currently under
construction at the Daewoo Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Co., Ltd. (“DSME”) shipyard in
South Korea. These drillships will have enhanced technical capabilities, including two seven-
ram BOPs, three 100-ton knuckle boom cranes, a 165-ton active heave “tree-running” knuckle
boom crane and 200 person accommodations. Total cost, including project management, drilling
and handling tools and spares, is approximately $635 million per drillship.
The Atwood Admiral and Atwood Archer were scheduled to be delivered in March 2015 and
December 2015, respectively. Due to lack of suitable drilling programs, we have not secured the
initial drilling contracts for these rigs. Therefore, we have entered into amendments to our
construction contracts with DSME to delay the delivery of these two rigs by six months each. The
Atwood Admiral is now scheduled for delivery on September 30, 2015 and the Atwood Archer on
June 30, 2016.
Jackup Rig Market
Bifurcation in day rates and utilization between high specification jackups and standard jackups
continues to characterize contracting activity in the jackup market. We expect this bifurcation
trend to become more pronounced in the future. As a result of newbuild jackup construction
programs initiated in 2005 and continuing through 2014, the jackup supply continues to increase.
As of November 1, 2014, there were 142 newbuild jackup rigs under construction. Thirteen jack-
ups are scheduled for delivery in 2014 and only three of these were contracted as of November
1, 2014. The remaining 129 rigs are scheduled for delivery in 2015 through 2017. This increase
in the marketed supply of jackups, most of which are high specification, may exceed customer
demand leading to lower day rates for jackup rigs of all classes in the future.
29
The percentage of marketed high specification jackup rigs (i.e., rigs equal to or greater than 350-
foot water depth capability) under contract is approximately 98% as compared to 87% for the
remainder of the global jackup fleet. Despite the expected increase in global jackup supply due
to the continued delivery of high specification newbuild rigs through the end of 2017, we expect
demand for high specification jackup rigs to remain elevated as operators continue to prefer
contracting newer, more capable rigs for their drilling programs.
Our High-Specification Jackup Rigs
The Atwood Mako, the Atwood Manta and the Atwood Orca, all 400-foot water depth Pacific
Class jackups, are operating offshore Thailand and are contracted through November 2014,
December 2015 and February 2016, respectively. The Atwood Aurora, a 350-foot water depth
jackup, is operating offshore West Africa and is contracted through September 2016. The Atwood
Beacon, a 400-foot water depth jackup, is operating in the Mediterranean Sea and is contracted
into January 2016.
Idled Rigs
During April 2014, we completed the sale of our subsidiary which owned our semisubmersible
tender assist drilling rig, the Seahawk. We anticipate that our remaining idled rig, the Atwood
Southern Cross, a mid-water floater, will not return to service during fiscal year 2015 due to the
lack of sufficient continuous demand, and thus, we are not actively marketing the rig at this time.
Contract Backlog
We maintain a backlog of commitments for contract drilling revenues. Our contract backlog at
September 30, 2014 was approximately $3.0 billion, representing a 21% decrease compared to
our contract backlog of $3.8 billion at September 30, 2013. We calculate our contract backlog by
multiplying the day rate under our drilling contracts by the number of days remaining under the
contract, assuming full utilization. The calculation does not include any revenues related to other
fees such as for mobilization, demobilization, contract preparation, customer reimbursables and
bonuses. The amount of actual revenues earned and the actual periods during which revenues
are earned will be different from amounts disclosed in our backlog calculations due to a lack of
predictability of various factors, including newbuild rig delivery dates, unscheduled repairs,
maintenance requirements, weather delays and other factors. Such factors may result in lower
applicable day rates than the full contractual day rate. In addition, under certain circumstances,
our customers may seek to terminate or renegotiate our contracts. See Item 1A., “Risk Factors—
Our business may experience reduced profitability if our customers terminate or seek to
renegotiate our drilling contracts” of this Form 10-K.
The following tables set forth as of September 30, 2014, the amount of our contract drilling
revenue backlog and the percent of available operating days committed for our actively-marketed
drilling units for the periods indicated:
Contract Drilling Revenue
Backlog
Fiscal
2015
Fiscal
2016
Fiscal
2017
Fiscal
2018
Fiscal 2019
and
thereafter
Total
(In millions)
Ultra-deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
$819
338
250
$1,407
Percentage of Available Operating
Days Committed
(In millions)
Ultra-deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
30
$808
226
103
$1,137
Fiscal
2015
100
71
83
85
$458
—
—
$458
$ 22
—
—
$ 22
$ —
—
—
$ —
Fiscal
2016
Fiscal
2017
Fiscal
2018
% 76
% 46
% 34
% 54
%  38
%  —
%  —
%  16
%  2
%  —
%  —
%  1
$2,107
564
353
$3,024
Fiscal 2019
and
thereafter
%  —
%  —
%  —
%  —
%
%
%
%
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year 2014 versus Fiscal Year 2013
Revenues—Revenues for fiscal year 2014 increased $110 million, or 10%, compared to the prior
fiscal year. Fiscal year 2014 included 3,839 operating days versus 3,718 operating days in fiscal
year 2013. A comparative analysis of revenues for fiscal years 2014 and 2013 is as follows:
(In millions)
Ultra-Deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
Reimbursable
REVENUES
Fiscal Year
2014
$462
333
308
71
$1,174
Fiscal Year
2013
$335
415
268
46
$1,064
Variance
$ 127
(82
40
25
$ 110
)
Our ultra-deepwater fleet realized average revenues of $440,000 per day on 1,050 operating
days, as compared to $460,000 per day on 730 operating days in fiscal year 2014 and 2013,
respectively. The increase in operating days in fiscal year 2014 is largely due to the Atwood
Achiever and Atwood Advantage, our "A-Class" ultra-deepwater drillships, being delivered and
commencing mobilization under their initial drilling contracts to Northwest Africa in September
2014 and to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in December 2013, respectively. The average revenue per
operating day for our ultra-deepwater fleet decreased in fiscal year 2014 as compared to fiscal
year 2013, primarily due to approximately 48 zero-rate days incurred by the Atwood Advantage in
the third quarter of fiscal year 2014 related to start-up activities and approximately 21 zero-rate
days incurred by the Atwood Condor in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014 related to subsea
equipment issues.
Our deepwater fleet realized average revenues of $390,000 per day on 860 operating days, as
compared to $385,000 per day on 1,078 operating days in fiscal years 2014 and 2013,
respectively. The decrease in operating days in fiscal year 2014 is primarily due to the Atwood
Hunter undergoing a regulatory and maintenance project from December 2013 through the end
of April 2014. The rig was then idle until August, when it recommenced operations in West Africa.
Additionally, our deepwater fleet realized higher average revenue per operating day for fiscal
year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013, primarily due to the Atwood Eagle and the Atwood
Falcon incurring less downtime for equipment repairs during fiscal year 2014, as compared to
fiscal year 2013.
Our jackup fleet realized average revenues of $160,000 per day on 1,929 operating days, as
compared to $140,000 per day on 1,910 operating days in fiscal years 2014 and 2013,
respectively. The increase in operating days in fiscal year 2014 is due to a full twelve months of
operations for the newly constructed, high specification jackup, the Atwood Manta, which was
delivered from the shipyard in December 2012, as well as nine months of operations for the
Atwood Orca, partially offset by the loss in operating days due to the sale of the Vicksburg.
Overall, the jackup fleet realized higher average revenue per operating day in fiscal year 2014,
as compared to fiscal year 2013 due primarily to higher average day rates realized by two of our
initial high specification jackups, the Atwood Aurora and the Atwood Beacon, and a greater
proportionate mix of our three newly constructed high specification jackups at higher day rates,
partially offset by the sale of the Vicksburg.
Reimbursable revenues are primarily driven by our clients' requests for equipment, services
and/or personnel that are not typically included in the contractual operating day rate. Thus, these
revenues vary depending on the timing of the clients' requests and the work performed. Changes
in the amount of these reimbursable revenues generally do not have a material effect on our
financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
31
Drilling Costs—Drilling costs for fiscal year 2014 increased $103 million, or 23%, compared to
the prior fiscal year. Fiscal year 2014 included 3,839 operating days versus 3,718 operating days
in fiscal year 2013. A comparative analysis of drilling costs for fiscal years 2014 and 2013 is as
follows:
(In millions)
Variance
DRILLING COSTS
Fiscal Year
2014
$167
201
132
56
6
$562
Fiscal Year
2013
 $127
 168
 124
 33
 7
 $459
)
$ 40
Ultra-Deepwater
 33
Deepwater
 8
Jackups
 23
Reimbursable
 (1
Other
 
 $ 103
Ultra-deepwater drilling costs per calendar day remained relatively stable at approximately
$170,000 in fiscal year 2014 and 2013. The increase in operating days in fiscal year 2014 is
largely due to the Atwood Achiever and Atwood Advantage, our "A-Class" ultra-deepwater
drillships, being delivered and commencing mobilization under their initial drilling contracts to
Northwest Africa in September 2014 and to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in December 2013,
respectively.
Deepwater drilling costs increased in fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013, due to
maintenance projects and regulatory inspections. Average drilling costs per calendar day for our
deepwater rigs increased from approximately $155,000 for fiscal year 2013 to approximately
$185,000 in fiscal year 2014 mainly due to the Atwood Hunter undergoing a regulatory and
maintenance project from December 2013 through the end of April 2014 and the Atwood Falcon
undergoing regulatory inspections and planned maintenance in December 2013. These
increases were partially offset by decreased average drilling costs per calendar day for the
Atwood Eagle in fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013, due to regulatory inspections,
planned maintenance, and upgrades that took place in December 2012.
Jackup drilling costs per calendar day increased from approximately $65,000 for fiscal year 2013
to approximately $70,000 for fiscal year 2014, as a result of full-year operations for the newly
constructed Atwood Orca and Atwood Manta. The increase is also due to the Atwood Aurora
undergoing regulatory inspections and planned maintenance in March 2014 and higher
personnel costs on the Atwood Beacon.
Reimbursable costs are primarily driven by our clients' requests for equipment, services and/or
personnel that are not typically included in the contractual operating day rate. Thus, these costs
vary depending on the timing of the clients' requests and the work performed. Changes in the
amount of these reimbursable costs generally do not have a material effect on our financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
32
Depreciation—Depreciation expense for the fiscal year 2014 increased $29 million, or 25%,
compared to the prior fiscal year. A comparative analysis of depreciation expense for fiscal years
2014 and 2013 is as follows:
(In millions)
Ultra-Deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
Other
Variance
DEPRECIATION EXPENSE
Fiscal Year
2014
$84
21
37
5
$147
Fiscal Year
2013
$59
21
32
6
$118
$ 25
—
5
(1
$ 29
)
Ultra-deepwater depreciation increased by $25 million for fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal
year 2013, due to the delivery of the Atwood Achiever and Atwood Advantage which were placed
into service in September 2014 and December 2013, respectively.
Jackup depreciation increased by $5 million for fiscal year 2014 as compared to 2013 due to the
addition of the Atwood Manta and the Atwood Orca, which were placed into service at the
beginning of December 2012 and May 2013, respectively.
General and administrative—General and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2014 increased
approximately $5 million, or 8%, compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to higher
personnel-related costs, including an increase in headcount to support our larger fleet and higher
rental and lease costs related to relocation to the new corporate headquarters office.
Interest Expense, net of capitalized interest—Interest expense, net of capitalized interest for fiscal
year 2014 increased approximately $16.9 million, compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due
to higher outstanding debt and reduced capitalized interest.
Income taxes—Our effective tax rate was 14% for fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year
2013 effective tax rate of 13%. The higher effective income tax was primarily due to the impact of
discrete items in the current year as well as changes in the geographic mix of income.
33
Fiscal Year 2013 versus Fiscal Year 2012
Revenues—Revenues for fiscal year 2013 increased $277 million, or 35%, compared to fiscal
year 2012. Fiscal year 2013 included 3,718 operating days versus 2,577 operating days in fiscal
year 2012. A comparative analysis of revenues for fiscal years 2013 and 2012 is as follows:
(In millions)
Variance
Ultra-Deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
Reimbursable
 
In fiscal year 2013, our ultra-deepwater fleet realized average revenues of $460,000 per day on
$ 136
 (1
 128
 14
 $ 277
)
REVENUES
Fiscal Year
2013
$335
415
268
46
$1,064
Fiscal Year
2012
 $199
 416
 140
 32
 $787
730 operating days, as compared to $440,000 per day on 457 operating days in fiscal year 2012.
The increase in operating days in fiscal year 2013 is largely due to the Atwood Condor being
delivered and commencing mobilization to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in September 2012. The
average revenue per operating day for our ultra-deepwater fleet increased in fiscal year 2013 as
compared to fiscal year 2012, primarily due to the Atwood Condor operating for the full fiscal year
in 2013.
In fiscal year 2013, our deepwater fleet realized average revenues of $385,000 per day on 1,078
operating days, as compared to $415,000 per day on 1,002 operating days in fiscal year 2012.
The Atwood Falcon was undergoing a shipyard upgrade project from February 2012 through
May 2012 in fiscal year 2012 during which time it incurred 96 days at zero-rate. No such projects
were undertaken in fiscal year 2013, resulting in higher operating days in fiscal year 2013, as
compared to fiscal year 2012. The average revenue per operating day for our deepwater fleet
decreased in fiscal year 2013, as compared to fiscal year 2012, primarily due to the Atwood
Hunter operating at a lower day rate contract offshore West Africa in fiscal year 2013, as
compared to a higher day rate contract in fiscal year 2012.
In fiscal year 2013, our jackup fleet realized average revenues of $140,000 per day on 1,910
operating days, as compared to $125,000 per day on 1,118 operating days in fiscal year 2012.
The increase in operating days in fiscal year 2013 is due primarily to the Atwood Mako, the
Atwood Manta and the Atwood Orca being delivered from the shipyard and commencing drilling
operations offshore Thailand in September 2012, December 2012 and May 2013. Overall, the
jackup fleet realized higher average revenue per operating day in fiscal year 2013, as compared
to fiscal year 2012, due primarily to higher average day rates realized by the Atwood Beacon and
the Atwood Vicksburg and a greater proportionate mix of our three newly constructed high
specification jackups mentioned above at higher day rates.
Reimbursable revenues are primarily driven by our clients' requests for equipment, services
and/or personnel that are not typically included in the contractual operating day rate. Thus, these
revenues vary depending on the timing of the clients' requests and the work performed. Changes
in the amount of these reimbursable revenues generally do not have a material effect on our
financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
34
(In millions)
Variance
Drilling Costs—Drilling costs for fiscal year 2013 increased $112 million, or 32%, compared to
fiscal year 2012. Fiscal year 2013 included 3,718 operating days versus 2,577 operating days in
fiscal year 2012. A comparative analysis of drilling costs for fiscal years 2013 and 2012 is as
follows:
$ 49
Ultra-Deepwater
 9
Deepwater
 38
Jackups
 14
Reimbursable
 1
Other
 $ 111
 
Ultra-deepwater drilling costs per calendar day remained relatively stable at approximately
DRILLING COSTS
Fiscal Year
2013
$125
168
124
33
9
$459
Fiscal Year
2012
 $76
 159
 86
 19
 8
 $348
$170,000 in fiscal year 2013 and 2012. The increase in the overall costs for fiscal year 2013 as
compared to fiscal year 2012 is due primarily to the Atwood Condor operating for the full fiscal
year in 2013 after commencing operations in September 2012.
Deepwater drilling costs per calendar day increased to approximately $155,000 for fiscal year
2013 from approximately $145,000 in fiscal year 2012, mainly due to the Atwood Eagle
undergoing regulatory inspections, planned maintenance and upgrades in December 2012 and
also due to the Atwood Falcon incurring significantly higher personnel costs working offshore
Australia in fiscal year 2013, compared to working offshore Malaysia in fiscal year 2012.
Jackup drilling costs per calendar day decreased to approximately $65,000 for fiscal year 2013,
from approximately $75,000 for fiscal year 2012, primarily due to the Atwood Aurora amortization
charges relating to mobilization to West Africa recorded in fiscal year 2012 as compared to none
in fiscal year 2013, since the rig continued to operate in West Africa. Overall, the Jackup costs
increased due to the Atwood Mako, the Atwood Manta and the Atwood Orca being delivered from
the shipyard and commencing drilling operations offshore Thailand in September 2012,
December 2012 and May 2013 and thus earned little to no drilling costs in fiscal year 2012, while
the rigs were predominantly under construction.
Reimbursable costs are primarily driven by our clients' requests for equipment, services and/or
personnel that are not typically included in the contractual operating day rate. Thus, these costs
vary depending on the timing of the clients' requests and the work performed. Changes in the
amount of these reimbursable costs generally do not have a material effect on our financial
position, results of operations or cash flows.
35
Depreciation—Depreciation expense for fiscal year 2013 increased $47 million, or 66%, as
compared to fiscal year 2012. A comparative analysis of depreciation expense by rig for fiscal
years 2013 and 2012 is as follows:
(In millions)
Variance
DEPRECIATION EXPENSE
Fiscal Year
2013
$59
20
33
6
$118
Fiscal Year
2012
 $ 33
 18
 15
 5
 $ 71
$ 26
 2
 18
 1
 $ 47
Ultra-Deepwater
Deepwater
Jackups
Other
 
Ultra-deepwater depreciation increased by $26 million for fiscal year 2013, as compared to fiscal
year 2012, due to the Atwood Condor being placed into service at the beginning of July 2012 and
incurring only three months of depreciation expense while mobilizing in the prior fiscal year 2012.
Jackup depreciation increased by $18 million for fiscal year 2013 as compared to fiscal year
2012 due to the addition of the Atwood Mako, the Atwood Manta and the Atwood Orca, which
were placed into service in September 2012, December 2012 and May 2013, respectively,
incurring little to no depreciation expense in the prior fiscal year 2012.
General and administrative—General and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2013 increased
approximately $7 million, or 14%, compared to the fiscal year 2012, primarily due to higher
personnel-related costs, including an increase in headcount, and higher professional fees to
support our larger fleet.
Income taxes—Our effective tax rate was 13% for fiscal year 2013, which was consistent with
fiscal year 2012.
36
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
Our sources of available liquidity include existing cash balances on hand, cash flows from
operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. At September 30, 2014, we had $80
million in cash on hand. At any time, we may require a significant portion of our cash on hand for
working capital and other purposes.  During the year ended September 30, 2014, we relied
principally on our cash flows from operations, cash on hand and borrowings under our credit
facility to meet liquidity needs and fund our cash requirements including our capital expenditures
of $976 million. To date, general inflationary trends have not had a material effect on our
operating revenues or expenses.
    
Cash Flows
 
(In millions)
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash used by investing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities
September 30,
2014
$442,620  $432,110  $255,603
(914,215 ) (745,076 ) (777,437 )
462,905
2013
2013
323,865
304,703
Working capital increased from $297 million as of September 30, 2013 to $330 million as of
September 30, 2014 due to an increase in our accounts receivable and inventory which is
attributable to our larger fleet. Net cash from operating activities for the year ended
September 30, 2014 was $443 million, which compared to $432 million for the year ended
September 30, 2013.
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures
Our investing activities are primarily related to capital expenditures for property and equipment.
Our capital expenditures, including maintenance capital expenditures, for fiscal year 2014 totaled
$976 million. As of September 30, 2014, we had expended approximately $320 million on our
drilling units under construction at that date. The expected remaining costs including firm
commitments, project management, capitalized interest and drilling and handling tools and
spares for our drilling units under construction for fiscal years ended September 30, 2015 and
2016 are as follows (in millions):
2015
2016
Total
We believe that we will be able to fund all additional construction costs with cash flow from
$550
400
$950
operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
From time to time, we may seek possible expansion and acquisition opportunities relating to our
business, which may include the construction or acquisition of rigs or other businesses in
addition to those described in this Form 10-K. Such determinations will depend on market
conditions and opportunities existing at that time, including with respect to the market for drilling
contracts and day rates and the relative costs associated with such expansions or acquisitions.
The timing, success or terms of any such efforts and the associated capital commitments are not
currently known. In addition to our sources of liquidity, we may seek to access the capital markets
to fund such opportunities. Our ability to access the capital markets depends on a number of
factors, including, among others, our credit rating, industry conditions, general economic
conditions, market conditions and market perceptions of us and our industry.
Sale of assets
We continually review the possibility of disposing of assets that we do not consider core to our
long-term business plan.
In January 2014, we sold our standard jackup drilling unit, the Vicksburg, for a sales price of
$55.4 million. The date of sale, the carrying value of the rig and its related inventory was $20.5
million.
In April 2014, we sold a wholly owned subsidiary which owned our semisubmersible tender
assist drilling rig, the Seahawk, for a sales price of $4.0 million. The carrying value of the
subsidiary, after recording a $2.0 million impairment charge recorded in the second quarter of the
current fiscal year, approximated its sales price.
37
Financing Activities
Our financing activities primarily consist of borrowing and repayment of long-term and short-term
debt. Proceeds received from issuances of long-term debt and borrowings from our bank credit
facilities totaled $700 million for fiscal year 2014, $600 million for fiscal year 2013 and $760
million for fiscal year 2012. Repayments on our bank credit facilities were $220 million for fiscal
year 2014, $175 million for fiscal year 2013 and $450 million for fiscal year 2012. We had
repayments of short-term debt of $14 million for fiscal year 2014 and proceeds of $3 million for
fiscal year 2013 and repayments of $0.3 million for fiscal year 2012. In July 2014, we financed
our major insurance policies, which financing arrangement bears an interest rate of 1.57% and is
amortized over a period of nine months. We had similar arrangements in fiscal years 2013 and
2012.
During fiscal year 2013, our financing activities included the repurchase and retirement of
common shares as discussed below. In addition, we received proceeds from the exercise of
stock options of $4 million for fiscal year 2014, $9 million for fiscal year 2013 and $6 million for
fiscal year 2012.
Expenses, fees and other costs paid in conjunction with our debt issuances were $7 million for
fiscal year 2014, $6 million for fiscal year 2013 and $11 million for fiscal year 2012.
6.50% Senior Notes Due 2020
In January 2012, we issued $450 million of 6.50% fixed-rate Senior Notes due 2020 (the "Senior
Notes"). We used the net proceeds to reduce outstanding borrowings under our credit facility. On
June 21, 2013, we issued an additional $200 million of Senior Notes and used the net proceeds
to reduce outstanding borrowings under our credit facility. The two issuances of Senior Notes
together form a single series under the indenture with an aggregate principal amount of $650
million.
The Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations and are not currently guaranteed by any of
our subsidiaries. Interest is payable on the Senior Notes semi-annually in arrears. The indenture
governing the Senior Notes contains provisions that limit our ability and the ability of our
restricted subsidiaries to incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock; pay
dividends or make other restricted payments; sell assets; make investments; create liens; enter
into agreements that restrict dividends or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us;
and consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our assets. Many of these restrictions
will terminate if the Senior Notes become rated investment grade. The indenture governing the
Senior Notes also contains customary events of default, including payment defaults; defaults for
failure to comply with other covenants in the indenture; cross-acceleration and entry of final
judgments in excess of $50.0 million; and certain events of bankruptcy, in certain cases subject
to notice and grace periods. We are required to offer to repurchase the Senior Notes in
connection with specified change in control events or with excess proceeds of asset sales not
applied for permitted purposes.
 
At any time prior to February 1, 2015, we may, on any one or more occasions, redeem up to 35%
of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain
equity offerings at a redemption price set forth in the indenture governing the Senior Notes. At
any time prior to February 1, 2016, we may, on any one or more occasions, redeem the Senior
Notes in whole or in part at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the
Senior Notes redeemed plus a “make whole” premium. On and after February 1, 2016, we may,
on any one or more occasions, redeem the Senior Notes in whole or in part at the redemption
price set forth in the indenture governing the Senior Notes.
Revolving Credit Facility
As of September 30, 2014, we had $1.09 billion of outstanding borrowings and $5.90 million in
letters of credit issued under our $1.55 billion senior secured revolving credit facility. On April 10,
2014, we entered into an agreement to amend our revolving credit facility the ("Credit Facility"),
which increased the total commitment to $1.55 billion from $1.1 billion and extended its maturity
to May 2018 from May 2016. Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Atwood Offshore Worldwide Limited
(“AOWL”), is the borrower under the Credit Facility, and we and certain of our other subsidiaries
are guarantors under the facility. Subsequent to the end of fiscal year 2014, we have repaid $50
million under the Credit Facility.
Prior to the amendment, borrowings under the Credit Facility bore interest at the Eurodollar rate
plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50% and the commitment on the unused portion of the
underlying commitments ranged from 0.5% to 1.0% per annum. Borrowings under the Credit
Facility bear interest at the Eurodollar rate plus a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.00% and the
commitment fee on the unused portion of the underlying commitment ranges from 0.30% to
0.40% per annum, each based on our corporate credit ratings.
38
)
)
$1,550
(1,085
(6
$459
The following summarizes our availability under our Credit Facility at September 30, 2014 (in
millions):
Commitment under Facility
Borrowings under Facility
Letters of Credit Outstanding
Availability
The Credit Facility contains various financial covenants that impose a maximum leverage ratio of
4.0 to 1.0, a debt to capitalization ratio of 0.5 to 1.0, a minimum interest expense coverage ratio of
3.0 to 1.0 and a minimum collateral maintenance of 150% of the aggregate amount outstanding
under the Credit Facility. In addition, the Credit Facility contains limitations on our and certain of
our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens; merge, consolidate or sell substantially all assets; pay
dividends; incur additional indebtedness; make advances, investments or loans; and transact
with affiliates. The Credit Facility also contains customary events of default, including but not
limited to delinquent payments, bankruptcy filings, material adverse judgments, guarantees or
security documents not being in full effect, non-compliance with the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act of 1974, cross-defaults under other debt agreements, or a change of control.
The Credit Facility is secured primarily by first preferred mortgages on nine of our active drilling
units (Atwood Aurora, Atwood Beacon, Atwood Condor, Atwood Eagle, Atwood Falcon, Atwood
Hunter, Atwood Mako, Atwood Manta and Atwood Osprey), as well as liens on the equity
interests of our subsidiaries that own, directly or indirectly, such drilling units. We were in
compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Facility at September 30, 2014, and we
anticipate that we will continue to be in compliance for the next fiscal year.
Repurchase and Retirement of Common Shares
As of September 30, 2014, we did not have an active stock repurchase program. On May 23,
2013, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Helmerich & Payne International Drilling
Co. ("H&P"), a subsidiary of Helmerich & Payne, Inc., under which we agreed to repurchase
2,000,000 shares of our common stock from H&P and to make a payment at closing to H&P of
$107.1 million. On June 13, 2013, we and H&P amended the agreement to extend the closing
date from June 13, 2013 to June 27, 2013 and to increase the amount to be paid at closing to
H&P by $200,000. The share repurchase closed on June 27, 2013. Following the share
repurchase, we canceled such shares. H&P is considered a related party due to a member of our
board of directors currently serving as Chairman of the Board of Helmerich & Payne, Inc.
Dividends
Our board of directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of common
stock, payable on January 13, 2015 to shareholders of record on January 6, 2015. The
declaration of future dividends is at the discretion of our board of directors and subject to our
financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and other factors and restrictions under
applicable law and our debt instruments.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as that term is defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of
Regulation S-K.
39
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our obligations and commitments as of September 30, 2014 for
fiscal years ended September 30.
(In thousands)
Debt (1)
Interest (2)
Purchase Commitments (3)
Operating Leases (4)
Fiscal
2015
Fiscal
2016 and
2017
Fiscal 2018
and 2019
Fiscal
2020 and
Thereafter
Total
133,118  98,872
$1,085,000  $650,000  $1,746,885
$11,885  $—
67,518
448,030  359,493  —
3,826
$531,259  $497,827  $1,188,164  $673,586  $2,890,836
313,591
 807,523
 22,837
14,083
 —
 9,503
5,216
4,292
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Debt amounts include principal payments on the Senior Notes and Credit Facility and short-
term notes payable. Unamortized premiums on the Senior Notes of $7.1 million are excluded
from this presentation as they do represent a future commitment of funds.
Interest amounts include fixed interest payments on the Senior Notes and swaps (assuming
September 30, 2014 LIBOR for floating rate) as well as interest and commitment fees on the
Credit Facility (assuming September 30, 2014 LIBOR for floating rate and the debt outstanding
and the unused portion of the underlying commitment as of September 30, 2014).
Purchase commitment amounts include commitments related to our two drilling units under
construction as of September 30, 2014 (excludes project management, capitalized interest
and drilling and handling tools and spares.)
We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business. Some lease agreements
provide us with the option to renew the leases. Our future operating lease payments would
change if we exercised these renewal options and if we entered into additional operating
lease agreements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Significant accounting policies are included in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements
for the year ended September 30, 2014. These policies, along with the underlying assumptions
and judgments made by management in their application, have a significant impact on our
consolidated financial statements. We identify our most critical accounting policies as those that
are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of
operations, and that require the most difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments by
management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. Our most critical
accounting policies are those related to revenue recognition, deferred fees and costs, property
and equipment, and income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
We account for contract drilling revenue in accordance with the terms of the underlying drilling
contract. These contracts generally provide that revenue is earned and recognized on a daily rate
(i.e. “day rate”) basis, and day rates are typically earned for a particular level of service over the
life of a contract assuming collectability is reasonably assured. Day rate contracts can be
performed for a specified period of time or the time required to drill a specified well or number of
wells. Revenues from day rate contracts for drilling and other operations performed during the
term of a contract (including during mobilization) are classified under contract drilling services.
Certain fees received as compensation for relocating drilling rigs from one major operating area
to another, equipment and upgrade costs reimbursed by the customer, as well as receipt of
advance billings of day rates are deferred and recognized as earned during the expected term of
the related drilling contract, as are the day rates associated with such contracts. If receipt of such
fees is not conditional, they will be recognized as earned on a straight-line method over the
expected term of the related drilling contract. However, fees received upon termination of a
drilling contract are generally recognized as earned during the period termination occurs as the
termination fee is usually conditional based on the occurrence of an event as defined in the
drilling contract, such as not obtaining follow on work to the contract in progress or relocation
beyond a certain distance when the contract is completed.
At September 30, 2014 and 2013, deferred fees associated with mobilization, related equipment
purchases and upgrades and receipt of advance billings of day rates totaled $7.7 million and
$12.0 million, respectively. Deferred fees are classified as current or long-term deferred credits in
the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets based on the expected term of the applicable
drilling contracts.
40
Deferred costs
We defer certain mobilization costs relating to moving a drilling rig to a new area incurred prior to
the commencement of the drilling operations and customer requested equipment purchases. We
amortize such costs on a straight-line basis over the expected term of the applicable drilling
contract. Contract revenues and drilling costs are reported in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations at their gross amounts.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is stated at cost. At September 30, 2014, the carrying value of our
property and equipment totaled approximately $4.0 billion, which represents approximately 88%
of our total assets. The carrying value reflects the application of our property and equipment
accounting policies, which incorporate estimates, assumptions and judgments by management
relative to the useful lives and salvage values of our units. Once rigs and related equipment are
placed in service, they are depreciated on the straight-line method over their estimated useful
lives, with depreciation discontinued only during the period when a drilling unit is out-of-service
while undergoing a significant upgrade that extends its useful life. The estimated useful lives of
our drilling units and related equipment, including drill pipe, can range from 3 years to 35 years
and our salvage values are generally estimated at 5% of capitalized costs. Any future increases
or decreases in our estimates of useful lives or salvage values will have the effect of decreasing
or increasing future depreciation expense, respectively.
We evaluate our property and equipment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable and reduce costs by provisions to
recognize economic impairment as necessary. An impairment loss on our property and
equipment may exist when the estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of
the asset. In determining an asset's fair value, we consider a number of factors such as estimated
future cash flows, appraisals and current market value analysis. If an asset is determined to be
impaired, the loss is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds
its fair value. Asset impairment evaluations are, by nature, highly subjective. Operations of our
drilling equipment are subject to the offshore drilling requirements of oil and gas exploration and
production companies and agencies of foreign governments. These requirements are, in turn,
subject to fluctuations in government policies, world demand and price for petroleum products,
proved reserves in relation to such demand and the extent to which such demand can be met
from onshore sources. The critical estimates which result from these dynamics include projected
utilization, day rates, and operating expenses, each of which impacts our estimated future cash
flows. Over the last five years, our full utilization rate for all rigs has averaged approximately 83%;
however, if a drilling unit incurs significant idle time or receives day rates below operating costs,
its carrying value could become impaired. See "Item 6: Selected Financial Data" for further
discussion on the calculation of full utilization rates.
The estimates, assumptions and judgments used by management in the application of our
property and equipment and asset impairment policies reflect both historical experience and
expectations regarding future industry conditions and operations. The use of different estimates,
assumptions and judgments, especially those involving the useful lives of our rigs and vessels
and expectations regarding future industry conditions and operations, would likely result in
materially different carrying values of assets and results of operations.
Fair value
We have certain assets and liabilities that are required to be measured and disclosed at fair
value. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to
transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date.
Independent third party services are used to determine the fair value of our financial instruments
using quoted market prices and observable inputs. When independent third party services are
used, we obtain an understanding of how the fair values are derived and selectively corroborate
fair values by reviewing other readily available market based sources of information.
The fair values of our interest rate swaps and our foreign currency forward exchange contracts
are based upon valuations calculated by an independent third party. The derivatives were valued
according to the "Market approach" where possible, and the "Income approach" otherwise. A
third party independently valued each instrument using forward price data obtained from
reputable data providers (e.g., Bloomberg and Reuters) and reviewed market activity and
similarity of pricing terms to determine appropriate reliability level assertions for each instrument.
The contribution of the credit valuation adjustment to total fair value is less than 1% for all
derivatives and is therefore not significant.
Income Taxes
We conduct operations and earn income in numerous foreign countries and are subject to the
laws of taxing jurisdictions within those countries, as well as U S. federal and state tax laws. At
September 30, 2014, we have an approximate $0.2 million
41
net deferred income tax liability. This balance reflects the application of our income tax
accounting policies. Such accounting policies incorporate estimates, assumptions and
judgments by management relative to the interpretation of applicable tax laws, the application of
accounting standards, and future levels of taxable income. The estimates, assumptions and
judgments used by management in connection with accounting for income taxes reflect both
historical experience and expectations regarding future industry conditions and operations.
Changes in these estimates, assumptions and judgments could result in materially different
provisions for deferred and current income taxes.
A comprehensive model is used to account for uncertain tax positions, which includes
consideration of how we recognize, measure, present and disclose uncertain tax positions taken
or to be taken on a tax return. The income tax laws and regulations are voluminous and are often
ambiguous. As such, we are required to make many subjective assumptions and judgments
regarding our tax positions that can materially affect amounts recognized in our consolidated
balance sheets and statements of income.
Our annual tax provision is based on expected taxable income, statutory rates and tax planning
opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate.  The determination
of our annual tax provision and evaluation of our tax positions involves interpretation of tax laws
in the various jurisdictions and requires significant judgment and the use of estimates and
assumptions regarding significant future events, such as the amount, timing and character of
income, deductions and tax credits.  Our tax liability in any given year could be affected by
changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements, and treaties, currency exchange restrictions or our
level of operations or profitability in each jurisdiction.  Additionally, we operate in many
jurisdictions where the tax laws relating to the offshore drilling industry are not well developed. 
Although our annual tax provision is based on the best information available at the time, a
number of years may elapse before the ultimate tax liabilities in the various jurisdictions are
determined.
In several of the locations in which we operate, certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries enter
into agreements with other of our wholly-owned subsidiaries to provide specialized services and
equipment in support of our operations. We apply a transfer pricing methodology to determine the
amount to be charged for providing the services and equipment, and utilize outside consultants to
assist us in the development of such transfer pricing methodologies. In most cases, there are
alternative transfer pricing methodologies that could be applied to these transactions and, if
applied, could result in different chargeable amounts.
Our international rigs are owned and operated, directly or indirectly, by Atwood Offshore
Worldwide Limited ("AOWL"), a Cayman Islands subsidiary which we wholly own. It is our
intention to indefinitely reinvest historic and future earnings of AOWL and its foreign subsidiaries
to finance operating and capital expenditures as well as pay down borrowings. Accordingly, we
have not made a provision for U.S. income taxes on approximately $2.4 billion of undistributed
foreign earnings and profits. Although we do not intend to repatriate the earnings of AOWL and
have not provided U.S. income taxes for such earnings, except to the extent that such earnings
were immediately subject to U.S. income taxes, these earnings could become subject to U.S.
income tax if remitted, or if deemed remitted as a dividend.  If these earnings were remitted, we
estimate approximately $450 million in additional taxes would be incurred.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In April 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued new guidance
intended to change the criteria for reporting discontinued operations while enhancing disclosures
for discontinued operations, which changes the criteria and requires additional disclosures for
reporting discontinued operations. The guidance is effective for all disposals of components of an
entity that occur within annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014, and interim
periods within annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2015. We do not expect that
our adoption will have a material impact on our financial statements or disclosures in our
financial statements.
In May 2014, the FASB issued new guidance intended to change the criteria for recognition of
revenue. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict
the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
To achieve this core principal, an entity should apply the following five steps: (1) Identify
contracts with customers, (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contracts, (3) Determine
the transaction price, (4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation in the
contract, and (5) Recognize revenue as the entity satisfies performance obligations. The
amendments in are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016,
including interim periods within that reporting period. Early application is not permitted. We are
currently evaluating what impact the adoption of this guidance would have on our financial
position, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
In June 2014, the FASB issued amended guidance on the accounting for certain share-based
employee compensation awards. The amended guidance applies to share-based employee
compensation awards that include a performance target that affects vesting when the
performance target can be achieved after the requisite service period. These targets are to be
treated as a performance condition. As such, the performance target should not be reflected in
estimating the grant-date fair value of the award and
42
compensation cost should be recognized in the period in which it becomes probable that the
performance target will be achieved. The amendments are effective for annual periods and
interim periods within those annual periods beginning after December 15, 2015. We do not
expect that our adoption will have a material impact on our financial statements or disclosures in
our financial statements.
In August 2014, the FASB issued guidance on disclosures of uncertainties about an entity's
ability to continue as a going concern. The guidance requires management's evaluation of
whether there are conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are
issued. This assessment must be made in connection with preparing financial statements for
each annual and interim reporting period. Management's evaluation should be based on the
relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable at the date the financial
statements are issued. If conditions or events raise substantial doubt about the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern, but this doubt is alleviated by management's plans, the entity
should disclose information that enables the reader to understand what the conditions or events
are, management's evaluation of those conditions or events and management's plans that
alleviate that substantial doubt. If conditions or events raise substantial doubt and the substantial
doubt is not alleviated, the entity must disclose this in the footnotes. The entity must also disclose
information that enables the reader to understand what the conditions or events are,
management's evaluation of those conditions or events and management's plans that are
intended to alleviate that substantial doubt. The amendments are effective for annual periods and
interim periods within those annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016. We do not
expect that our adoption will have a material impact on our financial statements or disclosures in
our financial statements.
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET
RISK
We are exposed to market risk, including adverse changes in interest rates and foreign currency
exchange rates as discussed below.
Interest Rate Risk
The provisions of our Credit Facility provide for a variable interest rate cost on our $1.085 billion
outstanding as of September 30, 2014. However, we have employed an interest rate risk
management strategy that utilizes derivative instruments with respect to $250 million of our debt
as of September 30, 2014, in order to minimize or eliminate unanticipated fluctuations in earnings
and cash flows arising from changes in, and volatility of, interest rates. Effectively, $835 million of
our variable long-term debt outstanding as of September 30, 2014 is subject to changes in
interest rates. A change of 10% in the interest rate on the floating rate debt would have an
immaterial impact on our annual earnings and cash flows.
Foreign Currency Risk
Our functional currency is the U.S. dollar. Certain of our subsidiaries have monetary assets and
liabilities that are denominated in a currency other than our functional currency. The majority of
our contracts are denominated in U.S. dollars, but occasionally all or a portion of a contract is
payable in local currency. To the extent there is a local currency component in a contract, we
attempt to match similar revenue in the local currency to the operating costs paid in the local
currency such as local labor, shore base expenses, and local taxes, if any, in order to minimize
foreign currency fluctuation impact.
From time to time, we enter into foreign currency forward exchange contracts to limit our
exposure to fluctuations and volatility in n currency exchange rates. In December 2013, we
entered into foreign currency forward exchange contracts for a portion of our anticipated euro
receipts associated with revenues earned on a drilling contract from December 2013 to
November 2015. These forward contracts are designated as cash flow hedging instruments.
Based on September 30, 2014 amounts, a decrease in the value of 10% in foreign currencies
relative to the U.S. dollar would not have a material effect to our annual earnings and cash flows.
Market Risk
Our Senior Notes bear interest at a fixed interest rate. The fair value of our Senior Notes will
fluctuate based on changes in prevailing market interest rates and market perceptions of our
credit risk. The fair value of our Senior Notes was approximately $666 million at September 30,
2014, compared to the principal amount of $650 million. The fair value of our Senior Notes was
approximately $662 million at September 30, 2013. If prevailing market interest rates had been
10% lower at September 30, 2014, the change in fair value of our Senior Notes would not have a
material effect to our annual earnings and cash flows.
43
ITEM 8.FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
Management of Atwood Oceanics, Inc. (which together with its subsidiaries is identified as the
“Company,” “we” or “our,” unless stated otherwise or the context requires otherwise) is
responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as
defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Our internal
control over financial reporting was designed by management, under the supervision of the Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes
in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America,
and includes those policies and procedures that:
(i)
(ii)
pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the Company;
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company
are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
Company; and
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use or disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements.
(iii)
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies and procedures may deteriorate.
Management assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial
reporting as of September 30, 2014. In making this assessment, management used the criteria
set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal
Control-Integrated Framework (1992).
Based on our evaluation under the criteria in Internal Control-Integrated Framework (1992),
management has concluded that the Company maintained effective internal control over financial
reporting as of September 30, 2014. PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, our independent registered
public accounting firm, has issued an attestation report on the effectiveness of the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting as of September 30, 2014, which appears on the
following page.
 
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC.   
 
by
 
/s/ Robert J. Saltiel
Robert J. Saltiel
President and
Chief Executive Officer
 
November 13, 2014
/s/ Mark L. Mey
  Mark L. Mey
  Senior Vice President and
  Chief Financial Officer
 
  November 13, 2014
44
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Atwood Oceanics, Inc.
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated
statements of operations, comprehensive income, cash flows and changes in shareholders’
equity present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and
its subsidiaries at September 30, 2014 and 2013, and the results of their operations and their
cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended September 30, 2014 in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the
Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as
of September 30, 2014, based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework
(1992) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO). The Company’s management is responsible for these financial statements, for
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the
effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to
express opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s internal control over
financial reporting based on our integrated audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with
the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial
statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our
audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed
risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in
the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of
the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and
directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have
a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or
detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or
that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Houston, Texas
November 13, 2014
45
46
2013
2012
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
 
 
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
REVENUES:
Contract drilling
Revenues related to reimbursable expenses
Total revenues
 
COSTS AND EXPENSES:
Contract drilling
Reimbursable expenses
Depreciation
General and administrative
(Gain) loss on sale of equipment
Other, net
 
 
OPERATING INCOME
 
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE):
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest
Interest income
 
 
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAXES
PROVISION FOR INCOME TAXES
NET INCOME
 
EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE (NOTE 2):
Basic
Diluted
WEIGHTED AVERAGE COMMON SHARES
OUTSTANDING (NOTE 2):
Basic
Diluted
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Years Ended September 30,
2014
 
$1,103,397  $1,017,923  $755,969
70,556
1,173,953
 
 
506,128
56,225
147,358
61,461
(34,139
(1,864
735,169
 
$438,784
 
 
(41,803
312
(41,491
 
397,293
56,471
$340,822
 
 
$5.31
$5.24
45,740
 1,063,663
  
  
 426,198
 32,727
 117,510
 56,786
) 971
) —
 634,192
  
 $429,471
  
  
) (24,903
 233
) (24,670
  
 404,801
 54,577
 $350,224
  
  
 $5.38
 $5.32
31,452
 787,421
  
  
 328,485
 18,694
 70,599
 49,776
 457
 —
 468,011
  
 $319,410
  
  
) (6,460
 354
) (6,106
  
 313,304
 41,133
 $272,171
  
  
 $4.17
 $4.14
65,267
 65,781
65,073
 65,845
)
)
64,240
65,074
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
 
 
(In thousands)
Net income
Other comprehensive income (loss):
Derivative financial instruments:
Unrealized holding gain (loss)
Reclassification adjustment for loss included in net
income
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
 
Comprehensive income
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Years Ended September 30,
2014
$340,822
 
 
4,208
2013
 $350,224
  
  
 (244
1,530
  
 $351,754
5,042
 
$345,864
834
1,774
1,610
2012
 $272,171
  
  
) (3,094
(1,484
  
 $270,687
)
)
47
ATWOOD OCEANICS INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS  
 
(In thousands, except par value)
ASSETS
Cash
Accounts receivable
Income tax receivable
Inventories of materials and supplies
Prepaid expenses, deferred costs and other current assets
Total current assets
 
Property and equipment, net
 
Other receivables
Deferred income taxes
Deferred costs and other assets
Total assets
 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Dividends payable
Short-term debt
Interest payable
Income tax payable
2013
  
 $88,770
 199,689
 4,672
 121,833
 38,796
 453,760
  
 3,164,724
  
 11,831
 —
 26,951
September 30,
2014
 
$80,080
242,684
6,260
132,368
36,415
497,807
 
3,967,028
 
11,831
589
29,973
$4,507,228  $3,657,266
 
 
$94,315
19,158
16,090
11,885
8,099
14,234
$95,827
 17,653
 —
 8,071
 7,945
 16,554
10,822
 156,872
  
 1,263,232
 485
 1,176
 28,130
 1,293,023
3,596
167,377
 
1,742,122
783
4,100
37,322
1,784,327
Deferred credits and other liabilities
Total current liabilities
 
Long-term debt
Deferred income taxes
Deferred credits
Other
Total long-term liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies (Note 10)
 
Preferred stock, no par value, 1,000 shares authorized, none
outstanding
Common stock, $1.00 par value, 180,000 shares authorized with
64,362 issued and outstanding at September 30, 2014 and 90,000
shares authorized and 64,057 shares issued and outstanding at
September 30, 2013
Paid-in capital
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
Total shareholders’ equity
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
64,362
—
—
183,390
201,464
 1,961,405
2,286,137
 (1,481
3,561
2,555,524
 2,207,371
$4,507,228  $3,657,266
)
64,057
48
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Common Stock
Paid-in
Retained
Capital
Earnings
Shares  Amount
(In thousands)
 
September 30, 2011 64,960  $64,960  $145,084  $1,444,270  $ (1,527
 
Net income
Other
comprehensive loss
Vesting of restricted
stock awards
Exercise of
272,171
(1,484
—
—
—
—
(207
—
—
—
) —
207
207
—
—
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
 Income (Loss)
Total
Stockholders’
Equity
)  $1,652,787
272,171
)  (1,484
)
—
)  1,939,422
350,224
5,546
10,402
1,530
—
9,224
—
—
—
—
1,530
—
—
—
437
437
168
168
285
285
—
(168
) —
—
—
8,787
—
5,261
—
14,231
—
10,402
—
—
—
—
—
160,540  1,716,441  (3,011
  
 —
350,224
—
employee stock
options
Stock option and
restricted stock
award compensation
expense
 
September 30, 2012 65,452  65,452
 
Net income
Other
comprehensive
income
Vesting of restricted
stock awards
Exercise of
employee stock
options
Stock option and
restricted stock
award compensation
expense
Repurchase and
retirement of
common shares
 
September 30, 2013 64,057  64,057
 
Net income
Other
comprehensive
income
Dividends declared —
Vesting of restricted
stock awards
Exercise of
employee stock
options
Stock option and
restricted stock
award compensation
expense
 
September 30, 2014 64,362  $64,362  $201,464  $2,286,137  $ 3,561
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
183,390  1,961,405  (1,481
  
 —
340,822
(2,000 ) (2,000
(105,260 ) —
(16,090
—
—
) —
—
—
—
—
—
14,691
—
—
180
3,563
—
—
(180
) —
—
125
125
—
—
5,042
) —
180
—
—
—
3,688
14,231
(107,260
)  2,207,371
340,822
5,042
(16,090
—
)
)
14,691
$2,555,524
49
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
 
(In thousands)
Cash flows from operating activities:
Net income
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash
provided by operating activities:
Depreciation
Amortization
Provision for doubtful accounts and inventory
obsolescence
Deferred income tax benefit
Share-based compensation expense
(Gain) loss on sale of assets
Change in assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
Income tax receivable
Inventories of materials and supplies
Prepaid expenses, deferred costs and other current
assets
Deferred costs and other assets
Accounts payable
Accrued liabilities
Premium on Senior Notes
Income tax payable
Deferred credits and other liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash flows from investing activities:
Capital expenditures
Proceeds from sale of assets
Net cash used by investing activities
Cash flows from financing activities:
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
Principal payments on long-term debt
Proceeds (repayments) on short-term debt, net
Repurchase and retirement of common shares
Proceeds from exercise of stock options
Debt issuance costs paid
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash at beginning of period
Cash at end of period
Cash paid during the period for:
Domestic and foreign income taxes
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
Years Ended September 30,
2014
 
$340,822
2013
  
 $350,224
2012
  
 $272,171
147,358
8,634
117,510
 5,224
70,599
 (712
2,826
(1,270
14,691
(34,139
 
(43,965
(1,588
(17,220
15,463
(11,682
1,932
1,647
—
(2,320
21,431
442,620
 
(975,731
61,516
(914,215
 
700,000
(220,000
(13,979
—
3,688
(6,804
462,905
(8,690
88,770
$80,080
 
$55,777
35,265
5,582
765
) (816
 14,231
) 971
  
) (36,330
) 1,078
) (43,254
(712
) (19,700
 11,440
 1,430
 8,500
) 5,863
 10,869
 432,110
  
) (745,223
 147
) (745,076
  
 600,000
) (175,000
) 2,923
 (107,260
 9,224
) (6,022
 323,865
) 10,899
 77,871
 $88,770
  
 $49,105
 21,200
) (989
 10,402
 457
  
) (80,013
 (119
) (23,395
) (6,386
) (32,597
 27,536
 (7,096
 —
 1,250
 23,730
 255,603
  
) (785,083
 7,646
) (777,437
  
 760,000
) (450,000
 (313
) —
 5,546
) (10,530
 304,703
 (217,131
 295,002
 $77,871
  
 $49,636
 1,849
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
Non-cash activities:
Increase (decrease) in accrued liabilities related to
capital expenditures
Dividends payable
Increase in short-term debt related to funding of
insurance policies
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
16,090
17,793
—
—
—
—
(2,804
) 795
(56,965
)
50
NOTE 1—NATURE OF OPERATIONS
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and its subsidiaries, which are collectively referred to herein as the
“Company,” “we,” “us” or “our” except where stated or the context indicates otherwise, are a
global offshore drilling contractor engaged in the drilling and completion of exploratory and
developmental oil and gas wells. We currently own a diversified fleet of 13 mobile offshore
drilling units located in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, the Mediterranean Sea, offshore West Africa,
offshore Southeast Asia and offshore Australia and are constructing two ultra-deepwater
drillships for delivery in fiscal years 2015 and 2016. We were founded in 1968 and are
headquartered in Houston, Texas with support offices in Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, the
United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom.
NOTE 2—SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and all of
its domestic and foreign subsidiaries. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions
have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States (“GAAP”) requires management to make extensive use of
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the
reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could
differ from those estimates.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior period financial statements to conform to
the current year presentation.
Accounts receivable
We record accounts receivable at the amount we invoice our customers. Our customers are
major international corporate entities and government organizations with stable payment
experience. Included within accounts receivable at September 30, 2014 and 2013 are unbilled
receivable balances totaling $84.2 million and $50.4 million, respectively, which represent
amounts for which services have been performed, revenue has been recognized based on
contractual provisions and for which collection is deemed reasonably assured. Such unbilled
amounts were billed subsequent to their respective fiscal year end. Historically, our uncollectible
accounts receivable have been immaterial, and typically, we do not require collateral for our
receivables. We provide an allowance for uncollectible accounts, as necessary, on a specific
identification basis. We have no allowance for doubtful accounts at September 30, 2014 and
2013. Our provision for bad debts for the years ended September 30, 2014 and 2013 was $1.0
million and $3.9 million, respectively. No bad debt expense was recorded for the year ended
September 30, 2012. Bad debt expense is reported as a component of Contract Drilling costs in
our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Concentrations of market and credit risk
All of our customers are in the oil and gas offshore exploration and production industry. This
industry concentration has the potential to impact our overall exposure to market and credit risks,
either positively or negatively, in that our customers could be affected by similar changes in
economic, industry or other conditions. However, we believe that the credit risk posed by this
industry concentration is offset by the creditworthiness of our customer base. Revenues from
individual customers that are 10% or more of our total revenues as follows: 
(In thousands)
Apache Energy Ltd.
Shell Offshore Inc.
Chevron Australia Pty. Ltd.
Hess Corporation
Noble Energy Inc.
Sarawak Shell Bhd.
Kosmos Energy Ghana Inc.
Fiscal 2014  Fiscal 2013  Fiscal 2012
$209,871
179,763
175,334
—
169,851
—
12,933
$159,369
 28,349
 197,242
 154,973
 153,615
 —
 —
$ —
 —
 265,731
 —
 137,135
 44,405
 90,088
51
In addition, we have certain customers that make up a significant portion of our Accounts
Receivable at September 30, 2014, as indicated in the table below:
Percentage
of Accounts
Receivable
12%
10%
14%
14%
Customer
Apache Energy Ltd.
Shell Offshore Inc.
Chevron Australia Pty. Ltd.
Noble Energy Inc.
Inventories of material and supplies
Inventories consist of spare parts, material and supplies held for consumption and are stated
principally at average cost, net of reserves for excess and obsolete inventory of $5.5 million and
$4.1 million at September 30, 2014 and 2013, respectively. We maintain our reserves at between
3% and 5% of the balance to provide for non-recoverable costs.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at historical cost. Interest costs related to property under
construction are capitalized as a component of construction costs.
Once rigs and related equipment are placed in service, they are depreciated on the straight-line
method over their estimated useful lives, with depreciation discontinued only during the period
when a drilling unit is out-of-service while undergoing a significant upgrade that extends its
useful life. Our estimated useful lives of our various classifications of assets are as follows:
 
 
Drilling vessels and related equipment 5-35
Years
3
3-10
Drill pipe
Furniture and other
Maintenance, repairs and minor replacements are charged against income as incurred. Major
replacements and upgrades are capitalized and depreciated over the remaining useful life of the
asset, as determined upon completion of the work. The cost and related accumulated
depreciation of assets sold, retired or otherwise disposed are removed from the accounts at the
time of disposition and any resulting gain or loss is reflected in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations for the applicable periods.
Impairment of property and equipment
We evaluate our property and equipment whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate
that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss on our property
and equipment exists when the estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of
the asset. If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured by the amount by which
the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. In determining an asset's fair value, we
consider a number of factors such as estimated future cash flows, appraisals and current market
value analysis.
Revenue recognition
We account for contract drilling revenue in accordance with accounting guidance and the terms
of the underlying drilling contract. These contracts generally provide that revenue is earned and
recognized on a daily rate (i.e. “day rate”) basis, and day rates are typically earned for a particular
level of service over the life of a contract assuming collectability is reasonably assured. Day rate
contracts can be performed for a specified period of time or the time required to drill a specified
well or number of wells. Revenues from day rate contracts for drilling and other operations
performed during the term of a contract (including during mobilization) are classified under
contract drilling services.
Certain fees received as compensation for relocating drilling rigs from one major operating area
to another, equipment and upgrade costs reimbursed by the customer, as well as receipt of
advance billings of day rates are deferred and recognized as earned during the expected term of
the related drilling contract, as are the day rates associated with such contracts. If receipt of such
fees is not conditional, they will be recognized as earned on a straight-line method over the
expected term of the related drilling contract.
52
However, fees received upon termination of a drilling contract are generally recognized as
earned during the period termination occurs as the termination fee is usually conditional based
on the occurrence of an event as defined in the drilling contract, such as not obtaining follow on
work to the contract in progress or relocation beyond a certain distance when the contract is
completed.
At September 30, 2014 and 2013, deferred fees associated with mobilization, related equipment
purchases and upgrades and receipt of advance billings of day rates totaled $7.7 million and
$12.0 million, respectively. Deferred fees are classified as current or long-term deferred credits in
the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets based on the expected term of the applicable
drilling contracts.
Reimbursable revenue
We recognize customer reimbursable revenues as we bill our customers for reimbursement of
costs associated with certain equipment, materials and supplies, subcontracted services,
employee bonuses and other expenditures, resulting in little or no net effect on operating income
since such recognition is concurrent with the recognition of the respective reimbursable costs in
operating and maintenance expense.
Deferred costs
We defer certain mobilization costs relating to moving a drilling rig to a new area incurred prior to
the commencement of the drilling operations and customer requested equipment purchases. We
amortize such costs on a straight-line basis over the expected term of the applicable drilling
contract. Contract revenues and drilling costs are reported in the Consolidated Statements of
Operations at their gross amounts.
At September 30, 2014 and 2013, deferred costs associated with mobilization and related
equipment purchases totaled $9.6 million and $17.4 million, respectively. Deferred costs are
classified as current or long-term deferred costs in the accompanying Consolidated Balance
Sheets based on the expected term of the applicable drilling contracts.
Deferred drydocking costs
Certifications from various regulatory bodies are required to operate our drilling rigs and well
control systems and we must maintain such certifications through periodic inspections and
surveys on an ongoing basis. We defer the periodic survey and drydock costs incurred in
connection with obtaining regulatory certifications and we recognize such costs in Contract
Drilling Expense over the period until the next survey using the straight-line method. At
September 30, 2014 and 2013, deferred drydocking costs totaling $2.6 million and $2.6 million,
respectively, were included in Deferred Costs and Other Assets in the accompanying
Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Derivative financial instruments
From time to time we may enter into a variety of derivative financial instruments in connection
with the management of our exposure to variability in interest rates and currency exchange rates.
We do not engage in derivative transactions for speculative or trading purposes and we are not a
party to leveraged derivatives.
We enter into interest rate swaps to limit our exposure to fluctuations and volatility in interest
rates. Our credit facility exposes us to short-term changes in market interest rates as our interest
obligations on these instruments are periodically re-determined based on the prevailing
Eurodollar rate.
Our functional currency is the U.S. dollar and thus our international operations expose us to
foreign currency risk associated with cash flows from transactions denominated in currencies
other than our functional currency. From time to time, we enter into foreign currency forward
exchange contracts to limit our exposure to fluctuations and volatility in currency exchange rates.
In December 2013, we entered into foreign currency forward exchange contracts for a portion of
our anticipated euro receipts associated with revenues earned on a drilling contract from
December 2013 to November 2015. These forward contracts are designated as cash flow
hedging instruments.
We record our derivative contracts at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheets (See Note
5). Each quarter, changes in the fair values of our derivative instruments designated as hedging
instruments will adjust the balance sheet asset or liability, with an offset to Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income (“AOCI”) for the effective portion of the hedge. The effective portion of the
cash flow hedge will remain in AOCI until it is reclassified into earnings in the period or periods
during which the hedged transaction affects earnings or when it is probable that the hedged
forecasted transaction will not occur by the end of the originally specified time period. Any
changes in fair value resulting from ineffectiveness are recognized immediately into earnings.
See our
53
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for changes in our unrealized holding losses
and reclassifications into earnings for fiscal 2014, 2013 and 2012.
Foreign exchange
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are re-measured to U.S. Dollars
at the rate of exchange in effect at the end of the fiscal year, items of income and expense are re-
measured at average monthly rates, and property and equipment and other nonmonetary
amounts are re-measured at historical rates. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions
and re-measurements are generally related to and included in contract drilling costs in our
consolidated statements of operations. We recorded a foreign exchange loss of $3.0 million
during fiscal year 2014, a loss of $2.8 million during fiscal year 2013 and a gain of $1.5 million
during fiscal year 2012. The effect of exchange rate changes on cash held in foreign currencies
was immaterial.
Income taxes
Deferred income taxes are recorded to reflect the tax consequences, if any, on future years of
differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at
each year-end given the provisions of enacted tax laws in each respective jurisdiction. We do not
record deferred taxes on the basis differences of our drilling rigs working in the U.S. Gulf of
Mexico as we do not believe these differences will result in additional U.S. income tax expense.
Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, based upon management’s
estimates, it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized in
a future period. In addition, we accrue for income tax contingencies, or uncertain tax positions,
that we believe are more likely than not to be realized. See Note 9 for further discussion.
Earnings per common share
Basic earnings per share excludes dilution and is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per
share reflects the assumed effect of the issuance of additional shares in connection with the
exercise of stock options and vesting of restricted stock.
The computation of basic and diluted earnings per share for each of the past three fiscal years is
as follows:
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
Net Income  Shares
Fiscal 2014
Basic earnings per share
Effect of dilutive securities:
Stock options
Restricted stock
Diluted earnings per share
Fiscal 2013
Basic earnings per share
Effect of dilutive securities:
Stock options
$340,822
 
—
—
$340,822
 
$350,224
 
—
64,240
  
 239
 595
 65,074
  
 65,073
  
 354
Per Share
Amount
  
 $ 5.31
  
 (0.01
 (0.06
 $ 5.24
  
 $ 5.38
  
 (0.03
)
)
)
Restricted stock
Diluted earnings per share
Fiscal 2012
Basic earnings per share
Effect of dilutive securities:
Stock options
Restricted stock
Diluted earnings per share
In fiscal years 2014 and 2013, there were no anti-dilutive options. The calculation of diluted
earnings per share for fiscal year 2012 excludes 656,000 anti-dilutive options.
—
$350,224
 
$272,171
 
—
—
$272,171
418
 65,845
  
 65,267
  
 255
 259
 65,781
(0.03
 $ 5.32
  
 $ 4.17
  
 (0.01
 (0.02
 $ 4.14
)
)
)
54
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In April 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued new guidance
intended to change the criteria for reporting discontinued operations while enhancing disclosures
for discontinued operations, which changes the criteria and requires additional disclosures for
reporting discontinued operations. The guidance is effective for all disposals of components of an
entity that occur within annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014, and interim
periods within annual periods beginning on or after December 15, 2015. We do not expect that
our adoption will have a material impact on our financial statements or disclosures in our
financial statements.
In May 2014, the FASB issued new guidance intended to change the criteria for recognition of
revenue. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict
the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
To achieve this core principal, an entity should apply the following five steps: (1) Identify
contracts with customers, (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contracts, (3) Determine
the transaction price, (4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation in the
contract, and (5) Recognize revenue as the entity satisfies performance obligations. The
amendments in are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016,
including interim periods within that reporting period. Early application is not permitted. We are
currently evaluating what impact the adoption of this guidance would have on our financial
position, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
In June 2014, the FASB issued amended guidance on the accounting for certain share-based
employee compensation awards. The amended guidance applies to share-based employee
compensation awards that include a performance target that affects vesting when the
performance target can be achieved after the requisite service period. These targets are to be
treated as a performance condition. As such, the performance target should not be reflected in
estimating the grant-date fair value of the award and compensation cost should be recognized in
the period in which it becomes probable that the performance target will be achieved. The
amendments are effective for annual periods and interim periods within those annual periods
beginning after December 15, 2015. We do not expect that our adoption will have a material
impact on our financial statements or disclosures in our financial statements.
In August 2014, the FASB issued guidance on disclosures of uncertainties about an entity's
ability to continue as a going concern. The guidance requires management's evaluation of
whether there are conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are
issued. This assessment must be made in connection with preparing financial statements for
each annual and interim reporting period. Management's evaluation should be based on the
relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable at the date the financial
statements are issued. If conditions or events raise substantial doubt about the entity's ability to
continue as a going concern, but this doubt is alleviated by management's plans, the entity
should disclose information that enables the reader to understand what the conditions or events
are, management's evaluation of those conditions or events and management's plans that
alleviate that substantial doubt. If conditions or events raise substantial doubt and the substantial
doubt is not alleviated, the entity must disclose this in the footnotes. The entity must also disclose
information that enables the reader to understand what the conditions or events are,
management's evaluation of those conditions or events and management's plans that are
intended to alleviate that substantial doubt. The amendments are effective for annual periods and
interim periods within those annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016. We do not
expect that our adoption will have a material impact on our financial statements or disclosures in
our financial statements.
55
715,320
 26,743
 24,439
 3,746,005
) (581,281
)
2013
September 30,
2014
$4,181,774  $2,979,503
319,548
31,265
35,566
4,568,153
(601,125
$3,967,028  $3,164,724
NOTE 3—PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
A summary of property and equipment by classification is as follows:
 
(In thousands)
Drilling vessels and equipment
Construction work in progress
Drill pipe
Office equipment and other
Total cost
Less: Accumulated depreciation
 Property and equipment, net
Completed Construction Projects
Our first ultra-deep water drillship, the Atwood Advantage, was delivered from the Daewoo
Shipbuilding and Marine Engineering Co., Ltd (“DSME”) yard in South Korea in December 2013.
Our second ultra-deepwater drillship, the Atwood Achiever, was delivered from the DSME yard in
September 2014.
The Atwood Orca, a 400-foot Pacific Class jackup drilling unit, was delivered in April 2013 from
the PPL Shipyard PTE LTD in Singapore (“PPL”).
Construction Projects
In September 2012, we entered into a turnkey construction contract with DSME to construct a
third ultra-deepwater drillship, the Atwood Admiral, at the DSME yard in South Korea. The
Atwood Admiral is scheduled for delivery in September 2015. In June 2013, we entered into a
turnkey construction contract with DSME to construct a fourth ultra-deepwater drillship, the
Atwood Archer, at the DSME yard in South Korea. The Atwood Archer is scheduled for delivery
in June 2016.
As of September 30, 2014, we had expended approximately $320 million on our ultra-deepwater
drillships then under construction. Total remaining firm commitments for these two drilling units
under construction were approximately $950 million at September 30, 2014.
Sale of Assets
In January 2014, we sold our standard jackup drilling unit, the Vicksburg, for a sales price of
$55.4 million. The carrying value of the rig and its related inventory was approximately $20.5
million.
In April 2014, we sold a wholly owned subsidiary which owned our semisubmersible tender
assist drilling rig, the Seahawk, for a sales price of $4.0 million. The carrying value of the
subsidiary after a $2.0 million impairment charge recorded in the second quarter of the current
fiscal year, approximated its sales price.
56
NOTE 4—DEBT
A summary of long-term debt is as follows:
 
 
(In thousands)
Senior Notes 6.5% due 2020
Revolving Credit Facility
Total long-term debt
September 30,
2014
$657,122
1,085,000
$1,742,122  $1,263,232
2013
 $658,232
 605,000
Long-term Debt
Senior Notes - In January 2012, we issued $450 million of 6.50% fixed-rate Senior Notes due
2020 (the "Senior Notes"). We used the net proceeds to reduce outstanding borrowings under
our credit facility. On June 21, 2013, we issued an additional $200 million of Senior Notes. The
two issuances of Senior Notes together form a single series under the indenture with an
aggregate principal amount of $650 million. Our Senior Notes are unsecured obligations and are
not guaranteed by any of our subsidiaries. We received a premium of $8.5 million as part of the
net proceeds for the Senior Notes issued in 2013. This premium is being amortized over the life
of our Senior Notes.
As of September 30, 2014, we had $1.085 billion of outstanding borrowings and $5.9 million in
letters of credit issued under our five-year aggregate $1.55 billion senior secured revolving credit
facility.
Credit Facility - On April 10, 2014, we entered into an agreement to amend our revolving credit
facility the ("Credit Facility"), which increased the total commitment to $1.55 billion from $1.1
billion and extended its maturity to May 2018 from May 2016. Our wholly-owned subsidiary,
Atwood Offshore Worldwide Limited (“AOWL”), is the borrower under the Credit Facility, and we
and certain of our other subsidiaries are guarantors under the facility.
Prior to the amendment, borrowings under the Credit Facility bore interest at the Eurodollar rate
plus a margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50% and the commitment on the unused portion of the
underlying commitments ranged from 0.5% to 1.0% per annum. Borrowings under the Credit
Facility bear interest at the Eurodollar rate plus a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.00% and the
commitment fee on the unused portion of the underlying commitment ranges from 0.30% to
0.40% per annum, each based on our corporate credit ratings. Our Credit Facility contains
various financial covenants and as of September 30, 2014, we were in compliance with those
covenants.
In connection with the amendment, we mortgaged as additional collateral the Atwood Mako and
the Atwood Manta. As a result, first preferred mortgages on nine of our active drilling units
(Atwood Aurora, Atwood Beacon, Atwood Condor, Atwood Eagle, Atwood Falcon, Atwood
Hunter, Atwood Mako, Atwood Manta and Atwood Osprey,), as well as liens on the equity
interests of our subsidiaries that own, directly or indirectly, such drilling units serve as collateral
for our Credit Facility.
The weighted-average effective interest rate on our long-term debt during fiscal 2014 was 2.28%.
The effective rate was determined after giving consideration to the effect of our interest rate
swaps accounted for as hedges and the amortization of premiums or discounts. Interest expense
for fiscal 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $41.8 million, $24.9 million and $6.5 million, respectively.
Capitalized interest expense for fiscal 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $30.0 million, $33.2 million and
$32.9 million, respectively.
Short-term Debt
In July 2014, we financed our primary insurance program covering against casualty and liability
risks. The financing arrangement bears an interest rate of 1.57% and is amortizing over a period
of nine months. We had a similar arrangement in fiscal 2013 and 2012 and the interest rate was
1.46% for fiscal 2013 and 1.46% for fiscal 2012.
57
NOTE 5—FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
We have certain assets and liabilities that are required to be measured and disclosed at fair
value. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to
transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date.
The fair value hierarchy prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into
three levels. Priority is given to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). Assets and liabilities
measured at fair value are classified based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the
fair value measurement. Our assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value
measurement requires judgment, which may affect the valuation of the fair value of assets and
liabilities and their placement within the fair value hierarchy levels. The determination of the fair
values, stated below, takes into account the market for our financial assets and liabilities, the
associated credit risk and other considerations.
We have classified and disclosed fair value measurements using the following levels of the fair
value hierarchy:
Level 1: Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date
for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Quoted prices in markets that are not active, or inputs which are observable, either
directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
Level 3: Measurement based on prices or valuation models that require inputs that are both
significant to the fair value measurement and less observable for objective sources (i.e.,
supported by little or no market activity).
Fair value of Certain Assets and Liabilities
The fair value of cash, accounts receivable and accounts payable approximate fair value
because of their short term maturities.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Independent third party services are used to determine the fair value of our financial instruments
using quoted market prices and observable inputs. When independent third party services are
used, we obtain an understanding of how the fair values are derived and selectively corroborate
fair values by reviewing other readily available market based sources of information.
Long-term Debt - Our long-term debt consists of both our Senior Notes and our Credit Facility.
Senior Notes - The carrying value of our Senior Notes, net of unamortized premium is $657
million ($650 million principal amount) while the fair value of our Senior Notes was $666 million
at September 30, 2014. The fair value is determined by a market approach using quoted period-
end bond prices. We have classified this as a Level 2 fair value measurement as valuation inputs
for fair value measurements are quoted market prices at September 30, 2014 that can only be
obtained from independent third party sources. The fair value amount has been calculated using
these quoted prices. However, no assurance can be given that the fair value would be the
amount realized in an active market exchange.
Credit Facility - Our Credit Facility is variable-rate and the carrying amounts of our variable-rate
debt approximates fair value because such debt bears short-term, market-based interest rates.
We have classified the fair value measurement of this instrument as Level 2 as valuation inputs
for purposes of determining our fair value disclosure are readily available published Eurodollar
rates.
Derivative financial instruments - Our derivative financial instruments consist of our interest rate
swap contracts and our foreign currency forward exchange contracts. We record our derivative
contracts at fair value on our consolidated balance sheets. The fair values of our interest rate
swaps and our foreign currency forward exchange contracts are based upon valuations
calculated by an independent third party. The derivatives were valued according to the "Market
approach" where possible, and the "Income approach" otherwise. A third party independently
valued each instrument using forward price data obtained from reputable data providers (e.g.,
Bloomberg and Reuters) and reviewed market activity and similarity of pricing terms to determine
appropriate reliability level assertions for each instrument. The contribution of the credit valuation
adjustment to total fair value is less than 1% for all derivatives and is therefore not significant.
Based on valuation inputs for fair value measurement and independent review performed by third
party consultants, we have classified our derivative contracts as Level 2 as they were valued
based upon observable inputs from dealer markets.
The following table sets forth the estimated fair value of our derivative financial instruments at
September 30, 2014 and 2013, which are measured and recorded at fair value on a recurring
basis:
58
(In thousands)
Derivative assets designated as
hedges:
Short-term foreign currency
forwards
Long-term foreign currency
forwards
Long-term interest rate swaps
Derivative liabilities designated as
hedges:
Short-term interest rate swaps
Total derivative contracts, net
 
NOTE 6—CAPITAL STOCK
Balance Sheet Classification
September 30,
 2014
2013
Prepaid expenses, deferred costs
and other current assets
$3,930
$—
Deferred costs and other assets  1,125
Deferred costs and other assets  275
—
—
Accrued liabilities
(838
 $4,492
) (1,586
 $(1,586
)
)
Dividends Declared
Our board of directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share of common
stock, payable on January 13, 2015 to shareholders of record on January 6, 2015. We have not
paid dividends historically.
Increase in Shares Authorized
At the Company's 2014 Annual Meeting of Shareholders held on February 19, 2014, our
shareholders approved an increase in the number of authorized shares of our common stock
from 90,000,000 to 180,000,000. The Company also has the authority to issue 1,000,000 shares
of preferred stock, each with no par value.
Repurchase and Retirement of Common Shares
On May 23, 2013, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Helmerich & Payne
International Drilling Co. ("H&P"), a subsidiary of Helmerich & Payne, Inc., under which we
agreed to repurchase 2,000,000 shares of our common stock from H&P and to make a payment
at closing to H&P of $107.1 million. On June 13, 2013, we and H&P amended the agreement to
extend the closing date from June 13, 2013 to June 27, 2013 resulting in an increase to the
amount paid at closing to H&P by $200,000. The share repurchase closed on June 27, 2013.
Following the share repurchase, we canceled such shares. H&P is considered a related party
due to a member of our board of directors currently serving as Chairman of the Board of
Helmerich & Payne, Inc.
59
NOTE 7—SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
Our incentive plans permit the issuance of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards (which
we refer to as "restricted stock awards"), performance awards, stock appreciation rights and stock
options. There are 1.9 million shares available for future grants at September 30, 2014. We
deliver newly issued shares of common stock for restricted stock awards upon vesting or upon
exercise of stock options.
Share-based compensation is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period on a
2012
19,898
 1.8
September 30,
2014
 2013
$14,691  $14,231  $10,402
 19,483
16,478
1.7
 2.2
straight-line basis. The total share-based compensation expense is based on the fair value of the
award measured at the grant date.
 
(In thousands, except average service periods)
Share-based compensation recognized
Unrecognized compensation cost, net of estimated forfeitures
Remaining weighted-average service period (years)
Stock Options
Under our stock incentive plans, the exercise price of each stock option must be equal to or
greater than the fair market value of one share of our common stock on the date of grant and all
outstanding options having a maximum term of 10 years. Options vest ratably over a period
ranging from the end of the first to the fourth year from the date of grant for stock options. Each
option is for the purchase of one share of our common stock.
The total fair value of stock options vested during fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $2.8
million, $3.2 million and $2.5 million, respectively. Cash proceeds received for the exercise of
options for the fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $3.7 million, $9.2 million and $5.5 million,
respectively. No stock options were granted during fiscal year 2014 or 2013. The weighted-
average grant date fair value of stock options granted during fiscal year 2012 was $16.90 per
share. For fiscal year 2012, we estimated the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant
using the Black-Scholes pricing model and the following assumptions:
Risk-Free Interest Rate
Expected Volatility
Expected Life (Years)
Dividend Yield
The average risk-free interest rate is based on the five-year U.S. treasury security rate in effect as
of the grant date. We determined expected volatility using a six-year historical volatility figure and
determined the expected term of the stock options using 10 years of historical data. We have not
historically paid dividends.
A summary of stock option activity for fiscal year 2014 is as follows:
Number of
Options
(000s)
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
Aggregate
Intrinsic
Value 
(000s)
Fiscal
2012
 0.9%
 44%
 5.4
 None
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life (Years)
  
  
  
  
 5.0
 4.5
$ 33.21
 —
Outstanding at October 1, 2013
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited
Outstanding at September 30, 2014
Exercisable at September 30, 2014
Restricted Stock
We have awarded restricted stock and restricted stock units to certain employees and to our non-
employee directors. All current awards of restricted stock to employees are subject to a vesting
and restriction period ranging from three to four years, as set forth
$ 2,637
  
 8,473
 7,928
)  29.44
)  40.24
 33.52
 31.78
989
—
(125
(31
833
666
60
in the terms of the grant. Our restricted stock awards are subject to acceleration for change of
control, retirement, death or disability. All awards of restricted stock to non-employee directors
are subject to a vesting and restriction period of a minimum of 13 months, subject to acceleration
upon certain events, such as change of control, as set forth in the terms of the grant. We value
restricted stock awards based on the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant.
Our restricted stock holders have the right to receive dividend equivalents for restricted awards
that vest for the dividends we will start paying in fiscal 2015. Recipients of restricted stock awards
do not have the rights of a shareholder until shares of stock are issued to the recipient.
A summary of restricted stock activity for fiscal year 2014 is as follows:
Unvested at October 1, 2013
Granted
Vested
Forfeited
Unvested at September 30, 2014
Number of
Shares
(000s)
623
235
(175
(61
622
Weighted
Average
Fair Value
 $ 42.44
 54.19
)  38.04
)  47.60
 47.62
Performance Units
We have made awards to certain employees that are subject to market-based performance
conditions ("performance units"). All current awards of performance units are subject to a vesting
and restriction period of three years. Our performance unit awards are subject to acceleration for
change of control, retirement, death or disability. The number of shares that vest based on
market-based performance conditions will depend on the degree of achievement of specified
corporate performance criteria which are strictly market-based. The grant date fair value of the
performance units we have granted was determined through use of the Monte Carlo simulation
method. The grant date fair value per share for the performance units we granted in fiscal 2014,
2013 and 2012 was $53.55, $45.20 and $40.28, respectively. Our performance unit holders have
the right to receive dividend equivalents for performance units that vest for the dividends we will
start paying in fiscal 2015. Recipients of performance units do not have the rights of a
shareholder until shares of stock are issued to the recipient.
A summary of performance unit stock activity for fiscal year 2014 is as follows:
Unvested at October 1, 2013
Granted
Vested
Forfeited
Unvested at September 30, 2014
Number of
Shares
(000s)
226
86
—
(48
264
Weighted
Average
Fair Value
 $ 42.35
 53.55
 —
)  43.10
 45.87
NOTE 8—RETIREMENT PLANS
We have two defined contribution retirement plans (the “Retirement Plans”). Qualified
participants may make contributions under these Retirement Plans, which together with our
contributions, can be up to 100% of their compensation, as defined, to a maximum of $52,000.
Effective January 1, 2014, an employee is immediately eligible upon date of hire to become a
participant in one of our Retirement Plans. Under the Retirement Plans, participant contributions
of 1% to 5% are matched on a 2 to 1 basis. Our contributions vest 100% after three years of
service with us, including any period of ineligibility mandated by the Retirement Plans. If a
participant terminates employment before becoming fully vested, the unvested portion is credited
to our account and can be used only to offset our future contribution requirements.
During fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012, forfeitures of $0.3 million, $0.2 million, and $0.2 million,
respectively, were used to reduce our cash contribution requirements. In fiscal years 2014, 2013
and 2012, our actual cash contributions totaled approximately $9.8 million, $6.8 million and $4.6
million, respectively. As of September 30, 2014, there were approximately $0.7 million of
contribution forfeitures, which can be used to reduce our future cash contribution requirements.
61
Fiscal 2014  Fiscal 2013  Fiscal 2012
$(36,756
434,049
$397,293
) $(35,685
 348,989
 $313,304
) $(17,823
 422,624
 $404,801
Fiscal 2014  Fiscal 2013  Fiscal 2012
$773
(980
56,968
(290
$56,471
NOTE 9—INCOME TAXES
Domestic and foreign income before income taxes for the three-year period ended September 30,
2014 is as follows: 
(In thousands)
Domestic loss
Foreign income
Income before income taxes
The provision (benefit) for domestic and foreign taxes on income consists of the following: 
(In thousands)
Current—domestic
Deferred—domestic
Current—foreign
Deferred—foreign
Provision for income taxes
Deferred Taxes
The components of the deferred income tax assets (liabilities) as of September 30, 2014 and
2013 are as follows: 
 
(In thousands)
Deferred tax assets:
Net operating loss carryforwards
Tax credit carryforwards
Stock option compensation expense
Book accruals
 
Deferred tax liabilities:
Difference in book and tax basis of equipment
Deferred dividend withholding tax
September 30,
2014
 
$35,935
1,246
11,744
3,274
52,199
 
496
(784
(288
2013
  
 $27,309
 1,246
 9,666
 5,604
 43,825
  
 (2,500
) —
) (2,500
$161
) (862
 55,233
) 45
 $54,577
$(1,048
) (980
 43,169
 (8
 $41,133
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
51,911
(52,105
$(194
41,325
Net deferred tax assets (liabilities) before valuation allowance
) (41,810
Valuation allowance
) $(485
Net deferred tax liabilities
For fiscal year 2014, we recorded a valuation allowance of $10.3 million on net deferred tax
assets primarily related to our United States net operating loss carry forward. The gross amount
of federal net operating loss carry forwards as of September 30, 2014 is estimated to be $159.3
million, which will begin to expire in 2025. Management does not expect that our tax credit carry
forward of $1.2 million will be utilized to offset future tax obligations before the credits begin to
expire in 2015. Thus, a corresponding valuation allowance of $1.2 million is recorded as of
September 30, 2014.
We have approximately $19.6 million of windfall tax benefits from previous stock option exercises
that have not been recognized as of September 30, 2014. This amount will not be recognized
until the deduction would reduce our United States income taxes payable. At such time, the
amount will be recorded as an increase to paid-in-capital. We apply the “with-and-without”
approach when utilizing certain tax attributes whereby windfall tax benefits are used last to offset
taxable income.
We do not record federal income taxes on the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries
that we consider to be indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations. The cumulative amount of
such undistributed earnings was approximately $2.4 billion at September 30, 2014. If these
earnings were distributed, we estimate approximately $450 million in additional taxes would be
incurred. These earnings could also become subject to additional taxes under the anti-deferral
provisions within the
62
U.S. Internal Revenue Code.  However, we believe this is highly unlikely given our current
structure and have not provided deferred income taxes on these foreign earnings as we consider
them to be permanently invested abroad.
We record estimated accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income
tax expense. At September 30, 2014, we had approximately $12.3 million of reserves for
uncertain tax positions, including estimated accrued interest and penalties of $3.3 million, which
are included in Other Long Term Liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. All $12.3 million
of the net uncertain tax liabilities would affect the effective tax rate if recognized.
A summary of activity related to the net uncertain tax positions including penalties and interest for
fiscal year 2014 is as follows: 
 
(In thousands)
Balance at October 1, 2013
Increases as a result of tax positions taken during the current period
Increases as a result of tax positions taken in prior periods
Decreases due to the lapse of the applicable statute of limitations
Balance at September 30, 2014
We believe that it is reasonably possible that approximately $1.2 million of our remaining
unrecognized tax benefits may be recognized by the end of fiscal year 2015 as a result of a lapse
of the statute of limitations.
Our United States tax returns for fiscal year 2010 and subsequent years remain subject to
Liability for Uncertain
Tax Positions
$ 7,711
1,224
5,546
(2,183
$ 12,298
)
examination by tax authorities. As we conduct business globally, we have various tax years
remaining open to examination in our international tax jurisdictions, including tax returns in
Australia for fiscal years 2008 through 2013, as well as returns in Equatorial Guinea for calendar
years 2010 through 2013. Although we cannot predict the outcome of ongoing or future tax
examinations, we do not anticipate that the ultimate resolution of these examinations will have a
material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We have historically earned most of our operating income in certain nontaxable and deemed
profit tax jurisdictions, which significantly reduced our effective tax rate for fiscal years 2014,
2013 and 2012 when compared to the United States statutory rate. There were no significant
transactions that materially impacted our effective tax for fiscal years 2014, 2013 or 2012. The
differences between the United States statutory and our effective income tax rate are as follows:
Fiscal 2014  Fiscal 2013  Fiscal 2012
 
Statutory income tax rate
35
—
Resolution of prior period tax items
 
Increase in tax rate resulting from:
Valuation allowance
2
1
Increases to the reserve for uncertain tax positions
Decrease in tax rate resulting from:
 
Foreign tax rate differentials, net of foreign tax credit
utilization
Effective income tax rate
% 35
 —
  
 1
 —
% 35
 (3
  
 4
 —
)
(23
)
(23
(24
14
)
%
%
)
% 13
% 13
63
NOTE 10—COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Operating Leases
Future minimum lease payments for operating leases for fiscal years ending September 30 are
as follows (in thousands):
 
$3,826
2015
2,768
2016
2,448
2017
2,149
2018
2019 and thereafter
11,646
Total rent expense under operating leases was approximately $11.5 million, $7.4 million and
$5.5 million for fiscal years ended September 30, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The future
minimum lease payments for our Houston corporate office is a material portion of the amounts
shown in the table above. This lease is for ten years and commenced on January 31, 2014.
Purchase Commitments
At September 30, 2014, our purchase commitments, relating to our drilling units under
construction, were as follows for fiscal years ended September 30 (in thousands):
2015
2016
2017
2018
$448,030
359,493
—
—
—
2019 and thereafter
Litigation
We are party to a number of lawsuits which are ordinary, routine litigation incidental to our
business, the outcome of which is not expected to have, either individually or in the aggregate, a
material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Other Matters
The Atwood Beacon operated in India from early December 2006 to the end of July 2009.
A service tax was enacted in India in 2004 on revenues derived from seismic and exploration
activities. This service tax law was subsequently amended in June 2007 and again in May 2008
to state that revenues derived from mining services and drilling services were specifically subject
to this service tax. The contract terms with our customer in India provided that any liability
incurred by us related to any taxes pursuant to laws not in effect at the time the contract was
executed in 2005 was to be reimbursed by our customer. We believe any service taxes assessed
by the Indian tax authorities under the 2007 or 2008 amendments are an obligation of our
customer. Our customer is disputing this obligation on the basis of its contention that revenues
derived from drilling services were taxable under the initial 2004 law, and are, therefore, our
obligation.
After reviewing the status of the drilling services we provided to our customer, the Indian tax
authorities assessed service tax obligations on revenues derived from the Atwood Beacon
commencing on June 1, 2007. The relevant Indian tax authority issued an extensive written ruling
setting forth the application of the June 1, 2007 service tax regulation and confirming the position
that drilling services, including the services performed under our contract with our customer prior
to June 1, 2007, were not covered by the 2004 service tax law. In August 2012, the Indian
Custom Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal issued an Order in our favor confirming our
position that service tax did not apply to drilling services performed prior to June 1, 2007. The
Indian Service Tax Authority has appealed this ruling to the Indian Supreme Court.
As of September 30, 2014, we had paid to the Indian government $10.5 million in service taxes
and have accrued $1.3 million of additional service tax obligations in accrued liabilities on our
consolidated balance sheets, for a total of $11.8 million relating to service taxes. We recorded a
corresponding $11.8 million long-term other receivable due from our customer relating to service
taxes due under the contract. We continue to pursue collection of such amounts from our
customer and expect to collect the amount recorded as receivable.
64
NOTE 11—OPERATIONS BY GEOGRAPHIC AREAS
Our offshore contract drilling operations are managed and reported as a single reportable
segment: Offshore Contract Drilling Services. The mobile offshore drilling units and related
equipment comprising our offshore rig fleet operate in a single, global market for contract drilling
services. Our drilling units are often redeployed globally due to changing demands of our
customers, which consist largely of major integrated oil and natural gas companies and
independent oil and natural gas companies. Due to the mobile nature of our rig fleet, the
geographic areas where we conduct our business can and does change from year to year. Our
offshore contract drilling services segment currently conducts offshore contract drilling operations
located in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, the Mediterranean Sea, offshore West Africa, offshore
Southeast Asia and offshore Australia. The accounting policies of our reportable segment are the
REVENUES
Fiscal 2014
$457,281
43,389
41,245
—
—
2,749
58,912
49,610
18,128
—
149,961
352,678
$1,173,953
same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies (see Note 2). We
evaluate the performance of our operating segment based on revenues from external customers
and segment profit.
A summary of revenues by geographic areas for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2014,
2013 and 2012 is as follows:
 
(In thousands)
Australia
Cameroon
Equatorial Guinea
Ghana
Guyana
Israel
Italy
Malaysia
Morocco
Suriname
Thailand
United States
Total revenues
A summary of property and equipment, net as of by geographic areas at September 30, 2014,
2013 and 2012 is as follows:
 
 
(In thousands)
Australia
Cameroon
Equatorial Guinea
Ghana
Israel
Italy
Korea (1)
Malaysia
Malta
Morocco
Singapore(1)
Thailand
United States
Total property and equipment, net
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT, NET
September 30,
2014
$669,845
166,464
66,045
—
—
82,617
311,494
321
3,332
627,459
—
539,333
1,500,118
$3,967,028
Fiscal 2013
 $445,538
 64,436
 142,637
 113
 127
 58,454
 —
 9,198
 —
 —
 159,853
 183,307
 $1,063,663
2013
 $704,158
 172,606
 52,085
 2,296
 77,056
 —
 715,320
 188,241
 3,968
 —
 —
 390,420
 858,574
 $3,164,724
Fiscal 2012
 $363,400
 35,362
 126,575
 90,076
 31,675
 6,301
 —
 44,413
 —
 13,488
 39,598
 36,533
 $787,421
2012
 $738,504
 235,573
 3
 5,475
 81,173
 —
 353,641
 169
 4,768
 —
 84,443
 208,303
 825,288
 $2,537,340
(1) Property and equipment, net in these geographic areas consist of assets under construction.
65
NOTE 12—QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED)
Summarized quarterly results for fiscal years 2014 and 2013 are as follows:
(In thousands, except per share
amounts)
Revenues
Income before income taxes
Net income
Earnings per common share:
Basic
Diluted
 
 
Revenues
Income before income taxes
Net income
Earnings per common share:
Basic
Diluted
Fiscal 2014 Quarters Ended
December 31  March 31
June 30
September 30
$273,097
 97,283
 73,300
  
 1.14
 1.13
$ 284,706
 94,260
 83,397
  
 1.30
 1.28
 Fiscal 2013 Quarters Ended
 December 31  March 31
 $ 245,093
 $253,161
 97,432
 84,087
 85,519
 72,831
  
  
 1.30
 1.11
 1.10
 1.28
$292,777
 79,365
 71,925
  
 1.12
 1.11
June 30
 $272,688
 105,130
 89,981
  
 1.38
 1.37
$ 323,373
 126,385
 112,200
  
 1.74
 1.72
September 30
 $ 292,721
 118,152
 101,893
  
 1.59
 1.57
(1)
The sum of the individual quarterly earnings per common share amounts may not agree with
year-to-date earnings per common share as each quarterly computation is based on the
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during that period.
NOTE 13—SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On October 31, 2014, we entered into Supplemental Agreements to the construction contracts for
each of the Atwood Admiral and Atwood Archer whereby the delivery of the drillships was
postponed by six months. The Atwood Admiral is now scheduled for delivery on September 30,
2015, and the Atwood Archer is now scheduled for delivery on June 30, 2016.  In consideration
of the agreement by DSME to postpone deliveries, we have agreed to accelerate the payment of
a portion of the milestone payments on each rig as follows: $50 million on each rig payable on
November 30, 2014; and $25 million on each rig payable on June 30, 2015.  In addition, each
rig’s final milestone payment amount will be increased by the aggregate financing cost on these
payments using an interest rate of 3.5% per annum.
66
ITEM 9.
None.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
ITEM 9A.CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer,
evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period
covered by this report. Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered
by this report have been designed and are effective at the reasonable assurance level so that the
information required to be disclosed by us in our periodic SEC filings is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specific in the SEC’s rules, regulations, and
forms and is communicated to management. We believe that a controls system, no matter how
well designed and operated, cannot provide absolute assurance that the objectives of the
controls system are met, and no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all
control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within a company have been detected.
(b) Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A copy of our Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting is included in
Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(c) Attestation Report of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
A copy of the report of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, our independent registered public
accounting firm, is included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K
(d) Change in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
As of July 22, 2014, we upgraded and re-implemented the use of Maximo software, a
maintenance, supply chain and inventory system, across our Maintenance and Supply Chain
departments at our headquarters in Houston, Texas as well as at our support offices and on our
rig fleet. As appropriate, we modified the design and documentation of internal control processes
and procedures relating to the upgraded system and related interfaces to simplify and improve
our existing internal control over financial reporting related to inventory management and
procurement.  There were no additional changes in our internal control over financial reporting
during the most recent fiscal year covered by this report that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B.OTHER INFORMATION
None.
67
PART III
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE
This information is incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015
Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of
the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-K.
ITEM 11.EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
This information is incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015
Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of
the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-K.
ITEM 12.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
This information is incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015
Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of
the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-K.
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENCE
This information is incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015
Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of
the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-K.
ITEM 14.PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
This information is incorporated by reference from our definitive Proxy Statement for the 2015
Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC not later than 120 days after the end of
the fiscal year covered by this Form 10-K.
68
PART IV
ITEM 15.EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(1)Financial Statements.
Our Consolidated Financial Statements, together with the notes thereto and the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP dated November 13, 2014, are included in Item 8 of this Form 10-
K.
(2)Financial Statement Schedules.
All financial statement schedules have been omitted because they are not applicable or not
required, the information is not significant, or the information is presented elsewhere in the
financial statements.
(3)Exhibits.
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Formation effective as of February 14, 2013
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of our Form 8-K filed on February 14,
2013).
   
Amendment No. 1 to Amended and Restated Certificate of Formation dated February
19, 2014 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of our Form 8-K filed on
February 21, 2014).
   
By-Laws of Atwood Oceanics, Inc., effective March 7, 2013 (Incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 3.1 to our Form 8-K filed on March 7, 2013).
   
Indenture dated January 18, 2012 between Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association, as trustee, relating to debt securities (Incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended December 31,
2011).
   
First Supplemental Indenture dated January 18, 2012 between Atwood Oceanics, Inc.
and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee, including the form of 6.50%
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
†10.1
†10.2
†10.3
†10.4
†10.5
†10.6
†10.7
†10.8
Senior Notes due 2020 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to our Form
10-Q for the quarter ended December 31, 2011.
   
See Exhibit Nos. 3.1 and 3.3 hereof for provisions of our Amended and Restated
Certificate of Formation and By-Laws defining the rights of our shareholders
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibits 3.1 of our Form 8-K filed on February 14,
2013 and Exhibit 3.1 to our Form 8-K filed on March 7, 2013).
   
Restatement Agreement, dated as of April 10, 2014, among Atwood Oceanics, Inc.,
Atwood Offshore Worldwide Limited, the lenders party thereto, Nordea Bank Finland
Plc, New York Branch, as existing administrative agent, and Nordea Bank Finland
Plc, London Branch, as successor agent (Incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of
our Form 8-K filed on April 11, 2014).
   
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 10, 2014, among Atwood
Oceanics, Inc., Atwood Offshore Worldwide Limited, the lenders party thereto and
Nordea Bank Finland Plc, London Branch, as administrative agent (included in Exhibit
10.1).
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Amended and Restated 2001 Stock Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Appendix D to our definitive proxy statement on
Form DEF 14A filed January 13, 2006).
   
Form of Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Stock Option Agreement – 2001 Stock Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3.7 of our Form 10-K for the year ended
September 30, 2005).
   
Form of Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Restricted Stock Award Agreement – 2001 Stock
Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3.8 of our Form 10-K for
the year ended September 30, 2005).
   
Form of Non-Employee Director Restricted Stock Award Agreement Amended and
Restated 2001 Stock Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1
of our Form 8-K filed June 1, 2006).
   
Form of Stock Option Agreement – 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1.1 of our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2007).
   
Form of Restricted Stock Award Agreement – 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1.2 of our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2007).
   
Form of Non-Employee Director Restricted Stock Award Agreement – 2007 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1.15 of our Form
10-K for the year ended September 30, 2009).
   
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Amended and Restated 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to our definitive proxy statement on Form DEF14A
filed January 14, 2011).
69
†10.9
†10.10
†10.11
†10.12
†10.13
†10.14
†10.15
†10.16
†10.17
†10.18
†10.19
First Amendment to Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Amended and Restated 2007 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to our Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended December 31, 2011).
   
Second Amendment to Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Amended and Restated 2007 Long-
Term Incentive Plan, effective November 21, 2013 (Incorporated herein by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 of our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended December 31, 2013).
   
Form of Notice of Restricted Stock Grant - 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended December 31, 2011).
   
Form of Notice of Non-employee Director Restricted Stock Grant - 2007 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to our Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended December 31, 2011).
   
Form of Notice of Option Grant - 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended December 31,
2011).
   
Form of Notice of Performance Unit Grant - 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended December 31, 2011).
   
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by
reference to Appendix A to our definitive proxy statement on Form DEF14A filed on
January 3, 2013).
   
Form of Notice of Restricted Stock Unit Award - 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2013).
   
Form of Notice of Non-employee Director Restricted Stock Unit Award - 2013 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to our Form 10-
Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013).
   
Form of Notice of Option Grant - 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein
by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013).
   
Form of Notice of Performance Unit Grant - 2013 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2013).
   
Revised Form of Notice of Restricted Stock Unit Award - 2013 Long Term Incentive
Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended December 31, 2013).
   
Revised Form of Notice of Performance Unit Grant - 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended December 31, 2013).
   
Revised Form of Notice of Non-Employee Director Restricted Stock Unit Award - 2013
Long Term Incentive Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 to our
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended December 31, 2013).
   
Form of Executive Change of Control Agreement (Incorporated herein by reference to
Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 8-K filed May 30, 2012).
   
Form of Indemnification Agreement for Directors and Executive Officers (Incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2012).
   
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Restated Executive Life Insurance Plan dated as of March 19,
1999 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.22 to our Form 10-K for the year
ended September 30, 2011).
   
First Amendment, dated as of May 24, 2012, to the Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Salary
Continuation Plan (formerly known as the Restated Executive Life Insurance Plan)
(Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to our Form 8-K filed May 30, 2012).
   
Form of Salary Continuation Agreement (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit
10.3 to our Form 8-K filed May 30, 2012).
   
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. Benefits Equalization Plan Amended and Restated Effective as
of January 1, 2013 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended December 31, 2012).
   
Amended and Restated Atwood Oceanics, Inc. 2007 Nonemployee Directors' Elective
Deferred Compensation Plan (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.6 to our
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013).
   
Contract for Construction and Sale of Drillship by and between Alpha Admiral
Company and Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering Co. Ltd., dated September
27, 2012 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.42 to our From 10-K for the
year ended September 30, 2012).
†10.20
†10.21
†10.22
†10.23
†10.24
†10.25
†10.26
†10.27
†10.28
†10.29
10.30
70
Contract for Construction and Sale of Drillship by and between Alpha Archer
Company and Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering Co., Ltd., dated June 24,
2013 (Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended June 30, 2013).
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated May 23, 2013, by and among Atwood Oceanics,
Inc. and Helmerich & Payne International Drilling Co. (Incorporated herein by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 8-K filed May 30, 2013).
First Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement, dated June 13, 2013, by and among
Atwood Oceanics, Inc. and Helmerich & Payne International Drilling Co. (Incorporated
herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to our Form 8-K filed June 17, 2013).
  List of Subsidiaries.
   
  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
   
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002.
   
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002.
   
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002.
   
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002.
   
  Interactive data files.
  Filed herewith
  Furnished herewith
  Management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement
10.31
10.32
10.33
*21.1
 
*23
*31.1
*31.2
**32.1
**32.2
*101
*
**
†
71
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the
registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto
duly authorized.
ATWOOD OCEANICS, INC.
 
/S/    ROBERT J. SALTIEL  
ROBERT J. SALTIEL
President and Chief Executive Officer
Date: November 13, 2014
/S/    ROBERT J. SALTIEL  
ROBERT J. SALTIEL
President and Chief Executive Officer;
Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
 
Date: November 13, 2014
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed
below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates
indicated.
 
/S/    MARK L. MEY 
MARK L. MEY
Senior Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    MARK W. SMITH   
MARK W. SMITH
Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
and Controller (Principal Accounting
Officer)
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    DEBORAH A. BECK  
DEBORAH A. BECK
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    GEORGE S. DOTSON  
GEORGE S. DOTSON
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/s/    JACK E. GOLDEN
JACK E. GOLDEN
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    HANS HELMERICH   
HANS HELMERICH
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
/S/    JEFFREY A. MILLER      
JEFFREY A. MILLER
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    JAMES R. MONTAGUE      
JAMES R. MONTAGUE
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
 
/S/    PHIL D. WEDEMEYER
PHIL D. WEDEMEYER
Director
 
Date: November 13, 2014
72