
DEF 14A 1 schedule14a.htm FORM DEF 14A Manas Petroleum Corporation: Schedule 14A - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Filed by the Registrant [X]
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant [ ]
Check the appropriate box: 
[ ] Preliminary Proxy Statement
[ ] Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2)) 
[X] Definitive Proxy Statement 
[ ] Definitive Additional Materials 
[ ] Soliciting Material under Rule 14a-12
MANAS PETROLEUM CORPORATION
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
_________________________________________________________
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
[X] No fee required.
 
[ ] Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
(1)
 (2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (Set forth the amount
on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
Total fee paid:
[ ] Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
[ ] Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for which the offsetting fee
was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Amount Previously Paid:
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
Filing Party:
Date Filed:
MANAS PETROLEUM CORPORATION
Bahnhofstrasse 9, P.O. Box 155
CH-6341 Baar, Switzerland
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON NOVEMBER 8, 2012
Dear Stockholder:
Our annual and special meeting of stockholders will be held on Thursday, November 8, 2012, at 10 a.m., local time, at the Hotel Sedartis,
Bahnhofstrasse 16, 8800 Thalwil, Switzerland for the following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
To elect Heinz J. Scholz, Michael J. Velletta, Dr. Richard Schenz, Dr. Werner Ladwein, Darcy W. Spady and Murray Rodgers
as the directors of our company;
To ratify the appointment of BDO Visura International AG as our independent registered public accounting firm;
To approve our 2011 stock option plan;
To approve an amendment to our articles of incorporation to change our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation;
To approve of an amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common
stock from 300,000,000 to 600,000,000; and
To transact such other business as may properly come before the annual and special meeting or any adjournment thereof.
These items of business are more fully described in the proxy statement accompanying this notice.
Our board of directors has fixed the close of business on September 19, 2012 as the record date for the determination of the stockholders
entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the annual and special meeting or any adjournment thereof. Only the stockholders of record on the
record date are entitled to vote at the annual and special meeting.
Dissent rights are available to the stockholders of record for their shares of our common stock under our bylaws. See “Dissent Rights”
beginning on page 32 of the accompanying proxy statement for a discussion of dissent rights and how to exercise them.
Whether or not you plan on attending the annual and special meeting, we ask that you vote by proxy by following instructions
provided  in  the  enclosed  proxy  card  as  promptly  as  possible.  If  your  shares  are  held  of  record  by  a  broker,  bank,  or  other
nominee, please follow the voting instruction sent to you by your broker, bank, or other nominee in order to vote your shares.
Even if you have voted by proxy, you may still vote in person if you attend the annual and special meeting. Please note, however,
that if your shares are held of record by a broker, bank, or other nominee and you wish to vote at the annual and special meeting,
you must obtain a valid proxy issued in your name from that record holder.
Sincerely,
By Order of the Board of Directors
/s/ Dr. Werner Ladwein
Dr. Werner Ladwein
President
 
September 24, 2012
*** IMPORTANT NOTICE TO RESOULTIONS “NAME CHANGE” AND “INCREASE OF
AUTHORIZED SHARE CAPITAL” ***
Dear Stockholder:
At our annual and special meeting this year, we are asking you to approve two important extraordinary resolutions – (1) a name change
and (2) an increase in the number of shares of common stock that we are authorized to issue. In addition to the disclosure about these two
resolutions  included  in  our  proxy  statement,  we  are  providing  you  with  this  cover  letter  explaining  why  we  have  included  these  two
resolutions on the agenda:
Name Change:
Operating in the international arena we must carefully choose our name to best advance our operations. In 2007, we selected the name
“Manas Petroleum Corporation” as its local nature created synergies with one of the Central Asian countries in which we operate. As we
have grown our operations the synergies created by our name in that one country are now balanced by obstacles that name creates in
other  countries  where  we  operate.  To  overcome  those  obstacles  we  seek  to  change  our  company’s  name  to  “MNP  Petroleum
Corporation.” We believe that this new name better projects our corporate image in all of the regions where we operate and removes the
obstacles created by the “Manas” name.
Increase in Authorized Capital:
Since the reverse transaction in April 2007, we have been authorized to issue a total of 300 million shares. Of this total, we have issued
or reserved for issuance an aggregate of 237 million shares, consisting of 172 million shares of our common stock issued and outstanding,
19 million shares reserved for issuance upon exercise of outstanding options and 46 million shares reserved for issuance upon exercise of
outstanding warrants.
Thus, the majority of our authorized shares are either outstanding or reserved for future issuance.
We  believe  that  the  requested  increase  in  authorized  capital  up  to  600  million  shares  is  in  the  best  interest  of  our  company  and
stockholders because it will make available additional authorized but unissued shares of common stock in an amount adequate to allow
us to grow the company by taking advantage of potential opportunities, expansion and future operational needs.
Our board of directors believes that future business development is best financed through direct equity participation in future projects,
reserve based lending and similar project level financing and does not intend to use share capital as the primary source of capital for the
development of our business. However, we see it prudent to position the company to raise share capital rather than request authority when
and if a need arises, as it would take many months to obtain shareholder approval for any specific increase and the delay could jeopardize
any proposed transaction.
Our board of directors believes that increasing the authorized common share capital to 600 million shares would be the appropriate
level to provide for future corporate requirements and opportunities.
The Board of Directors urges you to give these two resolutions your urgent attention and support our recommendation.
/s/ Heinz J. Scholz
Heinz J. Scholz
(Chairman of the Board of Directors)
MANAS PETROLEUM CORPORATION
Bahnhofstrasse 9, P.O. Box 155
CH-6341 Baar, Switzerland
PROXY STATEMENT
ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON NOVEMBER 8, 2012
Questions and Answers about the Annual and Special Meeting of Stockholders
Why am I receiving these materials?
The board of directors of Manas Petroleum Corporation (“we”, “us” or “our”) is soliciting proxies for use at the annual and special meeting of
stockholders to be held on Thursday, November 8, 2012, at 10 a.m., local time, at the Hotel Sedartis, Bahnhofstrasse 16, 8800 Thalwil,
Switzerland or at any adjournment of the annual and special meeting. These materials were first sent or given to our stockholders on or
about September 28, 2012.
What is included in these materials?
These materials include:
the notice of the annual and special meeting of stockholders;
the letter to stockholders;
this proxy statement for the annual and special meeting of stockholders;
the proxy card; and
our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on
March 30, 2012.
Important Notice Regarding the Availability of Proxy Materials 
for the Stockholder Meeting to be Held on November 8, 2012
Above materials are also available at http://www.manaspetroleum.com/s/AGM.asp.
The annual report on Form 10-K accompanies this proxy statement, but does not constitute a part of the proxy soliciting material.
What items will be voted at the annual and special meeting?
Our stockholders will vote on:
the election of directors;
the ratification of appointment of our independent registered public accounting firm;
the approval of our 2011 stock option plan;
the amendment of our articles of incorporation to change our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation.
the approval of amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock.
What do I need to do now?
We urge you to carefully read and consider the information contained in this proxy statement. We request that you cast your vote on each
of the proposals described in this proxy statement. You are invited to attend the annual and special meeting, but you do not need to attend
the annual and special meeting in person to vote your shares. Even if you do not plan to attend the annual and special meeting, please
vote by proxy by following instructions provided in the proxy card.
Who can vote at the annual and special meeting?
2
Our board of directors has fixed the close of business on September 19, 2012 as the record date for the determination of the stockholders
entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the annual and special meeting or any adjournment. If you were a stockholder of record on the record
date, you are entitled to vote at the annual and special meeting.
As of the record date, 172,592,292 shares of our common stock were issued and outstanding and, therefore, a total of 172,592,292 votes
are entitled to be cast at the annual and special meeting.
How many votes do I have?
On each proposal to be voted upon, you have one vote for each share of our common stock that you owned on the record date. There is no
cumulative voting.
How do I vote my shares?
If you are a stockholder of record, you may vote in person at the annual and special meeting or by proxy.
To vote in person, come to the annual and special meeting, and we will give you a ballot when you arrive.
If you do not wish to vote in person or if you will not be attending the annual and special meeting, you may vote by proxy by mail, by
telephone or via the Internet by following instructions provided in the proxy card.
If you hold your shares in “street name” and:
you wish to vote in person at the annual and special meeting, you must obtain a valid proxy from your broker, bank, or other nominee
that holds your shares giving you the right to vote the shares at the annual and special meeting.
you do not wish to vote in person or you will not be attending the annual and special meeting, you must vote your shares in the
manner prescribed by your broker, bank or other nominee. Your broker, bank or other nominee should have enclosed or otherwise
provided a voting instruction card for you to use in directing the broker, bank or nominee how to vote your shares.
What is the difference between a stockholder of record and a “street name” holder?
If your shares are registered directly in your name with our transfer agent, Island Stock Transfer, then you are a stockholder of record with
respect to those shares.
If  your  shares  are  held  in  a  stock  brokerage  account  or  by  a  bank,  or  other  nominee,  then  the  broker,  bank,  or  other  nominee  is  the
stockholder of record with respect to those shares. However, you still are the beneficial owner of those shares, and your shares are said to
be held in “street name.” Street name holders generally cannot vote their shares directly and must instead instruct the broker, bank, or
other nominee how to vote their shares. Street name holders are also invited to attend the annual and special meeting.
What does it mean if I receive more than one proxy card?
If you receive more than one proxy card, it means that you hold shares registered in more than one name or in different accounts. To
ensure that all of your shares are voted, please vote by proxy by following instructions provided in each proxy card. If some of your shares
are held in “street name,” you should have received voting instruction with these materials from your broker, bank or other nominee. Please
follow the voting instruction provided to ensure that your vote is counted.
What vote is required for the election of directors or for the approval of a proposal?
3
Our directors are elected by a majority of the votes cast. This means that the nominees who receive more “For” votes than “Against” votes
will be elected as directors. There is no cumulative voting in the election of directors.
The proposal for approval of amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock
requires the affirmative vote from the stockholders holding shares in our company entitling them to exercise at least a majority of the voting
power. This means that the proposal must receive “For” votes from the holders of at least 86,296,147 shares of our common stock.
The  proposal  for  the  approval  of  an  amendment  to  our  articles  of  incorporation  changing  our  company’s  name  to  MNP  Petroleum
Corporation requires the affirmative vote from the stockholders holding shares in our company entitling them to exercise at least a majority
of the voting power. This means that the proposal must receive “For” votes from the holders of at least 86,296,147 shares of our common
stock.
All other proposals require the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares represented at the annual and special meeting and entitled to
vote on any matter (which shares voting affirmatively also constitute at least a majority of the required quorum). Therefore, for the other
proposals to be approved, each proposal must receive more “For” votes than the combined votes of “Against” votes and votes that are
abstained.
How are votes counted?
For the election of directors, you may vote “For”, “Against”, or “Abstain” for each nominee for the directors. Votes that are abstained and
broker non-votes will have no effect on the outcome of the vote on the election of directors.
For the ratification of the appointment of the independent registered public accounting firm and the approval of our 2011 stock option plan,
you may vote “For”, “Against”, or “Abstain” for the proposal. Votes that are abstained will have the same effect as “Against” votes. Broker
non-votes will have no effect on the outcome of the vote on this proposal.
For the approval of amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock, you may
vote “For”, “Against”, or “Abstain” for the proposal. Votes that are abstained and broker non-votes will have the same effect as “Against”
votes.
For the approval of an amendment to our articles of incorporation changing our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation., you may
vote “For”, “Against”, or “Abstain” for the proposal. Votes that are abstained and broker non-votes will have the same effect as “Against”
votes.
A “broker non-vote” occurs when a broker, bank, or other nominee holding shares for a beneficial owner in street name does not vote on a
particular proposal because it does not have discretionary voting power with respect to that proposal and has not received instructions with
respect to that proposal from the beneficial owner of those shares, despite voting on at least one other proposal for which it does have
discretionary authority or for which it has received instructions.
What happens if I do not make specific voting choices?
If you are a stockholder of record and you submit your proxy without specifying how you want to vote your shares, then the proxy holder
will vote your shares in the manner recommended by our board of directors on all proposals.
If you hold your shares in the street name and you do not give instructions to your broker, bank or other nominee to vote your shares, under
the rules that govern brokers, banks, and other nominees who are the stockholders of record of the shares held in street name, it generally
has the discretion to vote uninstructed shares on routine matters but have no discretion to vote them on non-routine matters.
What is the quorum requirement?
4
A quorum of stockholders is necessary for the transaction of business at the annual and special meeting. Stockholders holding at least
10% of the shares entitled to vote, represented in person or by proxy, constitute a quorum at the annual and special meeting. Your shares
will be counted towards the quorum requirement only if you or the registered holder of your shares, properly vote by proxy or present in
person at the annual and special meeting. Votes that are abstained and broker non-votes will be counted towards the quorum requirement.
If there is no quorum, the annual and special meeting may be adjourned by the vote of a majority of the shares represented either in person
or by proxy.
How does the board of directors recommend that I vote?
Our board of directors recommends that you vote your shares:
“For” the election of all nominees for directors;
“For” the ratification of the appointment of the independent registered public accounting firm;
“For” the approval of our 2011 stock option plan;
“For” the approval of amendment of our articles of incorporation to change our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation.
“For” the approval of amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock.
Can I change my vote after submitting my proxy?
Yes. You may revoke your proxy and change your vote at any time before the final vote at the annual and special meeting. If you are a
stockholder of record, you may vote again on a later date via the Internet or by telephone (only your latest Internet or telephone proxy
submitted prior to the annual and special meeting will be counted), by signing and returning a new proxy card with a later date, or by
attending  the  annual  and  special  meeting  and  voting  in  person. Your  attendance  at  the  annual  and  special  meeting  will  not
automatically revoke your proxy unless you vote again at the annual and special meeting or specifically request in writing that
your prior proxy be revoked. You may also request that your prior proxy be revoked by delivering us at Manas Petroleum Corporation,
Bahnhofstrasse 9, P.O. Box 155, CH-6341 Baar, Switzerland, Attention: Tatjana Rosenast a written notice of revocation prior to the annual
and special meeting.
If you hold your shares in the street name, you will need to follow the voting instruction provided by your broker, bank or other nominee
regarding how to revoke or change your vote.
How can I attend the annual and special meeting?
You may call us at +41-44-718 10 30 if you want to obtain information or directions to be able to attend the annual and special meeting and
vote in person.
You may be asked to present valid picture identification, such as a driver’s license or passport, before being admitted to the annual and
special meeting. If you hold your shares in street name, you also will need proof of ownership to be admitted to the annual and special
meeting. A recent brokerage statement or letter from your broker, bank or other nominee is an example of proof of ownership.
Who pays for the cost of proxy preparation and solicitation?
We  pay  for  the  cost  of  proxy  preparation  and  solicitation,  including  the  reasonable  charges  and  expenses  of  brokers,  banks  or  other
nominees for forwarding proxy materials to street name holders.
We are soliciting proxies primarily by mail. In addition, our directors, officers and regular employees may solicit proxies by telephone,
facsimile, mail, other means of communication or personally. These individuals will receive no additional compensation for such services.
In addition, we may engage a proxy solicitor to solicit proxies on our behalf by telephone and by other means. We expect the cost of our
private proxy solicitor to be approximately $15,000 to $25,000.
We will ask brokers, banks, and other nominees to forward the proxy materials to their principals and to obtain their authority to execute
proxies and voting instructions. We will reimburse them for their reasonable expenses.
5
Forward-Looking Statements
This  proxy  statement  contains  forward-looking  statements.  These  statements  relate  to  future  events.  In  some  cases,  you  can  identify
forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “expect”, “plan”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate”, “predict”, “potential”
or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known
and  unknown  risks,  uncertainties  and  other  factors  that  may  cause  our  company’s  actual  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance  or
achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by
these forward-looking statements.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results,
levels of activity, performance or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States
and Canada, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
Voting Securities and Principal Holders Thereof
The following table sets forth, as of September 21, 2012, certain information with respect to the beneficial ownership of our common stock
by each stockholder known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our common stock and by each of our current directors,
director nominees, named executive officers (as defined in the “Executive Compensation” section below) and current executive officers
and by our current directors and executive officers as a group. We have determined the number and percentage of shares beneficially
owned by such person in accordance with Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. This information does not necessarily
indicate beneficial ownership for any other purpose.
Title of Class
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Title of Class
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
Name and Address of
Beneficial Owner
Heinz Scholz 
Seegartenstrasse 45 
Horgen 8810 
Switzerland
Peter-Mark Vogel 
Haabweg 2 
Baech 8806 
Switzerland
Michael J. Velletta 
4th Floor, 931 Fort Street 
Victoria, British Columbia V8V 3K3, 
Canada
Richard Schenz 
Hauptstrasse 70 
A-2372 Giesshuebl 
Austria
Name and Address of
Beneficial Owner
Ari Muljana 
SPB 73032 
Zuercherstrasse 161 
8010 Zuerich 
Switzerland
Werner Ladwein 
Etzelblick-Strasse 1 
8834 Schindellegi 
Switzerland
Darcy W. Spady 
Suite 577 – 717, 7th Ave. S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta T2P 0Z3 
Canada
Murray Rodgers 
Suite 400 – 1324, 17 th Ave. S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta T2T 5S8 
Canada
Amount and Nature of 
Beneficial Ownership(1)
21,847,637(2)
Direct
Percent of
Class(1)
12.5%
16,999,536(3)
Direct
9.8%
4,100,000(4)
Direct/ 
Indirect
2.4%
1,212,850(5)
Direct
*
6
Amount and Nature of 
Beneficial Ownership(1)
250,000 (6)
Direct
Percent of
Class(1)
*
3,596,020 (7)
Direct
2.1%
Nil
Nil
Direct
Direct
*
*
Common Stock
Common Stock
Common Stock
FMR LLC(8) 
82 Devonshire Street 
Boston, Massachusetts 02109
Libra Advisors LLC(9) 
777 Third Ave, 27th Fl 
New York, NY 10017
Directors and Executive Officers as a 
group (7 persons)
4,809,094 (8)
Indirect(8)
2.7%
12,732,500(9)
Direct/
Indirect (9)
48,006,043(10)
6.9%
27.8%
Less than 1%.
 
Percentage of ownership is based on 172,592,292 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding as of September 21, 2012.
Except as  otherwise  indicated,  we  believe  that  the  beneficial  owners  of  the common  stock  listed  above,  based  on  information
furnished by such owners, have sole investment and voting power with respect to such shares, subject to community property laws
where applicable. Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission
and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. Shares of common stock subject to stock options or
warrants currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for purposes of computing the percentage
ownership  of  the person  holding  such  stock  option  or  warrants,  but  are  not  deemed outstanding for purposes  of  computing  the
percentage ownership of any other person.
 
Consists of 19,847,637 shares of our common stock and 2,000,000 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
 
Consists of 15,966,132 shares of our common stock and 1,033,404 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
 
Consists of 2,750,000 shares of our common stock held by Velletta Resources & Technology Corp., of which Mr. Velletta
holds voting and dispositive control and 1,350,000 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
 
Consists of 1,212,850 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
 
Consists of 250,000 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
 
Consists of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock and 1,596,020 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
Notes  
*
 
(1)
(2)
 
(3)
 
(4)
 
 
(5)
 
(6)
 
(7)
(8)
(9)
7
Based solely on the information contained in the Schedule 13G/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February
14, 2012.
 
Based solely on the information contained in the Form 4 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 17, 2012.
Represents 12,732,500 shares of our common stock directly owned by Libra Fund II (Luxembourg) S.a r.l., which may be deemed to
be  beneficially owned  by  (a)  Libra  Fund  (Luxembourg)  S.a  r.l.,  by  virtue  of  its  role  as the  beneficial  owner  of  Libra  Fund  II
(Luxembourg) S.a r.l., (b) Libra Fund, L.P., by virtue of its role as a beneficial owner of Libra Fund (Luxembourg) S.a.r.l., (c) Libra
Advisors, LLC, by virtue of its role as the investment manager of Libra Fund II (Luxembourg) S.a r.l., Libra Fund (Luxembourg) S.a
r.l. and Libra Fund, L.P., (d) Libra Associates, LLC, by virtue of its role as the general partner of Libra Fund, L.P. and (e) Ranjan
Tandon as the managing member of Libra Advisors, LLC and Libra Associates LLC.
(10) Consists of 40,563,769 shares of our common stock and 7,442,274 stock options exercisable within 60 days.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract or other arrangement the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in control of our
company.
Proposal 1
Election of Directors
Our board of directors has nominated the persons named below as candidates for directors at the annual and special meeting. Unless
otherwise directed, the proxy holder will vote the proxies received by him for the six nominees named below.
Our directors hold office until the next annual and special meeting or until their successors have been elected and qualified, or until they
resign or are removed.
Our board of directors recommends that you vote FOR these nominees.
Nominees
Name
Heinz J. Scholz
Michael J. Velletta
Dr. Richard Schenz
Dr. Werner Ladwein
Darcy W. Spady
Murray Rodgers
Positions Held with Our Company
Executive Director and Chairman
Executive Director and 
Audit Committee Member
Director and
Audit Committee Member
Director, President and 
Audit Committee Member
None
None
Age
69
55
71
62
50
56
Date First Elected or Appointed
April 10, 2007
April 10, 2007
November 21, 2008
September 16, 2010
Not Applicable
Not Applicable
Business Experience of Nominees
The following is a brief account of the education and business experience of the nominees during at least the past five years, indicating
their principal occupation during the period, and the name and principal business of the organization by which they were employed.
Heinz J. Scholz, Executive Director and Chairman
Heinz J. Scholz is a physicist and engineer. In the 1980s Mr. Scholz built through his company HJS Planung & Engineering, where he
was the majority shareholder and Chief Executive Officer and President, factories and telecommunication networks in the former Soviet
Union. After the German reunification he also advised Soviet Ministries regarding the negotiations on the sale of Russia’s East German
telecommunication network to Deutsche Telecom. He has worked in collaboration with scientific institutes in the Russian Federation.
8
Mr. Scholz has been our Executive Director since August 25, 2008 and the Chairman of our board of directors and one of our directors
since April 10, 2007. Since May 2004, he has acted as the Chairman of the board of directors for DWM Petroleum AG, and from May 2004
to April 2007, he acted as Chief Executive Officer for DWM Petroleum AG. Mr. Scholz earned his Engineering degree in 1975 and MSc
equivalent in Physics in 1979 at University (Bremen) Engineer for Electro Technology, University for Technology (Bremen).
We believe Mr. Scholz is qualified to serve on our board of directors because of his extensive knowledge of our company’s history and
current operations. Mr. Scholz is also a co-founder of DWM Petroleum AG, our wholly-owned subsidiary. Mr. Scholz plays a critical role in
targeting,  appraising  and  subsequently  acquiring  the  rights  to  major  oil  and  gas  assets  in  the  former  Soviet  Union  and  its  satellite
countries.
Michael J. Velletta, Executive Director and Audit Committee Member
Michael J. Velletta has been a lawyer in British Columbia, Canada since 1990 and is a partner with the law firm of Velletta & Company,
which focuses on corporate and commercial law, and litigation. Mr. Velletta serves on the board of directors of several private and public
corporations, and is a governor of the Trial Lawyers Association of BC. Mr. Velletta was a director and Chairman of the Compensation
Committee of Petromanas Energy Inc. (TSX Venture Exchange: PMI) from February 24, 2010 to August 26, 2011.
Mr.  Velletta  has  been  our  Executive  Director  since  August  25,  2008  and  one  of  our  directors  since  April  10,  2007.  He  served  as  our
general counsel from April 10, 2007 to August 25, 2008. Mr. Velletta received his LL.B. degree in Law from the University of Victoria in
1989.
We believe Mr. Velletta is qualified to serve on our board of directors because of his extensive knowledge of our company’s history and
current operations, his legal background and skills, and his experience as a director on the board of other companies. In particular, Mr.
Velletta’s background as a lawyer provides a unique perspective to our board of directors.
Dr. Richard Schenz, Director and Audit Committee Member
Dr. Richard Schenz studied technical physics in Vienna and finished his studies in 1967, with a Ph.D. from the University of Technology in
Vienna. In 1969 he started his career with the Austrian oil & gas company OMV AG, and was its CEO from 1992 to 2001. In 2001, Dr.
Schenz was appointed representative for the Austrian Capital Market by the Austrian government. Additionally, Dr. Schenz has held the
positions of Vice President of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber and President of the Austrian Chapter of the International Chamber
of Commerce (ICC-Austria) since June 2001. In 2002, he was appointed Chairman of the Austrian Commission for Corporate Governance.
Dr. Schenz was appointed as one of our directors on November 21, 2008.
We believe Dr. Schenz is qualified to serve on our board of directors because of his extensive energy experience. Dr. Schenz has over 30
years  of  experience  in  the  energy  sector  which  he  obtained  with  OMV  AG.  Dr.  Schenz  sits  on  various  boards  of  private  and  listed
companies  in  Europe.  We  believe  Dr.  Schenz’s  strong  network  to  investment  banking  firms  as  well  as  sovereign  funds  will  prove
invaluable to us as we attempt to grow our company.
Dr. Werner Ladwein, Director, President and Audit Committee Member
Dr. Werner Ladwein obtained a Ph. D in Geology and Mineralogy from the University of Innsbruck, Austria in February 1977. Furthermore,
Dr. Ladwein obtained an MBA in International Business from Webster University in in July 1988. Dr. Ladwein has more than 30 years
experience in the oil & gas industry. At OMV AG, an Austrian oil and gas company, Dr. Ladwein was assigned various managerial tasks
primarily in exploration and production.
9
During his tenure at OMV AG Dr. Ladwein had the following management positions: from 1990 to 1992, he was the Head of Exploration
and  Research  in  Austria  and  neighboring  countries;  from  1992  to  1997,  he  was  the  General  Manager  of  OMV  AG  in  Libya;  the  first
operated  international  venture  of  OMV  AG  in  exploration  and  production  and  the  first  oil  field  development  for  OMV  AG  abroad.  He
renegotiated  agreements  and  acquired  new  licenses;  from  1997  to  2001,  he  was  the  General  Manager  of  OMV  AG  Albania;  He
restructured the joint venture and started exploration with new partners in new licenses; from 2002 to 2004, he was the General Manager
OMV AG Pakistan; He restructured the company and built up to the largest foreign producer, acquired operations of another company and
incorporated  company  into  OMV  AG,  acquired  additional  licenses  and  successful  implementation  of  Corporate  Social  Responsibility,
which was base for roll out in OMV AG; from 2004 to 2008, he was a member of the Petrom SA board of directors and Executive Director
Exploration and Production; He was a main contributor to OMV Group results, restructuring of a privatized company and integration into
OMV AG, changing it to be an efficient operator including successful implementation of environment policies, restructuring and acquisition
of a major service company to Petrom. Petrom had exploration and production activities in Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Russia; and
since 2008, he has worked as an independent oil and gas consultant.
Dr.  Ladwein  was  appointed  as  one  of  our  directors  on  September  16,  2010.  On  August  26,  2011,  Dr.  Ladwein  was  elected  by  the
shareholders of Petromanas Energy Inc. as director.
Effective November 1, 2011, Dr. Ladwein was appointed to the office of President. In this function Dr. Ladwein reports to the board of
directors.
We believe Dr. Ladwein is qualified to serve on our board of directors because of his 30 years of experience in the oil & gas industry,
including his experience gained from holding several management positions at OMV AG.
Darcy W. Spady
Mr. Spady has served as the Director of Client Solutions for the Canadian Business Unit of Sanjel Corporation, a Calgary headquartered
global energy service company since September 2012. From May 2010 to August 2012, he was Vice President and Managing Director of
Saint Brendan’s Exploration Ltd., focusing on the Canadian Maritimes and Europe. Mr. Spady also chairs the board of directors of Green
Imaging  Technologies,  Inc.  of  Fredericton,  New  Brunswick,  Canada.  He  has  previously  held  executive  positions  in  two  TSX  Venture
Exchange companies: Contact Exploration Inc. (from June 2007 until the company’s reorganization in May 2010) and Petroglobe Inc. (from
December 2005 to September 2007). Mr. Spady was also been based in Charleston, West Virginia and Fredericton, New Brunswick as
part of the Columbia Natural Resources / Triana Energy team, in various management positions.
Mr.  Spady  has  an  extensive  background  in  the  natural  gas  and  oil  industry  throughout  the  U.S.  and  Canada,  having  worked  for  the
Schlumberger organization in Western Canada, Ontario, Quebec, Atlantic Canada offshore, as well as the Illinois and the Appalachian
Basins.
Mr. Spady holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Petroleum Engineering from the University of Alberta and is a P.Eng. in the Provinces of
Alberta and New Brunswick. His is a past Chair of the Society of Petroleum Engineers Calgary Section.
We  believe  Mr.  Spady  is  qualified  to  serve  on  our  board  of  directors  because  of  his  extensive  background  in  the  natural  gas  and  oil
industry throughout the United States and Canada, spanning over two decades.
Murray Rodgers
Mr.  Rodgers  has  over  30  years  of  oil  and  gas  experience.  Mr.  Rodgers  has  been  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Zodiac
Exploration Corp. since June 2008 and was made President and Chief Executive Officer of Zodiac Exploration Inc. on September 28,
2010. Prior to starting Zodiac Exploration Corp. in June 2008 he was the first technical staff member and eventually rose to President and
Chief Executive Officer of Trident Exploration Corp. Over the course of approximately six years Trident Exploration grew from concept to
being  the  leading  coalbed  methane  producer  in  Canada  with  over  200  mmcf/d  of  operated  production.  Mr.  Rodgers  has  also  been  a
director  of  Cobra  Venture  Corporation,  a  corporation  focused  on  the  acquisition  and  development  of  strategic  oil  and  gas  reserves  in
Western Canada, since May 2002. Mr. Rodgers worked for 10 years with OMV-AG (Vienna), during which time he was the co-discoverer of
a multi TCF gas field in Pakistan (Miano/Sawan). He is also the creator and co-author of a comprehensive analysis of play types in the
WCSB, known today as “THE EDGE”, and for several years he authored the “In-Depth Reporter” for the Ross Smith Energy Group.
10
We believe Mr. Rodgers is qualified to serve on our board of directors because his 30 years of oil and gas experiences.
Executive Officers
Our board of directors appoints our officers, and our officers hold office for such term as may be prescribed by our board of directors and
until their successors are chosen and qualify, or until their death or resignation, or until their removal.
The names of our executive officers who are not also directors, their age, positions held, and duration of such and a brief description of the
background and business experience for the past five years are as follows:
Name
Peter-Mark Vogel
Ari Muljana
Position Held with Our Company
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
Age
47
33
Date First Elected or Appointed
July 15, 2010
July 9, 2009
Peter-Mark Vogel, Chief Executive Officer
Mr. Vogel was employed as a Senior Financial Analyst at Bank Sal. Oppenheim, Zürich, Switzerland from 2000 to July 2005 and holds the
Chartered Financial Analyst designation. He was Vice President of the HSBC Research Department in Guyerzeller, Zurich, Switzerland
from 1999 to 2000. From 1998 to 1999, he was Vice President of the Research Department Orbitex Finance. He was a Portfolio Manager
and Assistant to the Bank’s Executive Committee for Societe Generale from 1995 to 1998. He was Assistant Vice President of Societe
Generale,  Zurich,  Switzerland  from  1995  to  1998.  From  1993  to  1995  he  was  the  Finance  and  Regulatory  Associate  and  Regulatory
Analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. He has been a member of the Swiss Society of Investment Professionals since 1999 and a
member of the CFA Institute, formerly Association of Investment Management and Research, since 1999.
On September 16, 2010, our board of directors appointed Peter-Mark Vogel as our President and Chief Executive Officer. From July 15,
2010 to September 16, 2010, Mr. Vogel was our interim President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Vogel resigned as President effective
November 1, 2011, but has remained as Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Vogel is one of our founders and has previously served our company
in a number of roles, including Chief Financial Officer from April 10, 2007 to February 8, 2008 and a Director, Finance from April 10, 2007
to February 1, 2009. Also from February 1, 2009 to July 15, 2010 he acted as an advisor to our board of directors. Since February 24,
2010, Mr. Vogel has also been a director of Petromanas Energy Inc.
Mr. Vogel received his Master and Bachelor degrees in Business Administration and Economics from the University of Zurich, Switzerland
in 1992. He received his Master of Business Administration degree from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business in 2003.
Ari Muljana, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
Ari  Muljana  has  been  our  Chief  Financial  Officer  and  Treasurer  since  July  9,  2009.  From  February  24,  2010  to  August  30,  2010,  Mr.
Muljana was also Chief Financial Officer of Petromanas Energy Inc. From 2007 to 2009 Mr. Muljana worked at Capgemini Switzerland AG
as strategic consultant, focusing on controlling and performance measurement topics in various industries. In 2005, he began his career in
the Risk Management department at Deloitte AG, where he audited and advised within the oil and commodity trading industry. He is also
specialized in the area of consulting relating to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, where he implemented financial and risk management
processes for multinational companies to comply with SEC regulations. He has a Master of Science in Computer Science (University of
Zurich 2004) with a major in Financial Statement Analysis and Artificial Intelligence.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between any director or executive officer.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
11
We know of no material proceedings in which any of our directors, officers or affiliates, or any registered or beneficial stockholder is a party
adverse to our company or any of our subsidiaries or has a material interest adverse to our company or any of our subsidiaries.
Except as disclosed below, our directors and executive officers have not been involved in any of the following events during the past ten
years:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
any bankruptcy petition filed by or against any business of which such person was a general partner or executive officer
either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time;
 
any conviction in a criminal proceeding or being subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and
other minor offenses);
 
being subject to any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any court of competent
jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of
business, securities or banking activities;
 
being  found  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  (in  a civil  action),  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  or  the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated a federal or state securities or commodities law, and the judgment
has not been reversed, suspended, or vacated;
 
being  the  subject  of,  or  a  party  to,  any  federal  or  state judicial  or  administrative  order,  judgment,  decree,  or  finding,  not
subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  relating  to  an  alleged violation  of:  (i)  any  federal  or  state  securities  or
commodities law or regulation; or (ii) any law or regulation respecting financial institutions or insurance companies including,
but not limited to, a temporary or permanent injunction, order of disgorgement or restitution, civil money penalty or temporary
or permanent cease- and-desist order, or removal or prohibition order; or (iii) any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire
fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
6.
being  the  subject  of,  or  a  party  to,  any  sanction  or order,  not  subsequently  reversed,  suspended  or  vacated,  of  any self-
regulatory  organization  (as  defined  in  Section  3(a)(26)  of  the Securities Exchange Act of 1934), any registered entity (as
defined in Section 1(a)(29) of the Commodity Exchange Act), or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization
that has disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
On October 9, 2007, the British Columbia Securities Commission of Canada issued a cease trade order against our company in British
Columbia, Canada pursuant to section 164(1) of the Securities  Act (British Columbia). At the time of the order, we were not a reporting
issuer in British Columbia, Canada and had our securities quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board. We distributed securities to residents of
British Columbia and failed to file a Report of Exempt Distribution with the British Columbia Securities Commission according to National
Instrument 45-106. As a result, the British Columbia Securities Commission ordered that trading in our securities cease in British Columbia
until the order was revoked. We filed the Report of Exempt Distribution and on April 1, 2008, the British Columbia Securities Commission
partially  revoked  the  cease  trade  order  to  permit  trading  in  our  securities  except  by  certain  offshore  entities.  The  British  Columbia
Securities Commission left the order in effect with respect to those offshore entities because it was unable to determine the beneficial
ownership of the shares registered in the name of those entities.
Corporate Governance
Meetings
12
During the year ended December 31, 2011, our board of directors held three meetings. Except for Dr. Richard Schenz, during the year
ended December 31, 2011, no directors of our company attended fewer than 75% of the total number of the meetings of our board of
directors  and  committees  of  the  board  of  directors  held  during  the  year  ended  December  31,  2011.  Dr.  Schenz  attended  two  of  three
meetings of our board of directors.
We  encourage  all  incumbent  directors  and  nominees  for  election  as  director  to  attend  our  meeting  of  stockholders.  Three  directors
attended our annual and special meeting of stockholders held on September 22, 2011.
Committees of the Board of Directors
Our board of directors has the authority to appoint committees to perform certain management and administration functions. Currently, we
have an audit committee, but do not have compensation committee or nominating and corporate governance committee and do not have
an audit committee financial expert.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
We do not have a nominating and corporate governance committee. Our board of directors performed the functions associated with a
nominating  committee.  Generally,  nominees  for  directors  are  identified  and  suggested  by  the  members  of  our  board  of  directors  or
management using their business networks and all of our director nominees were nominated for a seat on the board of directors based on
prior service as directors to our company. Our board of directors has not retained any executive search firms or other third parties to identify
or evaluate director candidates in the past and does not intend to in the near future. We have elected not to have a nominating committee
because we are an exploration stage company with limited operations and resources.
Our board of directors does not have a written policy or charter regarding how director candidates are evaluated or nominated for our board
of  directors.  Additionally,  our  board  of  directors  has  not  created  particular  qualifications  or  minimum  standards  that  candidates  for  our
board of directors must meet. Instead, our board of directors considers how a candidate could contribute to our business and meet our
needs and those of our board of directors. As we are an exploration stage company, our board of directors will not consider candidates for
director recommended by our stockholders, and we have received no such candidate recommendations from our stockholders.
Compensation Committee
We currently do not have a compensation committee. However, our board of directors may establish a compensation committee once we
are no longer in the exploration stage, which would consist of inside directors and independent members. Until a formal committee is
established,  our  board  of  directors  will  continue  to  review  all  forms  of  compensation  provided  to  our  executive  officers,  directors,
consultants and employees including stock compensation.
Audit Committee
Effective December 20, 2010, our board of directors established an audit committee consisting of Michael J. Velletta, Dr. Werner Ladwein
and  Dr.  Richard  Schenz.  Michael  J.  Velletta  is  the  chair  of  the  audit  committee.  Our  audit  committee  assists  our  board  of  directors  in
fulfilling its financial oversight responsibilities by reviewing the financial reports and other financial information provided by our company to
regulatory authorities and stockholders, our systems of internal controls regarding finance and accounting and our auditing, accounting
and financial reporting processes. Our audit committee’s primary duties and responsibilities are to: serve as an independent and objective
party  to  monitor  our  financial  reporting  and  internal  control  system  and  review  our  financial  statements;  review  and  appraise  the
performance of our external auditor; and provide an open avenue of communication among our auditor, financial and senior management
and our board of directors.
13
The audit committee fulfills these responsibilities primarily by carrying out the activities enumerated in the audit committee charter adopted
by our board of directors on January 27, 2011. The audit committee charter is attached to this proxy statement as Schedule “B”.
Audit Committee Financial Expert
Our board of directors has determined that it does not have a member that qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert” as defined in
Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K issued by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
We believe that our entire audit committee is capable of analyzing and evaluating financial statements that present a breadth and level of
complexity of accounting issues that are generally comparable to the breadth and complexity of the issues reasonably expected to be
raised by our company. We believe that retaining an independent director who would qualify as an “audit committee financial expert”
would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our circumstances given the early stages of our development and the fact
that we have not generated operating revenues to date.
Audit Committee Report
Our audit committee oversees our financial reporting process. Management has the primary responsibility for the financial statements and
the reporting process, including the system of internal accounting controls.
Our  audit  committee  has  reviewed  and  discussed  the  audited  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2011  with
management.
Our  audit  committee  has  discussed  with  BDO  Visura  International  AG,  our  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm  for  the  year
ended December 31, 2011, the matters required to be discussed by the statement on Auditing Standards No. 61, as amended (AICPA,
Professional Standards, Vol. 1. AU Section 380) as adopted by the Public Accounting Oversight Board in Rule 3200T.
Our  audit  committee  has  received  written  disclosures  and  the  letter  from  BDO  Visura  International  AG  required  by  Independence
Standards Board Standard No. 1 (Independence Standards Board Standard No. 1, Independence Discussions with Audit Committees) as
adopted  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  in  Rule  3600T,  and  has  discussed  with  BDO  Visura  International  AG  its
independence.
Based on the reviews and discussions referred to above, our audit committee recommended to our board of directors that the audited
financial statements referred to above to be included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011 for filing
with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Members of the Audit Committee
Michael J. Velletta
Dr. Richard Schenz
Dr. Werner Ladwein
The material in this report is not “soliciting material,” is not deemed “filed” with the Securities and Exchange Commission and is not to be
incorporated by reference in any filing of our company under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 whether
made before or after the date hereof and irrespective of any general incorporation language in any such filing.
Director Independence
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board operated by FINRA (the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority) and on the over-
the-counter market operated by Pink OTC Markets Inc., which do not impose any director independence requirements. We are also listed
on  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange  which  imposes  director  independence  requirements.  Under  NASDAQ  rule  5605(a)(2),  and  the  TSX
Venture Exchange Corporate Finance Policy, a director is not independent if he or she is also an executive officer or employee of the
corporation. Using this definition of independent director, we only have one independent director, Dr. Richard Schenz.
Board Leadership Structure
14
The positions of our principal executive officer and the chairman of our board of directors are served by two individuals. Heinz J. Scholz is
our current Executive Director and a chairman of our board of directors. Peter-Mark Vogel is our Chief Executive Officer. Because of the
separation of those functions to two individuals, we have determined that the leadership structure of our board of directors is appropriate,
especially given that we are an exploration stage company with limited operations and resources.
Our board of directors provides oversight of our risk exposure by receiving periodic reports from senior management regarding matters
relating to financial, operational, legal and strategic risks and mitigation strategies for such risks.
Stockholder Communications with Our Board of Directors
We welcome comments and questions from our stockholders. Our stockholders can direct communications to the chairman of our board of
directors,  Heinz  J.  Scholz,  at  Manas  Petroleum  Corporation,  Bahnhofstrasse  9,  P.O.  Box  155,  CH-6341  Baar,  Switzerland.  While  we
appreciate all comments and questions from our stockholders, we may not be able to individually respond to all communications.
Heinz J. Scholz collects and evaluates all stockholder communications. If the communication is directed to our board of directors generally
or  to  a  specific  board  member,  Mr.  Scholz  will  disseminate  the  communication  to  the  appropriate  party  at  the  next  scheduled  board
meeting unless he decides that the communication requires a more urgent response. In that case, Mr. Scholz will direct the communication
to the appropriate party prior to the next scheduled board meeting. If the communication is addressed to an executive officer, Mr. Scholz
will direct that communication to the executive officer. All communications addressed to our directors and executive officers are reviewed
by those parties unless the communication is clearly frivolous.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires our executive officers and directors, and persons who own more than 10%
of our common stock, to file initial statements of beneficial ownership, reports of changes in ownership and annual reports concerning their
ownership of our common stock and other equity securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission and to provide us with copies of
those filings. Based solely on our review of the copies of such forms received by us, or written representations from certain reporting
persons, we believe that during year ended December 31, 2011, all filing requirements applicable to our executive officers and directors,
and persons who own more than 10% of our common stock were complied with, with the exception of the following:
Name
Number of Late Reports
Number of Transactions
Not Reported on a
Timely Basis
Failure to File
Requested Forms
Heinz J. Scholz
Dr. Richard Schenz
Dr. Werner Ladwein
Peter-Mark Vogel
Michael J. Velletta
Ari Muljana
6
1
1
1
Nil
1
19
1
1
1
1
1
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
1
Nil
Executive Compensation
Summary Compensation
The particulars of compensation paid to the following persons:
15
(a)
 
(b)
(c)
all individuals serving as our principal executive officer during the year ended December 31, 2011;
 
each of our two most highly compensated executive officers other than our principal executive officer who were serving as
executive officers at December 31, 2011 who had total compensation exceeding $100,000; and
 
up to two additional individuals for whom disclosure would have been provided under (b) but for the fact that the individual
was not serving as our executive officer at December 31, 2011,
who we will collectively refer to as the named executive officers, for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, are set out in the
following summary compensation table:
Name and Principal
Position
Year
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Dr. Werner Ladwein 
President and Director
Peter-Mark Vogel 
CEO
Ari Muljana 
CFO
2011 
2010
2011 
2010
2011 
2010
36,424 
Nil
220,953 
126,761
185,496 
143,233
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Stock 
Awards
($)
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Option 
Awards
All Other
Compensation
($)(1)
506,400 
Nil
168,800 
680,000
168,000 
Nil
($)
1,391(2) 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Total
($)
544,215(3) 
Nil
389,753 
806,761
354,296 
143,233
Notes
(1)
(2)
(3)
These amounts represent the fair value of these options at the date of grant. The fair value of all of the options was determined
using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, using a 3 and 5.62-year expected life of the option, a volatility factor of 119% and
108%, a risk-free rate of 0.65% and 1.03% and no assumed dividend rate for the grant in 2010 and the grants in 2011, respectively.
Payments for a leased car. Monthly income component corresponds to 0.8% of purchasing price in accordance with Swiss Tax law.
He received $36,424 in cash as salary from November 1, 2011 to December 31, 2011 in his role as President, $506,400 in option
awards and a compensation of $1,391 for a leased car.
Compensation for Executive Officers and Directors
Compensation arrangements for our named executive officers and directors are described below. Also, under our 2007 revised omnibus
plan, our board of directors may grant our qualified directors, officers, employees, consultants and advisors stock options (which may be
designated  as  nonqualified  stock  options  or  incentive  stock  options),  stock  appreciation  rights,  restricted  stock  awards,  performance
awards or other forms of stock-based incentive awards, up to a maximum of 20,000,000 shares. In addition, at the annual and special
meeting of our stockholders held on September 22, 2011, we adopted our 2011 stock option plan. Under our 2011 stock option plan, our
board of directors may grant directors, officers, employees or consultants of our company or our subsidiaries stock options to acquire up to
a maximum of 10% of the number of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at the time of the grant.
We maintain Swiss defined benefit plans for our employees, of which three are executive officers. The plan is part of an independent
collective fund which provides pensions combined with life and disability insurance. The assets of the funded plan are held independently
of  our  assets  in  a  legally  distinct  and  independent  collective  trust  fund  which  serves  various  unrelated  employers.  The  fund’s  benefit
obligations are fully reinsured by AXA Winterthur Insurance Company. Except for our Swiss defined benefit plans for our employees, there
is no plan that provides for the payment of retirement benefits, or benefits that will be paid primarily following retirement, including but not
limited  to  tax-qualified  defined  benefit  plans,  supplemental  executive  retirement  plans,  tax-qualified  defined  contribution  plans  and
nonqualified defined contribution plans.
16
The descriptions of the material terms of each contract, agreement, plan or arrangement, whether written or unwritten, that provides for
payments to a named executive officer or director at, following, or in connection with the resignation, retirement or other termination of a
named  executive  officer  or  director,  or  a  change  in  control  of  our  company  or  a  change  in  the  named  executive  officer’s  or  director’s
responsibilities following a change in control, with respect to each named executive officer or director are provided below.
Compensation for Dr. Werner Ladwein
As of September 16, 2010, we entered into an agreement with Dr. Werner Ladwein, pursuant to which Dr. Ladwein agreed to act as a
director of our company. In consideration for his services, we agreed to compensate him $5,000 per quarter or $20,000 per year. We also
agreed to reimburse him for expenses approved of in writing by our board of directors.
Effective  June  1,  2011,  our  board  of  directors  increased  the  annual  compensation  of  Dr.  Ladwein  from  $20,000  to  $21,000.  Effective
August 1, 2011, Dr. Ladwein’s compensation is to be paid in Swiss francs at a conversion rate of $1.00 equaling CHF 1.00.
We and Dr. Ladwein also agreed that Dr. Ladwein’s position as a director may be terminated at any time by either him or our company. In
the event that we end Dr. Ladwein’s position as director, we agreed to pay him to the end of the subsequent quarter.
As of September 16, 2010, we also granted Dr. Ladwein stock options to purchase 500,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise
price of $0.52 per share and 500,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.65 per share until September 16, 2020. The
stock options vest in 12 quarterly instalments, subject to proration to account for any partial calendar quarter at the beginning of the vesting
period, with the first instalment to vest on the first day of the first full calendar quarter after September 16, 2010, and with each subsequent
instalment to vest on the first day of each calendar quarter thereafter. The grant is subject to the terms of a stock option agreement by Dr.
Ladwein and us and the terms of our stock option plan.
On September 22, 2011, we granted upon approval by the annual and special meeting and accepted by the TSX Venture Exchange Dr.
Ladwein 2,000,000 shares of our common stock in part as remuneration for valuable services he has already provided to our company and
in part as an incentive for him to continue to provide us with his services. On September 22, 2011 we also granted Dr. Ladwein stock
options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options
vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March 22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and
September 22, 2013.
Effective November 1, 2011, we appointed Dr. Ladwein to the executive office of President. In his position as President of our Company,
Dr. Ladwein will be provided a monthly salary of approximately $18,650 (CHF 17,000) and an option to buy 3,000,000 shares of our
common stock at an exercise price of $0.215. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on May
1, 2012, November 1, 2012, May 1, 2013 and November 1, 2013. In addition, we will provide Dr. Ladwein with housing and a car as long
as he resides in Switzerland.
If we terminate Dr. Ladwein without cause or Dr. Ladwein resigns as a result of our breach of any provision of the employment agreement,
or a material change in his duties, we must make certain payments in addition to the payment of all compensation accrued through the
effective date of resignation and reimbursement for all expenses incurred before the termination. Under such circumstances, we must (i)
prior to November 1, 2012 pay him in a lump sum an amount equal to two months of his annual guaranteed salary in effect on the date of
termination and (ii) from November 1, 2012 pay him in a lump sum equal to three months of his annual guaranteed salary in effect on the
date of termination. In addition, all options granted to him would immediately vest and become exercisable upon the termination of Dr.
Ladwein’s employment as described above. Our stock option agreement also provides that all options granted to him would immediately
vest and become exercisable upon the occurrence of a change in control.
Compensation for Peter-Mark Vogel
17
On April 1, 2007, we entered into an employment and non-competition agreement with Peter-Mark Vogel, pursuant to which Mr. Vogel
agreed to serve as our Chief Financial Officer and member of our board of directors. In consideration for the services that Mr. Vogel agreed
to render pursuant to his employment agreement, Mr. Vogel was entitled to receive an annual base salary of approximately $348,000,
stock options to purchase 1,750,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $4.00 per share pursuant to our 2007 Omnibus Plan and a
non-accountable automobile and monthly parking allowance of $20,000 per year.
On February 1, 2009, we entered into a termination agreement with Mr. Vogel, releasing him as our Executive Director. As a result of his
termination, all of his options were cancelled on May 1, 2009.
On March 26, 2009, we entered into a consulting frame contract with Mr. Vogel, whereby Mr. Vogel agreed to perform tasks on an as-
requested  basis,  from  time-to-time.  We  agreed  to  compensate  Mr.  Vogel  on  either  a  fixed  price  arrangement  or  a  time  and  material
arrangement,  at  Mr.  Vogel’s  election  in  respect  of  each  task  that  we  ask  him  to  complete.  Mr.  Vogel  has  agreed  to  provide  us  with
consulting services relating to finance and auditing matters on a fixed price arrangement with monthly compensation of $12,000 per month.
If the compensation arrangement is a time and material arrangement, we agreed to pay Mr. Vogel a daily rate of $1,400 excluding VAT.
On February 24, 2010, we granted stock options to Peter-Mark Vogel to purchase an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of our common stock
at an exercise price of $0.70 per share for a term expiring February 22, 2015. The options vest in 12 quarterly instalments, subject to
proration to account for any partial calendar quarter at the beginning of the vesting period, with the first installment to vest on the first day of
the first full calendar quarter after the date of his stock option agreement, and with each subsequent installment to vest on the first day of
each calendar quarter thereafter. The grant is subject to the terms of a stock option agreement by Mr. Vogel and the terms of our 2007
Revised Omnibus Plan.
Effective March 1, 2010, Mr. Vogel has agreed to reduce his compensation to $88,733 per year. This consulting fee decrease results from
the sale of our Albanian project to Petromanas Energy Inc. in exchange for cash and shares of Petromanas Energy Inc. and reflect our
agreement that Mr. Vogel will spend some of his time working for our company and some of his time working for Petromanas Energy Inc.
Effective July 15, 2010, our board of directors appointed Mr. Vogel as our interim President and Chief Executive Officer. On September 16,
2010, our board of directors appointed Peter-Mark Vogel as our President and Chief Executive Officer, removing the word “interim” from his
title. Also our board of directors determined to compensate Mr. Vogel $17,000 per month for his services.
As  of  October  1,  2010,  we  entered  into  an  employment  and  non-competition  agreement  with  Mr.  Vogel,  pursuant  to  which  Mr.  Vogel
agreed  to  serve  as  our  Chief  Executive  Officer.  In  consideration  for  the  services  that  Mr.  Vogel  agreed  to  render  pursuant  to  his
employment agreement, we agreed to provide him guaranteed remuneration of $204,000 per annum, payable monthly.
Effective  June  1,  2011,  our  board  of  directors  increased  the  annual  compensation  of  Mr.  Vogel  from  $204,000  to  $214,200.  Effective
August 1, 2011, Mr. Vogel’s compensation is to be paid in Swiss francs at a conversion rate of $1.00 equaling CHF 1.00.
If we terminate Mr. Vogel without cause or Mr. Vogel resigns as a result of our breach of any provision of the employment agreement, or a
material change in his duties, we must make certain payments in addition to the payment of all compensation accrued through the effective
date of resignation and reimbursement for all expenses incurred before the termination. Under such circumstances, we must pay him in a
lump sum equal to two months of his annual guaranteed salary in effect on the date of termination.
On September 22, 2011 we granted Mr. Vogel stock options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
$0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March
22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and September 22, 2013.
Compensation for Ari Muljana
18
On April 1, 2009, we entered into an employment and non-competition agreement with Ari Muljana, pursuant to which Mr. Muljana agreed
to serve as our Senior Finance Manager. In consideration for the services that Mr. Muljana agreed to render pursuant to his employment
agreement, Mr. Muljana was entitled to receive an annual base salary of CHF 130,000 (approximately $138,012) and options to purchase
400,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.26 per share pursuant to the 2007 Revised Omnibus Plan. Effective July 1,
2009, Mr. Muljana’s annual salary was raised to CHF 136,500 (approximately $144,912). In addition, we and Mr. Muljana agreed to amend
Mr. Muljana’s employment agreement to adjust for the fact that the exercise price of the options should have been set at a price of $0.14
per share instead of $0.26 per share by providing that we will reimburse Mr. Muljana for the difference ($0.12 for each share purchased by
him pursuant to the exercise of his options) if and at such time he exercises any of his options. Effective January 1, 2010, Mr. Muljana’s
annual  salary  was  raised  to  CHF160,000  (approximately  $169,860).  Effective  March  1,  2010,  Mr.  Muljana  agreed  to  reduce  his
compensation  to  $52,093  per  year.  This  salary  decrease  resulted  from  the  sale  of  our  Albanian  project  to  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  in
exchange for cash and shares of Petromanas Energy Inc. and reflected our agreement that Mr. Muljana would spend some of his time
working for our company and some of his time working for Petromanas Energy Inc. Effective April 1, 2010, we informally entered into a
new compensatory arrangement with respect to Mr. Muljana. Effective April 1, 2010, we have agreed to pay Mr. Muljana an annual salary
of  CHF  160,000  (approximately  $169,860).  We  have  agreed  with  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  that,  for  services  provided  to  Petromanas
Energy  Inc.,  we  will  invoice  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  a  portion  of  this  salary  (currently,  we  have  agreed  upon  an  annual  amount  of
CDN$100,000, or approximately $100,100). CHF 160,000 (approximately $169,860) represents Mr. Muljana’s annual salary prior to the
salary decrease effective March 1, 2010.
Effective  June  1,  2011,  our  board  of  directors  increased  the  annual  compensation  of  Mr.  Muljana  from  CHF  160,000  (approximately
$191,709) to CHF 168,000 (approximately $201,294).
If we terminate Mr. Muljana without cause or Mr. Muljana resigns as a result of our breach of any provision of the employment agreement or
a  material  change  in  his  duties,  we  must  make  certain  payments  and  provide  him  certain  benefits  in  addition  to  the  payment  of  all
compensation accrued through the effective date of resignation and reimbursement for all expenses incurred before the termination. Under
such circumstances, we must (i) pay him in a lump sum an amount equal to three months of his annual guaranteed salary, and (ii) provide
for the first year after his termination continued coverage under all benefit plans in which he participated. In addition, all options granted to
him would immediately vest and become exercisable upon the termination of Mr. Muljana’s employment as described above. Our stock
option agreement also provides that all options granted to him would immediately vest and become exercisable upon the occurrence of a
change in control.
On September 22, 2011 we granted Mr. Muljana stock options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
$0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March
22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and September 22, 2013.
Compensation for Heinz J. Scholz
On April 1, 2007, we entered into an employment and non-competition agreement with Heinz Scholz, pursuant to which Mr. Scholz agreed
to  serve  as  the  Chairman  of  our  board  of  directors.  In  consideration  for  the  services  that  Mr.  Scholz  agreed  to  render  pursuant  to  his
employment  agreement,  Mr.  Scholz  was  entitled  to  receive  an  annual  base  salary  of  $336,000,  stock  options  to  purchase  1,750,000
shares of our common stock at a price of $4.00 (repriced to $0.70 on February 24, 2010) per share pursuant to our 2007 Omnibus Plan and
a non-accountable automobile and monthly parking allowance of $20,000 per year.
We  and  Mr.  Scholz  have  agreed  to  terminate  his  employment  agreement  and  to  enter  into  a  new  consulting  agreement.  The  new
arrangement resulted in the reduction of his monthly compensation from a salary of $31,000 per month to a consulting fee of $15,000 per
month, effective February 1, 2009. Effective March 1, 2010, Mr. Scholz has agreed to reduce his compensation to $114,552 per year. This
consulting  fee  decrease  results  from  the  sale  of  our  Albanian  project  to  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  in  exchange  for  cash  and  shares  of
Petromanas Energy Inc. and reflect our agreement that Mr. Scholz will spend some of his time working for our company and some of his
time working for Petromanas Energy Inc.
19
On September 16, 2010, our board of directors increased the compensation for Heinz J. Scholz to $15,000 per month, effective October 1,
2010.
Effective June 1, 2011, our board of directors increased the annual compensation of Mr. Scholz from $180,000 to $189,000. Effective
August 1, 2011, Mr. Scholz’s compensation is to be paid in Swiss francs at a conversion rate of $1.00 equaling CHF 1.00.
On September 22, 2011 we granted Mr. Scholz stock options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
$0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March
22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and September 22, 2013.
Compensation for Michael J. Velletta
On May 2, 2007, we granted our director, Michael J. Velletta, stock options to purchase 1,100,000 shares of our common stock at a price of
$4.00 (re-priced to $0.70 on February 24, 2010) per share for a term of 10 years as consideration for his service on our board of directors.
Such options vest in equal quarterly instalments over the three years from the date of the grant. Mr. Velletta also received $6,000 each
quarter for his services as a director.
We and Mr. Velletta agreed to terminate his employment agreement and to enter into a new consulting agreement. The new arrangement
resulted in the reduction of his monthly compensation from a salary of $12,000 per month to a consulting fee of $5,000 per month, effective
February 1, 2009. Effective July 1, 2009, Mr. Velletta’s monthly consulting fee was raised to $12,000. Additionally, Mr. Velletta receives
$2,000 as an office allowance. Effective March 1, 2010, Mr. Velletta has agreed to reduce his compensation to $97,944 per year. This
consulting  fee  decrease  results  from  the  sale  of  our  Albanian  project  to  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  in  exchange  for  cash  and  shares  of
Petromanas Energy Inc. and reflect our agreement that Mr. Velletta will spend some of his time working for our company and some of his
time working for Petromanas Energy Inc.
On September 16, 2010, our board of directors increased the compensation for Michael J. Velletta to $12,000 per month plus $2,000 per
month for office expenses, effective October 1, 2010.
Effective June 1, 2011, our board of directors increased the annual compensation of Mr. Velletta from $144,000 to $151,200. In addition,
Mr. Velletta annually receives $2,000 per month for office expenses. Effective August 1, 2011, Mr. Velletta’s compensation is to be paid in
Swiss francs at a conversion rate of $1.00 equaling CHF 1.00.
On September 22, 2011 we granted Mr. Velletta stock options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
$0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March
22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and September 22, 2013.
Compensation for Dr. Richard Schenz
On August 10, 2009 we entered into a consulting agreement with Dr. Richard Schenz. In return for acting as a member of our board of
directors, we have agreed to pay Dr. Schenz a fee of $5,000 per quarter starting the first day of the second quarter, and to grant stock
options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock, 500,000 at a price of $0.68 and 500,000 at a price of $0.79 per share, expiring
on November 21, 2018.
Effective June 1, 2011, our board of directors increased the annual compensation of Dr. Schenz from $20,000 to $21,000. Effective August
1, 2011, Dr. Schenz’s compensation was paid in Swiss francs at a conversion rate of $1.00 equaling CHF 1.00.
20
On September 22, 2011 we granted Dr. Schenz stock options to purchase 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of
$0.215 per share until September 22, 2021. The options vest in four equal installments over 24 months, with installments vesting on March
22, 2012, September 22, 2012, March 22, 2013 and September 22, 2013.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End of Named Executive Officers
The  following  table  sets  forth  for  each  named  executive  officer  certain  information  concerning  the  outstanding  equity  awards  as  of
December 31, 2011:
Option awards
Stock awards
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercise 
d Options 
Exercisable
214,676 
214,676 
Nil 
Nil
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised
Options
Unexercisable
285,324 
285,324 
1,000,000 
3,000,000
Option 
Exercise
Price
$0.520 
$0.650 
$0.215 
$0.215
Name and
Principal Position
Dr. Werner
Ladwein 
    President and 
Director
Peter-Mark Vogel 
   CEO
615,738 
Nil
384,262 
1,000,000
$0.700 
$0.215
Ari Muljana 
    CFO
356,409 
Nil
43,591 
1,000,000
$0.260 
$0.215
Equity
Incentive Plan
Equity 
Incentive
Market 
Value
of
Shares or 
Units of 
Stock 
that
Have Not
Vested
Awards : 
Number of 
Unearned 
Shares, 
Units or 
Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
Plan Awards:
Market or
Payout Value 
of Unearned 
Shares, Units
or Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
Number 
of Shares
or Units 
of Stock
that
Option Expiration
Have Not
Date
Vested
September 16,
2020   1)
September 16,
2020   1)
September 22,
2021   2)
November 1,
2021   3)
February 24, 2015
  4)
September 22,
2021   2)
April 28, 2012   5)
September 22,
2021  2)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Notes
 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with December 16, 2010.
Last vesting date is September 16, 2013.
These options vest in half-yearly installments equal to one-quarter of the total number of shares, beginning with March 22, 2012.
Last vesting date is September 22, 2013.
These options vest in half-yearly installments equal to one-quarter of the total number of shares, beginning with May 1, 2012. Last
vesting date is November 1, 2013.
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with May 24, 2010. Last
vesting date is February 24, 2013.
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with July 28, 2009. Last
vesting date is April 28, 2012.
Director Compensation
21
The following table sets forth for each director certain information concerning his compensation for the year ended December 31, 2011.
Name and
Fees 
Earned 
or Paid
Change in
Pension Value
and
Nonqualified
Deferred
Non-Equity
Stock
Option
Incentive Plan
Compensation
All Other
Principal 
Position
Heinz Scholz 
Chairman
Michael Velletta 
Director
Dr. Werner Ladwein 
Director
Dr. Richard Schenz 
Director
Notes
in Cash
($)
194,799
155,967
Awards1
Awards2
($)
Nil
Nil
($)
168,800
168,800
17,3065
356,8005
168,8005
22,139
Nil
168,800
Compensation
Earnings
Compensation
($)
($)
($)
Total
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
8,3223
371,921
25,2334
350,000
Nil
Nil
542,906
190,939
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
(4)
 
(5)
This amount represents the fair value of these shares at the grant date. The fair value of these shares was determined using the
market price at the date of grant ($0.21 per share).
 
These amounts represent the fair value of these options at the date of grant. The fair value of these options was determined using
the Black-Scholes option pricing model using a 5.62-year expected life of the option, a volatility factor of 109%, a risk- free rate
between 2.75% and no assumed dividend rate.
 
Payments for a leased car. Monthly income component corresponds to 0.8% of purchasing price in accordance with Swiss Tax law.
 
Allowance for office and administrative expenses.
 
He received in his role as Director $17,306 in cash as board compensation from January 1, 2011 to October 31, 2011, $356,800 in
stock awards and $168,800 in option awards.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End of Directors
Equity
Equity
Incentive Plan
Incentive Plan
Awards: 
Number of 
Unearned
Shares, Units
Awards: 
Market or
Payout Value 
of Unearned 
Shares, Units
or Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
or Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Number 
of Shares 
or Units 
of Stock 
that Have
Not 
Vested
Market 
Value of 
Shares or 
Units of 
Stock that 
Have Not
Vested
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Name and 
Principal 
Position
Heinz
Scholz 
Chairman
Michael
Velletta 
Director
Dr. Richard
Schenz 
Director
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised
Options
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying 
Unexercised
Options
Exercisable
1,750,000 
Nil
Unexercisable
- 
1,000,000
1,750,000 
Nil
- 
1,000,000
$0.700 
$0.215
398,101 
398,101 
Nil
101,899 
101,899 
1,000,000
$0.680 
$0.790 
$0.215
Option 
Exercise
Price
Option
Expiration
Date
$0.700 
$0.215
May 2, 2017(1)
September 22,
2021(2)
May 2, 2017(1)
September 22,
2021(2)
August 10,
2019(3)
August 10,
2019(3)
September 22,
2021(2)
22
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying
Number of 
Securities 
Underlying
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Awards: 
Number of 
Unearned
Shares,
Equity 
Incentive
Plan
Awards: 
Market or
Payout
Value
of Unearned
Number 
of Shares 
or Units 
of Stock
Market 
Value of 
Shares or 
Units of
Name
and
Principal
Position
Dr.
Werner
Ladwein 
President
and 
Director
Unexercised
Unexercised
Options
Options
Exercisable
Unexercisable
Option 
Exercise
Price
Option
Expiration
Date
that Have
Not 
Vested
Stock that 
Have Not
Vested
Units
or Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
Shares,
Units
or Other
Rights that 
Have Not
Vested
214,676 
214,676 
Nil 
Nil
285,324 
285,324 
1,000,000 
3,000,000
$0.520 
$0.650 
$0.215 
$0.215
September 16,
2020(4)
September 16,
2020(4)
September 22,
2021(2)
November 1,
2021(5)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with November 2, 2007.
Last vesting date was September 2, 2010.
 
These options vest in half-yearly installments equal to one-quarter of the total number of shares, beginning with March 22, 2012.
Last vesting date is September 22, 2013.
 
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with February 10, 2010.
Last vesting date is August 10, 2013.
 
These options vest in quarterly installments equal to one-twelfth of the total number of shares, beginning with March 16, 2011. Last
vesting date is September 16, 2014.
 
These options vest in half-yearly installments equal to one-quarter of the total number of shares, beginning with March 22, 2012.
Last vesting date is September 22, 2013.
Transactions with Related Persons
Other than as disclosed below, there has been no transaction, since January 1, 2010, or currently proposed transaction, in which our
company was or is to be a participant and the amount involved exceeds the lesser of $120,000 or one percent of the average of our total
assets at year end for the last two completed fiscal years, and in which any of the following persons had or will have a direct or indirect
material interest:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Any director or executive officer of our company;
Any beneficial owner of shares carrying more than 5% of the voting rights attached to our outstanding shares of common
stock;
Any  person  who  acquired  control  of  our  company  when  it was  a  shell  company  or  any  person  that  is  part  of  a  group,
consisting of two or more persons that agreed to act together for the purpose of acquiring, holding, voting or disposing of our
common stock, that acquired control of Manas Petroleum Corporation when it was a shell company; and
Any immediate family member (including spouse, parents, children, siblings and in-laws) of any of the foregoing persons.
On  April  10,  2007,  we  completed  the  transactions  contemplated  under  a  share  exchange  agreement  that  we  entered  into  with  DWM
Petroleum  AG,  a  Swiss  company,  and  the  shareholders  of  DWM  Petroleum  AG  on  November  23,  2006.  Under  this  share  exchange
agreement, the shareholders of DWM Petroleum AG received 80,000,000 shares of our common stock, equal to 79.9% of our outstanding
common stock at the time, in exchange for 100% of the shares of DWM Petroleum AG. The following table shows the number of shares of
our common stock received by our current or former officers, directors, and beneficial holders of more than 5% of our common stock, or
entities affiliated with them in exchange for the shares of DWM Petroleum AG owned by them.
Name
Alexander Becker
Heinz J. Scholz
Peter-Mark Vogel
Velletta Resources & Technology Corp.(1)
Neil Maedel
Yaroslav Bandurak
Rahul Sen Gupta
23
Number of Shares of Our 
Common Stock Received
Number of Shares of DWM 
Petroleum AG Exchanged
17,929,943
22,736,616
17,748,599
2,000,000
800,000
1,600,000
114,996
237,634
301,267
227,136
25,000
10,000
20,000
1,036
(1)
Velletta Resources & Technology is a company owned by Michael J. Velletta.
The share exchange agreement also requires us to issue an aggregate of up to an additional 500,000 shares of our common stock over
time to the former shareholders of DWM Petroleum AG for every 50 million barrels of P50 oil reserves net to us from exploration in the
Kyrgyz Republic, Albania and Tajikistan up to a maximum of 2.5 billion barrels of P50 oil reserves. At our option, this obligation can be
extended to additional properties that are acquired through the actions of the shareholders of DWM Petroleum AG. The following table
shows the number of shares of our common stock to be received by our current or former officers, directors, and beneficial holders of more
than 5% of our common stock, or entities affiliated with them.
Name
Alexander Becker
Heinz J. Scholz
Peter-Mark Vogel
Michael J. Velletta
Neil Maedel
Yaroslav Bandurak
Rahul Sen Gupta
Number of Shares of Our Common
Stock to be Received
118,817
150,634
113,550
12,500
5,000
10,000
518
As a condition to completion of the share exchange, the shareholders of DWM Petroleum AG. agreed to lock up the shares of our common
stock received by them at closing. Each affiliate of DWM Petroleum AG. entered into a lock up agreement restricting sales of his shares of
our common stock until April 10, 2010, provided that beginning December 10, 2008, he was to be permitted to sell up to 3% of the number
of shares of our common stock held by him in any three month period. Heinz Scholz, Alexander Becker, Michael J. Velletta, Neil Maedel,
Peter-Mark Vogel and Yaroslav Bandurak are our current or former officers and directors who were subject to the above mentioned lock up
agreements. On April 15, 2009, we agreed to waive all of the resale restrictions imposed by these lock up agreements. Resale of the
shares  of  our  stock  affected  by  these  agreements  continues  to  be  subject  to  any  resale  restrictions  imposed  by  law,  including  the
applicable securities laws.
On December 5, 2008, we entered into arrangements with Michael J. Velletta, Heinz J. Scholz, Alexander Becker and Peter-Mark Vogel
pursuant  to  which  they  lent  us  a  total  of  $540,646  ($16,043  from  Michael  J.  Velletta,  $217,769  from  Heinz  J.  Scholz,  $152,493  from
Alexander Becker, and $154,341 from Peter-Mark Vogel) in exchange for promissory notes. The promissory notes are for an indefinite
period of time. We can prepay the promissory notes at any time without notice, bonus or penalty and must repay the promissory notes upon
the earlier of the date that we raise $1,000,000 or more in debt or equity financings or the ninetieth day after we receive written notice from
the noteholder of a demand for repayment. No interest is due under the notes as long as we do not default on our obligations thereunder.
However, if we default on the repayment of the promissory note, we will be liable for interest accruing at a rate of 12% per annum on the
principal outstanding until we repay the promissory note in full. On May 1, 2009 we received $1,000,000 in financing. On March 9, 2010,
we have fully repaid the principal of $540,646 and a total interest accrued of $54,568.
24
On  September  26,  2010,  we  entered  into  a  share  placement/purchase  agreement  with  Alexander  Becker,  a  holder  of  approximately
14,290,493 shares of our common stock at the time. Mr. Becker has expressed an interest in selling all of his shares of our common stock
to a third party or back to our company. The share placement/purchase agreement provided that in the event any of Mr. Becker’s shares of
our common stock are not placed with buyers within 6 months from September 26, 2010, we would be obligated to purchase such shares
from Mr. Becker. As of February 17, 2011 all remaining shares of Mr. Becker have been placed with third party investors. Our exposure
resulting from the share placement/purchase agreement with Mr. Becker, therefore, is nil.
In March 2011, our executive officers and directors entered into lock-up agreements with our company and Raymond James Ltd. whereby
such  executive  officers  and  directors  agreed  not  to  sell,  assign,  convey  or  otherwise  dispose  of  any  of  shares  of  our  common  stock
beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, by them until 120 days after May 6, 2011, the closing date of our public offering in which we sold a
total of 44,450,500 units at a price of $0.50 per unit for aggregate gross proceeds of $22,225,250. In addition, on May 3, 2011 our executive
officers and directors entered into an escrow agreement with respect to securities of our company held by them in order to list the shares of
our common stock and common stock purchase warrants on the TSX Venture Exchange. These securities are subject to the following
release  schedule:  10%  of  the  securities  were  released  upon  the  date  of  issuance  of  the  final  exchange  bulletin  by  the  TSX  Venture
Exchange respecting the public offering of the units and listing on the TSX Venture Exchange (May 6, 2011) and an additional 15% of the
securities are to be released every 6 months thereafter.
Compensation for Our Executive Officers and Directors
Compensation for Erik Herlyn
On June 25, 2007, we entered into an employment and non-competition agreement with Erik Herlyn, pursuant to which Mr. Herlyn agreed
to serve as our Chief Operating Officer. In consideration for the services that Mr. Herlyn agreed to render pursuant to his employment
agreement, Mr. Herlyn was entitled to receive an annual base salary of $180,000 and options to purchase 400,000 shares of our common
stock at an exercise price of $5.50 (re-priced to $0.70 on February 24, 2010) per share pursuant to the 2007 Omnibus Plan. Effective May
1, 2008, Mr. Herlyn’s annual salary was raised to $210,000. Effective February 1, 2009, Mr. Herlyn agreed to reduce his compensation
from $20,000 per month to $18,000 per month. Effective March 1, 2010, Mr. Herlyn agreed to reduce his compensation to $17,232 per year.
This  salary  decrease  resulted  from  the  sale  of  our  Albanian  project  to  Petromanas  Energy  Inc.  in  exchange  for  cash  and  shares  of
Petromanas Energy Inc. and reflected our agreement that Mr. Herlyn would spend some of his time working for our company and some of
his time working for Petromanas Energy Inc. Effective April 1, 2010, we informally entered into a new compensatory arrangement with
respect to Mr. Herlyn. Effective April 1, 2010, Petromanas Energy Inc. has agreed to pay Mr. Herlyn an annual salary. We have agreed that
Petromanas Energy Inc. can invoice us for a portion of the salary that it pays to Mr. Herlyn, for services provided to us. Mr. Herlyn resigned
as our President, Chief Executive Officer and Secretary on July 15, 2010. Prior to his resignation, we carried 10% of Mr. Herlyn’s salary.
Effective July 31, 2010, our employment agreement and non-competition agreement with Mr. Herlyn, which was entered into on June 25,
2007, was terminated. In addition, Mr. Herlyn decided not to stand for re-election as a director at our annual meeting of stockholders on
September 16, 2010 and, as such, Mr. Herlyn is no longer a director of our company.
Compensation for Yaroslav Bandurak
On  April  1,  2007,  we  entered  into  an  employment  and  non-competition  agreement  with  Yaroslav  Bandurak,  pursuant  to  which  Mr.
Bandurak agreed to serve as our Chief Technical Officer. In consideration for the services that Mr. Bandurak agreed to render pursuant to
his employment agreement, Mr. Bandurak was entitled to receive an annual base salary of $63,000 and options to purchase 1,500,000
shares of our common stock at a price of $4.00 per share pursuant to the 2007 Omnibus Plan.
We  and  Mr.  Bandurak  have  agreed  to  amend  his  employment  agreement  to  reduce  his  salary  from  $10,000  per  month  to  $8,000  per
month, effective February 1, 2009.
On February 8, 2010, our board of directors approved changes to the terms of our employment of Mr. Bandurak. These changes are the
result  of  our  having  been  advised  by  Mr.  Bandurak  that,  on  a  going  forward  basis,  he  intends  to  spend  part  of  his  time  exploring  for,
developing  or  otherwise  having  an  interest  in  non-petroleum  resources  in  Mongolia.  Our  board  of  directors  has  confirmed  that  Mr.
Bandurak may do so provided that he continues to spend 50% or more of his time working for our company and that he accepts a 50%
reduction of the salary that we pay him.
25
On February 24, 2010, we re-priced 1,500,000 stock options originally granted to Mr. Bandurak on May 2, 2007 from an original exercise
price of $4.00 to $0.70.
Effective December 31, 2010, we decided to terminate our agreement for part-time services with Mr. Bandurak because we decided that
our operations in Mongolia require a full-time chief technical officer. We decided to reimburse Mr. Bandurak for his open expenses and pay
him three months of salary totalling $12,000. Effective December 31, 2010, we have removed Yaroslav Bandurak from any office held with
our company, including that of Chief Technical Officer.
Named Executive Officers and Current Directors
For information regarding compensation for our named executive officers and current directors, see “Executive Compensation”.
Ratification of the Appointment of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Proposal 2
Our board of directors is asking our stockholders to ratify the appointment of BDO Visura International AG as our independent registered
public accounting firm. Stockholder ratification of the appointment of BDO Visura International AG is required by the policies of the TSX
Venture Exchange. Even if the appointment is ratified, our board of directors in its discretion may direct the appointment of a different
independent registered public accounting firm at any time during the year if our board of directors determines that such a change would be
in the best interest of our company and our stockholders.
Representatives of BDO Visura International AG are not expected to be present at the annual and special meeting. However, we will
provide contact information for BDO Visura International AG to any stockholders who would like to contact the firm with questions.
Unless otherwise directed, the proxy holder will vote the proxies received by him for the ratification of the appointment of BDO Visura
International AG as our independent registered public accounting firm.
Our  board  of  directors  recommends  that  you  vote F OR the  ratification  of  the  appointment  of  BDO  Visura  International  AG  as  our
independent registered public accounting firm.
Fees Paid to Our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
BDO Visura International AG
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  fees  billed  to  our  company  for  professional  services  rendered  by  BDO  Visura  International  AG,  our
independent registered public accounting firm, for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010:
BDO Visura International AG Fees
Audit Fees
Audit-Related Fees
Tax-Fees
Other Fees
Total Fees
2011 
USD
202,169 
- 
135,853 
- 
338,022
2010 
USD
241,646 
- 
27,800 
- 
269,446
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures with respect to Services Performed by Independent Registered Public Accounting Firms
Before  BDO  Visura  International  AG  was  engaged  by  us  to  render  any  auditing  or  permitted  non-audit  related  service,  our  board  of
26
directors approved the engagement.
Our board of directors has considered the nature and amount of fees billed by BDO Visura International AG and believe that the provision
of services for activities unrelated to the audit was compatible with maintaining BDO Visura International AG’s independence.
Proposal 3
Approval of 2011 Stock Option Plan
Our board of directors is asking our stockholders to approve our 2011 stock option plan, which provides for granting of stock options to
acquire up to a maximum of 10% of the number of issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at the time of the grant. On June 7,
2011, our board of directors adopted our 2011 stock option plan.
Unless otherwise directed, the proxy holder will vote the proxies received by him for the approval of our 2011 stock option plan.
Our board of directors recommends that you vote FOR the approval of our 2011 stock option plan.
Description of Our 2011 Stock Option Plan
The following is a summary of the material features of our 2011 stock option plan. The full text of our 2011 stock option plan is attached to
this proxy statement as Schedule “A”.
Purpose
The purpose of our 2011 stock option plan is to advance the interests of our company by encouraging our directors, officers, employees
and consultants to acquire shares of our common stock, thereby increasing their proprietary interest in our company, encouraging them to
remain associated with our company and furnishing them with additional incentive in their efforts on behalf of our company in the conduct
of their affairs.
Shares Subject to Our 2011 Stock Option Plan
The shares of our common stock to be offered under our 2011 stock option plan are to consist of stock options to acquire up to a maximum
of 10% of the number of issued and outstanding shares of our common stock at the time of the grant. The aggregate number of shares of
our common stock to be delivered upon the exercise of all stock options granted under our 2011 stock option plan is not to exceed the
maximum number of shares of our common stock permitted under the rules of any stock exchange on which the shares of our common
stock are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction. If any stock option granted under our 2011 stock option plan expires or
terminates without having been exercised in full, the unpurchased shares of our common stock will again be available for the purpose of
our 2011 stock option plan.
Administration
Our 2011 stock option plan is to be administered by our board of directors or by a special committee of directors appointed by our board of
directors. Our board of directors, or if appointed our special committee of directors may designate bona fide directors, officers, employees
or consultants of our company or a subsidiary of our company, or a company that is wholly owned by a bona fide director, officer, employee
or consultant of our company or a subsidiary of our company to whom stock options to purchase shares of our common stock may be
granted and the number of shares of our common stock to be optioned to each, subject to the terms of our 2011 stock option plan.
27
As  of  June  30,  2012,  we  have  32  full  time  employees,  including  our  directors.  Although  we  do  not  expect  to  increase  our  number  of
employees over the next twelve months, we are not currently able to predict if new employees will be employed in the coming twelve
months. We outsource contract employment as needed and will continue to do so.
Number of Optioned Shares
The  number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  subject  to  stock  options  granted  to  an  optionee,  other  than  a  consultant  or  an  employee
conducting investor relations activities, must be determined by our board of directors or by a special committee of our board of directors, if
one has been appointed, but no optionee, where our company is listed on any stock exchange, must be granted stock options which cover
a number of shares of our common stock which exceed the maximum number of shares permitted under any stock exchange on which
shares of our common stock are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, which maximum number of shares is presently an
amount equal to 5% of the then issued and outstanding shares of our common stock (on a non-diluted basis) in any 12 month period
unless our company receives disinterested shareholder approval.
The maximum number of shares of our common stock subject to stock options that may be granted to an optionee who is a consultant is
presently limited to an amount equal to 2% of the then issued and outstanding shares of our common stock (on a non-diluted basis) in any
12 month period. The maximum number of shares of our common stock subject to stock options that may be granted to all persons in
aggregate who are employed to perform investor relations activities is presently limited to an amount equal to 2% of the then issued and
outstanding shares of our common stock (on a non-diluted basis) in any 12 month period and such stock options must vest in stages over a
12 month period with no more than 1/4 of the stock options vesting in any 3 month period. Other than the foregoing, our board of directors
or our special committee of the board of directors, if one has been appointed, subject to the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange, may
determine and impose terms upon which each stock option become vested.
Exercise Price
The exercise price of any stock options granted under our 2011 stock option plan must be determined by the our board of directors or a
special committee of our board of directors, if one is appointed, but may not be less than the price permitted by any stock exchange on
which shares of our common stock are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, which minimum exercise price is currently
not less than the discounted market price as defined by the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange. In addition, the minimum exercise price
of stock options granted to the optionees who are subject to tax in the United States must not be less than the fair market value of the
shares covered by such stock options on the date the stock options are granted. The minimum exercise price of shares of our common
stock covered by the stock options cannot be established unless the stock options are allocated to a particular optionee.
The exercise of any stock option is contingent upon our receipt of a written notice of exercise, accompanied by cash payment, certified
cheque or bank draft for the full purchase price of shares of our common stock with respect to which the stock option is exercised.
Option Period
The term of any stock options granted under our 2011 stock option plan must be determined by our board of directors, or by a special
committee of our board of directors, if one is appointed, at the time of grant but, subject to earlier termination in the event of cessation as a
director, officer, employee or consultant or in the event of death. The term of any stock options granted under our 2011 stock option plan
may not exceed the maximum period permitted by any stock exchange on which shares of our common stock are then listed or other
regulatory body having jurisdiction, which maximum period is presently 10 years from the date of grant.
If  an  optionee  who  is  a  director,  officer  employee  or  consultant  of  our  company  or  a  subsidiary  of  our  company  ceases  to  act  in  that
capacity (for a reason other than death), the optionee may, but only within 90 days (30 days for an optionee who is engaged in investor
relations activities on behalf of our company) after ceasing to be a director, officer, employee or consultant, exercise his stock options to
the extent he was entitled to exercise them at the date of such cessation.
In the event of the death of an optionee, the stock options previously granted to him are exercisable only within 12 months next succeeding
such death and then only by the person or persons to whom the optionee’s rights under the stock options pass by the optionee’s will or the
laws of descent and distribution and if and to the extent that he was entitled to exercise the stock options at the date of his death.
Transferability
28
The stock options are not transferable or assignable unless specifically provided in our 2011 stock option plan. During the lifetime of an
optionee, the stock options may only be exercised by the optionee.
Securities Regulation and Tax Withholding
The shares of our common stock will not be issued with respect to a stock option unless the exercise of such stock option and the issuance
and delivery of such shares comply with applicable securities laws and the rules of any applicable stock exchange and stock quotation
system.  The  optionee  must  pay  us  promptly  upon  exercise  of  a  stock  option  or,  if  later,  the  date  that  the  amount  of  such  obligations
becomes  determinable,  all  applicable  federal,  state,  local  and  foreign  withholding  taxes  resulting  upon  exercise  of  a  stock  option  or
otherwise related to a stock option or shares of our common stock acquired in connection with a stock option.
Amendment and Termination of Our 2011 Stock Option Plan
Our board of directors, or a special committee of our board of directors, if one has been appointed, may at any time terminate our 2011
stock option plan. Our board of directors may, subject to such approvals as may be required under the rules of any stock exchange on
which our common stock is then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, also at any time may amend or revise the terms of our
2011 stock option plan, provided that no such amendment or revision alters the terms of any stock options theretofore granted under our
2011 stock option plan.
Necessary Approvals
The ability of the stock options to be exercised and the obligation of our company to issue and deliver shares in accordance with our 2011
stock option plan is subject to any approvals which may be required from our stockholders, any regulatory authority or stock exchange
having jurisdiction over the securities of our company. So long as it remains a policy of the TSX Venture Exchange and shares of our
common stock are listed on the TSX Venture Exchange, we must obtain disinterested stockholder approval for:
1.
2.
(b)
(c)
our 2011 stock option plan, together with all of our previously established and outstanding stock option plans or grants, that
could result at any time in:
(a)
the  number  of  shares  reserved  for  issuance  under  stock options  granted  to  the  optionee  who  is  an  insider  of  our
company exceeding 10% of the issued shares;
the  grant  to  the  optionees  who  are  insiders  of  our company,  within  a  12  month  period,  of  a  number  of  options
exceeding 10% of the issued shares; or
the  issuance  to  any  one  optionee,  within  a  12  month period,  of  a  number  of  shares  exceeding  5%  of  the  issued
shares; or
any reduction in the exercise price of the stock option if the optionee is an insider of our company at the time of the proposed
amendment.
If any shares cannot be issued to the optionee for whatever reason, the obligation of our company to issue such shares must terminate and
any stock option exercise price paid to our company should be returned to the optionee.
Annual Approval of Our 2011 Stock Option Plan
So long as it remains a policy of the TSX Venture Exchange and shares of our common stock are listed on the TSX Venture Exchange,
our 2011 stock option plan must be annually approved by the TSX Venture Exchange and our stockholders.
Federal Income Tax Consequences
The following discussion is intended to be only a general description of the tax consequences of our 2011 stock option plan under the
provisions of U.S. federal income tax laws currently in effect and does not address any estate, gift, state, local or non-U.S. tax laws. U.S.
federal income tax laws are subject to change at any time, possibly with retroactive effect. This summary is not exhaustive of all possible
United  States  income  tax  consequences.  It  is  not  intended  as  legal  or  tax  advice  to  any  particular  optionee  and  should  not  be  so
construed.  The  tax  consequences  to  any  particular  optionee  will  vary  according  to  the  status  of  that  optionee  as  an  individual,  trust,
corporation or member of a partnership, the jurisdictions in which that optionee is subject to taxation and, generally, according to that
optionee’s particular circumstances. Each optionee should consult his or her own tax advisor with respect to the income tax consequences
applicable to such optionee’s own particular circumstances.
29
Stock options granted under the plan should not qualify as incentive stock options under U.S. tax law and as such should be taxed under
the rules applicable to nonqualified stock options. For stock options with an exercise price that is not less than the stock’s fair market value
on the grant date the optionee should generally recognize income on the date the stock option is exercised or sold. The amount realized
upon the exercise (typically the fair market value of the shares subject to the exercise minus the exercise price paid) or sale (cash or other
value received in exchange for the stock option) will be treated as compensation income for service providers subject to U.S. income
taxation.  Such  compensation  income  is  subject  to  applicable  withholding  rules  and  is  reportable  to  U.S.  taxpayers  and  the  Internal
Revenue Service on a Form W-2 if the optionee received the stock option on account of services rendered as an employee or on a Form
1099-MISC  if  the  stock  option  was  received  for  services  rendered  as  an  independent  contractor.  Special  rules  may  apply  in  certain
situations, such as where the optionee and the service provider are not the same person. Therefore, each optionee should seek U.S. tax
advice to determine the treatment of the transaction in his or her particular circumstances.
Compensation  for  services  rendered  by  nonresident  employees  or  nonresident  independent  contractors  should  not  be  subject  to  U.S.
withholding and/or reporting, provided the services are performed by the optionee outside of the United States and the appropriate Form
W-8 is submitted by the optionee to our company. However, if the services are provided by nonresident optionee within the United States,
the compensation income attributable to such services should be subject to U.S. taxation, absent a treaty or other exemption. We intend to
withhold U.S. tax on such income, unless the optionee provides an appropriate documentation on Form W-8 in support of the withholding
tax exemption. Such income is intended to be reported by us to the Internal Revenue Service and to the optionee on Form W-2 and/or
1042 (as appropriate).
A subsequent sale of shares acquired from the exercise of a compensatory stock option should be treated for U.S. tax purposes as gain or
loss on the disposition of a capital asset. The gain or loss on such sale will be the sales price less the amount paid to exercise the options
plus the amount of income recognized upon exercise.
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
The following table summarizes certain information regarding our equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2011:
Number of securities to 
be issued upon exercise 
of outstanding options,
warrants and rights
Weighted-average 
exercise price of
outstanding options, 
warrants and rights
Plan category
Equity compensation plans 
approved by security holders 
(2007 Revised Omnibus 
Stock Option Plan)
 
Equity compensation plans 
approved by security holders 
(2011 Stock Option Plan)
 
Equity compensation plans 
not approved by security 
holders
 
Total
(a)
9,250,000
9,600,000
Nil
18,850,000
(b)
$0.51
$0.21
Nil
$0.36
Number of securities 
remaining available for 
future issuance under 
equity compensation
plans (excluding
securities reflected in
column (a))
(c)
3,007,181
7,646,729
Nil
10,653,910
30
Proposal 4
Approval of Amendment of Our Articles of Incorporation to Change Our Company’s Name to MNP Petroleum Corporation.
Our  board  of  directors  is  asking  our  stockholders  to  approve  an  amendment  to  our  articles  to  change  our  company’s  name  to  MNP
Petroleum Corporation. On August 16, 2012, our board of directors proposed the amendment of our articles of incorporation to amend
Article I of our articles of incorporation to state substantially as follows:
The name of this corporation is MNP Petroleum Corporation.
This proposal is subject to the approval of the TSX Venture Exchange. Our stockholders will not be entitled to appraisal rights with respect
to this proposal.
Stockholders  will  not  be  required  to  surrender  or  exchange  certificates  representing  shares  of  our  common  stock  for  new  certificates
bearing the new corporate name. Following the effective date of the change of our company’s name, all new stock certificates issued by us
will bear the new corporate name.
Unless otherwise directed, the proxy holder will vote the proxies received by him for the approval of the amendment of our articles of
incorporation to change our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation.
Our  board  of  directors  recommends  that  you  vote FOR the  approval  of  the  amendment  of  our  articles  of  incorporation  to  change  our
company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation.
Effective Date of the Name Change
If the proposal to amend our articles of incorporation to change our company’s name to MNP Petroleum Corporation is approved by our
stockholders and the TSX Venture Exchange, we have to file a certificate of amendment with the Nevada Secretary of State to effect the
amendment of our articles of incorporation. If we obtain stockholder approval of this proposal, we intend to file the certificate as soon as
practicable.
Our board of directors reserves, notwithstanding stockholder approval of this proposal, the right not to proceed with the amendment of our
articles of incorporation to change our company’s name without further action by our stockholders at any time before the effective date of
the amendment of our articles of incorporation to change our company’s name.
Increase the Number of Authorized Shares of Our Common Stock from 300,000,000 to 600,000,000
Approval of Amendment of Our Articles of Incorporation to
Proposal 5
Our  board  of  directors  is  asking  our  stockholders  to  approve  amendment  to  our  articles  of  incorporation  to  increase  the  number  of
authorized  shares  of  our  common  stock  from  300,000,000  to  600,000,000.  On  August  16,  2012,  our  board  of  directors  proposed  the
amendment of our articles of incorporation to amend Article IV of our articles of incorporation to state substantially as follows:
The capital stock of this corporation shall consist of six hundred million shares of common stock (600,000,000), with a par value of $0.001
per share, all of which stock shall be entitled to voting power. The Corporation may issue the shares of stock for such consideration as may
be fixed by the Board of Directors.
This proposal is subject to the approval of the TSX Venture Exchange.
31
Our articles of incorporation currently provide for authorized capital stock consisting of 300,000,000 shares of common stock, par value
$0.001 per share. As of September 21, 2012, we had 172,592,292 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding. As of September
21, 2012, we have 15,950,000 stock options and 45,934,015 share purchase warrants outstanding.
Our board of directors believes that it is necessary and prudent to amend our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized
shares of our common stock from 300,000,000 to 600,000,000 to allow us to issue additional shares of our common stock for the purposes
described below, and for any other lawful purpose. We have no current intention or commitment to issue an amount of shares in excess of
the 600,000,000 shares currently authorized.
Unless otherwise directed, the proxy holder will vote the proxies received by him for the approval of the amendment of our articles of
incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock.
Our  board  of  directors  recommends  that  you  vote FOR the  approval  of  the  amendment  of  our  articles  of  incorporation  to  increase  the
number of authorized shares of our common stock.
Purpose and Effect of Increase in the Number of Authorized Shares of Our Common Stock
Our board of directors believes that an increase in the number of authorized shares of our common stock will provide us with the flexibility
to meet business needs as they arise, to take advantage of favorable opportunities and to respond to a changing corporate environment.
The increased reserve of shares available for issuance would give us the flexibility of using our common stock to raise capital and/or as
consideration in acquiring other businesses.
The increased reserve of shares available for issuance may also be used to facilitate public or private financings. If sufficient operating
funds cannot be generated by operations, we may need to, among other things, issue and sell our common stock, or securities convertible
into our common stock, in private transactions. Such transactions might not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. We may sell our
common stock at prices less than the public trading price of our common stock at the time, and we may grant additional contractual rights
to purchase our common stock not available to other holders of our common stock, such as warrants to purchase additional shares of our
common stock or anti-dilution protections. We have no plans or agreements in place for any financing at this time and have no intentions at
this time to issue any of the additional available authorized shares of our common stock for any financing if this proposal is approved.
We  are  continuously  seeking  opportunities  to  acquire  additional  oil  and  gas  properties  or  other  oil  and  gas  related  businesses.  Such
acquisitions may be effected using shares of our common stock or other securities convertible into our common stock and/or by using
capital that may need to be raised by selling such securities. The current number of available authorized shares of our common stock limits
our ability to effect acquisitions of oil and gas properties or other oil and gas related businesses using shares of our common stock or
issuing shares to raise capital to fund such acquisitions or for other purposes. We have no intentions, plans or agreements at this time to
issue any of the additional available authorized shares of our common stock to acquire an oil and gas property or other oil and gas related
business if this proposal is approved.
In addition, the increased reserve of shares available for issuance may be used for our equity incentive plans for grants to our directors,
officers,  employees  and  consultants,  and  those  of  our  subsidiaries.  Our  board  of  directors  believes  that  it  is  critical  to  incentivize  our
directors, officers, employees and consultants, and those of our subsidiaries through equity incentive awards. Such equity incentive plans
may also be used to attract and retain employees or in connection with potential acquisitions if we grant options to the employees of the
acquired companies. Our board of directors believes that our ability to achieve our growth strategy may be impaired without additional
authorized shares of our common stock that could be used to provide such equity incentives. We have no intentions, plans or agreements
at this time to issue any of the additional available authorized shares of our common stock under our equity incentive plans if this proposal
is approved.
32
The flexibility of our board of directors to issue additional shares of our common stock could also have an anti-takeover effect and enhance
our ability to negotiate on behalf of our stockholders in a takeover situation. The authorized but unissued shares of our common stock
could be used by our board of directors to discourage, delay or make more difficult a change in the control of our company. For example,
such  shares  could  be  privately  placed  with  purchasers  who  might  align  themselves  with  our  board  of  directors  in  opposing  a  hostile
takeover bid. The issuance of additional shares could serve to dilute the stock ownership of persons seeking to obtain control and thereby
increase the cost of acquiring a given percentage of the outstanding stock. Stockholders should therefore be aware that approval of this
proposal  could  facilitate  future  efforts  by  our  board  of  directors  to  deter  or  prevent  changes  in  control  of  our  company,  including
transactions in which our stockholders might otherwise receive a premium for their shares over then current market prices. The increase in
our authorized capital stock, however, is not being proposed in response to any effort of which we are aware to accumulate shares of our
common stock or to obtain control of us.
The  availability  of  additional  shares  of  our  common  stock  is  particularly  important  in  the  event  that  our  board  of  directors  needs  to
undertake any of the foregoing actions on an expedited basis and therefore needs to avoid the time (and expense) of seeking stockholder
approval in connection with the contemplated action. If this proposal is approved by our stockholders, our board of directors does not
intend to solicit further stockholder approval prior to the issuance of any additional shares of our common stock, except as may be required
by applicable laws or rules.
The possible future issuance of shares of equity securities consisting of our common stock or securities convertible into our common stock
could affect our current stockholders in a number of ways, including the following:
diluting the voting power of the current holders of our common stock;
diluting the market price of our common stock, to the extent that the shares of our common stock are issued and sold at prices below
current trading prices of our common stock, or if the issuance consists of equity securities convertible into our common stock, to the
extent that the securities provide for the conversion into our common stock at prices that could be below current trading prices of our
common stock;
diluting the earnings per share and book value per share of the outstanding shares of our common stock; and
making the payment of dividends on our common stock potentially more expensive.
We  have  no  intentions,  plans,  proposals  or  arrangements,  written  or  otherwise,  at  this  time  to  issue  any  of  the  additional  available
authorized shares of our common stock if this proposal is approved.
Effective Date of Increase in the Number of Authorized Shares of Our Common Stock
If the proposal to amend our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 300,000,000 to
600,000,000 is approved by our stockholders and the TSX Venture Exchange, we have to file a certificate of amendment with the Nevada
Secretary of State to effect the amendment of our articles of incorporation. If we obtain stockholder approval of this proposal, we intend to
file the certificate as soon as practicable.
Our board of directors reserves, notwithstanding stockholder approval of this proposal, the right not to proceed with the amendment of our
articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock without further action by our stockholders at any
time before the effective date of the amendment of our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common
stock.
Dissent Rights
Under our bylaws, our stockholders are entitled, after complying with certain requirements of our bylaws, to dissent from approval of the
proposal to amend our articles of incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock and to be paid the “fair
value” of their shares of our common stock, determined as of the close of business on the date before the proposal is approved. We will
require strict compliance with the procedures set out in our bylaws.
The following is intended as a brief summary of the material provisions of procedures required to be followed by a stockholder in order to
dissent from the proposal to amend our articles of incorporation:
33
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A dissenting stockholder must send to our company, at or before the annual and special meeting, a written objection to the
proposal. Failing to vote against the proposal will not constitute a waiver of the dissent rights, but voting against or failing to
vote for the proposal by itself does not constitute filing of the written objection. In addition, a dissenting stockholder must not
vote in favor of the proposal. A vote in favor of the proposal will constitute a waiver of the dissent rights in respects of the
shares of our common stock so voted and will nullify any previously filed written objection. Submission of a blank proxy will
constitute a vote in favor of the proposal since all signed proxies which contain no direction on voting are automatically voted
in favor of the proposals.
 
We must, within 10 days after our stockholders approve the proposal, send to each stockholder who has filed the written
objection a notice that the proposal has been approved. Such notice is not required to be sent to any stockholder who voted
for the proposal or who has withdrawn their objection.
 
A  dissenting  stockholder  must,  within  20  days  after receiving  our  notice  of  approval  of  the  proposal  or,  if  the  dissenting
stockholder does not receive such notice, within 20 days after learning that the proposal has been approved, send to our
company a written notice containing:
 
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
A dissenting stockholder may only claim the dissent rights with respect to all the shares of our common stock held on behalf
of any beneficial owner and registered in the name of the dissenting stockholder.
 
A  dissenting  stockholder  must,  within  30  days  after sending  a  notice  demanding  payment,  send  the  share  certificate(s)
representing the shares in respect of which the stockholder dissents to our company or our transfer agent.
 
We must, not later than 7 days after the later of (i) the day on which the amendment of our articles of incorporation is effective
or (ii) the day we receive the notice demanding payment, send to each dissenting stockholder who has sent such notice:
 
(d)
the stockholder’s name and address;
 
the number and class of shares in respect of which the stockholder dissents; and
 
a demand for payment of the fair value of such shares.
a written offer to pay for their shares in an amount considered by our board of directors to be fair value, accompanied
by a statement showing how the fair value was determined; or
 
a notification that we are unable lawfully to pay dissenting stockholders for their shares (as described below).
(e)
 
If we are able lawfully to pay dissenting stockholders for their shares, we must pay for the shares of a dissenting stockholder
within 10 days after our offer has been accepted, but any such offer lapses if we do not receive an acceptance within 30 days
after the offer has been made.
 
If we failed to make an offer described above, or if a dissenting stockholder fails to accept our offer, we may, within 50 days
after the amendment of our articles of incorporation is effective or within such further period as a court may allow, apply to a
court to fix a fair value for the shares of any dissenting stockholder. If we fail to apply to a court in this case, a dissenting
stockholder may apply to a court for the same purpose within a further period of 20 days or within such further period as a
court may allow.
We must not make a payment to a dissenting stockholder if such payment is prohibited by any applicable law or if there are reasonable
grounds for believing that:
1.
 
2.
we are or would after the payment be unable to pay our liabilities as they become due; or
 
the realizable value of our assets would thereby be less than the aggregate of our liabilities.
34
On sending a notice demanding payment, a dissenting stockholder ceases to have any rights as a stockholder other than the right to be
paid the fair value of their shares except where:
1.
 
2.
 
3.
the dissenting stockholder withdraws that notice before we make an offer to pay for their shares;
 
we fail to make an offer to pay for their shares and the stockholder withdraws the notice; or
 
our directors revoke or do not proceed with the amendment of our articles of incorporation, in which case the stockholder’s
rights are reinstated as of the date the notice is sent.
If you hold your shares of our common stock in a brokerage account or in other nominee form and you wish to exercise dissent rights, you
should consult with your broker or the other nominee to determine the appropriate procedures for the making of a demand for payment by
the broker or other nominee.
Interest of Certain Persons in Matters to be Acted Upon
No director, executive officer, or nominee for election as a director of our company and no associate of any of the foregoing persons has
any  substantial  interest,  direct  or  indirect,  by  security  holding  or  otherwise,  in  any  matter  to  be  acted  upon  at  the  annual  and  special
meeting other than elections of directors and approval of the 2011 stock option plan.
“Householding” of Proxy Materials
The Securities and Exchange Commission permits companies and intermediaries such as brokers to satisfy the delivery requirements for
proxy statements or annual reports with respect to two or more stockholders sharing the same address by delivering a single copy of the
proxy  statement  or  annual  report,  as  applicable,  addressed  to  those  stockholders.  This  process,  which  is  commonly  referred  to  as
“householding”, potentially provides extra conveniences for stockholders and cost savings for companies.
Although we do not intend to household for our stockholders of record, some brokers household our proxy materials and annual reports,
delivering a single copy of proxy statement or annual report to multiple stockholders sharing an address unless contrary instructions have
been received from the affected stockholders. Once you have received notice from your broker that it will be householding materials to
your address, householding will continue until you are notified otherwise or until you revoke your consent. If, at any time, you no longer
wish to participate in householding and would prefer to receive a separate copy of proxy statement or annual report, or if you are receiving
multiple copies of either document and wish to receive only one, please notify your broker. Stockholders who currently receive multiple
copies  of  the  proxy  statement  or  annual  report  at  their  address  from  their  brokers  and  would  like  to  request  “householding”  of  their
communications should contact their brokers.
Stockholder Proposals
Stockholder  proposals  to  be  considered  for  inclusion  in  the  proxy  statement  and  form  of  proxy  relating  to  our  next  annual  meeting  of
stockholders must be received no later than May 27, 2013. If we change the date of our next annual meeting of stockholders by more than
30 days from the date of this year’s annual and special meeting of stockholders, then the deadline is a reasonable time before we begin to
print  and  send  our  proxy  materials.  All  such  proposals  must  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Rule  14a-8  of  Regulation  14A  of  the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which sets forth specific requirements and limitations applicable to nominations and proposals at annual
meetings of stockholders.
All stockholder proposals, notices and requests should be made in writing and sent via registered, certified or express mail to Manas
Petroleum Corporation, Bahnhofstrasse 9, P.O. Box 155, CH-6341 Baar, Switzerland, Attention: Chairman of the Board of Directors.
35
Where You Can Find More Information
We file annual and other reports, proxy statements and other information with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and
certain Canadian securities regulatory authorities. The documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission are available to the
public  from  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission’s  website  at  www.sec.gov.  The  documents  filed  with  the  Canadian  securities
regulatory authorities are available at www.sedar.com.
Other Matters
Our board of directors does not intend to bring any other business before the annual and special meeting, and so far as is known to our
board of directors, no matters are to be brought before the annual and special meeting except as specified in the notice of the annual and
special meeting. If any other matters are properly brought before the annual and special meeting, it is the intention of the person named on
the proxy to vote the shares represented by the proxy on such matters in accordance with his judgment.
By Order of the Board of Directors
/s/ Dr. Werner Ladwein
Dr. Werner Ladwein
President
 
September 24, 2012
SCHEDULE “A”
2011 STOCK OPTION PLAN
A-2
MANAS PETROLEUM CORPORATION
2011 STOCK OPTION PLAN
1.           PURPOSE
The purpose of the Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”) of Manas Petroleum Corporation, a corporation incorporated under the laws of
the State of Nevada (the “Company”), is to advance the interests of the Company by encouraging the directors, officers, employees and
consultants of the Company to acquire shares in the Company, thereby increasing their proprietary interest in the Company, encouraging
them to remain associated with the Company and furnishing them with additional incentive in their efforts on behalf of the Company in the
conduct of their affairs.
2.           ADMINISTRATION AND GRANTING OF OPTIONS
The Plan shall be administered by the Board of Directors of the Company or, if appointed, by a special committee of directors
appointed from time to time by the Board of Directors of the Company, subject to approval by the Board of Directors of the Company (such
committee or, if no such committee is appointed, the Board of Directors of the Company, is hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”)
pursuant to rules of procedure fixed by the Board of Directors.
The Committee may from time to time designate bona fide directors, officers, employees or consultants of the Company or a
subsidiary of the Company, or a company that is wholly owned by a bona fide director, officer, employee or consultant of the Company or a
subsidiary of the Company (the “Participants”) to whom options to purchase common shares of the Company (each, an “Option”) may be
granted and the number of common shares to be optioned to each, provided that the total number of common shares to be optioned shall
not exceed the number provided in Clauses 3 and 4 hereof. The Company shall ensure that Participants who are granted Options will be
bona fide directors, officers, employees or consultants of the Company at the time of grant.
The Plan will at all times be subject to all legal requirements relating to the administration of stock option plans, if any, under
applicable securities laws and the rules of any applicable stock exchange or stock quotation system (the “Applicable Laws”).
3.           SHARES SUBJECT TO PLAN
Subject to adjustment as provided in Clause 12 hereof, the shares to be offered under the Plan shall consist of Options to acquire
up to a maximum of 10% of the number of issued and outstanding common shares in the Company’s capital stock at the time of the grant.
The aggregate number of shares to be delivered upon the exercise of all Options granted under the Plan shall not exceed the maximum
number of shares permitted under the rules of any stock exchange on which the common shares are then listed or other regulatory body
having jurisdiction. If any Option granted hereunder shall expire or terminate for any reason without having been exercised in full, the
unpurchased shares subject thereto shall again be available for the purpose of this Plan.
4.           NUMBER OF OPTIONED SHARES
The number of shares subject to an Option to a Participant, other than a Consultant (as defined in the policies of the TSX Venture
Exchange (the “Exchange”)) and an Employee (as defined in the policies of the Exchange) conducting Investor Relations Activities (as
defined in the policies of the Exchange) shall be determined by the Committee, but no Participant, where the Company is listed on any
stock exchange, shall be granted an Option which exceeds the maximum number of shares permitted under any stock exchange on which
the common shares are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, which maximum number of shares is presently an amount
equal  to  5%  of  the  then  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  the  Company  (on  a  non-diluted  basis)  in  any  12  month  period  unless  the
Company receives disinterested shareholder approval.
A-3
The maximum number of shares subject to an Option to a Participant who is a Consultant is presently limited to an amount equal to
2% of the then issued and outstanding shares of the Company (on a non-diluted basis) in any 12 month period.
The maximum number of shares subject to Options to all persons in aggregate who are employed to perform Investor Relations
Activities is presently limited to an amount equal to 2% of the then issued and outstanding shares of the Company (on a non-diluted basis)
in any 12 month period and such Options must vest in stages over a 12 month period with no more than 1/4 of the Options vesting in any 3
month period.
Other than the foregoing, the Committee, subject to the policies of the Exchange, may determine and impose terms upon which
each Option shall become vested.
5.           MAINTENANCE OF SUFFICIENT CAPITAL
The Company shall at times during the term of the Plan reserve and keep available such numbers of shares as will be sufficient to
satisfy the requirements of the Plan.
6.           PARTICIPATION
The Committee shall determine to whom Options shall be granted, the terms and provisions of the respective option agreements,
the time or times at which such Options shall be granted and the number of shares to be subject to each Option. An individual who has
been granted an Option may, if the individual is otherwise eligible, and if permitted by any stock exchange on which the common shares
are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction, be granted an additional Option or Options if the Committee shall so determine.
7.           EXERCISE PRICE
The exercise price of the shares covered by each Option shall be determined by the Committee. The exercise price shall not be
less  than  the  price  permitted  by  any  stock  exchange  on  which  the  common  shares  are  then  listed  or  other  regulatory  body  having
jurisdiction.  Currently,  the  minimum  exercise  price  as  determined  by  the  Exchange  is  not  less  than  the  Discounted  Market  Price  (as
defined by the Exchange). In addition, the minimum exercise price of Options granted to the Participants who are subject to tax in the
United States shall not be less than the fair market value of the shares covered by such Options on the date the Options are granted. The
minimum exercise price cannot be established unless the Options are allocated to a particular Participant.
8.           DURATION OF OPERATION
Each Option and all rights thereunder shall be expressed to expire on the date set out in the option agreements and shall be
subject to earlier termination as provided in Clauses 10 and 11.
9.           OPTION PERIOD, CONSIDERATION AND PAYMENT
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The option period (the “Option Period”) shall be a period of time fixed by the Committee, not to exceed the maximum period
permitted by any stock exchange on which the common shares are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction,
which maximum period is presently ten (10) years from the date the Option is granted, provided that the Option Period shall
be reduced with respect to any Option as provided in Clauses 10 and 11 covering cessation as a director, officer, employee
or consultant of the Company or a subsidiary of the Company or death of the Participant.
 
Except as set forth in Clauses 10 and 11, no Option may be exercised unless the Participant is, at the time of such exercise,
a director, officer, employee or consultant of the Company or a subsidiary of the Company.
A-4
The exercise of any Option will be contingent upon receipt by the Company at its head office of a written notice of exercise,
specifying the number of shares with respect to which the Option is being exercised, accompanied by cash payment, certified
cheque or bank draft for the full purchase price of such shares with respect to which the Option is exercised. No Participant or
his legal representatives, legatees or distributees will be, or will be deemed to be, a holder of any shares subject to an Option
under this Plan unless and until the certificates for such shares are issued to such persons under the terms of the Plan.
 
For greater certainty, an Option that had not become vested at the time that the relevant event referred to in Clause 10 or 11
occurred, shall not be or become vested or exercisable and shall be cancelled.
10.           CEASING TO BE A DIRECTOR, OFFICER, EMPLOYEE OR CONSULTANT
If a Participant shall cease to be a director, officer, employee or consultant, as the case may be, of the Company or a subsidiary of
the Company for any reason (other than death), he may, but only within 90 days after his ceasing to be a director, officer, employee or
consultant, exercise his Option to the extent that he was entitled to exercise it at the date of such cessation provided that, in the case of a
Participant  who  is  engaged  in  Investor  Relations  Activity  (as  that  term  is  defined  in  the  policies  of  the  Exchange)  on  behalf  of  the
Company, this 90 day period referenced herein shall be shortened to 30 days.
Nothing contained in the Plan, nor in any Option granted pursuant to the Plan, shall as such confer upon any Participant any right
with respect to continuance as a director, officer, employee or consultant of the Company or of any affiliate.
11.           DEATH OF A PARTICIPANT
In the event of the death of a Participant, the Option previously granted to him shall be exercisable only within the 12 months next
succeeding such death and then only:
(a)
(b)
by the person or persons to whom the Participant’s rights under the Option shall pass by the Participant’s will or the laws of
descent and distribution; and
 
if and to the extent that he was entitled to exercise the Option at the date of his death.
12.           ADJUSTMENTS
Appropriate and proportional adjustments in the exercise price of the Options and in the number of Options granted or to be
granted may be made by the Committee in its discretion to give effect to adjustments in the number of common shares of the Company
resulting from subdivisions, consolidations or reclassification of the common shares of the Company, the payment of stock dividends by
the Company or other relevant changes in the capital of the Company.
13.           TRANSFERABILITY
All benefits, rights and Options accruing to the Participant in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Plan shall not be
transferable or assignable unless specifically provided herein. During the lifetime of a Participant any benefits, rights and Options may only
be exercised by the Participant.
14.           SECURITIES REGULATION AND TAX WITHHOLDING
Common shares of the Company will not be issued with respect to an Option unless the exercise of such Option and the issuance
and delivery of such shares comply with all Applicable Laws. The inability of the Company to obtain from any regulatory body the authority
or approval deemed by the Company to be necessary for the lawful issuance and sale of any Options or shares under the Plan, or the
unavailability  of  an  exemption  from  registration  for  the  issuance  and  sale  of  any  Options  or  shares  under  the  Plan,  will  relieve  the
Company of any liability with respect to the non-issuance or sale of such Options or shares.
A-5
As a condition to the exercise of an Option, the Committee may require the Participant to represent and warrant in writing at the
time of such exercise that the shares are being purchased only for investment and without any then-present intention to sell or distribute
such shares. At the option of the Committee, a stop-transfer order against such shares may be placed on the stock books and records of
the Company, and a legend indicating that the stock may not be pledged, sold or otherwise transferred unless an opinion of counsel is
provided stating that such transfer is not in violation of any applicable law or regulation, may be stamped on the certificates representing
such shares in order to assure an exemption from registration. The Committee may also require such other documentation as may from
time to time be necessary  to  comply  with  applicable  securities  laws. The Company has no obligation to undertake registration of
Options or the common shares of the Company issuable upon the exercise of the Options.
The Participant shall pay the Company by cash payment, certified cheque or bank draft, promptly upon exercise of an Option or, if
later, the date that the amount of such obligations becomes determinable, all applicable federal, state, local and foreign withholding taxes
that the Committee, in its discretion, determines to result upon exercise of an Option or from a transfer or other disposition of common
shares of the Company acquired upon exercise of an Option or otherwise related to an Option or common shares of the Company acquired
in connection with an Option. Upon approval of the Committee, a Participant may satisfy such obligations by complying with any other
payment mechanism approved by the Committee from time to time.
The issuance, transfer or delivery of certificates of common shares of the Company pursuant to the exercise of Options may be
delayed, at the discretion of the Committee, until the Committee is satisfied that the requirements of the applicable securities laws and the
withholding provisions under Applicable Laws have been met and that the Participant has paid or otherwise satisfied any withholding tax
obligation as described above.
15.           HOLD PERIOD
Share certificates issued on exercise of an Option shall be legended in all cases as may be required by applicable securities laws
and the rules of the Exchange.
16.           AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION OF PLAN
The Committee may, at any time, suspend or terminate the Plan. The Board of Directors may, subject to such approvals as may be
required under the rules of any stock exchange on which the common shares are then listed or other regulatory body having jurisdiction,
also at any time amend or revise the terms of the Plan, PROVIDED that no such amendment or revision shall alter the terms of any Options
theretofore granted under the Plan.
17.           NECESSARY APPROVALS
The ability of the Options to be exercised and the obligation of the Company to issue and deliver shares in accordance with the
Plan is subject to any approvals which may be required from the shareholders of the Company, any regulatory authority or stock exchange
having jurisdiction over the securities of the Company. So long as it remains a policy of the Exchange and the common shares of the
Company are listed on the Exchange, the Company shall obtain disinterested shareholder approval for:
(a)
the Plan, together with all of the Company’s previously established and outstanding stock option plans or grants, that could
result at any time in:
 
(i)
the number of shares reserved for issuance under stock options granted to the Participant who is an insider of the
Company exceeding 10% of the issued shares;
A-6
(b)
(ii)
(iii)
the  grant  to  the  Participants  who  are  insiders  of  the Company,  within  a  12  month  period,  of  a  number  of  options
exceeding 10% of the issued shares; or
 
the issuance to any one Participant, within a 12 month period, of a number of shares exceeding 5% of the issued
shares; or
any reduction in the exercise price of the Option if the Participant is an insider of the Company at the time of the proposed
amendment.
If any shares cannot be issued to the Participant for whatever reason, the obligation of the Company to issue such shares shall
terminate and any Option exercise price paid to the Company will be returned to the Participant.
18.           EFFECTIVE DATE OF PLAN
The Plan has been adopted by the Board of Directors and shall become effective upon the later of (i) the date of first approval of
the Plan by the shareholders of the Company and (ii) the date of first approval of the Plan by the Exchange. So long as it remains a policy
of  the  Exchange  and  the  common  shares  of  the  Company  are  listed  on  the  Exchange,  the  Plan  must  be  annually  approved  by  the
Exchange and the shareholders of the Company.
Effective Date: September 22, 2011.
SCHEDULE “B”
AUDIT COMMITTEE CHARTER
B-2
Audit Committee Charter
Mandate
The primary function of the audit committee (the “Committee”) is to assist the Board of Directors (“Board”) in fulfilling its financial oversight
responsibilities  by  reviewing  the  financial  reports  and  other  financial  information  provided  by  Manas  Petroleum  Corporation  (the
“Company”) to regulatory authorities and shareholders, the Company’s systems of internal controls regarding finance and accounting and
the Company’s auditing, accounting and financial reporting processes. The Committee’s primary duties and responsibilities are to:
serve as an independent and objective party to monitor the Company’s financial reporting and internal control system and review the
Company’s financial statements;
review and appraise the performance of the Company’s external auditor; and
provide an open avenue of communication among the Company’s auditor, financial and senior management and the Board.
Composition
The Committee shall be comprised of at least three directors as determined by the Board, all of whom shall be “independent” directors
except  as  permitted  by  applicable  securities  regulatory  guidelines  (including  applicable  exemptions  while  the  Company  is  a  “venture
issuer” within the meaning of applicable securities legislation). A  quorum  of  the  Committee  shall  be  a  majority  of  the  members.  Each
member of the Committee will be a member of the Board. In the event of an equality of votes, the Chair of the Committee shall not have a
second casting vote.
The members of the Committee shall be elected by the Board at its first meeting following the annual shareholders’ meeting. Unless a
Chair is elected by the Board, the members of the Committee may designate a Chair by a majority vote of the full Committee membership.
Meetings
The Committee shall meet a least four times annually, or more frequently as circumstances dictate or as may be prescribed by securities
regulatory requirements. As part of its job to foster open communication, the Committee will meet at least annually with the Chief Financial
Officer and the external auditor in separate sessions.
Responsibilities and Duties
To fulfill its responsibilities and duties, the Committee shall:
1.
Documents/Reports
 
(a)
 
(b)
review and update, if applicable or necessary, this Audit Committee Charter annually;
 
review  with  management  and  the  independent  auditor  the Company’s  annual  and  interim  financial  statements,
management’s discussion and analysis, any annual and interim earnings press releases and any reports or other financial
information  to  be  submitted  to  any  governmental and/or  regulatory  body,  or  the  public,  including  any  certification, report,
External Auditor
 
(a)
2.
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
 
(g)
(h)
(i)
 
(j)
opinion, or review rendered by the external auditor for the purpose of recommending their approval to the Board prior to their
filing, issue or publication. The Chair of the Committee may represent the entire Committee for purposes of this review in
circumstances where time does not allow the full Committee to be available;
 
review analyses prepared by management and/or the external auditor setting forth significant financial reporting issues and
judgements  made  in  connection  with  the  preparation  of  the  financial statements,  including  analyses  of  the  effects  of
alternative GAAP methods on the financial statements;
 
review the effect of regulatory and accounting initiatives, as well as off balance sheet structures, on the financial statements
of the Company;
B-3
review policies and procedures with respect to directors’ and officers’ expense accounts and management perquisites and
benefits, including their use of corporate assets and expenditures related to executive travel and entertainment, and review
the results of the procedures performed in these areas by the external auditor, based on the terms of reference agreed upon
by the external auditor and the Committee; and
 
ensure  that  adequate  procedures  are  in  place  for  the review  of  the  Company’s  public  disclosure  of  financial  information
extracted  or  derived  from  the  Company’s  financial  statements,  as  well  as review  any  financial  information  and  earnings
guidance provided to analysts and rating agencies, and periodically assess the adequacy of those procedures.
review annually, the performance of the external auditor who shall be ultimately accountable to the Board and the Committee
as representatives of the shareholders of the Company;
 
obtain annually, a formal written statement of the external auditor setting forth all relationships between the external auditor
and the Company;
 
review  and  discuss  with  the  external  auditor  any disclosed  relationships  or  services  that  may  have  an  impact  on  the
objectivity and independence of the external auditor;
 
take, or recommend that the Board take, appropriate action to oversee the independence of the external auditor, including the
resolution of disagreements between management and the external auditor regarding financial reporting;
 
recommend to the Board the selection and, where applicable, the replacement of the external auditor nominated annually for
shareholder approval;
 
recommend to the Board the compensation to be paid to the external auditor;
 
at each meeting, where desired, consult with the external auditor, without the presence of management, about the quality of
the Company’s  accounting  principles,  internal  controls  and  the  completeness and  accuracy  of  the  Company’s  financial
statements;
 
review and approve the Company’s hiring policies regarding partners, employees and former partners and employees of the
present and former external auditor of the Company;
 
review with management and the external auditor the audit plan for the year-end financial statements; and
 
review and pre-approve all audit and audit-related services and the fees and other compensation related thereto, and any
non-audit  services,  provided  by  the  Company’s  external  auditor.  The authority to pre-approve non-audit services may be
delegated by the Committee to one or more independent members of the Committee, provided that such pre-approval must
be presented to the Committee’s first scheduled meeting following such pre-approval. Pre-approval of non-audit services is
satisfied if:
 
(i)
the aggregate amount of all the non-audit services that were not pre-approved is reasonably expected to constitute no
more than 5% of the total amount of fees paid by the Company and subsidiaries to the Company’s external auditor
during the fiscal year in which the services are provided;
 
the Company or a subsidiary did not recognize the services as non-audit services at the time of the engagement; and
 
the services are promptly brought to the attention of the Committee and approved, prior to completion of the audit, by
the Committee or by one or more of its members to whom authority to grant such approvals has been delegated by the
Committee.
(ii)
 
(iii)
Financial Reporting Processes
 
(a)
B-4
3.
4.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
 
(i)
 
(j)
(k)
Other
 
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
in consultation with the external auditor, review with management the integrity of the Company’s financial reporting process,
both internal and external;
 
consider the external auditor’s judgments about the quality and appropriateness of the Company’s accounting principles as
applied in its financial reporting;
 
consider  and  approve,  if  appropriate,  changes  to  the Company’s  auditing  and  accounting  principles  and  practices  as
suggested by the external auditor and management;
 
review significant judgments made by management in the preparation of the financial statements and the view of the external
auditor as to appropriateness of such judgments;
 
following  completion  of  the  annual  audit,  review separately  with  management  and  the  external  auditor  any  significant
difficulties encountered during the course of the audit, including any restrictions on the scope of work or access to required
information;
 
review any significant disagreement among management and the external auditor in connection with the preparation of the
financial statements;
 
review with the external auditor and management the extent to which changes and improvements in financial or accounting
practices have been implemented;
 
review any complaints or concerns about any questionable accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing matters;
 
review certification process;
 
establish a procedure for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints received by the Company regarding accounting,
internal accounting controls or auditing matters; and
 
establish  a  procedure  for  the  confidential,  anonymous submission  by  employees  of  the  Company  of  concerns  regarding
questionable accounting or auditing matters.
review any material related party transactions;
 
engage independent counsel and other advisors as it determines necessary to carry out its duties; and
 
to set and pay compensation for any independent counsel and other advisors employed by the Committee.