
EX-99.26 27 a12-11867_1ex99d26.htm EX-99.26
Exhibit 99.26
SANDSTORM GOLD LTD. Security Class
Holder Account Number Voting Instruction
Form ("VIF") - Annual and Special Meeting
to be held on Tuesday, May 10, 2011 NON-
REGISTERED (BENEFICIAL)
SHAREHOLDERS 1. We are sending to you
the enclosed proxy-related materials that
relate to a meeting of the holders of the
series or class of securities that are held on
your behalf by the intermediary identified
above. Unless you attend the meeting and
vote in person, your securities can be voted
only by Management, as proxyholder of the
registered holder, in accordance with your
instructions. 2. We are prohibited from voting
these securities on any of the matters to be
acted upon at the meeting without your
specific voting instructions. In order for these
securities to be voted at the meeting, it will
be necessary for us to have your specific
voting instructions. Please complete and
return the information requested in this VIF
to provide your voting instructions to us
promptly. 3. If you wish to attend the
meeting in person or appoint some other
person or company, who need not be a
shareholder, to attend and act on your
behalf at the meeting or any adjournment or
postponement thereof, please insert your
name(s) or the name of your chosen
appointee in the space provided (please
see reverse). 4. This VIF should be signed
by you in the exact manner as your name
appears on the VIF. If these voting
instructions are given on behalf of a body
corporate set out the full legal name of the
body corporate, the name and position of
the person giving voting instructions on
behalf of the body corporate and the
address for service of the body corporate. 5.
If this VIF is not dated, it will be deemed to
bear the date on which it is mailed by
Management to you. 6. When properly
signed and delivered, securities represented
by this VIF will be voted as directed by you,
however, if such a direction is not made in
respect of any matter, the VIF will direct the
voting of the securities to be made as
recommended in the documentation
provided by Management for the meeting. 7.
This VIF confers discretionary authority on
the appointee to vote as the appointee
sees fit in respect of amendments or
variations to matters identified in the Notice
of Meeting or other matters as may properly
come before the meeting or any
adjournment or postponement thereof. 8.
Should you wish to receive a legal form of
proxy, please write to Computershare at the
address indicated above and one will be
sent to you by mail. Please remember that a
legal proxy is subject to all terms and
conditions that apply to proxies as outlined
in the documentation provided by
Management including any cut-off time for
receipt. 9. Your voting instructions will be
recorded on receipt of the VIF and a legal
form of proxy will be submitted on your
behalf. 10. By providing voting instructions
as requested, you are acknowledging that
you are the beneficial owner of, and are
entitled to instruct us with respect to the
voting of, these securities. 11. If you have
any questions regarding the enclosed
documents, please contact the Registered
Representative who services your account.
12. This VIF should be read in conjunction
with the accompanying documentation
provided by Management. VIFs submitted
must be received by 10:00 a.m., Pacific
Daylight Savings Time, on Friday, May 6,
2011. VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR
INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A
WEEK! To Vote Using the Telephone • Call
the number listed BELOW from a touch tone
telephone. 1-866-734-VOTE (8683) Toll
Free To Vote Using the Internet • Go to the
following web site: www.investorvote.com If
you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO
NOT mail back this VIF. Voting by mail may
be the only method for securities held in the
name of a corporation or securities being
name of a corporation or securities being
voted on behalf of another individual. Voting
by mail or by Internet are the only methods
by which a holder may choose an appointee
other than the Management appointees
named on the reverse of this VIF. Instead of
mailing this VIF, you may choose one of the
two voting methods outlined above to vote
this VIF. To vote by telephone or the
Internet, you will need to provide your
CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER - Fold - Fold
10MA11057.nobo.E.sedar/000001/000001/i
- Fold - Fold Appointee(s)
Management Appointees are:
Nolan Watson, or failing him, David
Awram, or failing him, David E. De
Witt, OR If you wish to attend in
person or appoint someone else to
attend on your behalf, print your
name or the name of your
appointee in this space (see Note
#3 on reverse). as my/our
appointee to attend, act and to
vote in accordance with the
following direction (or if no
directions have been given, as the
appointee sees fit) and all other
matters that may properly come
before the Annual and Special
Meeting of shareholders of
Sandstorm Gold Ltd. to be held in
the Connaught Room at the
Metropolitan Hotel, 645 Howe
Street, Vancouver, BC, on
Tuesday, May 10, 2011 at 10:00
a.m. Pacific Daylight Savings Time
and at any adjournment or
postponement thereof. VOTING
RECOMMENDATIONS ARE
INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED
TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
Authorized Signature(s) - This
section must be completed for your
instructions to be executed. If you
are voting on behalf of a
corporation or another individual
you may be required to provide
documentation evidencing your
power to sign this VIF with signing
capacity stated. Signature(s) Date
Interim Financial Statements - Mark
this box if you would like to receive
Interim Financial Statements and
accompanying Management’s
Discussion and Analysis by mail.
Annual Financial Statements - Mark
this box if you would like to receive
the Annual Financial Statements
and accompanying Management’s
Discussion and Analysis by mail. If
you are not mailing back your VIF,
you may register online to receive
the above financial report(s) by mail
at
www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
A R 1 2 4 5 6 1 1 S D O Q Should
you wish to receive a legal proxy,
refer to Note #8 on reverse. 1.
Number of Directors To set the
number of Directors at FIVE (5). For
Against 2. Election of Directors 01.
Nolan Watson For Withhold 02.
David Awram For Withhold 03.
David E. De Witt For Withhold 04.
Andrew T. Swarthout 05. John P.A.
Budreski 3. Appointment of
Auditors Appointment of Deloitte &
Touche LLP as Auditors of the
Company for the ensuing year and
authorizing the Directors to fix their
remuneration. For Withhold 4.
Restricted Share Plan To consider
and, if deemed appropriate, to
pass, with or without variation, an
ordinary resolution approving the
Company's Restricted Share Plan,
as more particularly described in
the accompanying Information
Circular. For Against 5. Shareholder
Rights Plan To consider and, if
deemed appropriate, to pass, with
or without variation, an ordinary
resolution confirming the
Company's Shareholder Rights
Plan, as more particularly described
in the accompanying Information
Circular. For Against 6. 10% Rolling
Stock Option Plan To consider and,
if deemed appropriate, to pass,
with or without variation, an
ordinary resolution re-approving the
Company's 10% Rolling Stock
Option Plan, as more particularly
described in the accompanying
Information Circular. For Against 7.
Transact Other Business To
transact such other business as
may properly come before the
Meeting or any adjournment
thereof. For Against