
EX-4.1 2 s8081216_ex4z1.htm EXHIBIT 4.1 STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN Exhibit 4.1 Stock
Incentive Plan
EXHIBIT 4.1
MEXUS GOLD US 2016 STOCK INCENTIVE PLAN
Adopted August 11, 2016
THIS  MEXUS  GOLD  US  2016  STOCK  INCENTIVE  PLAN (the  “Plan”)  is  designed  to  retain
directors,  executives  and  selected  employees  and  consultants  and  reward  them  for  making
contributions  to  the  success  of  the  Company.  These  objectives  are  accomplished  by  making
long-term  incentive  awards  under  the  Plan  thereby  providing  Participants  with  a  proprietary
interest in the growth and performance of the Company.
1. Definitions
(a) “Board” – The Board of Directors of the Company.
(b) “Change in Control” – Means, and shall be deemed to have occurred upon the occurrence
of, any one of the following events:
i.  The  acquisition  in  one  transaction  by  any  individual,  entity  or  group  (within  the  meaning  of
Section 13(d)(3) or 14(d)(2) of the Exchange Act) (a “ Person ”) of beneficial ownership (within
the meaning of Rule l3d-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act) of shares or other securities (as
defined in Section 3(a)(10) of the Exchange Act) representing 51% or more of outstanding Stock
of the Company; provided, however, that a Change in Control as defined in this clause (1) shall
not be deemed to occur in connection with any acquisition by the Company, an employee benefit
plan of the Company or any Person who immediately prior to the effective date of this Plan is a
holder of Stock (a “Current  Stockholder ”) so long as such acquisition does not result in any
Person  other  than  the  Company,  such  employee  benefit  plan  or  such  Current  Stockholder
beneficially owning shares or securities representing 51% or more of the outstanding; or
ii. Any election has occurred of persons as directors of the Company that causes two-thirds or
more of the Board to consist of persons other than (i) persons who were members of the Board on
the effective date of this Plan and (ii) persons who were nominated by the Board for election as
members of the Board at a time when at least two-thirds of the Board consisted of persons who
were members of the Board on the effective date of this Plan; provided, however, that any person
nominated for election by the Board when at least two-thirds of the members of the Board are
persons  described  in  sub  clause  (i)  or  (ii)  and  persons  who  were  themselves  previously
nominated in accordance with this clause (2) shall, for this purpose, be deemed to have been
nominated by a Board composed of persons described in sub clause (ii); or
iii. Approval by the stockholders of the Company of a reorganization, merger, consolidation or
similar  transaction  (a  “Reorganization  Transaction ”),  in  each  case,  unless,  immediately
following  such  Reorganization  Transaction,  more  than  50%  of,  respectively,  the  outstanding
shares of common stock (or similar equity security) of the corporation or other entity resulting from
or surviving such Reorganization Transaction and the combined voting power of the securities of
such  corporation  or  other  entity  entitled  to  vote  generally  in  the  election  of  directors,  is  then
beneficially owned, directly or indirectly, by the individuals and entities who were the respective
beneficial owners of the outstanding Stock immediately prior to such Reorganization Transaction
in substantially the same proportions as their ownership of the outstanding Stock immediately
prior to such Reorganization Transaction; or
iv. Approval by the stockholders of the Company of (i) a complete liquidation or dissolution of the
Company  or  (ii)  the  sale  or  other  disposition  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  the  assets  of  the
Company to a corporation or other entity, unless, with respect to such corporation or other entity,
immediately  following  such  sale  or  other  disposition,  more  than  50%  of,  respectively,  the
outstanding shares of common stock (or similar equity security) of such corporation or other entity
and the combined voting power of the securities of such corporation or other entity entitled to vote
generally  in  the  election  of  directors,  is  then  beneficially  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  the
individuals  and  entities  who  were  the  respective  beneficial  owners  of  the  outstanding  Stock
immediately  prior  to  such  sale  or  disposition  in  substantially  the  same  proportions  as  their
ownership of the outstanding Stock immediately prior to such sale or disposition.
(c) “Code” – The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time.
(d)  “Committee”  –  The  Compensation  Committee  of  the  Company's  Board,  or  such  other
committee of the Board that is designated by the Board to administer the Plan, composed of not
less than two members of the Board who are disinterested persons, as contemplated by Rule
16b-3 (“ Rule 16b-3 ”) promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the
“ Exchange Act ”).
(e) “Company” – Mexus Gold US and its subsidiaries, including subsidiaries of subsidiaries.
(f) “Exchange Act” – The Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time.
(g) “Fair Market Value” – The fair market value of the Company's issued and outstanding Stock
as determined in good faith by the Board or the Committee.
(h) “Grant ” – The grant of any form of stock option, stock award, or stock purchase offer, whether
granted singly, in combination, or in tandem, to a Participant pursuant to such terms, conditions
and limitations as the Committee may establish in order to fulfill the objectives of the Plan.
(i) “Grant Agreement” – An agreement between the Company and a Participant that sets forth
the terms, conditions and limitations applicable to a Grant.
(j) “Option” – Either an Incentive Stock Option, in accordance with Section 422 of Code, or a
Nonstatutory  Option,  to  purchase  the  Company's  Stock  that  may  be  awarded  to  a  Participant
under  the  Plan.  A  Participant  who  receives  an  award  of  an  Option  shall  be  referred  to  as  an
“Optionee”.
(k) “Participant” – A director, officer, employee or consultant of the Company to whom an Award
has been made under the Plan.
(l) Restricted Stock Purchase Offer” – A Grant of the right to purchase a specified number of
shares of Stock pursuant to a written agreement issued under the Plan.
(m) “Securities Act” – The Securities Act of 1933, as amended from time to time.
(n) “Stock” – Authorized and issued or unissued shares of common stock of the Company.
(o) “Stock Award” – A Grant made under the Plan in stock or denominated in units of stock for
which the Participant is not obligated to pay additional consideration.
2 . Administration.  The  Plan  shall  be  administered  by  the  Board,  provided  however,  that  the
Board may delegate such administration to the Committee. Subject to the provisions of the Plan,
the Board and/or the Committee shall have authority to (a) grant, in its discretion, Incentive Stock
Options in accordance with Section 422 of the Code, or Nonstatutory Options, Stock Awards or
Restricted Stock Purchase Offers; (b) determine in good faith the Fair Market Value of the Stock
covered by any Grant; (c) determine which eligible persons shall receive Grants and the number
of  shares,  restrictions,  terms  and  conditions  to  be  included  in  such  Grants;  (d)  construe  and
interpret  the  Plan;  (e)  promulgate,  amend  and  rescind  rules  and  regulations  relating  to  its
administration, and correct defects, omissions and inconsistencies in the Plan or any Grant; (f)
consistent  with  the  Plan  and  with  the  consent  of  the  Participant,  as  appropriate,  amend  any
outstanding Grant or amend the exercise date or dates thereof; (g) determine the duration and
purpose  of  leaves  of  absence  which  may  be  granted  to  Participants  without  constituting
termination of their employment for the purpose of the Plan or any Grant; and (h) make all other
determinations  necessary  or  advisable  for  the  Plan's  administration.  The  interpretation  and
construction  by  the  Board  of  any  provisions  of  the  Plan  or  selection  of  Participants  shall  be
conclusive and final. No member of the Board or the Committee shall be liable for any action or
determination made in good faith with respect to the Plan or any Grant made thereunder.
3. Eligibility.
(a) General: The  persons  who  shall  be  eligible  to  receive  Grants  shall  be  directors,  officers,
employees or consultants to the Company. The term consultant shall mean any person, other
than an employee, who is engaged by the Company to render services and is compensated for
such services. An Optionee may hold more than one Option. Any issuance of a Grant to an officer
or  director  of  the  Company  subsequent  to  the  first  registration  of  any  of  the  securities  of  the
Company under the Exchange Act shall comply with the requirements of Rule 16b-3.
(b) Incentive  Stock  Options: Incentive  Stock  Options  may  only  be  issued  to  employees  of  the
Company. Incentive Stock Options may be granted to officers or directors, provided they are also
employees  of  the  Company.  Payment  of  a  director's  fee  shall  not  be  sufficient  to  constitute
employment by the Company.
2
(c) The Company shall not grant an Incentive Stock Option under the Plan to any employee if
such Grant would result in such employee holding the right to exercise for the first time in any one
calendar  year,  under  all  Incentive  Stock  Options  granted  under  the  Plan  or  any  other  plan
maintained  by  the  Company,  with  respect  to  shares  of  Stock  having  an  aggregate  fair  market
value,  determined  as  of  the  date  the  Option  is  granted,  in  excess  of  $100,000.  Should  it  be
determined that an Incentive Stock Option granted under the Plan exceeds such maximum for
any reason other than a failure in good faith to value the Stock subject to such option, the excess
portion of such option shall be considered a Nonstatutory Option. To the extent the employee
holds  two  (2)  or  more  such  Options  which  become  exercisable  for  the  first  time  in  the  same
calendar  year,  the  foregoing  limitation  on  the  exercisability  of  such  Option  as  Incentive  Stock
Options  under  the  Federal  tax  laws  shall  be  applied  on  the  basis  of  the  order  in  which  such
Options are granted. If, for any reason, an entire Option does not qualify as an Incentive Stock
Option by reason of exceeding such maximum, such Option shall be considered a Nonstatutory
Option.
(d) Nonstatutory  Option:  The  provisions  of  the  foregoing  Section  3(b)  shall  not  apply  to  any
Option designated as a “Nonstatutory Option” or which sets forth the intention of the parties that
the Option be a Nonstatutory Option.
(e) Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Purchase Offers: The provisions of this Section 3 shall not
apply to any Stock Award or Restricted Stock Purchase Offer under the Plan.
4. Stock
(a) Authorized Stock: Stock subject to Grants may be either unissued or reacquired Stock
(b) Number  of  Shares: Subject  to  adjustment  as  provided  in  Section  5(i)  of  the  Plan,  the  total
number of shares of Stock which may be purchased or granted directly by Options, Stock Awards
or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers, or purchased indirectly through exercise of Options granted
under  the  Plan  shall  not  exceed  thirty  million  (30,000,000).  If  any  Grant  shall  for  any  reason
terminate  or  expire,  any  shares  allocated  thereto  but  remaining  unpurchased  upon  such
expiration or termination shall again be available for Grants with respect thereto under the Plan
as though no Grant had previously occurred with respect to such shares. Any shares of Stock
issued pursuant to a Grant and repurchased pursuant to the terms thereof shall be available for
future Grants as though not previously covered by a Grant.
(c) Reservation of Shares: The Company shall reserve and keep available at all times during the
term of the Plan such number of shares as shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the
Plan.  If,  after  reasonable  efforts,  which  efforts  shall  not  include  the  registration  of  the  Plan  or
Grants under the Securities Act, the Company is unable to obtain authority from any applicable
regulatory body, which authorization is deemed necessary by legal counsel for the Company for
the  lawful  issuance  of  shares  hereunder,  the  Company  shall  be  relieved  of  any  liability  with
respect  to  its  failure  to  issue  and  sell  the  shares  for  which  such  requisite  authority  was  so
deemed necessary unless and until such authority is obtained.
(d) Application of Funds: The proceeds received by the Company from the sale of Stock pursuant
to the exercise of Options or rights will be used for general corporate purposes.
(e) No  Obligation  to  Exercise:  The  issuance  of  a  Grant  shall  impose  no  obligation  upon  the
Participant to exercise any rights under such Grant.
5 . Terms  and  Conditions  of  Options.  Options  granted  hereunder  shall  be  evidenced  by
agreements between the Company and the respective Optionees, in such form and substance as
the  Board  or  Committee  shall  from  time  to  time  approve.  Option  agreements  need  not  be
identical,  and  in  each  case  may  include  such  provisions  as  the  Board  or  Committee  may
determine, but all such agreements shall be subject to and limited by the following terms and
conditions:
(a) Number of Shares: Each Option shall state the number of shares to which it pertains.
(b) Exercise  Price: Each  Incentive  Stock  Option  shall  state  the  exercise  price,  which  shall  be
determined as follows:
(i) Any Incentive Stock Option granted to a person who at the time the Option is granted owns (or
is  deemed  to  own  pursuant  to  Section  424(d)  of  the  Code)  stock  possessing  more  than  ten
percent (10%) of the total combined voting power or value of all classes of stock of the Company
(“Ten Percent Holder”) shall have an exercise price of no less than 110% of the Fair Market
Value of the Stock as of the date of grant; and
(ii) Incentive Stock Options granted to a person who at the time the Option is granted is not a Ten
Percent Holder shall have an exercise price of no less than 100% of the Fair Market Value of the
Stock as of the date of grant.
3
For the purposes of this Section 5(b), the Fair Market Value shall be as determined by the Board
in  good  faith,  which  determination  shall  be  conclusive  and  binding;  provided  however,  that  if
there  is  an  active  public  market  for  such  Stock,  the  Fair  Market  Value  per  share  shall  be  the
average of the   bid and asked prices (or the closing price if such stock is listed on the NASDAQ
Global Market or NASDAQ Capital Market) on the date of grant of the Option, or if listed on a
stock exchange, the closing price on such exchange on such date of grant.
The exercise price of each Nonstatutory Stock Option shall be determined at the discretion of the
Board of Directors of the Corporation.
(c) Medium  and  Time  of  Payment: The  exercise  price  shall  become  immediately  due  upon
exercise of the Option and shall be paid in cash or check made payable to the Company. Should
the Company's outstanding Stock be registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act at the
time the Option is exercised, then the exercise price may also be paid as follows:
(i) in shares of Stock held by the Optionee for the requisite period necessary to avoid a charge to
the Company's earnings for financial reporting purposes and valued at Fair Market Value on the
exercise date, or
(ii)  through  a  special  sale  and  remittance  procedure  pursuant  to  which  the  Optionee  shall
concurrently provide irrevocable written instructions (a) to a Company designated brokerage firm
to effect the immediate sale of the purchased shares and remit to the Company, out of the sale
proceeds available on the settlement date, sufficient funds to cover the aggregate exercise price
payable  for  the  purchased  shares  plus  all  applicable  Federal,  state  and  local  income  and
employment taxes required to be withheld by the Company by reason of such purchase and (b)
to the Company to deliver the certificates for the purchased shares directly to such brokerage firm
in order to complete the sale transaction.
(iii)  At  the  discretion  of  the  Board,  exercisable  either  at  the  time  of  Option  grant  or  of  Option
exercise, the exercise price may also be paid (i) by Optionee's delivery of a promissory note in
form  and  substance  satisfactory  to  the  Company  and  permissible  under  applicable  securities
rules and bearing interest at a rate determined by the Board in its sole discretion, but in no event
less than the minimum rate of interest required to avoid the imputation of compensation income to
the Optionee under the Federal tax laws, or (ii) in such other form of consideration permitted by
the Nevada Revised Statutes as may be acceptable to the Board.
(d) Term  and  Exercise  of  Options: Any  Option  granted  to  an  employee  of  the  Company  shall
become exercisable over a period of no longer than ten (10) years. In no event shall any Option
be exercisable after the expiration of ten (10) years from the date it is granted, and no Incentive
Stock  Option  granted  to  a  Ten  Percent  Holder  shall,  by  its  terms,  be  exercisable  after  the
expiration of ten (10) years from the date of the Option. Unless otherwise specified by the Board
or the Committee in the resolution authorizing such Option, the date of grant of an Option shall be
deemed to be the date upon which the Board or the Committee authorizes the granting of such
Option.
Each Option shall be exercisable to the nearest whole share, in installments or otherwise, as the
respective Option agreements may provide. During the lifetime of an Optionee, the Option shall
be exercisable only by the Optionee and shall not be assignable or transferable by the Optionee,
and   no other person shall acquire any rights therein. To the extent not exercised, installments (if
more than one) shall accumulate, but shall be exercisable, in whole or in part, only during the
period for exercise as stated in the Option agreement, whether or not other installments are then
exercisable.
( e ) Termination  of  Status  as  Employee,  Consultant  or  Director: If  Optionee's  status  as  an
employee shall terminate for any reason other than Optionee's disability or death, then Optionee
(or  if  the  Optionee  shall  die  after  such  termination,  but  prior  to  exercise,  Optionee's  personal
representative or the person entitled to succeed to the Option) shall have the right to exercise the
portions of any of Optionee's Incentive Stock Options which were exercisable as of the date of
such termination, in whole or in part, within 90 days after such termination (or, in the event of “
termination for good cause ” as that term is defined in Nevada case law related thereto, or by the
terms  of  the  Plan  or  the  Option  Agreement  or  an  employment  agreement,  the  Option  shall
automatically  terminate  as  of  the  termination  of  employment  as  to  all  shares  covered  by  the
Option).
With respect to Nonstatutory Options granted to employees, directors or consultants, the Board
may  specify  such  period  for  exercise,  not  less  than  90  days  (except  that  in  the  case  of
“termination for cause” or removal of a director), the Option shall automatically terminate as of the
termination of employment or services as to shares covered by the Option, following termination
of employment or services as the Board deems reasonable and appropriate. The Option may be
exercised only with respect to installments that the Optionee could have exercised at the date of
termination  of  employment  or  services.  Nothing  contained  herein  or  in  any  Option  granted
pursuant hereto shall be construed to affect or restrict in any way the right of the Company to
terminate the employment or services of an Optionee with or without cause.
4
(f) Disability of Optionee: If an Optionee is disabled (within the meaning of Section 22(e)(3) of the
Code) at the time of termination, the ninety (90) day period set forth in Section 5(e) shall be a
period, as determined by the Board and set forth in the Option, of not less than six months nor
more than one year after such termination.
(g) Death  of  Optionee: If an Optionee dies while employed by, engaged as a consultant to, or
serving  as  a  Director  of  the  Company,  the  portion  of  such  Optionee's  Option  which  was
exercisable  at  the  date  of  death  may  be  exercised,  in  whole  or  in  part,  by  the  estate  of  the
decedent or by a person succeeding to the right to exercise such Option at any time within (i) a
period, as determined by the Board and set forth in the Option, of not less than six (6) months nor
more than one (1) year after Optionee's death, which period shall not be more, in the case of a
Nonstatutory  Option,  than  the  period  for  exercise  following  termination  of  employment  or
services, or (ii) during the remaining term of the Option, whichever is the lesser. The Option may
be so exercised only with respect to installments exercisable at the time of Optionee's death and
not previously exercised by the Optionee.
(h) Nontransferability of Option: No Option shall be transferable by the Optionee, except by will or
by the laws of descent and distribution.
(i) Recapitalization: Subject to any required action of shareholders, the number of shares of Stock
covered by each outstanding Option, and the exercise price per share thereof set forth in each
such  Option,  shall  be  proportionately  adjusted  for  any  increase  or  decrease  in  the  number  of
issued shares of Stock of the Company resulting from a stock split, stock dividend, combination,
subdivision or reclassification of shares, or the payment of a stock dividend, or any other increase
or  decrease  in  the  number  of  such  shares  affected  without  receipt  of  consideration  by  the
Company; provided, however, the conversion of any convertible securities of the Company shall
not be deemed to have been “ effected without receipt of consideration ” by the Company.
In the event of a proposed dissolution or liquidation of the Company, a merger or consolidation in
which the Company is not the surviving entity, or a sale of all or substantially all of the assets or
capital stock of the Company (collectively, a “Reorganization”),  unless  otherwise  provided  by
the  Board,  this  Option  shall  terminate  immediately  prior  to  such  date  as  is  determined  by  the
Board,  which  date  shall  be  no  later  than  the  consummation  of  such  Reorganization.  In  such
event, if the entity which shall be the surviving entity does not tender to Optionee an offer, for
which it has no obligation to do so, to substitute for any unexercised Option a stock option or
capital stock of such surviving entity, as applicable, which on an equitable basis shall provide the
Optionee  with  substantially  the  same  economic  benefit  as  such  unexercised  Option,  then  the
Board may grant to such Optionee, in its sole and absolute discretion and without obligation, the
right for a period commencing thirty (30) days prior to and ending immediately prior to the date
determined by the Board pursuant hereto for termination of the Option or during the remaining
term of the Option, whichever is the lesser, to exercise any unexpired Option or Options without
regard to the installment provisions of Paragraph 6(d) of the Plan; provided, that any such right
granted shall be granted to all Optionees not receiving an offer to receive substitute options on a
consistent  basis,  and  provided  further,  that  any  such  exercise  shall  be  subject  to  the
consummation of such Reorganization.
Subject to any required action of shareholders, if the Company shall be the surviving entity in any
merger  or  consolidation,  each  outstanding  Option  thereafter  shall  pertain  to  and  apply  to  the
securities to which a holder of shares of Stock equal to the shares subject to the Option would
have been entitled by reason of such merger or consolidation.
In the event of a change in the Stock of the Company as presently constituted, which is limited to
a change of all of its authorized shares without par value into the same number of shares with a
par value, the shares resulting from any such change shall be deemed to be the Stock within the
meaning of the Plan.
To the extent that the foregoing adjustments relate to stock or securities of the Company, such
adjustments  shall  be  made  by  the  Board,  whose  determination  in  that  respect  shall  be  final,
binding  and  conclusive.  Except  as  expressly  provided  in  this  Section  5(i),  the  Optionee  shall
have no rights by reason of any subdivision or consolidation of shares of stock of any class or the
payment of any stock dividend or any other increase or decrease in the number of shares of stock
of  any  class,  and  the  number  or  price  of  shares  of  Stock  subject  to  any  Option  shall  not  be
affected by, and no adjustment shall be made by reason of, any dissolution, liquidation, merger,
consolidation or sale of assets or capital stock, or any issue by the Company of shares of stock of
any class or securities convertible into shares of stock of any class.
The Grant of an Option pursuant to the Plan shall not affect in any way the right or power of the
Company to make any adjustments, reclassifications, reorganizations or changes in its capital or
business structure or to merge, consolidate, dissolve, or liquidate or to sell or transfer all or any
part of its business or assets.
5
(j) Rights as a Shareholder: An Optionee shall have no rights as a shareholder with respect to
any shares covered by an Option until the effective date of the issuance of the shares following
exercise of such Option by Optionee. No adjustment shall be made for dividends (ordinary or
extraordinary,  whether  in  cash,  securities  or  other  property)  or  distributions  or  other  rights  for
which the record date is prior to the date such stock certificate is issued, except as expressly
provided in Section 5(i) hereof.
(k) Modification,  Acceleration,  Extension,  and  Renewal  of  Options: Subject  to  the  terms  and
conditions and within the limitations of the Plan, the Board may modify an Option, or, once an
Option is exercisable, accelerate the rate at which it may be exercised, and may extend or renew
outstanding Options granted under the Plan or accept the surrender of outstanding Options (to
the extent not theretofore exercised) and authorize the granting of new Options in substitution for
such Options, provided such action is permissible under Section 422 of the Code and applicable
state  securities  laws.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this  Section  5(k),  however,  no
modification  of  an  Option  shall,  without  the  consent  of  the  Optionee,  alter  to  the  Optionee's
detriment or impair any rights or obligations under any Option theretofore granted under the Plan
(l) Exercise Before Exercise Date: At the discretion of the Board, the Option may, but need not,
include a provision whereby the Optionee may elect to exercise all or any portion of the Option
prior  to  the  stated  exercise  date  of  the  Option  or  any  installment  thereof.  Any  shares  so
purchased prior to the stated exercise date shall be subject to repurchase by the Company upon
termination  of  Optionee's  employment  as  contemplated  by  Section  5(n)  hereof  prior  to  the
exercise  date  stated  in  the  Option  and  such  other  restrictions  and  conditions  as  the  Board  or
Committee may deem advisable.
(m) Other Provisions: The Option agreements authorized under the Plan shall contain such other
provisions,  including,  without  limitation,  restrictions  upon  the  exercise  of  the  Options,  as  the
Board  or  the  Committee  shall  deem  advisable.  Shares  shall  not  be  issued  pursuant  to  the
exercise of an Option, if the exercise of such Option or the issuance of shares thereunder would
violate, in the opinion of legal counsel for the Company, the provisions of any applicable law or
the rules or regulations of any applicable governmental or administrative agency or body, such
as the Code, the Securities Act, the Exchange Act, applicable state securities laws, the corporate
law  of  the  state  of  Nevada,  and  the  rules  promulgated  under  the  foregoing  or  the  rules  and
regulations of any exchange upon which the shares of the Company are listed. Without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, the exercise of each Option shall be subject to the condition that if
at any time the Company shall determine that (i) the satisfaction of withholding tax or other similar
liabilities, or (ii) the listing, registration or qualification of any shares covered by such exercise
upon any securities exchange or under any state or federal law, or (iii) the consent or approval of
any regulatory body, or (iv) the perfection of any exemption from any such withholding, listing,
registration, qualification, consent or approval is necessary or desirable in connection with such
exercise or the issuance of shares thereunder, then in any such event, such exercise shall not be
effective  unless  such  withholding,  listing  registration,  qualification,  consent,  approval  or
exemption shall have been effected, obtained or perfected free of any conditions not acceptable
to the Company.
(n) Repurchase Agreement: The Board may, in its discretion, require as a condition to the Grant
of an Option hereunder, that an Optionee execute an agreement with the Company, in form and
substance satisfactory to the Board in its discretion (“Repurchase  Agreement ”), (i) restricting
the Optionee's right to transfer shares purchased under such Option without first offering such
shares  to  the  Company  or  another  shareholder  of  the  Company  upon  the  same  terms  and
conditions as provided therein; and (ii) providing that upon termination of Optionee's employment
with the Company, for any reason, the Company (or another shareholder of the Company, as
provided in the Repurchase Agreement) shall have the right at its discretion (or the discretion of
such other shareholders) to purchase and/or redeem all such shares owned by the Optionee on
the date of termination of his or her employment at a price equal to: (A) the fair value of such
shares as of such date of termination; or (B) if such repurchase right lapses at 20% of the number
of  shares  per  year,  the  original  purchase  price  of  such  shares,  and  upon  terms  of  payment
permissible under the applicable state securities laws; provided that in the case of Options or
Stock  Awards  granted  to  officers,  directors,  consultants  or  affiliates  of  the  Company,  such
repurchase provisions may be subject to additional or greater restrictions as determined by the
Board or Committee.
6. Stock Awards and Restricted Stock Purchase Offers.
(a) Types of Grants.
(i) Stock  Award. All  or  part  of  any  Stock  Award  under  the  Plan  may  be  subject  to  conditions
established by the Board or the Committee, and set forth in the Stock Award Agreement, which
may include, but are not limited to, continuous service with the Company, achievement of specific
business objectives, increases in specified indices, attaining growth rates and other comparable
measurements of Company performance. Such Awards may be based on Fair Market Value or
other specified valuation.
(ii) Restricted Stock Purchase Offer. A Grant of a Restricted Stock Purchase Offer under the Plan
shall  be  subject  to  such  (i)  vesting  contingencies  related  to  the  Participant's  continued
association with the Company for a specified time and (ii) other specified conditions as the Board
or Committee shall determine, in their sole discretion, consistent with the provisions of the Plan.
6
(b) Conditions  and  Restrictions. Shares  of  Stock  which  Participants  may  receive  as  a  Stock
Award under a Stock Award Agreement or Restricted Stock Purchase Offer under a Restricted
Stock Purchase Offer may include such restrictions as the Board or Committee, as applicable,
shall  determine,  including  restrictions  on  transfer,  repurchase  rights,  right  of  first  refusal,  and
forfeiture provisions. When transfer of Stock is so restricted or subject to forfeiture provisions it is
referred to as “Restricted Stock.” Further, with Board or Committee approval, Stock Awards or
Restricted Stock Purchase Offers may be deferred, either in the form of installments or a future
lump sum distribution. The Board or Committee may permit selected Participants to elect to defer
distributions of Stock Awards or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers in accordance with procedures
established  by  the  Board  or  Committee  to  assure  that  such  deferrals  comply  with  applicable
requirements of the Code including, at the choice of Participants, the capability to make further
deferrals  for  distribution  after  retirement.  Any  deferred  distribution,  whether  elected  by  the
Participant or specified by the Stock Award Agreement, Restricted Stock Purchase Offers or by
the Board or Committee, may require the payment be forfeited in accordance with the provisions
of Section 6(c). Dividends or dividend equivalent rights may be extended to and made part of any
Stock Award or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers denominated in Stock or units of Stock, subject
to such terms, conditions and restrictions as the Board or Committee may establish.
(c) Cancellation  and  Rescission  of  Grants. Unless  the  Stock  Award  Agreement  or  Restricted
Stock Purchase Offer specifies otherwise, the Board or Committee, as applicable, may cancel
any unexpired, unpaid, or deferred Grants at any time if the Participant is not in compliance with
all other applicable provisions of the Stock Award Agreement or Restricted Stock Purchase Offer,
the Plan and with the following conditions:
(i) A Participant shall not render services for any organization or engage directly or indirectly in
any business which, in the judgment of the chief executive officer of the Company or other senior
officer designated by the Board or Committee, is or becomes competitive with the Company, or
which organization or business, or the rendering of services to such organization or business, is
or  becomes  otherwise  prejudicial  to  or  in  conflict  with  the  interests  of  the  Company.  For
Participants whose employment has terminated, the judgment of the chief executive officer shall
be based on the Participant's position and responsibilities while employed by the Company, the
Participant's  post-employment  responsibilities  and  position  with  the  other  organization  or
business, the extent of past, current and potential competition or conflict between the Company
and the other organization or business, the effect on the Company's customers, suppliers and
competitors  and  such  other  considerations  as  are  deemed  relevant  given  the  applicable  facts
and  circumstances.  A  Participant  who  has  retired  shall  be  free,  however,  to  purchase  as  an
investment or otherwise, stock or other securities of such organization or business so long as
they  are  listed  upon  a  recognized  securities  exchange  or  traded  over-the-counter,  and  such
investment does not represent a substantial investment to the Participant or a greater than ten
percent (10%) equity interest in the organization or business.
(ii)  A  Participant  shall  not,  without  prior  written  authorization  from  the  Company,  disclose  to
anyone  outside  the  Company,  or  use  in  other  than  the  Company's  business,  any  confidential
information  or  material,  as  defined  in  the  Company's  Proprietary  Information  and  Invention
Agreement  or  similar  agreement  regarding  confidential  information  and  intellectual  property,
relating  to  the  business  of  the  Company,  acquired  by  the  Participant  either  during  or  after
employment with the Company.
(iii) A Participant shall disclose promptly and assign to the Company all right, title and interest in
any  invention  or  idea,  patentable  or  not,  made  or  conceived  by  the  Participant  during
employment  by  the  Company,  relating  in  any  manner  to  the  actual  or  anticipated  business,
research or development work of the Company and shall do anything reasonably necessary to
enable the Company to secure a patent where appropriate in the United States and in foreign
countries.
(iv) Upon exercise, payment or delivery pursuant to a Grant, the Participant shall certify on a form
acceptable to the Committee that he or she is in compliance with the terms and conditions of the
Plan. Failure to comply with all of the provisions of this Section 6(c) prior to, or during the six
months after, any exercise, payment or delivery pursuant to a Grant shall cause such exercise,
payment or delivery to be rescinded. The Company shall notify the Participant in writing of any
such rescission within two years after such exercise, payment or delivery. Within ten days after
receiving such a notice from the Company, the Participant shall pay to the Company the amount
of  any  gain  realized  or  payment  received  as  a  result  of  the  rescinded  exercise,  payment  or
delivery pursuant to a Grant. Such payment shall be made either in cash or by returning to the
Company  the  number  of  shares  of  Stock  that  the  Participant  received  in  connection  with  the
rescinded exercise, payment or delivery.
(d) Nonassignability.
(i) Except pursuant to Section 6(e)(iii) and except as set forth in Section 6(d)(ii), no Grant or any
other benefit under the Plan shall be assignable or transferable, or payable to or exercisable by,
anyone other than the Participant to whom it was granted.
7
(ii) Where a Participant terminates employment and retains a Grant pursuant to Section 6(e)(ii) in
order to assume a position with a governmental, charitable or educational institution, the Board or
Committee,  in  its  discretion  and  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law,  may  authorize  a  third  party
(including  but  not  limited  to  the  trustee  of  a  “blind”  trust),  acceptable  to  the  applicable
governmental or institutional authorities, the Participant and the Board or Committee, to act on
behalf of the Participant with regard to such Awards.
(e) Termination  of  Employment. If  the  employment  or  service  to  the  Company  of  a  Participant
terminates,  other  than  pursuant  to  any  of  the  following  provisions  under  this  Section  6(e),  all
unexercised, deferred and unpaid Stock Awards or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers shall be
cancelled immediately, unless the Stock Award Agreement or Restricted Stock Purchase Offer
provides otherwise:
(i) Retirement Under a Company Retirement Plan. When a Participant's employment terminates
as a result of retirement in accordance with the terms of a Company retirement plan, the Board or
Committee may permit Stock Awards or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers to continue in effect
beyond  the  date  of  retirement  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  Grant  Agreement  and  the
exercisability and vesting of any such Grants may be accelerated.
(ii) Rights in the Best Interests of the Company. When a Participant resigns from the Company
and,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Board  or  Committee,  the  acceleration  and/or  continuation  of
outstanding Stock Awards or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers would be in the best interests of
the  Company,  the  Board  or  Committee  may  (i)  authorize,  where  appropriate,  the  acceleration
and/or continuation of all or any part of Grants issued prior to such termination and (ii) permit the
exercise,  vesting  and  payment  of  such  Grants  for  such  period  as  may  be  set  forth  in  the
applicable Grant Agreement, subject to earlier cancellation pursuant to Section 9 or at such time
as  the  Board  or  Committee  shall  deem  the  continuation  of  all  or  any  part  of  the  Participant's
Grants are not in the Company's best interest.
(iii) Death or Disability of a Participant.
1. In the event of a Participant's death, the Participant's estate or beneficiaries shall have a period
up to the expiration date specified in the Grant Agreement within which to receive or exercise any
outstanding Grant held by the Participant under such terms as may be specified in the applicable
Grant Agreement. Rights to any such outstanding Grants shall pass by will or the laws of descent
and  distribution  in  the  following  order:  (a)  to  beneficiaries  so  designated  by  the  Participant;  if
none, then (b) to a legal representative of the Participant; if none, then (c) to the persons entitled
thereto as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. Grants so passing shall be made at
such times and in such manner as if the Participant were living.
2. In the event a Participant is deemed by the Board or Committee to be unable to perform his or
her usual duties by reason of mental disorder or medical condition which does not result from
facts which would be grounds for termination for cause, Grants and rights to any such Grants may
be paid to or exercised by the Participant, if legally competent, or a committee or other legally
designated guardian or representative if the Participant is legally incompetent by virtue of such
disability.
3. After the death or disability of a Participant, the Board or Committee may in its sole discretion
at any time (1) terminate restrictions in Grant Agreements; (2) accelerate any or all installments
and rights; and (3) instruct the Company to pay the total of any accelerated payments in a lump
sum to the Participant, the Participant's estate, beneficiaries or representative; notwithstanding
that, in the absence of such termination of restrictions or acceleration of payments, any or all of
the payments due under the Grant might ultimately have become payable to other beneficiaries.
4. In the event of uncertainty as to interpretation of or controversies concerning this Section 6, the
determinations of the Board or Committee, as applicable, shall be binding and conclusive.
7 . Change  in  Control.  Unless  otherwise  provided  in  the  applicable  Grant  Agreement,  in  the
event  of  a  Change  in  Control,  50%  of  the  vesting  restrictions  applicable  to  each  Participant’s
Grant(s) shall terminate fully and the Participant shall immediately have the right to the delivery of
share  certificates  or  exercise  of  Options,  i.e.  to  the  extent  that  a  Participant’s  Option(s)  are
unvested, 50% of such unvested portion shall vest.
8
8 . Investment  Intent.  All  Grants  under  the  Plan  are  intended  to  be  exempt  from  registration
under  the  Securities  Act  provided  by  Rule  701  thereunder.  Unless  and  until  the  granting  of
Options or sale and issuance of Stock subject to the Plan are registered under the Securities Act
or shall be exempt pursuant to the rules promulgated thereunder, each Grant under the Plan shall
provide  that  the  purchases  or  other  acquisitions  of  Stock  thereunder  shall  be  for  investment
purposes and not with a view to, or for resale in connection with, any distribution thereof. Further,
unless the issuance and sale of the Stock have been registered under the Securities Act, each
Grant shall provide that no shares shall be purchased upon the exercise of the rights under such
Grant  unless  and  until  (i)  all  then  applicable  requirements  of  state  and  federal  laws  and
regulatory agencies shall have been fully complied with to the satisfaction of the Company and
its counsel, and (ii) if requested to do so by the Company, the person exercising the rights under
the Grant shall (A) give written assurances as to knowledge and experience of such person (or a
representative  employed  by  such  person)  in  financial  and  business  matters  and  the  ability  of
such person (or representative) to evaluate the merits and risks of exercising the Option, and (B)
execute and deliver to the Company a letter of investment intent and/or such other form related to
applicable exemptions from registration, all in such form and substance as the Company may
require. If shares are issued upon exercise of any rights under a Grant without registration under
the Securities Act, subsequent registration of such shares shall relieve the purchaser thereof of
any investment restrictions or representations made upon the exercise of such rights.
9 . Amendment, Modification, Suspension or Discontinuance of the Plan. The Board may,
insofar as permitted by law, from time to time, with respect to any shares at the time not subject to
outstanding  Grants,  suspend  or  terminate  the  Plan  or  revise  or  amend  it  in  any  respect
whatsoever,  except  that  without  the  approval  of  the  shareholders  of  the  Company,  no  such
revision or amendment shall (i) increase the number of shares subject to the Plan, (ii) decrease
the price at which Grants may be granted, (iii) materially increase the benefits to Participants, or
(iv) change the class of persons eligible to receive Grants under the Plan; provided, however, no
such action shall alter or impair the rights and obligations under any Option, or Stock Award, or
Restricted Stock Purchase Offer outstanding as of the date thereof without the written consent of
the Participant thereunder. No Grant may be issued while the Plan is suspended or after it is
terminated, but the rights and obligations under any Grant issued while the Plan is in effect shall
not be impaired by suspension or termination of the Plan.
In the event of any change in the outstanding Stock by reason of a stock split, stock dividend,
combination or reclassification of shares, recapitalization, merger, or similar event, the Board or
the Committee may adjust proportionally (a) the number of shares of Stock (i) reserved under the
Plan,  (ii)  available  for  Incentive  Stock  Options  and  Nonstatutory  Options  and  (iii)  covered  by
outstanding Stock Awards or Restricted Stock Purchase Offers; (b) the Stock prices related to
outstanding Grants; and (c) the appropriate Fair Market Value and other price determinations for
such Grants. In the event of any other change affecting the Stock or any distribution (other than
normal cash dividends) to holders of Stock, such adjustments as may be deemed equitable by
the Board or the Committee, including adjustments to avoid fractional shares, shall be made to
give proper effect to such event. In the event of a corporate merger, consolidation, acquisition of
property or stock, separation, reorganization or liquidation, the Board or the Committee shall be
authorized to issue or assume stock options, whether or not in a transaction to which Section
424(a) of the Code applies, and other Grants by means of substitution of new Grant Agreements
for previously issued Grants or an assumption of previously issued Grants.
10. Tax Withholding.  The  Company  shall  have  the  right  to  deduct  applicable  taxes  from  any
Grant  payment  and  withhold,  at  the  time  of  delivery  or  exercise  of  Options,  Stock  Awards  or
Restricted Stock Purchase Offers or vesting of shares under such Grants, an appropriate number
of shares for payment of taxes required by law or to take such other action as may be necessary
in the opinion of the Company to satisfy all obligations for withholding of such taxes. If Stock is
used to satisfy tax withholding, such stock shall be valued based on the Fair Market Value when
the tax withholding is required to be made.
11. Availability  of  Information.  During  the  term  of  the  Plan  and  any  additional  period  during
which  a  Grant  granted  pursuant  to  the  Plan  shall  be  exercisable,  the  Company  shall  make
available, not later than one hundred and twenty (120) days following the close of each of its
fiscal years, such financial and other information regarding the Company as is required by the
bylaws  of  the  Company  and  applicable  law  to  be  furnished  in  an  annual  report  to  the
shareholders of the Company.
12. Notice. Any written notice to the Company required by any of the provisions of the Plan shall
be addressed to the chief personnel officer or to the chief executive officer of the Company, and
shall become effective when it is received by the office of the chief personnel officer or the chief
executive officer.
9
13. Indemnification of Board. In addition to such other rights or indemnifications as they may
have as directors or otherwise, and to the extent allowed by applicable law, the members of the
Board  and  the  Committee  shall  be  indemnified  by  the  Company  against  the  reasonable
expenses,  including  attorneys'  fees,  actually  and  necessarily  incurred  in  connection  with  the
defense  of  any  claim,  action,  suit  or  proceeding,  or  in  connection  with  any  appeal  thereof,  to
which they or any of them may be a party by reason of any action taken, or failure to act, under or
in connection with the Plan or any Grant granted thereunder, and against all amounts paid by
them in settlement thereof (provided such settlement is approved by independent legal counsel
selected by the Company) or paid by them in satisfaction of a judgment in any such claim, action,
suit or proceeding, except in any case in relation to matters as to which it shall be adjudged in
such  claim,  action,  suit  or  proceeding  that  such  Board  or  Committee  member  is  liable  for
negligence or misconduct in the performance of his or her duties; provided that within sixty (60)
days after institution of any such action, suit or Board proceeding the member involved shall offer
the Company, in writing, the opportunity, at its own expense, to handle and defend the same.
14. Governing Law. The Plan and all determinations made and actions taken pursuant hereto, to
the extent not otherwise governed by the Code or the securities laws of the United States, shall
be governed by the law of the State of California and construed accordingly.
15. Termination Dates. The Plan shall terminate ten years later, subject to earlier termination by
the Board pursuant to Section 9.
The  foregoing  2016  Stock  Incentive  Plan  was  duly  adopted  and  approved  by  the  Board  of
Directors as of Mexus Gold US on August 11, 2016.
MEXUS GOLD US
 
By:/s/ Paul Thompson Sr.
  Name: Paul Thompson, Sr.
 
Title: Chief Executive Officer
10