
Prospectus
Excelsior Gold Limited
ACN: 123 629 863
ASX Code:  EXG
This  Prospectus  is  a  compliance  prospectus  to  facilitate  secondary  trading  of 
Shares issued by the Company prior to the date of this Prospectus. The Offer is 
only made to persons nominated by the Company.
This Prospectus provides important information about the Company.  You should read the 
entire document.  If you have any questions about the New Shares being offered under this 
Prospectus,  or  any  other  matter  relating  to  an  investment  in  the  Company,  you  should 
consult  your  professional  adviser.    An  investment  in  the  New  Shares  offered  under  this 
Prospectus is highly speculative.
Important Notice
This  Prospectus  is  dated  26  August  2016  and  was 
lodged  with  ASIC  on  that  date.    Application  will  be 
made to ASX for quotation of the New Shares offered 
under this Prospectus within 7 days of this date. 
Neither ASIC, ASX nor any of their respective officers 
take  any  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  this 
Prospectus or the merits of the investment to which 
this Prospectus relates.  No securities will be allotted 
or  issued  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus  later  than 
13 months after the date of this Prospectus.
Nature of this Prospectus
The New Shares which will be issued pursuant to this 
Prospectus are in the same class of Shares that have 
been quoted on the official list of the ASX during the 
12 months prior to the issue of this Prospectus. 
This Prospectus is a ‘transaction specific prospectus’ 
to which the special content rules under section 713 
of the Corporations Act apply.  That provision allows 
the issue of a more concise prospectus in relation to 
an  offer  of  securities  in  a  class  which  has  been 
continuously  quoted  by  ASX  in  the  3 months  prior  to 
the  date  of  the  prospectus.    In  general  terms 
‘transaction  specific  prospectuses’  are  only  required 
to contain information in relation to the effect of the 
issue  of  New  Shares  on  the  Company  and  the  rights 
attaching  to  the  New  Shares.    It  is  not  necessary  to 
include  general  information  in  relation  to  all  of  the 
assets  and  liabilities,  financial  position,  profits  and 
losses or prospects of the issuing company. 
This  Prospectus  contains  information  only  to  the 
extent  to  which  it  is  reasonable  for  investors  and 
their  professional  advisers  to  expect  to  find  the 
information  in  it.    It  does  not  include  all  of  the 
information  that  would  be  included  in  a  prospectus 
for an initial public offer.
Prospectus availability
at  www.excelsiorgold.com.au
Eligible  Shareholders  can  obtain  a  copy  of  this 
Prospectus during the Offer period on the Company’s 
website 
by 
contacting the Company.  If you access an electronic 
copy  of  this  Prospectus,  you  should  ensure  that  you 
download and read the entire Prospectus. 
The electronic copy of this Prospectus available from 
the  Company’s  website  will  not 
include  an 
Application Form.
or
whether  any  governmental  or  other  consents  are 
required or whether any other formalities need to be 
considered  and  followed.    This  Prospectus  does  not 
constitute  an  offer  in  any  place  in  which,  or  to  any 
person to whom, it should not be lawful to make such 
an offer.
Disclaimer of representations
No person is authorised to provide any information or 
make any representation in connection with the Offer 
which is not contained in this Prospectus.
Forward looking statements
This  Prospectus  contains  forward  looking  statements 
that,  despite  being  based  on  the  Company’s  current 
expectations  about  future  events,  are  subject  to 
known  and  unknown 
risks,  uncertainties  and 
assumptions,  many  of  which  are  outside  the  control 
of the Company and the Directors.  These known and 
unknown  risks,  uncertainties  and  assumptions,  could 
cause actual results, performance or achievements to 
materially differ from future results, performance or 
achievements  expressed  or 
implied  by  forward-
looking  statements  in  this  Prospectus.    These  risks, 
uncertainties  and  assumptions  include,  but  are  not 
limited  to,  the  risks  outlined  in  section  6  of  this 
Prospectus. 
include 
those  containing 
‘anticipate’, 
‘estimate’,  ‘believe’,  ‘should’,  ‘will’,  ‘may’  and 
similar expressions.
Forward-looking  statements
such  words  as
Privacy
Please  read  the  privacy  information  located  in 
section  5.3  of  this  Prospectus.    By  submitting  an 
Application  Form,  you  consent  to  the  matters 
outlined in that section.
Definitions
Certain  terms  and  abbreviations  used 
in  this 
Prospectus  have  defined  meanings  which  are 
explained in the Glossary.
Foreign jurisdictions
The  distribution  of  this  Prospectus  in  jurisdictions 
outside Australia and New Zealand may be restricted 
by law and persons who come into possession of this 
Prospectus should seek advice on and observe any of 
these  restrictions.    Failure  to  comply  with  these 
restrictions  may  violate  securities  laws.    Applicants 
who  are  residents  in  countries  other  than  Australia 
should  consult  their  professional  advisers  as  to
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table of Contents
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER ........................................................... 4
DETAILS OF THE OFFER ............................................................................ 5
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SECURITIES .......................................... 6
RISK FACTORS ....................................................................................... 9
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ...................................................................... 14
DIRECTORS’ RESPONSIBILITY AND CONSENT .................................................. 23
7	 GLOSSARY .......................................................................................... 25
Corporate Directory
Directors
Peter Bird 
David Hamlyn 
Chen Chik Ong 
Jimmy Kong Leng Lee
(Non-Executive Chairman) 
(Managing Director) 
(Commercial Director) 
(Non-Executive Director)
Company Secretary
Chen Chik (Nicholas) Ong
Website
www.excelsiorgold.com.au
Registered and Business Office
Share Registry
Unit 2 
124 Stirling Highway 
North Fremantle WA 6159 
Telephone: 
Facsimile:
+61 8 9335 7770 
+61 8 9335 6231
Solicitors to the Offer
Kings Park Corporate Lawyers  
Level 2, 45 Richardson Street 
West Perth WA 6005
Security Transfer Registrars 
770 Canning Highway 
Applecross WA 6153 
Telephone:   +61 8 9315 2333 
Facsimile: 
+61 8 9315 2233
Auditor*
BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd 
38 Station Street 
Subiaco WA 6008
*These parties are included for information purposes only. They have not been involved in the preparation 
of this Prospectus.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 3
1
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER
1.1
Purpose of the Offer
On  18  August  2016,  the  Company  issued  19  million  Shares  (Placement  Shares)  at 
$0.05  to  raise  $950,000  (Placement)  before  costs.  The  funds  raised  from  the 
Placement will be directed towards the ongoing mining operation in the upper part 
of  the  Zoroastrian  Central  open  pit  and  to  resource  expansion  drilling  programs 
initially at the Bulletin South deposit.
The  Placement  Shares  were  issued  without  disclosure  under  Chapter  6D  of  the 
Corporations Act.
The Corporations Act generally requires that an offer within 12 months of securities 
issued  without  disclosure  requires  a  prospectus.    Section  708A(11)  of  the 
Corporations Act provides an exemption from this general requirement where:
(a)
(b)
the relevant securities are in a class of securities of the company that are 
quoted securities of the body; and
a prospectus is lodged with ASIC:
(i)
(ii)
on or after the day on which the relevant securities were issued but 
before the day on which the sale offer is made; or
before  the  day  on  which  the  relevant  securities  are  issued  and  the 
offers  of  securities  that  have  been  made  under  the  prospectus  are 
still open for acceptance on the day on which the relevant securities 
were issued.
The purpose of this Prospectus and the Offer is to comply with section 708A(11) of 
the Corporations Act so that Shares issued prior to this Prospectus can be offered 
for sale without disclosure.
1.2
New Shares offered for subscription
By  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  offers  for  subscription  1,000  New  Shares  at  an 
issue  price  of  $0.05  per  New  Share  to  raise  $50.  The  Offer  is  made  to  unrelated 
persons  who  are  invited  by  the  Company  to  subscribe  for  New  Shares  and  is  not 
open to the general public.
Applications for New Shares must be made using the Application Form attached to 
this  Prospectus.    The  Directors  will  have  discretion  over  which  Applications  to 
accept.  Applicants  will  need  to  follow  the  procedures  advised  to  them  by  the 
Company for Applications under this Offer.
The  rights  and  liabilities  of  the  New  Shares  offered  under  this  Prospectus  are 
summarised at section 3.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 4
1.3
Capital structure
At the close of the Offer, the capital structure of the Company will be:
Shares
Shares currently on issue (including Placement Shares)
707,144,423
New Shares offered under this Prospectus
Total Shares on issue following the Offer
1,000
707,145,423
1.4
Effect on control
There will be no effect on control as a result of the Offer.
1.5
Effect on financial position of the Company
There  is  no  material  effect  on  the  Company’s  cash  and  equity  position  by  this 
offer.
2
DETAILS OF THE OFFER
2.1  Minimum subscription
There is no minimum subscription.
2.2
Opening and closing dates
The Opening date of the Offer will be 26 August 2016 and the Closing Date will be 
as determined by the Board.
2.3
Application money held in trust
All  Application  Moneys  will  be  deposited  into  a  separate  bank  account  of  the 
Company  and  held  in  trust  for  Applicants  until  the  New  Shares  are  issued  or 
Application  Moneys  returned.    Any  interest  that  accrues  will  be  retained  by  the 
Company and will not be paid to Applicants.
2.4
Quotation
The Company will apply to ASX within 7 days after the date of this Prospectus for 
quotation  of  the  New  Shares  offered  by  this  Prospectus  on  ASX.    If  ASX  does  not 
grant permission for the quotation of the New Shares offered under this Prospectus 
within  3 months  after  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  or  such  longer  period  as 
modified  by  ASIC,  none  of  the  New  Shares  offered  by  this  Prospectus  will  be 
allotted  or  issued.    In  these  circumstances,  all  Applications  will  be  dealt  with  in 
accordance with the Corporations Act including the return of all Application Moneys 
without interest.  A decision by ASX to grant official quotation of the New Shares is
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 5
not to be taken in any way as an indication of ASX's view as to the merits of the 
Company or of the New Shares.
Quotation, if granted, of the New Shares offered by this Prospectus will commence 
as  soon  as  practicable  after  statements  of  holdings  of  the  New  Shares  are 
dispatched.
2.5
CHESS
The Company will apply to participate in the Clearing House Electronic Subregister 
System (CHESS).  CHESS is operated by ASX Settlement, a wholly owned subsidiary 
of ASX.
Under  CHESS,  the  Company  will  not  issue  certificates  to  investors.    Instead, 
security holders will receive a statement of their holdings in the Company.  If an 
investor is broker sponsored, ASX Settlement will send a CHESS statement.
2.6
Expenses of the Offer
The  total  estimated  expenses  of  this  Prospectus  are  estimated  to  be  $3,350, 
consisting of the following:
Cost
ASIC fees
Legal fees
Total
$
$2,350
$1,000
$3,350
These expenses have or will be paid by the Company.
2.7
Enquiries
Any  queries  regarding  the  Offer  should  be  directed  to  the  Company  Secretary  on 
+61 8 9335 7770.
3
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SECURITIES
Full details of the rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares are:
•
•
detailed  in  the  Constitution,  a  copy  of  which  can  be  inspected,  free  of 
charge,  at  the  registered  office  of  the  Company  during  normal  business 
hours; and
in  certain  circumstances,  regulated  by  the  Corporations  Act,  the  Listing 
Rules and the general law.
The following is a summary of the more significant rights and liabilities attaching to 
the  Shares.    This  summary  is  not  exhaustive  and  does  not  constitute  a  definitive
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 6
statement of the rights and liabilities of Shareholders.  To obtain such a statement, 
persons should seek independent legal advice.
(a)
Voting rights
Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any class 
or  classes  of  shares,  at  a  general  meeting  of  members  every  member  has 
one vote on a show of hands and one vote per Share on a poll.  Voting may 
be in person or by proxy, attorney or representative.
(b)
Dividends
Subject  to  the  Corporations  Act,  the  Listing  Rules  and  any  rights  or 
restrictions attached to a class of shares, the Company may pay dividends 
as the Directors authorise.
(c)
Future issues of securities
Subject  to  the  Corporations  Act  and  the  Listing  Rules,  the  Directors  may 
issue,  grant  options  over,  or  otherwise  dispose  of  unissued  shares  in  the 
Company at the times and on the terms that the Directors think proper and 
a share may be issued with preferential or special rights.
(d)
Transfer of Shares
A shareholder may transfer Shares by a market transfer in accordance with 
any computerised or electronic system established or recognised by ASX for 
the purpose of facilitating transfers in Shares or by an instrument in writing 
in a form approved by ASX or the Board.
(e)
Meetings and notices
Each  shareholder  is  entitled  to  receive  notice  of,  and  to  attend,  general 
meetings  for  the  Company  and  to  receive  all  notices,  accounts  and  other 
documents required to be sent to shareholders under the Constitution, the 
Corporations Act or the Listing Rules.
Shareholders may requisition meetings in accordance with the Corporations 
Act.
(f)
Liquidation rights
The  Company  has  one  class  of  shares  on  issue,  ordinary  shares.  Each 
ordinary Share ranks equally in the event of liquidation.
(g)
Variation of rights
Subject to the Listing Rules, the rights attached to the Shares may be varied 
with  the  consent  in  writing  of  shareholders  holding  three-quarters  of  the 
Shares  or  by  a  special  resolution  passed  at  a  separate  meeting  of  the 
holders of the Shares in accordance with the Corporations Act
(h)
Election of directors
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 7
At every annual general meeting one third of the Directors (rounded up to 
the nearest whole number) must retire from office. Any Director who would 
have  held  office  for  more  than  3  years  if  that  Director  remains  in  office 
until  the  next  general  meeting  must  retire.  These  retirement  rules  do  not 
apply to certain appointments including the managing director.
(i)
Indemnities
To the extent permitted by law the Company must indemnify each past and 
present Director and secretary against any liability incurred by that person 
as an officer of the Company and any legal costs incurred in defending an 
action in respect of such liability.
(j)
Winding up
Subject  to  the  Corporations  Act,  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  and  any  rights  or 
restrictions attached to a class of shares, on a winding up of the Company 
any surplus must be divided among the shareholders of the Company.
(k)
Shareholder liability
As  the  Shares  under  the  Prospectus  are  fully  paid  Shares,  they  are  not 
subject  to  any  calls  for  money  by  the  Directors  and  will  therefore  not 
become liable for forfeiture.
(l)
Alteration to the Constitution
The Constitution can only be amended by a special resolution passed by at 
least  three  quarters  of  shareholders  present  and  voting  at  the  general 
meeting. At least 28 days written notice specifying the intention to propose 
the resolution as a special resolution must be given.
(m)
Listing Rules
If  the  Company  is  admitted  to  trading  on  the  Official  List,  then  despite 
anything in the Constitution, if the Listing Rules prohibit an act being done, 
the act must not be done. Nothing in the Constitution prevents an act being 
done that the Listing Rules require to be done. If the Listing Rules require 
an act to be done or not to be done, authority is given for that act to be 
done or not to be done (as the case may be). If the Listing Rules require the 
Constitution to contain a provision and it does not contain such a provision, 
the  Constitution  is  deemed  to  contain  that  provision.  If  the  Listing  Rules 
require  the  Constitution  not  to  contain  a  provision  and  it  contains  such  a 
provision,  the  Constitution  is  deemed  not  to  contain  that  provision.  If  a 
provision  of  the  Constitution  is  or  becomes  inconsistent  with  the  Listing 
Rules,  the  Constitution  is  deemed  not  to  contain  that  provision  to  the 
extent of the inconsistency.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 8
4
RISK FACTORS
The New Shares offered under this Prospectus are considered highly speculative. An 
investment in the Company is not risk free and the Directors strongly recommend 
potential investors to consider the risk factors described below and together with 
information  contained  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus  and  to  consult  with  your 
professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for the New Shares pursuant 
to this Prospectus.
There  are  specific  risks  which  relate  directly  to  the  Company’s  business.  In 
addition, there are general risks, many of which are largely beyond the control of 
the Company and the Directors.  The risks identified in this section, or other risk 
factors, may have a material impact on the financial performance of the Company 
and the market price of the New Shares.
The following is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which 
the Company is exposed.
4.1
Company and industry risks
The  risks  outlined  below  are  specific  to  the  Company’s  operations  and  to  the 
resource exploration industry in which the Company operates.
(a)
Paddington Ore Treatment Agreement:
The Company treats its ore at the Paddington plant operated by Paddington 
Gold Pty Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of Norton Gold Fields Limited. 
Given the Company does not own the plant, its ability to treat its ore at the 
Paddington  plant  is  subject  to  continue  operations  of  the  plant,  which  is 
beyond the control of the Company and its Directors.
(b)
Hedging:
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  has  the  following  hedging 
positions sold at A$1,570 per ounce, which can be settled with physical gold 
delivery or financial closed out by buying back the forward contracts at the 
end of each quarters:
•  4,326 ounces due 30 September 2016 
•  4,873 ounces due 30 December 2016 
•  4,786 ounces due 31 March 2017 
•  5,705 ounces due 30 June 2017 
•  5,743 ounces due 29 September 2017 
•  3,104 ounces due 29 December 2017
In  addition,  the  Company  has  19,942  ounces  of  European  calls  grant 
exercisable  at  A$1,600  per  ounce  between  end  of  December  2017  to  the
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 9
end of March 2019. Average call grant ounces per quarter is 3,324. The calls 
grant can be settled with physical gold delivery at $1,600 or financial closed 
out  by  buying  back  the  calls  at  the  end  of  each  quarters.    There  is  a  risk 
that  the  Company  will  be  subject  to  additional  costs  for  managing  the 
hedging  positions  at  gold  prices  above  $1,570  per  ounce  at  the  time  of 
delivery and at gold prices above $1,600 per ounce for the call grant.
(c)
Commodity Price and Exchange Rate Risk
As the Company’s potential earnings will be largely derived from the sale of 
mineral commodities, the Company’s future revenues and cash flows will be 
impacted by changes in the prices of these commodities. Commodity prices 
fluctuate  and  are  affected  by  numerous  factors  beyond  the  control  of  the 
Company.  These  factors  include  current  and  expected  future  supply  and 
demand,  forward  selling  by  producers,  production  cost  levels  in  major 
metal  producing  centres  as  well  as  macroeconomic  conditions  such  as 
inflation and interest rates.
the
Furthermore, 
international  prices  of  most  commodities  are 
denominated in United States dollars while the Company’s cost base will be 
in  Australian  dollars.  Consequently  changes  in  the  Australian  dollar 
exchange  rate  will  impact  on  the  earnings  of  the  Company.  The  exchange 
rate  is  affected  by  numerous  factors  beyond  the  control  of  the  Company, 
including interest rates, inflation and the general economic outlook.
(d)
Mining Risk
Mine  designs,  Ore  Reserves  and  mine  production  forecasts  are  based  on 
mineral  resource  estimates  which  are  in  turn  based  on  interpretations  of 
the  mineralisation  from  exploration  and  resource  definition  drilling  data. 
While  the  Company  uses  its  best  endeavours  to  understand  the  geology 
through  appropriately  spaced  drilling,  the  extrapolation  of  geological 
information  from  drilling  data  is  subjective.  There  is  a  risk  that  mineral 
resource  estimates  may  predict  volumes  and  grades  which  may  not  be 
achieved  during  actual  mining.  The  risk  is  managed  by  conducting  close 
spaced grade control drilling ahead of mining to refine the resource model 
and accurately define ore boundaries. Mining to date has demonstrated that 
the  Zoroastrian  mineral  resource  estimation  has  predicted  more contained 
metal in the surface volumes than the grade control resource model due to 
extrapolation of resource definition drilling data up into the poorer tested 
volumes near to surface. This has impacted on the top 10% of the mineral 
resource in the open pit. The current mining level in the open pit is at the 
very top of the clearly defined ore zone development and resource drilling 
demonstrates  more  consistent  mineralised  intervals  with  the  expectation 
that  discrepancies  between  the  mineral  resource  estimates  and  the  grade 
control  resource  estimates  will  diminish  with  depth.  Independent  resource 
consultants have been engaged to review and report on this risk.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 10
(e)
Exploration Risk
The  successful  exploration  and  development  of  mineral  properties  is 
speculative.  Most  exploration  projects  do  not  result  in  the  discovery  of 
commercially  minable  deposits.  The  Tenements  of  the  Company  are  at 
various  stages  of  mine  development  and  exploration.  There  can  be  no 
assurance  that  further  exploration  of  the  Tenements,  or  any  other 
tenements that may be acquired in the future, will result in the discovery 
of  economic  deposits.  Even  if  an  apparently  viable  deposit  is  identified, 
there is no guarantee that it can be economically exploited into a producing 
mine.
The  exploration  costs  of  the  Company  are  based  on  certain  assumptions 
with  respect  to  the  method  and  timing  of  exploration.  By  their  nature, 
these  estimates  and  assumptions  are  subject  to  significant  uncertainties 
and,  accordingly,  the  actual  costs  may  materially  differ  from  these 
estimates and assumptions. Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the 
cost estimates and the underlying assumptions will be realised in practice, 
which may materially and adversely affect the Company’s viability.
(f)
Grade Risk
Due to the Company’s agreement to process its ore through the Paddington 
Mill on a blended basis, the final grade and recovery of the Company’s ore 
is determined by metallurgical test work and recovery results performed by 
an independent laboratory on representative samples of the ore. The grade 
and recovery determination procedure simulates the processing route at the 
Paddington  Mill  however  the  mine  claimed  grade  may  vary  from  the  final 
recovered  grade  received  from  laboratory.  This  risk  would  persist  even  if 
the Company processed ore through its own mill or batch treating ore at a 
similar third party processing facility.
(g)
Payment Risk
Under the terms of the Company’s agreement to process its ore through the 
Paddington Mill, the Company receives front end payments of approximately 
50%  of  the  value  of  recoverable  gold  within  the  ore  based  on  mine  grade 
estimates and assumed moisture and mill recovery parameters and the spot 
gold  price  at  the  time  of  delivery.  Following  completion  of  the  laboratory 
grade  and  recovery  determination  procedure  and  agreement  between  the 
parties  on  the  final  recoverable  gold  content  of  each  ore  batch,  a  second 
tranche payment covering the residual gold value of the ore and net of all 
treatment  and  haulage  costs,  is  payable  to  the  Company.  The  quantum  of 
the payment is dependent on the grade and recovery determination (refer 
Grade Risk) and the timing of the payment is dependent upon the sampling 
procedure and laboratory turnaround timing. There is a risk that delays in 
settlement of second tranche payments could affect operational cash flow.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 11
This risk has impacted on the Company in the past but modifications to the 
sampling  and  laboratory  procedures  have  been  implemented  to  overcome 
delays and improve second tranche payment schedules.
(h)
Operating Risks
The  operations  of  the  Company  may  be  affected  by  various  factors, 
including failure to locate or identify deposits, failure to achieve predicted 
grades  in  exploration  and  mining,  operational  and  technical  difficulties 
encountered in mining, difficulties in securing, commissioning and operating 
plant and equipment, mechanical failure or plant breakdown, unanticipated 
metallurgical problems which may affect extraction costs, adverse weather 
conditions,  industrial  and  environmental  accidents,  industrial  disputes  and 
unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of consumables, spare parts, 
plant and equipment.
Having commenced mining operations in November 2015, the Company has 
a limited operating history, although it should be noted that the Company’s 
Directors  and  operations  management  have  between  them  significant 
operational experience in the Kalgoorlie region. No assurances can be given 
that the Company will achieve commercial viability through the successful 
exploration and mining of the Tenements.
(i)
Mineral Resources Risk
The Company’s mineral resources and ore reserves estimates are based on a 
number of assumptions in accordance with the JORC Code. There can be no 
assurance  that  the  Company’s  mineral  resources  and  ore  reserves  will  be 
recovered in the quantities, qualities or yields presented to the market.
Mineral  resources  and  ore  reserves  estimates  are  inherently  prone  to 
variability.  They  involve  expressions  of  judgment  with  regard  to  the 
presence and quality of mineralisation and the ability to extract and process 
the mineralisation economically. These judgments are based on a variety of 
factors, such as knowledge, experience and industry practice. The accuracy 
of these estimates may be affected by many factors, including the quality 
of the results of drilling and sampling of the mineral deposits and analysis of 
the  mineral  samples  and  the  procedures  adopted  and  experience  of  the 
person(s) making the estimates.
There  are  risks  associated  with  such  estimates,  including  that  the  mineral 
mined  may  be  of  a  different  or  inferior  quality,  volume,  overburden  strip 
ratio or stripping cost from the mineral resource estimates. Such estimates 
may  also  be  revised  following  actual  production,  further  exploration  or 
analysis.
If the Company encounters mineralisation or geological or mining conditions 
different  from  those  predicted  by  historical  drilling,  sampling  and  similar
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 12
examinations,  it  may  have  to  adjust  its  mining  plans  in  a  way  that  may 
materially  and  adversely  affect  its  business,  prospects,  financial  condition 
and results of operations and reduce the estimated amount of gold mineral 
resources and ore reserves available for production and expansion plans.
(j)
Future Capital Needs
Further funding of projects may be required by the Company to support its 
ongoing  activities  and  operations.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  such 
funding  will  be  available  on  satisfactory  terms  or  at  all.  Any  inability  to 
obtain funding will adversely affect the business and financial condition of 
the Company and, consequently, its performance.
(k)
No Profit to Date
While the Directors have confidence in the future revenue-earning potential 
of the Company, there can be no certainty that the Company will achieve or 
sustain  profitability  or  achieve  or  sustain  positive  cash  flow  from  its 
operating activities.
(l)
Reliance on Key Personnel
As  a  new  gold  production  Company,  Excelsior  Gold  is  dependent  on  its 
senior  management  and  key  personnel  for  the  day-to-day  operations  and 
strategic management of the Company. The value of the Company’s Shares 
and  the  operations  of  the  Company  could  be  adversely  affected  by  the 
departure of any of these employees.
(m)
Litigation Risk
During the course of its operations the Company faces the risk of litigation 
with counterparties and others.  In particular, GWR has asserted that it may 
have  been  supplied  with  misleading  information  prior  to  entering  into  the 
Term  Sheet.    The  Company  has  investigated  the  assertion  and  does  not 
believe that it has any merit.
4.2
General investment risks
The  risks  outlined  below  are  some  of  the  general  risks  that  may  affect  an 
investment in the Company.
(a)
Securities Investments and Share Market Conditions
There  are  risks  associated  with  any  securities  investment.    The  prices  at 
which the securities trade may fluctuate in response to a number of factors.
Furthermore, the stock market, and in particular the market for exploration 
and  mining  companies  may  experience  extreme  price  and  volume 
fluctuations  that  may  be  unrelated  or  disproportionate  to  the  operating 
performance  of  such  companies.    These  factors  may  materially  adversely 
affect the market price of the securities of the Company regardless of the
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 13
Company's  operational  performance.    Neither  the  Company  nor  the 
Directors warrant the future performance of the Company, or any return of 
an investment in the Company.
(b)
Liquidity Risk
The  market  for  the  Company’s  Shares  may  be  illiquid.    As  a  consequence 
investors may be unable to readily exit or realise their investment.
(c)
Economic Risk
Changes  in  both  Australia  and  world  economic  conditions  may  adversely 
affect the financial performance of the Company.  Factors such as inflation, 
currency  fluctuations,  interest  rates,  industrial  disruption  and  economic 
growth  may  impact  on  future  operations  and  earnings.  The  Company’s 
possible  revenues  and  price  of  its  securities  can  be  affected  by  these 
factors which are beyond the control of the Company and its Directors.
(d)
Government Regulation and Policy
Mining  is  subject  to  extensive  regulation  by  local,  State  and  Federal 
governments  in  relation  to  exploration,  production,  taxes  and  royalties, 
labour  standards,  occupational  health,  waste  disposal,  protection  and 
rehabilitation  of  the  environment,  mine  reclamation,  mine  safety,  toxic 
substances, native title and other matters. Compliance with such laws and 
regulations  will  increase  the  costs  of  exploring,  drilling,  developing, 
constructing, operating and closing mines and other production facilities.
(e)
Tenure and Access
Mining and exploration tenements are subject to periodic renewal. There is 
no  guarantee  that  current  or  future  tenements  or  future  applications  for 
production tenements will be approved.
The  Company’s  tenements  are  subject  to  numerous  State-specific 
legislation conditions. The renewal of the term of the granted tenement is 
also subject to discretion of the relevant Minister. Renewal conditions may 
include  increased  expenditure  and  work  commitments  or  compulsory 
relinquishment  of  areas  of  the  tenements  comprising  the  Company’s 
projects.  The  imposition  of  new  conditions  or  the  inability  to  meet  those 
conditions  may  adversely  affect  the  operations,  financial  position  and/or 
performance of the Company.
5
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
5.1
Disclosing entity
The  Company  is  a  ‘disclosing  entity’  (as  defined  in  section  111AC  of  the 
Corporations Act) for the purposes of section 713 of the Corporations Act and, as
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 14
such,  is  subject  to  regular  reporting  and  disclosure  obligations.    Specifically,  like 
all  listed  companies,  the  Company  is  required  to  continuously  disclose  any 
information it has to the market which a reasonable person would expect to have a 
material effect on the price or the value of the Company's securities.
This  Prospectus  is  intended  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  publicly  available 
information  in  relation  to  the  Company  which  has  been  notified  to  ASX  and  does 
not  include  all  of  the  information  that  would  be  included  in  a  prospectus  for  an 
initial public offering of securities in an entity that is not already listed on a stock 
exchange.    Investors  should  therefore  have  regard  to  the  other  publicly  available 
information in relation to the Company before making a decision whether or not to 
invest.
Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such  enquires  as  are  reasonable, 
the  Company  believes  that  it  has  complied  with  the  general  and  specific 
requirements  of  ASX  as  applicable  from  time  to  time  throughout  the  period  from 
lodgment  of  the  Company’s  annual  financial  statements  of  the  Company  for  the 
financial  year  ended  30  June  2015  to  the  issue  of  this  Prospectus  which  required 
the Company to notify ASX of information about specified events or matters as they 
arise for the purpose of ASX making that information available to the stock market 
conducted by ASX.
Information  that  is  already  in  the  public  domain  has  not  been  reported  in  this 
Prospectus other than that which is considered necessary to make this Prospectus 
complete.
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act states that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations;
copies of documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company (not 
being documents referred to in section 1274(2)(a) of the Corporations Act) 
may be obtained from, or inspected at, the offices of the ASIC; and
it will provide a copy of each of the following documents, free of charge, to 
any person on request between the date of issue of this Prospectus and the 
Closing Date:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  annual  financial  statements  of  the  Company  for  the  financial 
year  ended  30  June  2015  being  the  last  financial  statements  for  a 
financial year, of the Company lodged with the ASIC before the issue 
of this Prospectus;
any half-year financial report lodged with ASIC by the Company after 
the lodgment of that annual report and before the lodgment of this 
Prospectus; and
any  continuous  disclosure  notices  given  by  the  Company  after  the 
lodgment of that annual report and the lodgment of this Prospectus.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 15
Copies  of  all  documents  lodged  with  the  ASIC  in  relation  to  the  Company 
can be obtained free of charge from the Company’s registered office during 
normal office hours.  The Company has lodged the following announcements 
with ASX since the 30 June 2015 audited financial statements:
Date
Description of Announcement
26/08/2016
Termination of Technical Director’s Employment
23/08/2016
Notice Under Section 249D of the Corporations Act
22/08/2016
Settlement of Zoroastrian Ore Batches
19/08/2016
Issue of Shares and Appendix 3B
17/08/2016
Becoming a Substantial Shareholder
17/08/2016
Change of Director’s Interest Notices
16/08/2016
Issue of Shares and Appendix 3B
12/08/2016
Underwritten Rights Issue & New Placement Raises $6.8M
03/08/2016  Notice of General Meeting
03/08/2016  Supplementary Prospectus for Rights Issue
03/08/2016  $4.8 Million Rights Issue Now Fully Underwritten
29/07/2016  Quarterly Cashflow Report – June 2016
29/07/2016  Quarterly Activities Report – June 2016
28/07/2016  Extension of Rights Issue Closing Date
21/07/2016  Despatch of Rights Issue Prospectus
18/07/2016
Issue of Shares to Farrah & Appendix 3B
15/07/2016  Letter to Shareholders – Rights Issue
13/07/2016  Appendix 3B – Rights Issue
13/07/2016  Change of Director’s Interest Notices
13/07/2016  Rights Issue Prospectus
12/07/2016  Funding and Operational Update
08/07/2016  Trading Halt
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 16
Date
Description of Announcement
04/07/2016  Extension of Funding Program Timetable
24/06/2016
Initial Director’s Interest Notice
24/06/2016  Appointment of Director – Jimmy Lee
23/06/2016  Appendix 3B
23/06/2016  Completion of Satellite Pits Ore Payments
21/06/2016  The CEO Sessions Presentation - June 2016
21/06/2016  Recent  Results  Demonstrate  Significant  Upside  To
Zoroastrian
20/06/2016  Appendix 3B
20/06/2016  GWR: takes Cornerstone Position in Excelsior Gold
20/06/2016  Reinstatement
20/06/2016  New Cornerstone Investor Provides Financing Certainty
16/06/2016  Suspension extension
14/06/2016  Suspension extension
07/06/2016  Suspension extension
06/06/2016  Extension of Suspension
01/06/2016  Extension of Suspension
31/05/2016  Suspension
27/05/2016  Trading Halt
24/05/2016  Navan Significant Drilling Results
19/05/2016  Further Processing Expansion for 2016
18/05/2016  Production Optimisation at Zoroastrian Central Pit
17/05/2016  Resolution of Ore Payment Delays
12/05/2016  RIU Sydney Conference May 2016
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 17
Date
Description of Announcement
04/05/2016  Zoroastrian High Grade Gold Vein Structures
02/05/2016  Quarterly Cashflow Report - March 2016
02/05/2016  Quarterly Activities Report - March 2016
19/04/2016  Gold Production Update
18/03/2016  Commencement of Drilling at Zoroastrian
15/03/2016
Interim Financial Report - 31 December 2015
14/03/2016  Production Cost Estimate and Cash Position
23/02/2016
Increased Production Forecast for 2016
03/02/2016  Processing Allocation Expansion for 2016
01/02/2016  February 2016 Investor Presentation
29/01/2016  Quarterly Cashflow Report - December 2015
29/01/2016  Quarterly Activities Report - December 2015
08/01/2016  Excelsior Gold Buys Out Joint Venture Interest
07/01/2016  Third Open Pit Brought Online
04/01/2016  Loan Facility Financial Closure and Expiry of Options
31/12/2015  Mining Fleet Expanded to Accelerate Production
30/12/2015  First Ore Payment Received
22/12/2015  Zoroastrian South Open Pit Mine Plan Accelerated
10/12/2015  Commencement of Ore Haulage
27/11/2015  AGM Presentation
27/11/2015  Results of Annual General Meeting
19/11/2015  Commencement of Mining
18/11/2015  Becoming a substantial holder
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 18
Date
Description of Announcement
09/11/2015  Mining Contract and Construction Update
03/11/2015  Better News Drilling Returns Shallow Gold Intercepts
02/11/2015  Change of Director's Interest Notice
02/11/2015
Issue of Shares and Appendix 3B
30/10/2015  Quarterly Cashflow Report - September 2015
30/10/2015  Quarterly Activities Report - September 2015
28/10/2015  Excelsior Gold Regains Nickel Rights
27/10/2015  Excelsior Gold Fully Funded to Production
26/10/2015  Notice of Annual General Meeting
23/10/2015  Trading Halt
22/10/2015  Lady Kelly Drilling Returns Broad High Grade Gold Intercept
21/10/2015  Company Update
14/10/2015  Commencement of Drilling at Bulletin
13/10/2015  Capital Cost Reduction Ahead of Mine Production
30/09/2015  Appendix 4G & Corporate Governance Statement
ASX maintains files containing publicly available information from all listed 
companies.  The  Company’s  file  is  available  for  inspection  at  ASX  during 
business hours.
5.2
No prospective financial forecasts
The  Directors  have  considered  the  matters  outlined  in  ASIC  Regulatory  Guide  170 
and  believe  that  they  do  not  have  a  reasonable  basis  to  forecast  future  earnings 
because the proposed future operations of the Company do not have an operating 
history  from  which  reliable  forecasts  can  be  made.    Accordingly,  any  forecast  or 
projection information would contain such a broad range of potential outcomes and 
possibilities  that  it  is  not  possible  to  prepare  a  reliable  best  estimate  forecast  or 
projection.
Notwithstanding  the  above,  this  Prospectus  includes,  or  may  include,  forward 
looking  statements  including,  without  limitation,  forward  looking  statements
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 19
regarding  the  Company’s  financial  position,  business  strategy,  and  plans  and 
objectives for its business and future operations (including development plans and 
objectives), which have been based on the Company’s current expectations.  These 
forward-looking  statements  are,  however,  subject  to  known  and  unknown  risks, 
uncertainties  and  assumptions  that  could  cause  actual  results,  performance  or 
achievements 
results,  performance  or 
achievements  expressed  or  implied  by  such  forward-looking  statements.  Such 
forward  looking  statements  are  based  on  numerous  assumptions  regarding  the 
Company’s  present  and  future  business  strategies  and  environment  in  which  the 
Company will operate in the future.
to  differ  materially
from
future
Matters not yet known to the Company or not currently considered material to the 
Company  may  impact  on  these  forward  looking  statements.  These  statements 
reflect  views  held  only  as  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus.  In  light  of  these  risks, 
uncertainties  and  assumptions,  the  forward-looking  statements  in  this  Prospectus 
might not occur. Investors are therefore cautioned not to place undue reliance on 
these statements.
5.3
Privacy
The Company collects information about each Applicant provided on an Application 
Form  for  the  purposes  of  processing  the  Application  and,  if  the  Application  is 
successful, to administer the Applicant’s security holding in the Company.
By  submitting  an  Application  Form,  each  Applicant  agrees  that  the  Company  may 
use  the  information  provided  by  an  Applicant  on  the  Application  Form  for  the 
purposes set out in this privacy disclosure statement and may disclose it for those 
purposes  to  the  Share  Registry,  the  Company’s  related  body  corporates,  agents, 
contractors  and  third  party  service  providers,  including  mailing  houses  and 
professional advisors, and to ASX and regulatory authorities.
If an Applicant becomes a Shareholder, the Corporations Act requires the Company 
to include information about the Shareholder (including name, address and details 
of  the  Shares  held)  in  its  public  register.    The  information  contained  in  the 
Company’s  public  register  must  remain  there  even  if  that  person  ceases  to  be  a 
Shareholder.    Information  contained  in  the  Company’s  register  is  also  used  to 
facilitate  distribution  payments  and  corporate  communications  (including  the 
Company’s  financial  results,  annual  reports  and  other  information  that  the 
Company may wish to communicate to its security holders) and compliance by the 
Company with legal and regulatory requirements.
If  you  do  not  provide  the  information  required  on  the  Application  Form,  the 
Company may not be able to accept or process your Application.  An Applicant has 
the  right  to  gain  access  to  the  information  that  the  Company  holds  about  that 
person subject to certain exceptions under law.  A fee may be charged for access.  
Such requests must be made in writing to the Company’s registered office.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 20
5.4
Directors’ interests
As at the date of this Prospectus the Directors have a relevant interest in securities 
of the Company and remuneration as set out below.
Director
Peter Bird
David Hamlyn
Chen Chik (Nicholas) Ong
Jimmy Kong Leng Lee
Shares
4,350,000
17,978,666
6,458,334
Nil
Remuneration  paid  to  Directors  in  the  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus
Director
Peter Bird3
David Hamlyn1
Chen Chik (Nicholas) Ong2
Jimmy Kong Leng Lee
Notes:
2015/2016
2014/2015
$60,000
$360,000
$223,200
$0
$55,833
$355,833
$198,470
$0
1  Mr Hamlyn is the Company’s Managing Director and is entitled to an annual salary 
of  $394,200  inclusive  of  superannuation.  Share  based  remuneration  (amount 
expensed)  for  Mr  Hamlyn  is  $116,934  and  $348,738  for  financial  years  2016  and 
2015 respectively. The 2015 share based remuneration includes expense relating to 
cancellation of shares and the resulting acceleration of their value.
2    Mr  Ong  is  an  Executive  Director  and  Company  Secretary,  and  is  entitled  to  an 
annual  salary  of  $244,404  inclusive  of  superannuation.  Share  based  remuneration 
(amount expensed) for Mr Ong is $77,956 and $98,036 for financial years 2016 and 
2015 respectively. The 2015 share based remuneration includes expense relating to 
cancellation of shares and the resulting acceleration of their value.
3  Mr Bird is a Non-Executive Director and is entitled to an annual salary of $65,700 
inclusive  of  superannuation.  Share  based  remuneration  (amount  expensed)  for  Mr 
Bird is $38,978 and $143,939 for financial years 2016 and 2015 respectively.  The 
2015 share based remuneration includes expense relating to cancellation of shares 
and the resulting acceleration of their value.
The Company has entered into indemnity, insurance and access deeds with each of 
the Directors (Deeds).  Under the Deeds, the Company agrees to indemnify each of
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 21
the  Directors  to  the  extent  permitted  by  the  Corporations  Act  against  certain 
liabilities incurred by the Directors whilst acting as an officer of the Company, and 
to insure each Director against certain risks to which the Company is exposed as an 
officer  of  the  Company.    The  Deeds  also  grant  each  Director  a  right  of  access  to 
certain  records  of  the  Company  for  a  period  of  up  to  7 years  after  the  Director 
ceases to be an officer of the Company.
The  Deeds  were  entered  into  as  part  consideration  for  the  Directors  agreeing  to 
hold office as directors of the Company.
The Company also pays premiums to insure all of the Directors against liabilities for 
costs  and  expenses  incurred  by  them  in  defending  legal  proceedings  arising  from 
their conduct whilst acting in the capacity as a Director of the Company.
5.5
No other interests
Other  than  as  set  out  above  or  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus,  no  Director  or 
proposed Director holds at the date of this Prospectus, or held at any time during 
the  last  2 years  before  the  date  of  lodgment  of  this  Prospectus  with  ASIC,  any 
interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
any  property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  the  Company  in 
connection with its formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer,
and no amounts have been paid or agreed to be paid by any person and no benefits 
have been given or agreed to be given by any person:
(d)
(e)
to  a  Director  or  proposed  Director  to  induce  him  or  her  to  become,  or  to 
qualify as, a Director; or
for services provided by a Director or proposed Director in connection with 
the formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer.
5.6
Interests of promoters and named persons
Except as disclosed in this Prospectus, no other person named in this Prospectus as 
performing  a  function  in  a  professional  advisory  or  other  capacity  in  connection 
with the preparation or distribution of the Prospectus, nor any firm in which any of 
those persons is or was a partner nor any company in which any of those persons is 
or  was  associated  with,  has  now,  or  has  had,  in  the  2 year  period  ending  on  the 
date of this Prospectus, any interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in connection 
with its formation or promotion or the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 22
Kings Park Corporate Lawyers has acted as solicitors to the Offer.  In respect of this 
work, the Company will pay approximately $1,000 (inclusive of GST). Subsequently 
fees  will  be  paid  in  accordance  with  normal  hourly  rates.  Kings  Park  Corporate 
Lawyers have received fees of approximately $80,000 (inclusive of GST) for services 
to the Company in the 2 years prior to the date of this Prospectus.
5.7
Consents
Each of the persons referred to in this section:
(a)
has given and has not, before the date of lodgment of this Prospectus with 
ASIC withdrawn their written consent:
(i)
(ii)
to  be  named  in  the  Prospectus  in  the  form  and  context  which  it  is 
named; and
where  applicable,  to  the  inclusion  in  this  Prospectus  of  the 
statement(s) and/or reports (if any) by that person in the form and 
context in which it appears in this Prospectus;
has not caused or authorised the issue of this Prospectus;
has not made any statement in this Prospectus or any statement on which a 
statement in this Prospectus is based, other than specified below;
to the maximum extent permitted by law, expressly disclaims all liability in 
respect of, makes no representation regarding, and takes no responsibility 
for,  any  part  of  this  Prospectus,  other  than  the  references  to  their  name 
and the statement(s) and/or report(s) (if any) specified below and included 
in this Prospectus with the consent of that person.
(b)
(c)
(d)
Name
Kings Park Corporate Lawyers
Role
Lawyers
5.8
Litigation
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  is  not  involved  in  any  legal 
proceedings  of  a  material  nature  and  the  Directors  are  not  aware  of  any  legal 
proceedings pending or threatened against the Company.
6
DIRECTORS’ RESPONSIBILITY AND CONSENT
Each Director has consented to the lodgment of this Prospectus with the ASIC and 
has not withdrawn that consent.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 23
Dated: 26 August 2016
Signed for and on behalf of 
Excelsior Gold Limited by 
Chen Chik (Nicholas) Ong
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 24
7
GLOSSARY
Where  the  following  terms  are  used  in  this  Prospectus  they  have  the  following 
meanings:
A$ or $
Applicant
Application
Australian dollars unless otherwise stated.
a  person  who  submits  a  valid  Application  Form 
pursuant to this Prospectus.
a  valid  application  made  on  an  Application  Form  to 
subscribe for New Shares pursuant to this Prospectus.
Application Form
the application form attached to this Prospectus.
Application Moneys
money paid by an Investor upon Application.
ASIC
ASX
the Australian Securities & Investments Commission.
the  ASX  Limited  ACN  008  624  691  and  where  the 
context  permits  the  Australian  Securities  Exchange 
operated by ASX Limited.
ASX Settlement
ASX Settlement Pty Ltd (ACN 008 504 532).
Board
Closing Date
the board of Directors.
the closing date for receipt of Application Forms under 
this Prospectus as determined by the Board.
Company or EXG
Excelsior Gold Limited (ACN 123 629 863).
Constitution
the constitution of the Company.
Corporations Act
the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Director
a  director  of  the  Company  and,  where  the  context 
requires, the proposed Directors.
Listing Rules
the listing rules of the ASX.
New Share
a Share offered under this Prospectus.
Offer
the offer of New Shares made under this Prospectus.
Placement
has the meaning given in section 1.1.
Placement Shares
has the meaning given in section 1.1.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 25
Prospectus
prospectus
this 
prospectus.
and
includes
the
electronic
Share
a fully paid ordinary share in the Company.
Share Registry
Security Transfer Registrars.
Shareholder
the registered holder of Shares in the Company.
WST
Western Standard Time.
Prospectus – Excelsior Gold Limited
Page 26