
Notice of Meeting
President’s Message
And Information Circular
-2016-
1
NOTICE OF ANNUAL AND SPECIAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
TAKE  NOTICE  that  an  Annual  and  Special  Meeting  of  Shareholders  (the  "Meeting")  of  WASECO  RESOURCES 
INC. (the "Corporation") will be held at the Offices of Blaney McMurtry LLP, Ste. 1500, 2 Queen Street East, Toronto,  
Ontario, M5C 3G5, on Wednesday, August 31st, 2016, at 11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) for the following purposes:
To receive and consider the President's Report to Shareholders and the audited financial statements of the Corporation for  
the year ended February 29th, 2016, together with the Auditors' Report thereon; and
(a) 
(b)
(c) 
(d)
to elect Directors of the Corporation for the ensuing year;  
to appoint the auditors of the Corporatio n for the ensuing year and to authorize the Directors to fix the auditors' 
remuneration; 
to approve the Stock Option Plan; and  
to transact such other business as may properly be brought before the Meeting or any adjournment or 
adjournments thereof.
Only shareholders of record at the close of business on July  29th, 2016 will be entitled to vote at the Meeting. A copy of 
the Corporation’s audited financial statements for the year ended February 2 9th, 2016, together with the Auditors’ Report 
thereon form part of the Corporation’s Annual Report and togethe r with the Information Circular and form of Proxy are 
filed  on  SEDAR  and  on  the  Company  web  site.  Shareholders  who  are  unable  to  attend  the  Meeting  in  person  are 
requested  to  complete,  date  and  sign  the  enclosed  form  of  proxy  and  return  same  in  the  envelope  provided  for  that 
purpose.  The  Directors  have  fixed  the  hour  of  11:00  a.m.  on  August  29th,    2016  before  which  time  the  instrument  of 
proxy  to  be  used  at  the  Meeting  must  be  deposited  with  the  Corporation,  c/o  TSX  Trust,  Attention:  Proxy 
Department, 200 University Ave. Ste. 300 Toronto,  Ontario M5H 4H1or delivered personally to the Chairman prior 
to the commencement of the Meeting.
DATED at Toronto, Ontario, July 29th, 2016
WASECO RESOURCES INC.                                                                                                                                                                                     
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD,
Richard Williams 
President
2
To our Shareholders
A  few  years  ago,  we  made  the  Battle  Mountain  Ridge  gold  property  our  lead  project.     The  property  is  strategically  located  on  the 
prolific  Battle  Mountain  Trend  in  Nevada,  immediately  adjacent  to  Newmont’s  Trenton  Canyon  Mine,  and  within  a  few  miles  of  the 
Marigold and Phoenix mines, each hosting multi-million ounce resources.
Exploration by previous holders  had  established the presence of near  surface oxidized  gold, at  comparable  grades  and  widths to  that 
being  locally  mined  by  the  majors.  Since  acquiring  rights  to  the  Battle  Mountain  Ridge  Property,  we  carried  out  a  surface  sampling 
program which completed the surface grid over the property. During this process, a new gold target was identified.  A six hole diamond 
drill program was subsequently completed in the fall of 2012 under the direction of Mr. Bartlett, Director and Project Manager, who has 
extensive exploration experience in Nevada.
The Waseco program utilized HQ (63mm diameter) core drilling for sample recovery at Battle Mountain Ridge. All previous progr ams 
utilized  reverse  circulation  (“RC”)  drilling  techniques,  The  goal  of  this  program  was  to  confirm  prior  drilling,  gain  a  better 
understanding  of  the  structural  controls,  confirm  the  extension  of  the  newly  identified  gold  zone  at  depth,  and  determine  whether  the 
previously identified gold zones continue to depth.
The  highlight  of  the  program  was  Hole  #5  (drilled  at  -55  degrees  to  the  east)  which  returned  an  intersection  of  25.39g/t  Au  (0.9  oz./t) 
over 3.7m (12 feet) in the interval 150-153.7m down hole (450-465 feet). These intersections were from the North Zone. This interval 
included intersections of:
47.6 g/t Au (1.68 oz. /t) over 0.9m (3 feet) and 
61g/t Au (2.15 oz. /t) over 0.6m (2 feet)
This hole intersected the highest grade gold mineralization reported from any known exploration program completed on the prop erty 
to date. It is also noteworthy,  that the gold was found within a stibnite zone, which is well established as a pathfinder metal for gold 
deposition.    The stibnite zone carried gold at surface and at a depth of 150m (450ft).  This high grade zone remains open laterally and 
to  depth.  An  upper  zone,  higher  in  the  hole,  between  128  and  141  m  (420-465  feet),  returned  gold  values  averaging  1.82g/t  Au 
(0.06oz) over 13.72m (45 feet). A follow-up drill program was planned and permitted but    postponed due to market conditions.
With  the  recent  improvement  in  both  gold  prices  and  market  sentiment,  the  Board  has  given  the  “green  light”  to  proceed,  and 
preparations  are  currently  underway  to  complete  a  follow-up  reverse  circulation  program  in  the  late  summer  or  early  fall.  This 
program will seek to establish continuity of the high grade zones as well as test other identified targets.
We thank you for your continued support.
Waseco Resources Inc .
Richard Williams 
President & CEO 
J u l y  2 9 th,   2 0 1 6
3
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
Annual and Special Meeting of Shareholders
This  management  information  circular  (the  “Circular”)  is  furnished  in  connection  with  the  solicitation  by  the 
management of Waseco Resources Inc. (the "Corporation") of proxies for use at the annual and special meeting of 
shareholders  of  the  Corporation  to  be  held  at  the  time  and  place  and  for  the  purposes  set  forth  in  the 
accompanying notice of meeting (the “Notice of Meeting”).  Such meeting is hereinafter referred to as the  "Meeting". 
The information contained herein is given as of July  29th, 2016, except as otherwise noted. The address of the registered  
office of the Corporation is Ste. 1500, 2 Queen Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3G5.
SOLICITATION OF PROXIES
It is expected that the solicitation of proxies will be primarily by mail, b ut proxies may also be solicited personally or by 
telephone by employees of the Corporation, or persons retained by the Corporation for that purpose. The cost of soliciting  
proxies  will  be  borne  by  the  Corporation.  The  Corporation  will  reimburse  brokers,  c ustodians,  nominees  and  other 
fiduciaries  for  their  reasonable  charges  and  expenses  incurred  in  forwarding  this  proxy  material  to  beneficial  owners  of  
shares. In addition to solicitation by mail, certain officers, directors and employees of the Corporation  may solicit proxies 
by telephone, telegraph or personally. These persons will receive no compensation for such solicitation.
MANNER IN WHICH PROXIES WILL BE VOTED
The shares represented by the accompanying form of proxy (if the same is properly executed i n favour of Messrs. Richard 
Williams or James Richardson, the management nominees, and received at the offices of  TSX Trust, 200 University Ave. 
Ste  300,  Toronto,  Ontario  M5H  4H1,  (the  "Transfer  Agent")  not  later  than  11:00  a.m.  (Toronto  time)  on  Monday, 
August 29th, 2016 (or, if the Meeting is adjourned, not later than 48 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and  holidays, 
preceding the time of such adjourned Meeting, or delivered to the Chairman of the Meeting on the day of the  Meeting 
or any adjournment thereof prior to the time of voting) will be voted or withheld from voting at the Meeting and,  subject 
to  Section  114  of  the  B u siness  Co rpo ra ti on s  A ct   (Ontario),  where  a  choice  is  specified  in  respect  of  any  matter  to   be 
acted  upon,  will  be  voted  in  accordance  with  the  specifications  made.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  specification,  such 
shares will be voted in favour of such matter.
The accompanying form of proxy confers discretionary authority upon the persons named therein with respect to 
amendments or variations to matters identified in the accompanying Notice of Meeting, and with respect to other 
matters  that  may  properly  come  before  the  Meeting.  At  the  date  hereof,  management  of  the  Corporation  knows  of  no 
such amendments, variations or other matters.
A registered shareholder attending the Meeting has the right to vote in person and, if he or she does so, his or her proxy is  
nullified with respect to matters such person votes upon and any subsequent matters thereafter to be voted upon at the 
Meeting or any adjournment thereof. A shareholder whose shares are held through a Registered plan or in any other way  
are registered in the name of his broker or another entity (as discussed more fully below) is not a registered shareholder  
and is required to follow the proxy submission process.
ALTERNATE PROXY
Each  shareholder  has  the  right  to  appoint  a  person  other  than  the  persons  named  in  the  accompanying  form  of 
proxy,  who  need  not  be  a  Shareholder,  to  attend  and  act  for  the  Shareholder  on  the  Shareholder’s  behalf  at  the 
Meeting.  Any  shareholder  wishing  to  exercise  such  right  may  do  so  by  inserting  in  the  blank  space  provided  in  the 
accompanying  form  of  proxy  the  name  of  the  person  whom  such  shareholder  wishes  to  appoint  as  proxy  and  by  duly 
depositing such proxy, or by duly completing and depositing another proper form of proxy and depositing the same with 
the Transfer Agent at the address and within the time specified under "Manner In Which Proxies Will Be Voted" above.
4
REVOCABILITY OF PROXY
A  shareholder  giving  a  proxy  has  the  power  to  revoke  it.  Such  revocation  may  be  made  by  the  shareholder  duly 
executing  another  form  of  proxy  bearing  a  later  date  and  duly  depositing  the  same  before  the  specified  time,  or  may  be 
made  by  written  instrument  revoking  such  proxy  execut ed  by  the  shareholder  or  by  his  or  her  attorney  authorized  in 
writing or, if the shareholder is a body corporate, by an officer or attorney thereof duly authorized, and deposited either a t 
the registered office of the Corporation at Ste. 1500, 2 Queen Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3G5 at any time up to 
and including 11:00 a.m. (Toronto time) 48 hours preceding the date of the Meeting or any adjournment thereof, or with 
the  Chairman  of  the  Meeting  on  the  day  of  the  Meeting  or  any  adjournment  thereof.  If   such  written  instrument  is 
deposited with the Chairman of the Meeting on the day of the Meeting or any adjournment thereof, such instrument will 
not be effective with respect to any matter on which a vote has already been cast pursuant to such proxy.
VOTING BY NON-REGISTERED SHAREHOLDER
The  meeting  materials  are  being  sent  to  both  registered  and  non -registered  owners  of  the  securities.  If  you  are  a 
non-registered  owner,  and  the  issuer  or  its  agent  has  sent  these  materials  directly  to  you,  your  name  and  add ress  and 
information  about  your  holdings  of  securities  have  been  obtained  in  accordance  with  applicable  securities  regulatory 
requirements from the intermediary holding on your behalf.
Only registered shareholders or the persons they appoint as their proxi es are permitted to vote at the Meeting. However, in 
many  cases,  shares  owned  by  a  person  (a  “non-registered  holder”)  are  registered  either:  (a)  in  the  name  of  an 
intermediary  (an  “Intermediary”)  that  the  non-registered  holder  deals  with  in  respect  of  the  shares  (Intermediaries 
include,  among  others,  banks,  trust  companies,  securities  dealers  or  brokers  and  trustees  or  administrators  of 
self-administered  registered  savings  plans,  registered  retirement  income  funds,  registered  education  savings  plans  and 
similar  plans);  or  (b)  in  the  name  of  a  clearing  agency  (such  as  CDS  Clearing  and  Depository  Services  Inc.   (“CDS”))  of 
which  the  Intermediary  is  a  participant.  In  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  National  Instrument  54 -101  of  the 
Canadian Securities Administrators, the Corporation has distributed copies of this Circular and the accompanying Notice of 
Meeting  together  with  the  form  of  proxy  (collectively,  the  “Meeting  Materials”)  to  the  clearing  agencies  and 
Intermediaries for onward distribution to non-registered holders of shares.
Intermediaries are required to forward the Meeting Materials to non -registered holders unless a non-registered holder has 
waived the right to receive them. Very often, Intermediaries will use service companies to forward the Meeti ng Materials 
to non-registered holders. Generally, non-registered holders who have not waived the right to receive Meeting Materials 
will either:
a)  be  given  a  form  of  proxy  which  has  already  been  signed  by  the  Intermediary  (typically  by  a  facsimile  stamped 
signature),  which  is restricted  as  to  the  number  and  class of  securities  beneficially owned by  the  non -registered 
holder but which is not otherwise completed. Because the Intermediary has already signed the form of proxy, this 
form of proxy is not required  to be signed by the non-registered holder when submitting the proxy. In this case, 
the non-registered holder who wishes to vote by proxy should otherwise properly complete the form of proxy and 
deliver it as specified; or
b)  more typically, be  given  a voting instruction  form  which  is  not  signed  by the  Intermediary,  and  which,  when 
properly  completed  and  signed  by  the  non-registered  holder  and  returned  to  the  Intermediary  or  its  service 
company  (or  as  an  alternative,  votes  may  often  be  registered  by  telephone  or  over  the  Internet),  will 
constitute  voting  instructions  (often  called  a  "proxy  authorization  form")  which  the  Intermediary  must  follow. 
Typically,  the  proxy  authorization  form  will  consist  of  a  one  page  pre -printed  form.  Sometimes,  instead  of  the 
one page pre-printed form,  the proxy authorization form will consist of a regular printed proxy form accompanied 
by a page of instructions which contains a removable label containing a bar -code and other information. In order 
for the form of proxy to validly constitute a proxy authorization form, the non-registered holder must remove the 
label  from  the  instructions  and  affix  it  to  the  form  of  proxy,  properly  complete  and  sign  the  form  of  proxy  and 
return it to the Intermediary or its service company in accordance  with the instructions of the Intermediary or its 
service company.
In  either  case,  the  purpose  of  this  procedure  is  to  permit  non -registered  holders  to  direct  the  voting  of  the  shares  they 
beneficially own. Should a non-registered holder who receives either form of proxy  wish to vote at the Meeting in person, 
the non-registered holder should strike out the persons named in the form of proxy and insert the non -registered holder’s 
name  in  the  blank  space  provided.  Non-registered  holders  should  carefully  follo w  the  instructions  of  their  Intermediary 
including those regarding when and where the form of proxy or Voting Instruction Form is to be delivered.
5
AUTHORIZED CAPITAL, VOTING SHARES AND PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDERS
Authorized Capital and Voting Shares
The  authorized capital  of  the  Corporation  consists of an  unlimited  number of common  shares (the  “Common  Shares”). 
As at the date hereof,  35,946,390 Common Shares are issued and outstanding as fully paid and non -assessable shares in 
the capital of the Corporation.
Common Shares
The holders of the Common Shares are entitled to receive notice of all meetings of shareholders and to attend and vote on  
the basis of one vote in respect of each Common Share held in connection with each matter to be acted upon at a meeting 
of the shareholders. Holders of Common Shares are entitled to receive dividends if, as and when declared by the board of 
directors  of  the  Corporation.  In  the  event  of  a  liquidation,  dissolution  or  winding -up  of  the  Corporation  or  other 
distribution of the assets of the Corporation, the holders of the Common Shares will be entitled to receive, on a pro rata 
basis, all of the assets remaining after the Corporation has paid out its liabilities.
Voting at the Meeting
A  holder  of  record  of  Common  Shares  on  July  29th,  2016  (the  "record  date")  will  be  entitled  to  vote  such  shares  in 
person  or  by  proxy  at  the  Meeting  (subject,  in  the  case  of  voting  by  proxy,  to  the  timely  deposit  of  his  or  her  executed 
form of proxy as described herein).
Principal Shareholders
To the knowledge of the directors and officers of the Corporation, there are no persons w ho beneficially own or exercise
control or direction over 10% or more of the outstanding Common Shares at the date hereof
Executive Compensation
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
Overview
The  Board  is  responsible  for  setting  the  overall  compensation  strategy  of  the  Corporation  and  for  evaluating  and 
approving the compensation of directors and executive officers. The Corporation has not delegated these responsibilities 
to  a  separate  board  committee.  The  Board  of  Directors  annually  reviews  the  base  salary,  incentive  compensation  and 
long-term compensation for the Corporation’s executive officers to determine if the compensation package for executive 
officers  is  appropriate,  given  the  status  and  activities  of  the  business,  or  if  any  modifications  are  required.  Factors 
considered by the Board of Directors in establishing suitable compensation packages for its executive officers include the 
early stage of development of the Corporation, the small number of executive officers, financial resources available to the 
Corporation, competitive factors and the time committed by the executive officer to the affairs of the Corporation.
Objectives of Compensation Program
It is the objective of the Corporation’s compensation program to retain highly qualified executives and to link incentive 
compensation to performance and shareholder value. It is the goal of the Board of Directors to endeavour to ensure that 
the compensation of executive officers is sufficient to achieve the objectives of the executive compensation program. The 
Board  of  Directors  gives  consideration  to  the  Corporation’s  contractual  obligations,  performance,  quantitative  financial 
objectives  including relative  shareholder  return as  well  as  to  the qualitative  aspects of  the individual’s performance  and 
achievements.
Role of Executive Officers in Compensation Decisions
The  Board  of  Directors  will  receive  and  review  any  recommendations  of  the  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  
relating  to  the  general  compensation  structure  and  policies  and  programs  for  the  Corporation  and  the  salary  and  benefit 
levels for executive officers.
6
Elements of the Compensation Program
The Corporation’s compensation program comprises (i) base salary o r fees and (ii) long term incentives including an 
incentive stock option plan (the “Plan”). Each component of the executive compensation program is addressed below.
Base Salaries, Fees and Benefits
Salaries  or  fees  for  executive  officers  are  reviewed  annua lly  based  on  corporate  and  personal  performance  and  on 
individual levels of responsibility. Salaries of the executive officers are not determined based on a specific formula. The 
Board  of  Directors  considers,  and,  if  thought  appropriate,  approves  salaries  recommended  by  the  President  and  Chief 
Executive  Officer  for  the  other  executive  officers  of  the  Corporation.  As  stated  above,  base  salaries  are  established  to 
retain  highly  qualified  executives.  The  current  compensation  programs  are  significantly  less  tha n  other  junior  mining 
companies and as such are not competitive, however, executives would be compensated through participation in the Plan 
should there be share appreciation.
The Corporation does not provide any pension or retirement benefits to its execu tive officers.
Long Term Incentives and Stock Option Plan
The Board of Directors administers the Plan that is designed to provide a long -term incentive that is linked to shareholder 
value. The Board of Directors determines the number of options to be grant ed to each executive officer based on the level 
of responsibility and experience required for the position. The Board of Directors regularly reviews and where appropriate  
adjusts the number of options granted to individuals and determines the vesting provi sions of such options. The Board of 
Directors  sets  the  number  of  options  as  appropriate  designed  to  attract  and  retain  qualified  and  talented  personnel.  The 
Board  of  Directors  also  takes  account  of  the  Corporation’s  contractual  obligations  and  the  award  hi story  for  all 
participants in the Plan.
Option based awards
A description of the process that the Corporation uses to grant option -based awards to executive officers including the role 
of the Board of Directors and executive officers, is included under the  heading “Compensation Discussion and Analysis  – 
Elements  of  Compensation  Program  –  Long  Term  Incentives  and  Stock  Option  Plan”  above.  Also  for  an  additional 
description of the stock option plan of the Corporation see  “Stock Option Plan" below.
In March, 2015, the Board of Directors granted a total of 800,000 options exercisable at $0.10 per share for a period of 
three years ending March 26th, 2018, to four (4) directors. A three year option to acquire 200,000 shares at $0.10 was 
granted to a then newly elected director during the year ended February 28, 2014. The total number of options granted 
under the Plan stands at 1 million.    No additional options were granted during the year under review.
Summary Compensation
Securities  legislation  requires  the  disclo sure  of  compensation  received  by  each  “Named  Executive  Officer”   (“NEO”)  of 
the  Corporation  for  the  three  most  recently  completed  financial  years.  “Named  Executive  Officer”  is  defined  by  the 
legislation to mean (i) each of the Chief Executive Officer and th e Chief Financial Officer of the Corporation (ii) each of 
the  Corporation’s  three  most  highly  compensated  executive  officers,  or  the  three  most  highly  compensated  individuals 
acting  in  a  similar  capacity,  other  than  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Fi nancial  Officer,  at  the  end  of  the  most 
recently completed financial year and whose total compensation exceeds $150,000, and (iii) any additional individual for 
whom disclosure would have been provided under (ii) but for the fact that the individual was no t serving as an executive 
officer of the Corporation at the end of the most recently completed financial year end of the Corporation.
The  following  table  sets  forth  a  summary  of  all  compensation  for  services  earned  during  the  three  most  recently 
completed  financial  years  ended  on  February  29th,  2016  by  Richard  Williams,  who  served  as  President  and  Chief 
Executive  Officer  and  James  Richardson,  who  served  as  Chief  Financial  Officer,  during  the  financial  year  (collectively 
the “Named Executive Officers”).
7
Summary Compensation Table
Name and 
Position
Fiscal 
Year
Salary
($)
Share-Based 
Awards ($)
Option-Based
Awards ($)
Non-Equity
Incentive plan
Compensation ($) 
Long 
Annual 
Incentive 
Term
Plans
Incentive
Pension 
Value
($)
All Other
Total
Compensation
Compensation
($)
($)
Richard Williams
Pres. & CEO.
James A.
Richardson
CFO
2016 
2015 
2014 
2016 
2015 
2014
32,000 
32,000 
32,000 
12,000 
12,000 
12,000
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
2,200
Nil 
Nil
2,200
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Plans
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
34,200 
32,000 
32,000 
14,200 
12,000 
12,000
Perquisites and other personal benefits do not exceed the lesser of $50,000 and 10% of the total annual salary for each of th e Named 
Executive Officers and, in fact, are NIL.
Options to acquire common shares were granted in March 2015, exercisable at a price of $0.10 per common share and expire on March 
26,  2018.  The  value  of  the  option-based  award  is  calculated  using  the  grant  date  fair  value  ($0.011)  multiplied  by  the  number  of 
options granted. The grant date fair value of $0.011 for each option has been calculated using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model 
using the following assumptions: risk-free interest rate of 1%; volatility of 100%; expected dividend yield of Nil; and expected option 
life of 3 years.
Incentive Plan Awards
Incentive Plan Awards – Outstanding Share-Based Awards and Option-Based Awards
There were two share-based awards and option-based awards outstanding at the end of the financial year ended  February 
29, 2016, in favour of the Named Executive Officers of the Corporation, an Option grant of 200,000 options to each NEO 
to acquire a like number of shares at $0.10 per share (above market at the time of grant) for a period of three years . Each 
of the then five (5) directors had earlier received 200,000 options at $0.10 (the strike price being greater than the market 
price) for a period of 3 years, expiring in 2015 with respect to four of the five, the fifth expiring in 2016. The four which 
expired unexercised in March, 2015, were issued new options at $0.10 per share, for a further 3 year period, expiring in 
2018, as noted above.
Incentive Plan Awards – Value Vested or Earned During the Year
The  full  value  of  $2,200  each  vested  during  the  year  ended  February  29th,  2016  in  respect  of  option-based  awards, 
share-based awards and non-equity incentive plan compensation by Named Executive Officers of the Corporation.
Pension Plan Benefits
Defined Benefit Plans Table
The Corporation does not have any pension or retirement plans.
Deferred Compensation Plans
The Corporation does not have any deferred compensation plans.
Termination and Change of Control Benefits
The  Corporation  does  not  have  in  place  any  compensatory  plan  or  arrangement  with  any  Named  Executiv e  Officer  that 
would  be  triggered  by  the  resignation,  retirement  or  other  termination  of  employment  of  such  officer,  from  a  change  of 
control of the Corporation or a change in the executive officer's responsibilities following any such change of control.
8
Director Compensation
Directors of the Corporation are not currently paid any fees for their service s as directors and all directors are reimbursed 
for  out-of-pocket  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  such  duties.  However,  directors  are  eligible  to  parti cipate  in  the 
Corporation's stock option plan. See "Stock Option Plan". Directors are also entitled to receive compensation to the extent 
that they provide  additional  services to the Corporation at rates that  would be charged by such directors for such services 
to arm's length parties. Except as otherwise disclosed herein, during  the year ended February 29th, 2016, no compensation 
was paid or payable to directors or entities controlled by directors for services rendered.
Incentive Plan Awards – Outstanding Share-Based Awards and Option-Based Awards
There  were  two  option-based  awards  outstanding  at  the  end  of  the  financial  year  ended  February  2 9th,  2016  to  the 
directors of the Corporation (who are not also Named Executive Officers) ,200,000 options exercisable by each director at 
$0.10 per share for a period of 3 years.
Incentive Plan Awards – Value Vested or Earned During the Year
There was value of $4,400 vested or earned during the year ended February 29th, 2016 in respect of option-based awards, 
share-based awards and non-equity incentive plan compensation by directors of the Corporation (who are not also Named 
Executive Officers).
Director and Officer Liability Insurance
The Corporation maintains insurance for the benefit of its directors and officers again st liability in their respective 
capacities as directors and officers.
Stock Options
As of the date hereof, the Corporation has 1,000,000 issued and outstanding stock options.
The  Corporation recognizes the  importance of  the contributions  of  its  directors,  officers,  employees  and  consultants  to  the 
success of the Corporation. The board of directors, in its discretion, has in the past and may in the future grant options to  
purchase Common Shares to directors, senior officers, employees and consultants of the  Corporation.
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
As at February 29th 2016, there were no equity compensation plans under which equity securities of the Corporation were  
authorized for issuance.
INDEBTEDNESS OF DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
AND SENIOR OFFICERS
No director, officer or employee or former director, officer or employee of the Corporation was indebted to the 
Corporation as of February 29th, 2016 or at any time during the year.
9
AUDIT COMMITTEE INFORMATION REQUIRED IN THE INFORMATION CIRCULAR
OF A VENTURE ISSUER
Multilateral  Instrument  52-110  (“MI  52-110”)  requires  that  certain  information  regarding  the  Audit  Committee  of  a 
“venture  issuer”  (as  that  term  is  defined  in  MI  52 -110)  be  included  in  the  management  information  circular  sent  to 
shareholders in connection with the issuer’s annual meeting.
Audit Committee Charter
The full text of the charter of the Corporation’s Audit Committee is attached hereto as Exhibit “A”.  
Composition of the Audit Committee
Name 
Derek Bartlett (Chairman) 
Rick Ekstein 
Peter Sever
Independent 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Relevant Education and Experience
Financially Literate 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Set out below is a description of the education and experience of each of the Corporation’s directors, which is rele vant to 
the performance of his audit committee type responsibilities on the board of directors.
Derek  Bartlett  has  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Geology  from  the  University  of  New  Brunswick.  He  has  had  more  than  30 
years experience in the public mining sector as  an officer, director and consultant. He has been the President and CEO of  
junior  mining  companies.  His  experience  includes  financing  various  junior  mining  companies  and  acquiring,  joint 
venturing and disposing of mining assets and analyzing their financial  impact. In the course of his work, he had to review 
the financial situation of the companies and study and analyze their financial statements. Therefore, Mr. Bartlett had to 
review and understand financial statements of similar complexity as the financial  statements of the Company.
Rick Ekstein graduated from York University in 1978 with a B.A. in Political Scien ce. He is currently President and CEO 
of  Weston  Forest  Products  and  has  more  than  35  years  experience  in  the  private  sector  as  an  officer  and  a  director  of 
private companies. His experience includes financing various companies and acquiring, joint venturing and disposing of 
resource assets and analyzing their financial impact. In the course of his work, he had to review the financial situation of 
the  companies  and  study  and  analyze  their  financial  statement s.  Therefore,  Mr.  Ekstein  reviews  and  understands 
financial statements of similar complexity as the financial statements of the Company.
Peter  Sever  obtained  his  MBA  from  York  University  in  1972.  H e  was  in  the  gold  mining  industry  previously  and  has 
served  on  the  board  of  directors  of  a  publicly  traded  mining  company.  During  his  career,  Mr.  Sever  has  founded,  built 
and  sold,  several  global  businesses,  thereby  gaining  broad  experience  and  understandi ng  of  finance  and  financial 
statements.
Reliance on Certain Exemptions
The Company is relying upon the exemptions from the requirements of NI 52-110 relating to the composition and 
reporting obligations of the Audit Committee provided in Section 6.1 of NI-52-110.
10
Audit Fees
The following table provides detail in respect of audit, audit related, tax and other fees paid by the Corporation to the 
external auditors for professional services:
Audit Fees
Audit-Related
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
Year ended Feb 29th, 2016
$12,500
Year ended Feb 28 th, 2015
$16,475
Fees
Nil
Nil
$2,500
$2,500
Nil
Nil
Audit Fees – Audit fees were paid for professional services rendered by the auditors for the audit of the Corporation’s 
annual financial statements as well as services provided in connection with statutory and regulatory filings.
Audit-Related Fees – Audit-related fees would be those paid for professional services rendered by the auditors.
Tax Fees – Tax fees were paid for tax compliance, tax advice a nd tax planning professional services. These services 
included reviewing tax returns and assisting in responses to government tax authorities.
All Other Fees – would comprise primarily of the review of quarterly financial statements and related documents.     No
such review has been sought.
STATEMENT OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICES
National Instrument 58-101 – “Disclosure of Corporate Governance Practices” (“NI 58-101”) and National Policy 58-201 – 
“Corporate  Governance  Guidelines”  (“NP  58-201”)  set  out  a  series  of  guidelines  for  effective  corporate  governance. 
Each reporting issuer, including the Corporation, must disclose on an annual basis and in prescribed form, the corporate 
governance practices that it has adopted.
The Corporation’s annual disclosure of its corporate governance practices in accordance with Form 58 - 101F2 - Corporate 
Governance Disclosure under NI 58-101 is set forth in Exhibit “B” to this Circular. The board of directors does not have 
other standing committees other than the Audit Commit tee and the Corporate Governance/ Compensation Committee.
PARTICULARS OF MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
ANNUAL BUSINESS
PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The audited consolidated financial statements of the Corporation for the fiscal year ended February 2 9th, 2016 and the 
report of the auditors thereon, will be presented at the Meeting and copies are available on SEDAR and the Company’s 
web site.
11
APPOINTMENT OF AUDITOR
parker  simone  LLP.,  Chartered  Accountants,  have  been  the  auditors  of  the  Corporation  since  J uly  2004.  Unless  the 
shareholder  directs  that  his  or  her  Common  Shares  are  to  be  withheld  from  voting  in  connection  with  the 
appointment  of  auditors,  the  persons  whose  names  are  printed  in  the  form  of  proxy  intend  to  vote  for  the 
re-appointment  of  parker  simone  LLP.  -  Chartered  Accountants  as  auditors  of  the  Corporation  until  the  next 
annual meeting of shareholders and to authorize the board of directors to fix their remuneration.
ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
A  board  of  five  directors  is  to  be  elected  at  the  Meeting.  Unless  the  shareholder  directs  that  his  or  her  Common 
Shares  are  to  be  withheld  from  voting  in  connection  with  the  election  of  directors,  the  persons  named  in  the 
enclosed form of proxy intend to vote for the election of the nominees whose names are se t forth below.  All of the 
nominees  set  forth  below  are  now  directors  of  the  Corporation  and  have  been  directors  since  the  dates  indicated. 
Management does not contemplate that any of the nominees will be unable to serve as a director but, if that should oc cur 
for any reason prior to the Meeting, the persons named in the enclosed form of proxy reserve the right to vote for another  
nominee in their discretion. Each director elected will hold office until the next annual meeting of Shareholders or until  
his successor is duly elected, unless his office is earlier vacated in accordance with the by -laws of the Corporation.
The following information relating to the nominees as directors is based partly on the Corporation's records and partly on  
information received by the Corporation from such persons and is given as of the date hereof.
Name, Current Position with
Principal Occupation (1)
Date on Which First Elected
Shares of the Corporation
the Corporation and
Municipality of
Residence
Derek Bartlett (3),(4) 
Director 
Mississauga, Ontario
Rick Ekstein (3)(4) 
Toronto, Ontario
As a Director
Beneficially Owned or Over 
Which Control or Direction
is Exercised (2)
Independent Geologist;
May 8, 1996
500
President& CEO of Weston 
Forest Products Inc.
August 28, 2008
566,000
Peter Sever (3)(4) 
Toronto, Ontario
Entrepreneur & Business 
Executive
August 28, 2013
60,000
James Richardson 
Director, CFO Sec-Treas 
Toronto, Ontario
Richard Williams 
President and Director 
Uxbridge, Ontario
Chartered Accountant
August 24, 2000
1,479,000
Solicitor; President of 
Blackwell Investor Relations 
Corp.
February 27, 1995
3,509,581
(1)  All of the directors and officers have held their principal occupations as set out above for more than the last five years. 
Mr.  Williams  currently  serves as  a director of Sparton Resources Inc.  First  Metals Inc.,  and  Claim Post  Resources Inc. 
Mr.  Richardson  is  a  director  of  Walmer  Capital  Corp.,  First  Metals  Inc.  and  Argus  Corporation.  He  is  the  Managing 
Partner of James A. Richardson Partners. Mr. Bartlett is a director of Newport Gold Inc. and Lund Enterprises.
(2)  The information as to shares beneficially owned directly or indirectly, not being within the knowledge of the
Corporation, has been furnished by the respective proposed Directors individually.
(3)  Members of the Audit Committee. 
(4)  Member of the Corporate Governance/Compensation Committee
None of the Nominees is as at the date of this Circular, or has been within the 10 years before the date of this Circular, a 
director,  chief  executive  officer  or  chief  financial  office r  of  any  company,  including  any  personal  holding  company  of 
such  director,  chief  executive  officer  or  chief  financial  officer,  that  was  subject  to  an  order  that  was  issued  while  that 
person  was  acting  in  that  capacity,  or  was  subject  to  an  order,  that  was  issued  after  that  person  ceased  to  be  a  director, 
chief  executive  officer  or  chief  financial  officer  and  which  resulted  from  an  event  that  occurred  while  that  person  was
12
acting  in  such  capacity  other  than  Messrs.  Williams  and  Richardson  who  were  directors  of  First  Metals  Inc.  who  were 
excluded  from  management  when  a  management  cease  trade  order  was  issued  by  the  Ontario  Securities  Commission 
(which  has  since  lapsed)  for  failure  by  the  company  to  file  financial  statements  by  the  statutory  deadline  date  and  w ere 
subsequently directors of First Metals Inc. when it again failed to file its financial statements by the statutory deadline .
None of the Nominees is as at the date of this Circular, or has been within the 10 years before the date of this Circular, a 
director  or  executive  officer  of  any  company,  including  any  personal  holding  company  of  such  director  or  executive 
officer, that, while that person was acting in that capacity or within a year of that person ceasing to act in that capacity,  
became  bankrupt,  made  a  proposal  under  any  legislation  relating  to  bankruptcy  or  insolvency  or  was  subject  to  or 
instituted  any  proceedings,  arrangement  or  compromise  with  creditors  or  had  a  receiver,  receiver  manager  or  trustee 
appointed to hold the assets of such company other than:
Messrs Richardson and Williams, who were directors of @rgentum Management and Research Corporation which was the 
subject  of  a  freeze  order  and  an  order  to  cease  activity  in  respect  of  securities  transactions  issued  by  the  bureau  de 
decision et revision at the request of the authorite des marches financiers. The fund was also subject of a cease trade order  in 
Ontario  and  was  subsequently  placed  into  bankruptcy  by  the  Ontario  Securities  Commission.  Both  are  also  directors  of 
First  Metals  Inc.  which  filed  a  Notice  of  Intention  to  Make  a  Proposal  under  the  Bankruptcy  and  Insolvency  Act.  The 
filing was made in order to facilitate the company’s ability to implement a restructuring plan.
Mr.  Richardson  became  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Argus   Corporation  (“Argus”)  in  January  2005. 
Subsequently,  in  May  2005  Argus,  by  court  order,  was  added  to  the  receivership  proceedings  of  The  Ravelston 
Corporation.
None of the Nominees nor any personal holding company of the Nominees has within the 10 years b efore the date of this 
Circular, become bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or become subject  to 
or  instituted  any  proceedings,  arrangement  or  compromise  with  creditors,  or  had  a  receiver,  receiver  manager  or  trustee 
appointed to hold the assets of such individual or their personal holding company.
None  of  the  Nominees  has  been  the  subject  of  any  penalties  or  sanctions  imposed  by  a  court  relating  to  securities 
legislation or by  a  securities regulatory  author ity or  has entered into  a  settlement agreement  with a  securities regulatory 
authority,  or  has  been  subject  to  any  other  penalties  or  sanctions  imposed  by  a  court  or  regulatory  body  that  would  be 
likely to be considered important to a reasonable securityhol der in deciding whether to vote for a proposed director.
Stock Option Plan
Shareholder  approval  for  our  current  Stock  Option  Plan  (the  “Plan”)  2015  was  obtained  at  our  Annual  and  Special 
meeting  held  in  August,  2015.  The  purpose  of  the  Stock  Option  Plan  is  to  encourage  ownership  of  Waseco’s  common 
shares  by  persons (“Eligible Persons”)  who  are directors,  senior officers and  key  employees  of,  as  well  as  consultants and  
employees of management companies providing services to Waseco. It is these individuals wh o are primarily responsible 
for  the  management  and  profitable  growth  of  Waseco’s  business.  Management  hopes  that  the  Stock  Option  Plan  will 
advance the interests of Waseco by providing additional incentive for superior performance by all eligible recipient s.
The aggregate number of common shares in the capital of Waseco reserved for issuance under the Stock Option Plan is a 
maximum  of  10%  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of  Waseco  at  the  date  of  grant.  If  any  options  granted  expire  or 
terminate for any  reason without having been exercised in full, the unpurchased shares will again be available under the  
Stock  Option  Plan.  As  our  Stock  Option  Plan  is  a  “rolling  plan”,  the  policies  of  the  TSX  Venture  Exchange  (the 
“Exchange”) provide that we must seek shareholder approval of the plan annually. The Stock Option plan is subject to 
Exchange approval.
Terms of the Stock Option Plan
The following summary is a brief description of the Stock Option Plan and is qualified in its entirety by the full text of th e 
Stock Option Plan, which will be available for shareholders to review at the Meeting:
1. The maximum number of shares that may be issued upon the exercise of stock options previously granted  
and those granted under the Stock Option Plan  will be  10% of the issued  and outstanding common 
shares at the time of the grant.
2. Stock options can be issued to persons who are directors, senior officers, employees and consultants of,
13
or employees of management companies providing services to Waseco.
3. The option price of any  common  share in respect of  which an option  may  be  granted  under  the Stock 
Option Plan  shall be  fixed  by  the Board of Directors  but  shall be  not  less than  the  minimum  price 
permitted by the Exchange or, if the shares are no longer listed for trading on the Exch ange, then such 
other exchange or quotation system on which the shares are listed or quoted for trading.
4. The number of options granted to any one individual may not exceed 5% of the outstanding listed
shares in any 12 month period.
5. The number of options granted to any one consultant may not exceed 2% of Waseco’s outstanding
listed shares in any 12 month period.
6. All options granted under the Stock Option Plan may not have an expiry date later than five years from
the date on which the Board of Directors gran t and announce the granting of the option.
7. If  the  optionee  ceases  to  be  (other  than  by  reason  of  death)  an  eligible  recipient  of  options,  then  the 
option  granted  shall expire within  30 days after the date  that  the option  holder  ceases  to be eligible, 
subject to the terms and conditions set out in the Stock Option Plan.
8. If an optionee ceases to be an eligible recipient of option by reason of death, an optionee’s heirs or
administrators shall have until the earlier of:
(a) 
(b) 
outstanding at the time of death of the optionee.
one year from the death of the option ho lder; and 
the expiry date of the options in which to exercise any portion of options
9. The  Stock  Option  Plan  will  be  administered  by  Waseco’s  Board  of  Directors  who  will  have  the  full 
authority and sole discretion to grant options under the Stock Option Plan to any eligible recipient, 
including themselves.
10.  The options are not assignable or transferable by an optionee.
11.  The Board of Directors may from time to time, subject to regulatory approval, amend or r evise the
terms of the Stock Option Plan
Accordingly, Shareholders will be asked to consider and, if thought appropriate, to approve, with or without amendment, 
the following resolution:
Stock Option Plan Resolution
“BE IT RESOLVED that:
1.
2.
The Stock Option  Plan be approved and that the Board of Directors of the Corporation be authorised in 
their absolute discretion  to establish and administer  the  Stock  Option Plan  in  accordance  with  its terms 
and conditions;
The Board of Directors be authorised on behalf of  the Corporation to make any amendments to the Stock 
Option Plan as may be required by regulatory authorities, without further approval of the Corporation’s 
Shareholders, in order to ensure adoption of the Stock Option Plan; and
Any two directors of the Corporation be and are hereby authorized and directed to do all such acts and things and to 
execute and deliver under the corporate seal or otherwise all such deeds, documents, instruments and assurances as in  
their opinion may be necessary to give effect to  this resolution.”
INTEREST OF INSIDERS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
Other  than  those  transactions  referred  to  elsewhere  in  this  Circular  or  disclosed  in  a  prior  information  circular  of  the 
Corporation, no person who has been a director or an officer of the Cor poration at any time since the beginning of its last 
completed fiscal year nor any proposed nominee for election as a director of the Corporation, or any associate or affiliate 
of  any  such  director,  officer  or  proposed  nominee,  has  any  material  interest,  d irect  or  indirect,  by  way  of  beneficial
14
ownership of securities or otherwise, in any matter to be acted upon at the Meeting.
INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
No  “informed  person”  (as  such  term  is  defined  under  applicable  securities  law s),  proposed  nominee  for  election  as  a 
director of the Corporation or any associate or affiliate of any informed person or proposed nominee has or had a material  
interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction since the beginning of the Corporation’s last  fiscal year or in any proposed 
transaction which has materially affected or would materially affect the Corporation except as disclosed elsewhere in this 
Circular or any prior management information circular of the Corporation.
OTHER MATTERS WHICH MAY COME BEFORE THE MEETING
Management of the Corporation knows of no matters to come before the Meeting other than as set forth in the Notice of 
Meeting. However, if other matters, which are not known to management, should properly come before the Meeting, the 
accompanying proxy will be voted on such matters in accordance with the best judgment of the persons voting the proxy.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Corporation will provide to any shareholder, upon written request to the President of the Corporation at 1500,  2 
Queen Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 3G5, a copy of:
a)
the  audited  comparative  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the  Corporation  for  its  most  recently 
completed  financial  period,  together  with  the  management’s  discussion  and  analysis  of  such  financi al 
results and the auditor’s report thereon, and one copy of any interim financial statements subsequent to  
the financial statements of the Corporation that have been filed for any period after the end of its most 
recently completed financial period; and
b)  a copy of the Notice of Meeting and this Circular.
Additional  information  relating  to  the  Corporation  is  available  on  SEDAR  at  www.sedar.com  and  on  the 
company  website  at  www.wasecoresources.com.  Financial  information  about  the  Corporation  may  be  found  in 
the  Corporation’s  consolidated  financial  statements  and  management’s  discussion  and  analysis  for  its  most 
recently completed financial period.
GENERAL
Unless otherwise stated, information contained herein is given as of the date hereof. The contents and the sending of this  
Circular have been approved by the board of directors of the Corporation.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Toronto, Ontario
(signed)"Richard  Williams" 
July 29th, 2016
President & C.E.O.
15
TO THE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
CHARTER OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
SCHEDULE “A”
I. PURPOSE
The  Audit  Committee  (the  “Committee”)  is  a  committee  of  the  board  of  directors.  The  primary  function  of  the 
Committee  is  to  assist  the  board  of  directors  in  fulfilling  its  financial  reporting  and   controls  responsibilities  to  the 
shareholders  of  the  Company  and  the  investment  community.  The   external  auditors  will  report  directly  to  the 
Committee. The Committee’s primary duties and responsibilities are:
  Overseeing the  integrity of the Company’s  financial  statements and reviewing the financial reports and 
other  financial  information  provided  by  the  Company  to  any  government  body  or  the  public  and  other 
relevant documents;
  Recommending  the  appointment  and  reviewing  and  appraising  the  audit  efforts  of  the  Company’s 
external  auditors,  overseeing  the  external  auditors’  qualifications  and  independence  and  providing  an 
open  avenue  of  communication  among  the  exter nal  auditors,  financial  and  senior  management  and  the 
board of directors;

Monitoring  the  Company’s  financial  reporting  process  and  internal  controls,  its  management  of  the 
business and financial risk, and its compliance with legal, ethical and  regulatory requirements.
II.    COMPOSITION
The  Committee  shall  consist  of  a  minimum  of  three  directors  of  the  Company  the  majority  of  whom  shall  not  be 
officers  or  “control  persons”,  as  such  term  is  defined  hereunder,  of  the  Company.  All  members  shall,  to  the 
satisfaction of the board of directors, be “financially literate”  as such term is defined hereunder.
The  members  of  the  Committee  shall  be  appointed  by  the  board  of  directors.  The  board  of  directors  may  remove  a 
member of the Committee at any time in its sole dis cretion by resolution of the board.
111. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1.
The Committee shall review and recommend to the board for approval:
a)
b)
The Company’s financial statements (annual and quarterly), MD&A and earnings  releases to be filed 
with regulatory bodies such as securities commissions prior to the release of earnings.
Documents  referencing,  containing  or  incorporating  by  reference  the  annual  audited  consolidated 
financial  statements  or  interim  financial  results  (e.g.,  prospectuses,  press  releases  with  financial 
results) prior to their release
The Committee, in fulfilling its mandate, will: 
 
a)
2.
b)
c)
Satisfy  itself  that  adequate  internal  controls  and  procedures  are  in  place  to  allow  the  Chief  Executive 
Officer and the  Chief Financial  Officer  to certify  financial   statements and other  disclosure documents 
as required under securities laws. 
 
Recommend  to  the  board  of  directors  the  selection  of  the  external  auditor,  consider  the  independence 
and effectiveness and approve the fees and other compensation to be paid to  the external auditor.
Monitor  the  relationship  between  management  and  external  auditor  including  reviewing  any
16
d)
e)
f) 
 
g) 
 
h)
i)
j)
k) 
 
l)
m) 
 
n)
management  letters or other reports of  the  external auditor,  and discussing  and resolving any  material 
differences of opinion or disagreements between management and the external auditor.
Periodically consult with the external auditor out of the presence of management about significant risks 
or exposures, internal controls and other steps that management has taken to control such risks, and the 
fullness and accuracy of the financial statements.
Obtain  and  review  annually  a  report  prepared  by  the  external  auditors  summarizing  the  auditors’ 
internal quality-control procedures and processes.
Review the scope of the external audit, including the fee s involved.
Review the report of the external auditor on the annual audited financial statements.
Review  the  problems  identified  during  audit,  and,  if  any,  the  limits  and  restrictions  imposed  by 
management and any significant accounting matters for which  management sought a second opinion.
Review  and  approve  requests  for  any  management  consulting  engagement  to  be  performed  by  the 
external  auditor  and  be  advised  of  any  other  study  undertaken  at  the  request  of  management  that  is 
beyond the scope of the audit engagement letter and related fees.
Review  with  management,  the  external  auditors  and  legal  counsel,  any  litigation,  claims  or  other 
contingency, including tax assessments, which could have a material effect upon the financial position 
or  operating  results  of  the  Company,  and  whether  these  matters  have  been  appropriately  disclosed  by 
the financial statements.
Review with management their approach with respect to busine ss ethics and corporate conduct
Review  periodically  legal  and  regulatory  requirement s  that  if  breached,  could  have  a  significant 
impact  on  the  Company’s  published  financial  reports  or  reputation.  Inquire  on  the  extent  of  the 
compliance with security policies.
Review with management the accuracy and timeliness of filings with regulatory a uthorities.
Review annually general insurance coverage of the Company to ensure adequate  protection of major 
corporate assets including but not limited to D&O coverage.
3.
Annually, the Committee will review its Charter and, where appropriate, recommend cha nges to the board of 
directors.
IV. MEETINGS
1.
2.
3.
The Committee shall meet no less than four times per year. At least annually, the Committee shall meet 
separately with management and with the external auditors.
The external auditors of the Company will receive  notice of every meeting of the Committee. The external 
auditors may also call a meeting of the Committee.
The board shall be kept informed of the Committee’s activities by copies of minutes, at  the next board meeting 
following each Committee meeting or by an oral report.
V. QUORUM
Quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Audit Committee shall be a majority  of the number of 
members of the Committee.
VI. DEFINITIONS
In accordance with Multilateral Instrument 52-110-Audit Committees.
17
“Financially literate” means “that the director has the ability to read and understand a set of  financial statements that 
present  a  breadth  and  level  of  complexity  of  accounting  issues  that  are   generally  comparable  to  the  breadth  and 
complexity of the issues that can reasonably be expected to be raised by the Company’s financial statements.”
“Control Person” means “any person that holds or is one of a combination of persons that holds  a sufficient number of 
any of the securities of the Company so as to affect materially the control of the Company, or that holds more than 20% 
of  the  outstanding  voting  shares  of  the  Company  except  where  there  is  evidence  showing  that  the  holder  of  those 
securities does not materially affect the control of the Company.”
APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
As of July 28, 2010
18
EXHIBIT “B”
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICES General
Effective June 30, 2005, National Instrument 58 -10 1 Disclosure of Corporate Governance Practices ("NI 58-101") and 
National  Policy  58-20  1  Corporate  Governance  Guidelines  ("NP  58-201  ")  were  adopted  in  each  of  the  provinces  and 
territories of Canada. NI 58-101 requires issuers  to disclose  annually  the  corporate governance practices that  they  have 
adopted. NP 58-20 1 provides guidance on corporate governance pr actices.
The board of directors of the Corporation believes that good corporate governance improves  corporate performance and 
benefits all shareholders. The Canadian Securities Administrators (the  "CSA") have adopted NP 58-201, which provides 
non-prescriptive guidelines on corporate governance practices for reporting issuers such as the Corporation. In addition, 
the CSA has implemented Form 58-10 1F2 under NP 58-101 which prescribes the disclosure required to be made by the 
Corporation  about  its  corporate  governance  practices.  This  section  sets  out  the  Corporation's  approach  to  corporate 
governance and addresses the Corporation's compliance with NI 58-101.
Board of Directors
Directors are considered to be independent if they have no direct or indirect materi al relationship with the Company. A 
"material relationship" is a relationship which could, in the view of the board, be reasonably expected to interfere with 
the exercise of a director's independent judgment.
Management  has  been  delegated  the  responsibility  for  meeting  defined  corporate  objectives,  implementing  approved 
strategic  and  operating  plans,  carrying  on  the  Corporation's  business  in  the  ordinary  course,  managing  cash  flow, 
evaluating  new  business  opportunities,  recruiting  staff  and  complying  with  a pplicable  regulatory  requirements.  The 
board facilitates its independent supervision over management by reviewing and approving long -term strategic, business 
and capital plans, material contracts and business transactions, and all debt and equity financing  transactions. Through 
its audit committee, the board examines the effectiveness of the  Corporation's internal control processes and management 
information systems. The board reviews executive compensation and recommends stock option grants.
The  only  independent  members  of  the  board  currently  are  Derek  Bartlett,  Peter  Sever  and  Rick  Ekstein.  The 
non-independent directors are Richard Williams, by virtue of his position as  the President and Chief Executive Officer of 
the Corporation,  and James Richardson by virtue of his position as the Secretary-Treasurer. A majority of the board is 
therefore-independent.
Orientation and Continuing Education 
While  the  Corporation  currently  has  no  formal  orientation  and  education  program  for  new  Board  members,  sufficient 
information is available and will be provided to any new Board member to ensure that the new directors are familiarized 
with  the  Corporation’s  business  and  the  procedures  of  the  Board.  The  Board  ensures  that  every  director  possesses  the 
capabilities, expertise, availability and knowledge required to fill this position adequately.  
 
Ethical Business Conduct 
The Corporation has adopted a Code of Ethics (the “Code”) in order to encourage and promote a culture of ethical 
business conduct. The Code is available at the corporate offices.
Nomination of Directors 
The Board performs the functions of a nominating committee with responsibility for the appointment and assessment of 
directors.  The  Board  believes  that  this  is  a  practical  approach  at  this  stage  of  the  Corporatio n’s  development.  While 
there  are  no  specific  criteria  for  Board  membership,  the  Corporation  attempts  to  attract  and  maintain  directors  with  a 
wealth  of  business  knowledge  and  a  particular  knowledge  of  the  Corporation’s  industry  or  other  industries,  which 
provide  knowledge  which  would  assist  in  guiding  the officers of the  Corporation.  As  such,  nominations tend  to be the 
result  of  recruitment  efforts  by  management  of  the  Corporation  and  discussions  among  the  directors  prior  to  the 
consideration of the Board as a whole.
19
Compensation 
The directors decide as a Board the compensation for the Corporation's officers, based on levels  expected to be less than 
industry standards and the Corporation's financial situation. The directors  currently do not receive any cash remuneration 
for their acting in such capacity, however, they are entitled to participate in the Corporation's stock option plan.
Other Board Committees 
The Board has no standing committees other than the Audit Committee and the Corporate  Governance and 
Compensation Committee.
Assessments 
The  Board  assesses,  on  an  annual  basis,  the  contributions  of  the  Board  as  a  whole,  any  committees  of  the  Board  and 
each of the directors, in order to determine whether each is functioning effectively.
20