
EX-99.4 5 ex99-4.htm CERTIFICATION OF ANNUAL FILINGS FROM THE CFO
Form 52-109FV1
Certification of Annual Filings
Venture Issuer Basic Certificate
I, Kate-Lynn Genzel, Chief Financial Officer of Jet Metal Corp., certify the following:
1.
Review: I have reviewed the AIF, if any, annual financial statements and annual MD&A,
including, for greater certainty, all documents and information that are incorporated by
reference in the AIF (together, the "annual filings") of Jet Metal Corp. (the "issuer") for the
financial year ended April 30, 2016.
No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
annual filings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the
circumstances under which it was made, for the period covered by the annual filings.
Fair presentation: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the annual
financial statements together with the other financial information included in the annual filings
fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, financial performance and cash
flows of the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the annual filings.
2.
3.
Date: August 26, 2016
"Kate-Lynn Genzel"
_______________________
Kate-Lynn Genzel
Chief Financial Officer
NOTE TO READER
In contrast to the certificate required for non-venture issuers under National Instrument 52-109
Certification of Disclosure in Issuers' Annual and Interim Filings (NI 52-109), this Venture Issuer
Basic Certificate does not include representations relating to the establishment and maintenance
of disclosure controls and procedures (DC&P) and internal control over financial reporting
(ICFR), as defined in NI 52-109. In particular, the certifying officers filing this certificate are not
making any representations relating to the establishment and maintenance of
controls and other procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance that information
required to be disclosed by the issuer in its annual filings, interim filings or other reports filed or
i)
submitted under securities legislation is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within
the time periods specified in securities legislation; and
ii)
a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and
the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer's
GAAP.
The issuer's certifying officers are responsible for ensuring that processes are in place to provide
them with sufficient knowledge to support the representations they are making in this certificate. 
Investors should be aware that inherent limitations on the ability of certifying officers of a venture
issuer to design and implement on a cost effective basis DC&P and ICFR as defined in NI 52-
109 may result in additional risks to the quality, reliability, transparency and timeliness of interim
and annual filings and other reports provided under securities legislation.