
2
1
0
2
,
1
H
C
R
A
M
D
E
T
A
D
M
R
O
F
I
N
O
T
A
M
R
O
F
N
I
 
L
A
U
N
N
A
1MAR201115144127
MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
ACTIONS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
INTEREST OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS IN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
AUDIT COMMITTEE INFORMATION
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AND REGULATORY
1 MARKET FOR SECURITIES
1 DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
1
3
4
4
4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
. . . . . . . . .
6 MATERIAL CONTRACTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
INTERESTS OF EXPERTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
DISCLOSURE PURSUANT TO THE REQUIREMENTS
. . . . .
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ADVISORY – FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
SCHEDULES
OF THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
70
71
74
76
76
76
76
76
76
77
77
Schedule ‘‘A’’ – Audit Committee Mandate . . . . . A-1
Schedule ‘‘B’’ – Suncor Energy Inc. Policy and
Procedures for Pre-Approval of Audit and
Non-Audit Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Schedule ‘‘C’’ – Form 51-101F2 Report on Reserves
B-1
Data by Independent Qualified Reserves
Evaluator or Auditor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C-1
Schedule ‘‘D’’ – Form 51-101F2 Report on Reserves
Data by Independent Qualified Reserves
Evaluator or Auditor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D-1
Schedule ‘‘E’’ – Form 51-101F3 Report of
Management and Directors on Reserves Data
and Other Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E-1
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM DATED MARCH 1, 2012
TABLE OF CONTENTS
9
9
15
21
24
24
25
25
27
34
41
51
57
67
68
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
ADVISORIES
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .
Common Industry Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Common Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conversion Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Name and Incorporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Intercorporate Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Three-Year History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE BUSINESS
NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF SUNCOR’S
BUSINESSES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oil Sands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Exploration and Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Refining and Marketing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Other Suncor Businesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SUNCOR EMPLOYEES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SIGNIFICANT POLICIES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
STATEMENT OF RESERVES DATA AND OTHER OIL
AND GAS INFORMATION
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oil and Gas Reserves Tables and Notes . . . . . . . .
Future Net Revenues Tables and Notes . . . . . . . .
Additional Information Relating to Reserves Data .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .
INDUSTRY CONDITIONS
RISK FACTORS
DIVIDENDS
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE
i
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
ADVISORIES
In this Annual Information Form (AIF), references to ‘‘we’’, ‘‘our’’, ‘‘us’’, ‘‘Suncor’’ or ‘‘the company’’ mean Suncor Energy Inc., its
subsidiaries, partnerships and joint venture investments, unless the context otherwise requires. On August 1, 2009, Suncor
completed its merger with Petro-Canada, referred to in this document as the ‘‘merger’’. References to the ‘‘Board of Directors’’
or the ‘‘Board’’ mean the Board of Directors of Suncor Energy Inc., unless the context otherwise requires.
All  financial  information  is  reported  in  Canadian  dollars,  unless  otherwise  noted.  Production  volumes  are  presented  on  a
working-interest basis, before royalties, unless otherwise noted. Certain amounts in prior years may have been reclassified to
conform to the current year’s presentation.
References to our 2011 audited Consolidated Financial Statements mean Suncor’s audited Consolidated Financial Statements
prepared in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the notes and the auditors’ report, as
at and for each year in the two-year period ended December 31, 2011. References to our MD&A mean Suncor’s Management’s
Discussion and Analysis, dated February 23, 2012.
Unless otherwise noted, all financial information has been prepared in accordance with Canadian GAAP, which is within the
framework of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
This AIF contains forward-looking information based on Suncor’s current expectations, estimates, projections and assumptions.
This information is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed in this document in the Risk Factors
section, many of which are beyond the company’s control. Users of this information are cautioned that actual results may differ
materially. Refer to the Advisory – Forward-Looking Information section of this AIF for information on other risk factors and the
material assumptions underlying our forward-looking information.
Information contained in or otherwise accessible through Suncor’s website www.suncor.com does not form a part of this AIF,
and is not incorporated into the AIF by reference.
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Common Industry Terms
Products
Hydrocarbons are solids, liquids or gas made up of compounds of carbon and hydrogen, in varying proportions.
Crude oil is a mixture of pentanes (lighter hydrocarbons) and heavier hydrocarbons that exists in the liquid phase in reservoirs
and remains liquid at atmospheric pressure and temperature. Crude oil may contain small amounts of sulphur and other
non-hydrocarbons, but does not include liquids obtained in the processing of natural gas.
Bitumen  or  heavy  crude  oil is  a  naturally  occurring  viscous  mixture,  consisting  mainly  of  pentanes  and  heavier
hydrocarbons, which may not be recoverable at a commercial rate in its naturally occurring viscous state through a well
without using enhanced recovery methods. After it is extracted, bitumen or heavy crude oil may be upgraded into crude
oil and other petroleum products.
Conventional crude oil is crude oil produced through wells by standard industry recovery methods.
Oil sands are naturally occurring deposits of sand or sandstone, or other sedimentary rocks that contain bitumen.
Synthetic crude oil (SCO) is a mixture of hydrocarbons derived by upgrading bitumen from oil sands. SCO may contain
sulphur or other non-hydrocarbon compounds and has many similarities to crude oil. SCO with lower sulphur content is
referred  to  as  sweet  synthetic  crude  oil,  while  SCO  with  higher  sulphur  content  is  referred  to  as  sour  synthetic
crude oil.
West Texas Intermediate is a type of crude oil used as a benchmark in oil pricing, and is the underlying commodity of
futures contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX).
Natural  gas is  a  mixture  of  lighter  hydrocarbons,  which  at  atmospheric  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  is  in  a
gaseous state.
Conventional natural gas is natural gas produced from all geological strata, including associated, non-associated and
solution gas, but excluding coal bed methane and shale gas.
Non-associated gas is an accumulation of natural gas in a reservoir where there is no crude oil. Associated gas is the gas
cap overlying a crude oil accumulation in a reservoir.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
1
Solution gas is natural gas dissolved in crude oil in a reservoir.
Natural gas liquids (NGLs) are hydrocarbon components that can be recovered from natural gas as liquids, including, but not
limited to, ethane, propane, butanes, pentanes, plus condensate and small quantities of non-hydrocarbons.
Oil and gas exploration and development processes
Development costs are costs incurred to obtain access to reserves and to provide facilities for extracting, treating, gathering
and storing the oil and gas from reserves.
Exploration costs are costs incurred in identifying areas that may warrant examination and in examining specific areas that are
considered to have prospects that may contain oil and gas reserves.
Field is a defined geographical area consisting of one or more pools containing hydrocarbons.
Glory hole is an excavation into the sea floor designed to protect wellhead equipment from icebergs, and which typically
contains multiple wellheads.
Reservoir is a porous and permeable subsurface rock formation that contains a separate accumulation of petroleum that is
confined by impermeable rock or water barriers and is characterized by a single pressure system.
Wells:
Development wells are drilled inside the established limits of an oil or gas reservoir, or in close proximity to the edge of
the reservoir, to the depth of a stratigraphic horizon known to be productive.
Dry wells are exploratory or development wells found to be incapable of producing either oil or gas in sufficient quantities
to justify the completion as an oil or gas well.
Exploratory wells are drilled in a territory without existing proved reserves, with the intention to discover commercial
reservoirs or deposits of crude oil and/or natural gas. Exploratory wells include appraisal wells, which are drilled to
measure the commercial potential (i.e. size and quality) of a hydrocarbon discovery. Before development, an offshore
discovery is likely to need several appraisal wells.
Service wells are drilled or completed for the purpose of supporting production in an existing field, such as wells drilled
for observation or wells drilled for the injection of gas or water.
Stratigraphic wells are drilling efforts, geologically directed, to obtain information pertaining to a specific geologic
condition, such as core hole drilling on oil sands leases, and are usually drilled without the intention of being completed
for production.
Production processes
Capacity is the annual average output that may be achieved from a processing facility, such as an upgrader, refinery or natural
gas processing plant, under ideal operating conditions and in accordance with current design specifications.
Downstream refers to the refining of crude oil or synthetic crude oil and the selling and distribution of refined products in
retail and wholesale channels.
Feedstock generally refers either to i) the bitumen required in the production of synthetic crude oil for the company’s oil sands
operations;  or  ii)  crude  oil  and/or  other  components  required  in  the  production  of  refined  products  for  the  company’s
downstream operations.
In situ or ‘‘in place’’ refers to methods of extracting bitumen or heavy crude oil from deep deposits of oil sands by means other
than surface mining.
Overburden is  the  material  overlying  oil  sands  that  must  be  removed  before  mining,  which  consists  of  muskeg,  glacial
deposits and sand.
Production Sharing Contracts (PSC) are a common type of contract signed between a government and a resource extraction
company that states how much of the resource produced each party will receive and which parties are responsible for the
development and operation of the resource. An Exploration and Production Sharing Agreement (EPSA) is a form of
Production Sharing Contract, which also states which parties are responsible for exploration activities.
Steam-assisted  gravity  drainage  (SAGD) is  an  enhanced  oil  recovery  technology  for  producing  heavy  crude  oil  and
bitumen. It is an advanced form of steam stimulation in which a pair of horizontal wells are drilled into the oil reservoir, one a
2
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
few metres above the other. Low pressure steam is continuously injected into the upper wellbore to heat the oil and reduce its
viscosity, causing the heated oil to drain into the lower wellbore, from which it is pumped out.
Steam-to-oil ratio (SOR) is a metric used to quantify the efficiency of an in situ oil recovery process, which measures the cubic
metres of steam required to produce one cubic metre of oil. The lower the ratio, the higher the efficiency of the use of steam.
Utilization is  the  average  use  of  capacity,  and  includes  the  impact  of  planned  and  unplanned  facility  outages  and
maintenance. More specifically, refinery utilization is the amount of crude oil and natural gas plant liquids run through crude
distillation units, expressed as a percentage of the capacity of these units.
Upgrading is the two-stage process by which bitumen or heavy crude oil is converted into synthetic crude oil.
Primary upgrading, also referred to as coking or thermal cracking, heats the bitumen in coke drums to remove excess
carbon. The superheated hydrocarbon vapours are sent to fractionators where they condense into naphtha, kerosene and
gas oil. Carbon residue, or coke, is removed from the coke drums on short intervals and later sold as a byproduct.
Secondary  upgrading, a  purification  process  also  referred  to  as  hydrotreating,  adds  hydrogen  to,  and  reduces  the
sulphur of, primary upgrading output to create sweet synthetic crude oil and diesel.
Upstream refers to the exploration, development and production of conventional crude oil, bitumen or natural gas.
Reserves and resources
Please refer to the Definitions for Reserves Data Tables section of the Statement of Reserves Data and Other Oil and Gas
Information in this AIF.
Common Abbreviations
The following is a list of abbreviations that may be used in this AIF:
Measurement
bbl(s)
bbls/d
mbbls/d
mmbbls
boe
boe/d
mboe
mboe/d
mmboe
mcf
mcf/d
mcfe
mmcf
mmcf/d
mmcfe
mmcfe/d
bcf
GJ
mmbtu
m3
m3/d
km
MW
barrel(s)
barrels per day
thousands of barrels per day
millions of barrels
barrels of oil equivalent
barrels of oil equivalent per day
thousands of barrels of oil equivalent
thousands of barrels of oil equivalent per day
millions of barrels of oil equivalent
thousands of cubic feet of natural gas
thousands of cubic feet of natural gas per day
thousands of cubic feet of natural gas equivalent
millions of cubic feet of natural gas
millions of cubic feet of natural gas per day
millions of cubic feet of natural gas equivalent
millions of cubic feet of natural gas equivalent per day
billions of cubic feet of natural gas
gigajoule
millions of British thermal units
cubic metres
cubic metres per day
kilometres
megawatts
Places and Currencies
U.S.
U.K.
B.C.
United States
United Kingdom
British Columbia
$ or Cdn$
US$
£
c
Canadian dollars
United States dollars
Pounds sterling
Euros
Products, Markets and Processes
WTI
WCS
NGL(s)
LPG
SCO
NYMEX
TSX
NYSE
SAGD
PSC
EPSA
West Texas Intermediate
Western Canadian Select
natural gas liquid(s)
liquefied petroleum gas
synthetic crude oil
New York Mercantile Exchange
Toronto Stock Exchange
New York Stock Exchange
steam-assisted gravity drainage
production sharing contract
exploration and production sharing agreement
Suncor converts certain crude oil and NGL volumes to mmcfe or mmcfe/d on the basis of one bbl to six mcf, and certain natural
gas volumes to boe, mboe, mmboe or mboe/d on the same basis. Any figure presented in mcfe, mmcfe, mmcfe/d, boe, boe/d,
mboe, mmboe or mboe/d may be misleading, particularly if used in isolation. A conversion ratio of one bbl of crude oil or NGL
to six mcf of natural gas is based on an energy equivalency conversion method primarily applicable at the burner tip and does
not necessarily represent value equivalency at the wellhead. Given that the value ratio based on the current price of crude oil as
compared to natural gas is significantly different from the energy equivalency of 6:1, utilizing a conversion on a 6:1 basis may
be misleading as an indication of value.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
3
Conversion Table (1)(2)
1 m3 liquids = 6.29 barrels
1 m3 natural gas = 35.49 cubic feet
1 m3 overburden = 1.31 cubic yards
1 tonne = 0.984 tons (long)
1 tonne = 1.102 tons (short)
1 kilometre = 0.62 miles
1 hectare = 2.5 acres
(1) Conversion using the above factors on rounded numbers appearing in this AIF may produce small differences from reported amounts.
(2) Some information in this AIF is set forth in metric units and some in imperial units.
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Name and Incorporation
Suncor Energy Inc. (formerly Suncor Inc.) was originally formed by the amalgamation under the Canada Business Corporations
Act  on  August  22,  1979,  of  Sun  Oil  Company  Limited,  incorporated  in  1923,  and  Great  Canadian  Oil  Sands  Limited,
incorporated  in  1953.  On  January  1,  1989,  we  further  amalgamated  with  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  under  the  Canada
Business Corporations Act. We amended our articles in 1995 to move our registered office from Toronto, Ontario, to Calgary,
Alberta, and again in April 1997 to adopt our current name, ‘‘Suncor Energy Inc.’’. In April 1997, May 2000, May 2002, and
May 2008, we amended our articles to divide the issued and outstanding shares on a two-for-one basis.
Pursuant to an arrangement (the Arrangement), which was completed effective August 1, 2009, Suncor amalgamated with
Petro-Canada to form a single corporation continuing under the name ‘‘Suncor Energy Inc.’’. The Arrangement was effected
pursuant to section 192 of the Canada Business Corporations Act through an arrangement agreement dated March 22, 2009
and  accompanying  plan  of  arrangement,  as  amended.  Under  the  terms  of  the  Arrangement,  Petro-Canada  shareholders
received  1.28  common  shares  of  the  continuing  Suncor  entity  for  each  Petro-Canada  common  share  held  and  Suncor
shareholders received one common share of the continuing Suncor entity for each common share held.
Our registered and head office is located at 150 - 6th Avenue, S.W., Calgary, Alberta, T2P 3E3.
Intercorporate Relationships
Material subsidiaries, each of which was owned 100%, directly or indirectly, by the company as at December 31, 2011 are
as follows:
Name
Canadian operations
Suncor Energy Oil Sands Limited Partnership
Suncor Energy Ventures Partnership
Suncor Energy Products Partnership
Suncor Energy Oil & Gas Partnership
Suncor Energy Joslyn Partnership
Suncor Energy Products Inc.
Suncor Energy Marketing Inc.
4
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Jurisdiction where
organized
Description
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
Canada
This partnership holds most of the company’s oil sands
assets.
This partnership was created in 2011 and holds the
company’s interest in the Syncrude joint venture.
This partnership holds substantially all of the company’s
Canadian refining and marketing assets.
This partnership holds certain upstream Canadian oil and gas
assets.
This partnership holds our working interest in the Joslyn joint
venture.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy Inc. that holds interests in the
company’s energy marketing and renewable energy
businesses, and which is a partner of Suncor Energy Products
Partnership.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy Products Inc. through which
the products produced by our upstream North American
businesses are marketed. Through this subsidiary, we also
administer Suncor’s energy trading activities, market certain
third-party products, procure crude oil feedstocks and natural
gas for our downstream business, and procure and market
NGLs and LPG for our downstream business.
Jurisdiction where
organized
Description
U.S.
U.S.
Canada
U.K.
U.K.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy Inc. that holds the majority of
our U.S. interests.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy Inc. through which our
U.S. refining and marketing operations are conducted.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy Inc. that holds certain of our
international interests.
A subsidiary of 3908968 Canada Inc. that holds certain of
our U.K. interests. Formerly Petro-Canada U.K. Holdings
Limited.
A subsidiary of Suncor Energy UK Holdings Ltd. through
which certain of our operations are conducted in the
U.K. Formerly Petro-Canada U.K. Limited.
A subsidiary of 3908968 Canada Inc. that holds certain of
our international interests.
A subsidiary of Petro-Canada Cooperative Holding UA that
holds certain of our international interests.
Name
U.S. operations
Petro-Canada U.S. Holdings Ltd.
Suncor Energy (U.S.A.) Inc.
International operations
3908968 Canada Inc.
Suncor Energy UK Holdings Ltd.
Suncor Energy UK Limited
Petro-Canada Cooperative Holding U.A.
The Netherlands
Petro-Canada (International) Holdings B.V.
The Netherlands
Petro-Canada Palmyra B.V.
Petro-Canada Germany GmbH (1)
Petro-Canada Oil (North Africa) GmbH (2)
The Netherlands
A subsidiary of Petro-Canada (International) Holdings BV that
holds the majority of our interests in Syria.
Germany
Germany
A subsidiary of Petro-Canada (International) Holdings BV that
holds the majority of our interests in Libya.
A subsidiary of Petro-Canada Germany GmbH through which
the majority of our Libya operations are conducted.
(1) Subsequent to December 31, 2011, Petro-Canada Germany GmbH changed its name to Suncor Energy Germany GmbH.
(2) Subsequent to December 31, 2011, Petro-Canada Oil (North Africa) GmbH changed its name to Suncor Energy Oil (North Africa) GmbH.
Individually, the company’s remaining subsidiaries accounted for (i) less than 10% of the company’s consolidated assets as at
December 31, 2011, and (ii) less than 10% of the company’s consolidated sales and operating revenues for the fiscal year
ended  December  31,  2011.  In  aggregate,  the  remaining  subsidiaries  accounted  for  less  than  20%  of  each  of  (i)  and
(ii) described above.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
5
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE BUSINESS
Overview
Suncor  is  an  integrated  energy  company,  with  corporate  headquarters  in  Calgary,  Alberta,  Canada.  We  are  strategically
focused on developing one of the world’s largest petroleum resource basins – Canada’s Athabasca oil sands. In addition, we
explore for, acquire, develop, produce and market crude oil and natural gas in Canada and internationally, and we transport
and refine crude oil, and market petroleum and petrochemical products primarily in Canada. Periodically, we market third-party
petroleum products. We also carry on energy trading activities focused principally on the marketing and trading of crude oil,
natural gas, refined products and byproducts.
Suncor has classified its operations into the following segments:
OIL SANDS
Suncor’s Oil Sands segment, with assets located in northeast Alberta, recovers bitumen from mining and in situ operations and
upgrades the majority of this production into refinery feedstock, diesel fuel and byproducts. The Oil Sands segment includes:
(cid:127)
Oil Sands operations refers to Suncor’s wholly owned and operated mining, extraction, upgrading and in situ assets in the
Athabasca oil sands region. Oil Sands activities consist of:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Oil Sands Base operations include the Millennium and Steepbank (including the North Steepbank Extension) mining
and extraction operations, two integrated upgrading facilities known as Upgrader 1 and Upgrader 2, and the associated
infrastructure  for  these  assets – including  utilities,  energy  and  reclamation  facilities,  such  as  Tailings  Reduction
Operations (TROTM) assets.
In Situ operations include oil sands bitumen production from Firebag and MacKay River and supporting infrastructure,
such as central processing facilities and cogeneration units. The majority of In Situ production is upgraded by Oil Sands
Base; however, the company’s marketing plan includes sales of bitumen when marketing conditions are favourable or as
operating conditions at Oil Sands Base require.
(cid:127)
Oil Sands Ventures includes the company’s interests in significant growth projects, including two where Suncor is the
operator – the Fort Hills mining (40.8%) and the Voyageur upgrader (51%) projects, and one where Total E&P Canada Ltd.
(Total  E&P)  is  the  operator – the  Joslyn  mining  project  (36.75%).  Oil  Sands  Ventures  also  includes  the  company’s  12%
interest in the Syncrude oil sands mining and upgrading joint venture.
EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION
In  January  2011,  Suncor  combined  its  International  and  Offshore  and  Natural  Gas  segments  into  the  Exploration  and
Production segment, which consists of offshore operations off the east coast of Canada and in the North Sea, and onshore
operations in North America, Libya and Syria.
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
East Coast Canada operations include Suncor’s 37.675% working interest in Terra Nova, for which Suncor is the operator.
Suncor also holds a 20% interest in the Hibernia base project and a 19.5% interest in the Hibernia Southern Extension Unit
(HSEU), a 27.5% interest in the White Rose base project and a 26.125% interest in the White Rose Extensions, and a
22.729% interest in Hebron, all of which are operated by other companies.
International operations include Suncor’s 29.89% working interest in Buzzard and a 26.69% interest in the Golden Eagle
Area Development (Golden Eagle) – both of which are operated by another company – in the U.K. portion of the North Sea.
Suncor  also  holds  interests  in  several  North  Sea  licences  offshore  the  U.K.  and  Norway.  Suncor  owns,  pursuant  to  a
Production Sharing Contract, an interest in the Ebla gas development in the Ash Shaer and Cherrife areas in Syria. Suncor
also  owns,  pursuant  to  Exploration  and  Production  Sharing  Agreements,  working  interests  in  the  exploration  and
development of oilfields in the Sirte Basin in Libya.
Due to recent unrest in both countries, the company has declared force majeure under its contractual obligations in Libya
and Syria. Operations in Libya are in the process of restarting, while operations in Syria have been suspended indefinitely.
(cid:127)
North America Onshore operations include Suncor’s interests in a number of assets in Western Canada, which primarily
produce natural gas.
REFINING AND MARKETING
Suncor’s Refining and Marketing segment consists of two primary operations:
(cid:127)
Refining and Product Supply operations refine crude oil into a broad range of petroleum and petrochemical products.
Eastern North America operations include refineries located in Montreal, Quebec and Sarnia, Ontario, and a lubricants
6
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
business  located  in  Mississauga,  Ontario  that  manufactures,  blends  and  markets  products  worldwide.  Western  North
America operations include refineries located in Edmonton, Alberta and Commerce City, Colorado. Other assets include
interests in a petrochemical plant, pipelines and product terminals in Canada and the U.S.
(cid:127)
Downstream  Marketing  operations  sell  refined  petroleum  products  and  lubricants  to  retail,  commercial  and  industrial
customers through a combination of company-owned, branded-dealer and other retail stations in Canada and Colorado, a
nationwide commercial road transport network in Canada, and a bulk sales channel in Canada.
CORPORATE, ENERGY TRADING AND ELIMINATIONS
The  grouping  Corporate,  Energy  Trading  and  Eliminations  includes  the  company’s  investments  in  renewable  energy
projects,  results  related  to  energy  supply  and  trading  activities,  and  other  activities  not  directly  attributable  to  any  other
operating segment.
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Renewable Energy interests include six operating wind power projects and the St. Clair ethanol plant in Ontario.
Energy Trading activities primarily involve the marketing and trading of crude oil, natural gas, refined petroleum products
and byproducts and the use of midstream infrastructure and financial derivatives to optimize related trading strategies.
Corporate includes stewardship of Suncor’s debt and borrowing costs, expenses not allocated to the company’s businesses,
and the company’s captive insurance activities that self-insure a portion of the company’s asset base.
Intersegment revenues and expenses are removed from consolidated results in Group Eliminations. Intersegment activity
includes the sale of feedstock by the Oil Sands and Exploration and Production segments to the Refining and Marketing
segment, the sale of fuels and lubricants by the Refining and Marketing segment to the Oil Sands segment, the sale of
ethanol by the Renewable Energy business to the Refining and Marketing segment, and the provision of insurance for a
portion of the company’s operations by the Corporate captive insurance entity.
Three-Year History
2009
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Economic downturn leads to ‘‘safe mode’’ for key growth projects. In the first quarter of 2009, Suncor placed a
number of oil sands projects into safe mode as a result of the downturn in the global economy. Safe mode is the deferral of
projects and maintenance of equipment and facilities in a safe manner in order to expedite remobilization when appropriate.
The placement and maintenance of projects in safe mode resulted in significant operating expenses in 2009 and 2010, and
the  ensuing  changes  to  project  scheduling  resulted  in  increased  capital  expenditures  when  projects  were  eventually
remobilized. As a result of the merger and an improvement in the economy, in 2010, Firebag Stage 3, Firebag Stage 4
and the Millennium Naphtha Unit (MNU) projects were all taken out of safe mode. The Voyageur upgrader project began
remobilizing in 2011.
Merger with Petro-Canada. On August 1, 2009, Suncor merged with Petro-Canada, adding approximately 375 mboe/d of
upstream production at that time, which included the MacKay River in situ bitumen project, a 12% ownership interest in the
Syncrude joint venture, interests in all of the major producing fields offshore Newfoundland and Labrador, interests in several
offshore fields in the U.K. and the Netherlands portions of the North Sea, including Buzzard, interests in foreign operations
pursuant to PSCs in Syria and Libya, and significant natural gas assets in Western Canada and the U.S. Rockies. Growth
assets acquired included the Fort Hills oil sands mining project, other extensive oil sands acreage considered prospective for
in situ development of bitumen resources, and interests in other North Sea fields that would eventually become known as
Golden Eagle. Downstream assets acquired included the Edmonton and Montreal refineries, a lubricants plant, and the
Petro-CanadaTM branded network of retail service stations and wholesale cardlock sites. In addition, responsibilities for crude
marketing and procurement activities related to Petro-Canada assets were assumed by Suncor’s existing Energy Trading
business.
Steepbank extraction plant completed. To reduce the distance to the mine face, a new bitumen extraction plant on the
east side of the Athabasca River was completed, resulting in improved reliability and bitumen recovery.
Fires at Suncor’s upgrading facilities. In December 2009, there was a fire at the company’s Upgrader 2 facilities, which
were repaired and returned to normal operations in February 2010. In February 2010, there was a fire at our Upgrader 1
facilities, which were repaired and returned to full operations by April 2010.
2010
(cid:127)
Disposition of non-core assets. Subsequent to the merger, the company undertook a strategic initiative to sell non-core
assets.  Throughout  2010,  the  company  completed  or  entered  into  agreements  for  the  disposition  of  non-core  assets
representing approximately 60 mboe/d of production. This included assets in the U.S. Rockies, the Netherlands portion of the
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
7
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
North Sea, Trinidad and Tobago, the Scott, Telford and Guillemot areas in the U.K. portion of the North Sea, and numerous
natural gas packages in Western Canada. Some of these disposals closed in 2011. Additional disposals of non-core North
America Onshore assets representing approximately 5.9 mboe/d of 2010 production occurred in 2011.
Reclamation of tailings pond. Suncor became the first oil sands company to complete surface reclamation of a tailings
pond. The 220-hectare site was the company’s first storage pond for oil sands tailings when commercial production began in
1967. Suncor renamed the area Wapisiw Lookout.
Tailings  Reduction  Operations  (TROTM).  Suncor  received  approval  from  Alberta  regulators  to  convert  from  the
Consolidated Tailings (CT) management process to TROTM, a process in which mature fine tailings are dried, rather than
mixed with sand and other materials to form CT. Suncor expects that TROTM will allow the company to significantly reduce
the area required for tailings management, increase the speed at which it is able to reclaim its tailings ponds and meet the
requirements of the Tailings Directive approved by Alberta’s Energy Resources Conservation Board (ERCB) in 2009.
Production commences in Syria. Suncor achieved commercial production of natural gas from the Ebla project in April. First
oil was later achieved from Ebla in December.
First oil from the White Rose Extensions. In the second quarter, first oil was achieved from the North Amethyst portion of
the White Rose Extensions.
Terra Nova redetermination. In December, the joint venture owners of the Terra Nova oilfield finalized the redetermination
of  working  interests  required  under  the  Terra  Nova  Development  and  Operating  Agreement  following  field  payout  on
February 1, 2005. Suncor’s working interest increased to 37.675% from 33.990%.
Transformation of downstream Marketing operations. Suncor rebranded 158 SunocoTM retail sites to consolidate its
post-merger Canadian downstream marketing operations under the Petro-CanadaTM brand. Suncor divested 104 retail sites
in Ontario to comply with Canadian Competition Bureau requirements relating to the merger.
Suncor announced plans to grow production to one million barrels of oil equivalent per day. In December, Suncor
announced that it had entered into agreements with Total E&P. Concurrent with this announcement, Suncor introduced its
long-term growth strategy to increase production to over one million boe/d by 2020. Key components of the plan included
arrangements with Total E&P for the restart of construction of the Voyager upgrader, and the joint development of the Fort
Hills and Joslyn mining projects with the respective joint venture owners of these projects. Other key components of the
ten-year growth strategy included continued development of the company’s Firebag and MacKay River in situ projects, and
investments in, and ongoing production from, international and offshore operations.
2011
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Exploration and Production segment created. In January, Suncor announced organizational changes that included the
International  and  Offshore  and  Natural  Gas  business  divisions  merging  into  a  single  organization  primarily  focused  on
conventional production, which includes both onshore and offshore operations.
Ethanol plant expansion completed. In January, Suncor completed the expansion of its ethanol plant in Ontario that
doubled production capacity to 400 million litres per year, making it Canada’s largest biofuels production facility.
Operations in Libya temporarily suspended. In response to political unrest and sanctions in Libya in the first quarter, the
joint venture operator shut in production, while Suncor suspended all exploration activities and declared force majeure under
its EPSAs. The uncertainty about the company’s future in Libya caused by these events at that time resulted in the company
recording an impairment charge against the company’s assets. Sanctions in Libya were eventually lifted upon the transition
to a new government, and the joint venture operator was able to restart production from all major producing fields by early
January 2012.
Transactions with Total E&P close. After receiving the necessary regulatory approvals, Suncor and Total E&P completed
their previously announced transactions. In exchange for net proceeds of $1.820 billion (after closing adjustments) and a
36.75% interest in the Joslyn project, Suncor sold to Total E&P a 49% interest in the Voyageur upgrader and a 19.2%
interest in the Fort Hills project.
Largest  turnaround  in  Suncor  history.  During  the  second  quarter,  the  company  completed  safely  and  on  time  a
turnaround at its Upgrader 2 facilities.
New wind farms commissioned. In May, the eight-turbine, 20-MW Kent Breeze wind power project in southwest Ontario
commenced operations. In November, Suncor completed construction of, and initiated full production from, the 55-turbine,
88-MW Wintering Hills project in southern Alberta.
First oil at Firebag Stage 3. In July, Suncor achieved first oil from the first of three well pads at the Firebag Stage 3
expansion. With the ramp up of production from the Stage 3 expansion and the addition of infill wells at Firebag, Suncor’s In
Situ production surpassed 100,000 bbls/d of bitumen for the first time in the fourth quarter.
8
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Development  of  Golden  Eagle  approved.  In  the  third  quarter,  the  field  development  plan  for  Golden  Eagle  was
approved. The company anticipates first production late in 2014 or early 2015.
North Steepbank Extension. In December, the company started mining ore from the North Steepbank Extension (NSE) at
its Oil Sands Base operations. The opening of this new mine extension enables Suncor to access additional oil sands ore,
decrease overall haul distances and decrease mine congestion.
Operations in Syria suspended. In December, sanctions were introduced that resulted in Suncor declaring force majeure
under its contractual obligations and suspending its operations in Syria. Consequently, the company has ceased recording all
production and revenue associated with its Syrian assets.
Systems  integration  project  completed.  During  the  year,  the  company  integrated  Exploration  and  Production  and
Refining  and  Marketing  assets  acquired  in  the  merger  onto  a  common  information  systems  platform.  Oil  Sands  and
Corporate assets were integrated during 2010.
2012
(cid:127)
Chief Executive Officer Rick George to retire. Suncor’s long-standing chief executive officer (CEO) announced his plan to
retire after more than 20 years leading the company. Steve Williams, Suncor’s chief operating officer (COO), was appointed
president and a member of the company’s Board of Directors, and will assume the role of CEO upon Mr. George’s retirement
in May 2012.
NARRATIVE DESCRIPTION OF SUNCOR’S BUSINESSES
Oil Sands
For a discussion of environmental and other regulatory conditions, and competitive conditions and seasonal impacts affecting
our Oil Sands segment, refer to the Industry Conditions and Risk Factors sections of this AIF.
Oil Sands Base Operations
Our integrated Oil Sands Base operations, located near Fort McMurray, Alberta, involve numerous activities:
(cid:127)
Mining and Extraction
After overburden is removed, open-pit mining operations use shovels to excavate the oil sands bitumen ore, which is trucked
to sizers and breaker units that reduce the size of the ore, then create a slurry of hot water, rock, sand and bitumen. The
slurry is delivered via a hydrotransport pipeline to extraction plants. The raw bitumen is separated from the slurry using a hot
water process that creates a bitumen froth. Naphtha is added to the bitumen froth to form a diluted bitumen, which is
subsequently sent to a centrifuge plant that removes most of the remaining impurities and minerals.
(cid:127)
Upgrading
After the diluted bitumen is transferred to upgrading facilities, the naphtha is removed and recycled to be used again as
diluent. Bitumen is upgraded through a coking and distillation process. The upgraded product, referred to as sour SCO, is
either sold directly to customers or upgraded further into sweet SCO by removing sulphur and nitrogen using a hydrotreating
process. In addition to sweet and sour SCO, upgrading processes also produce diesel, naphtha, kerosene and gas oil.
(cid:127)
Utilities
Process water is used in extraction processes and then recycled. Steam and electricity are generated through facilities on site.
Steam required for operations is generated by a cogeneration unit or coke-fired boilers. Electricity is generated by turbine
generators,  some  of  which  are  part  of  the  cogeneration  unit.  Excess  energy  produced  is  sold  back  to  the  power  grid;
however, during peak periods, Suncor purchases additional electricity from the grid.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
9
(cid:127)
Maintenance
In the normal course of our operations, we regularly conduct planned maintenance events at our facilities. Large planned
maintenance  events,  which  require  units  to  be  taken  offline  to  be  completed,  are  often  referred  to  as  turnarounds.
Turnaround  maintenance  provides  opportunities  for  both  preventive  maintenance  and  capital  replacement,  which  are
expected to improve reliability and operational efficiency. Planned maintenance events generally occur on routine cycles,
determined by historical operating performance, recommended usage factors or regulatory requirements. A turnaround
typically involves shutting down the unit, inspecting it for wear or other damage, repairing or replacing components, and
then restarting the unit.
(cid:127)
Reclamation
Mining processes disturb areas of land that must be reclaimed. Land reclamation activities involve monitoring soil salvage
and replacement, wetlands research, fish, waterfowl and other wildlife protection, and re-vegetation.
The extraction process produces tailings that are a mixture of water, clay, sand and residual bitumen. Suncor has developed a
new tailings management approach, known as TROTM, which involves converting tailings more rapidly into a solid landscape
suitable for reclamation. In this process, mature fine tailings are mixed with a polymer flocculent and then deposited in thin
layers on shallow slopes. The resulting product is a dry material that is capable of being reclaimed in place or moved to
another location for final reclamation. The new process is expected to eliminate the need for new tailings ponds at existing
mining operations, improve tailings management going forward and, in the years ahead, reduce the number of tailings
ponds presently in operation.
Oil Sands Base Assets
Mining and Extraction
Suncor pioneered the commercial development of the Athabasca oil sands beginning in 1962. The original mining area is
essentially depleted, and, for several years, bitumen has been mined almost exclusively from the Millennium area, which began
production in 2001. During 2011, the company mined approximately 160 million tonnes from Millennium, and started mining
ore from the NSE.
Suncor currently operates two extraction plants, the second of which was brought into service during 2009. The original
extraction plant on the west side of the Athabasca River is operated only as required to support reclamation activities. During
2011, Suncor averaged processing 289,000 bbls/d of mined bitumen ore in its extraction facilities.
Upgrading
Suncor’s upgrading facilities consist of two upgraders – Upgrader 1, which has a primary upgrading capacity of 110,000 bbls/d
of  SCO,  and  Upgrader  2,  which  has  a  primary  upgrading  capacity  of  240,000  bbls/d  of  SCO. When  the  MNU  is  fully
commissioned, Suncor’s secondary upgrading facilities will consist of three hydrogen plants, three naphtha hydrotreaters, two
gas oil hydrotreaters and two diesel hydrotreaters.
During 2011, Suncor averaged 279,700 bbls/d of upgraded bitumen (SCO) production and an additional 25,000 bbls/d of
non-upgraded bitumen production (2010 – 251,400 bbls/d upgraded, 31,600 bbls/d non-upgraded).
Other Mining Leases
Suncor owns several other oil sands leases, including those known as Voyageur South and Audet, which it believes can be
developed using mining techniques and on which it undertakes modest exploratory drilling programs on a year-to-year basis.
In Situ Operations
Suncor’s In Situ operations, Firebag and MacKay River, use SAGD technology to separate bitumen from oil sands deposits that
are too deep to be mined economically and primarily provide additional bitumen to Oil Sands Base upgrading facilities.
(cid:127)
The SAGD process
The SAGD process drills pairs of horizontal wells with one located above the other. To help reduce land disturbance and
improve cost efficiency, well pairs are drilled from central multi-well pads. Steam is injected into the upper well to create a
high-temperature steam chamber underground. This process reduces the viscosity of the thick bitumen, allowing heated
bitumen and condensed steam to drain into the bottom well and flow up to the surface aided by subsurface pumps or
circulating gas. Typically, it takes 18 to 24 months for the steam chamber to reach conditions that support peak production
levels.
10
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
(cid:127)
Central processing facilities
The bitumen and water mixture is pumped to separation units at central processing facilities, where the water is removed
from the bitumen, treated and recycled for use in steam generation. To facilitate transportation of viscous bitumen, In Situ
operations add diluent (naphtha) or use an insulated (referred to as ‘‘hot’’) bitumen pipeline.
(cid:127)
Steam generation
Gas vapours recovered at central processing facilities are treated and used as fuel to power Once Through Steam Generators.
Cogeneration  units  are  energy  efficient  systems,  which  use  natural  gas  combustion  to  power  turbines  that  generate
electricity and steam.
(cid:127)
Maintenance and feedstock supply
Central processing facilities, steam generation units and well pads are all subject to routine inspection and maintenance
cycles.
SAGD production volumes are impacted by reservoir quality and the capacity of central processing facilities and steam
generation  units  to  process  liquids  and  generate  steam.  As  with  conventional  oil  and  gas  properties,  SAGD  wells  will
experience natural production declines after several years. Suncor strives to maintain bitumen supply by drilling new wells
from existing well pads or by developing new well pads.
(cid:127)
New technologies
Suncor is involved in numerous pilot projects, both operated and non-operated. These pilot projects evaluate potential
enhancements  to  existing  SAGD  operations  or  potential  new  technologies  targeted  at  improving  capital  efficiency  and
lowering SORs.
In Situ Assets
Firebag
Initial development of Suncor’s Firebag operations included two well pads, each with ten well pairs, and central processing
facilities for each of Firebag Stage 1 and Stage 2, with production commencing in 2004 and 2006, respectively. A cogeneration
unit was added in 2007. The combined processing capacity of these initial Firebag operations was approximately 95,000 bbls/d
of bitumen at design SORs of 2.0 to 2.5; however, actual SORs for Firebag have been higher than the design specifications,
largely  due  to  geological  heterogeneity  (inconsistent  quality  throughout  the  reservoir).  Prior  to  first  oil  from  the  Stage  3
expansion,  production  averaged  between  50,000  to  60,000  bbls/d  for  2010  and  2011.  As  at  December  31,  2011,  the
cumulative  SOR  at  Firebag  was  3.3.  As  production  from  the  Stage  3  expansion  increases,  the  Firebag  SOR  is  expected
to decrease.
During 2011, the company completed its Firebag Stage 3 expansion, which added three well pads, two cogeneration units and
a central processing facility. Commissioning of the cogeneration units is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2012.
The Firebag Stage 4 expansion, scheduled for completion during 2013, includes two well pads, an additional central processing
facility and two more cogeneration units. The design capacity for both of the Stage 3 and Stage 4 expansions is 62,500 bbls/d
of  bitumen.  Actual  production  may  vary  from  this  capacity  based  on  steaming  and  ramp-up  periods,  scheduled  and
unscheduled maintenance, reservoir conditions and other factors. Suncor designed the Stage 3 and Stage 4 expansions with
the goal of integrating the entire Firebag operation. Steam and electricity generated at one facility or unit can be used at any
well pad. Central processing facilities have been designed to be flexible as to which well pads supply bitumen.
Suncor has received regulatory approval for further expansion of Firebag beyond Stage 4 for an aggregate of 368,000 bbls/d
of bitumen.
During 2011, Firebag operations averaged production of 59,500 bbls/d of bitumen (2010 – 53,600 bbls/d), approximately
90% of which was upgraded by Oil Sands Base operations.
MacKay River
Production from MacKay River commenced in 2002 from two well pads with 25 well pairs, and subsequent expansion phases
added four more well pads with 31 producing well pairs. Starting in June 2011, a new phase of 22 well pairs was initiated, with
production coming on-stream in the fourth quarter of 2011 and continuing to build throughout 2012. Central processing
facilities have a nameplate capacity of approximately 30,000 bbls/d of bitumen. A third party owns and operates the on-site
cogeneration unit in return for a fee and natural gas fuel being purchased by Suncor. As at December 31, 2011, the cumulative
SOR at MacKay River was 2.5.
Suncor has regulatory approval for 73,000 bbls/d of bitumen production from MacKay River and is currently evaluating an
expansion to add a second central processing facility. Suncor has approval to include its Dover properties in the MacKay River
project area, and has submitted an application to develop a portion of these lands.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
11
During  2011,  MacKay  River  operations  averaged  production  of  30,000  bbls/d  of  bitumen  (2010 – 31,500  bbls/d),
approximately 30% of which was upgraded by Oil Sands Base operations.
Other In Situ Leases
Suncor owns several other oil sands leases, including those known as Meadow Creek, Lewis, Chard and Kirby, which it believes
can  be  developed  using  in  situ  techniques,  and  on  which  it  may  undertake  modest  exploratory  drilling  programs  on  a
year-to-year basis.
Oil Sands Ventures – Assets and Operations
Syncrude
Suncor holds a 12% interest in the Syncrude joint venture, also located near Fort McMurray, which includes operations at the
Mildred Lake North and Aurora North oil sands mines. Syncrude also has regulatory approval to develop the Aurora South oil
sands mining leases.
Syncrude began producing in 1978 and is operated by Syncrude Canada Ltd. (SCL). In 2006, SCL entered into a comprehensive
management  services  agreement  with  Imperial  Oil  Resources  (Imperial  Oil)  to  provide  operational,  technical  and  business
management services. This agreement has an initial term of ten years and includes renewal provisions.
Syncrude mining operations use truck, shovel and hydrotransport systems, similar to those at Oil Sands Base. Extraction and
upgrading technologies at Syncrude are also similar to those used at Oil Sands Base, except that Syncrude uses a fluid coking
process that involves the continuous thermal cracking of the heaviest hydrocarbons, as opposed to a delayed coking process.
At Mildred Lake, electricity is provided by a utility plant fuelled by off-gas from upgrading operations and natural gas. At Aurora
North,  Syncrude  operates  two  80-MW  gas  turbine  power  plants.  The  gross  design  capacity  for  Syncrude  facilities  is
approximately 375,000 bbls/d, but when allowances are made for scheduled and unscheduled downtime the gross productive
capacity of the facilities is approximately 350,000 bbls/d.
Syncrude primarily produces a single sweet synthetic light crude product. Marketing of this product is the responsibility of the
individual joint venture owners.
Land  reclamation  activities  are  similar  to  those  at  Oil  Sands  Base;  however,  tailings  management  processes  are  different.
Syncrude’s ERCB-approved tailings plan uses the following: freshwater capping, a composite tails mixture of fine tails and
gypsum, and plans for centrifuge technology that separates water from tailings.
In 2011, Suncor’s share of Syncrude production averaged 34,600 bbls/d (2010 – 35,200 bbls/d).
Voyageur Upgrader, Fort Hills and Joslyn
Oil Sands Ventures also includes assets important to Suncor’s long-term growth strategy. During the first quarter of 2011,
Suncor completed transactions with Total E&P, which brought Total E&P into the Voyageur upgrader project, increased their
working interest in the Fort Hills oil sands mining project and brought Suncor into the Joslyn oil sands mining project.
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Fort Hills is the oil sands mining project comprising leases on the east side of the Athabasca River, north of Oil Sands Base
operations.  Preliminary  designs  for  Fort  Hills  plan  for  164,000  bbls/d  of  bitumen  production  (gross).  Suncor  originally
acquired a 60% working interest in Fort Hills as a result of the merger, and then agreed to a partial disposition of 19.2% as
part of transactions with Total E&P. Suncor now holds a 40.8% working interest in the Fort Hills project. Suncor Energy
Operating Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Suncor, is the contract operator for the Fort Hills project. Prior to the merger, the
joint  venture  owners  of  Fort  Hills  had  completed  design  basis  memorandum  engineering  in  2008,  but  deferred  a  final
investment decision as a result of the economic downturn. Subsequent to completing the transactions with Total E&P, the
Fort Hills project has restarted design basis memorandum engineering. Total E&P holds a 39.2% working interest in the Fort
Hills project and Teck Resources Limited holds the remaining 20%.
Joslyn is the oil sands mining project comprising leases southwest of the Fort Hills project and on the west side of the
Athabasca River. Preliminary designs for the Joslyn North mine project plan for 100,000 bbls/d of bitumen production (gross).
Suncor acquired a 36.75% working interest in this asset as a result of transactions with Total E&P. Under this joint venture
agreement, Total E&P is scheduled to act as operator, holding a 38.25% interest, while Occidental Oil and Gas Corporation
(15%) and Inpex Canada Ltd. (10%) hold the remaining interests.
Suncor anticipates that the majority of bitumen production from the Fort Hills and Joslyn projects will be upgraded into SCO
and other products by the Voyageur upgrader. Suncor began design work for the Voyageur upgrader in 2004. The original
Voyageur program received approval from the Board of Directors in January 2008. The Voyageur upgrader project was
placed into safe mode in January 2009 as a result of the economic downturn, at which time construction was approximately
15% complete. Subsequent to the transactions with Total E&P in December 2010, the Voyageur upgrader project team has
12
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
engaged in activities such as remobilizing personnel and assessing the condition of assets. Preliminary design plans are for
200,000 bbls/d (gross) of upgrading capacity.
The development of each of these projects is still subject to approval by Suncor’s Board of Directors and the joint venture
owners for each respective project.
Sales of Principal Products
Primary  markets  for  SCO  and  bitumen  production  from  Suncor’s  Oil  Sands  segment,  which  is  sold  to  and  subsequently
marketed by Suncor’s Energy Trading business, include refining operations in Alberta, Ontario, the U.S. Midwest and the
U.S. Rocky Mountain regions. Diesel production from upgrading operations is sold primarily in Western Canada, marketed by
Suncor’s Refining and Marketing business.
For bitumen production from In Situ operations, Suncor’s marketing strategy allows it to take advantage of changes in market
conditions by either: a) upgrading the bitumen directly at our Oil Sands Base facilities; b) upgrading the bitumen at Suncor’s
refineries; or c) selling diluted bitumen directly to third parties. Direct bitumen sales may also be required during outages of
upgrading facilities or interruptions in pipeline systems. During 2011, 73% (2010 – 63%) of In Situ bitumen production was
processed by Oil Sands Base upgrading facilities.
In 2011, sales of light sweet SCO and diesel represented 44% and sales of light sour SCO and bitumen represented 45% of
total Oil Sands segment operating revenues. There were no individual customers that represented 10% or more of Suncor’s
consolidated revenues in 2011 or 2010.
Operating  revenues  include  sales  of  non-proprietary  volumes  purchased  from  third  parties.  These  volumes  are  typically
transacted when Oil Sands Base or third-party refinery capacities are constrained, in conjunction with a corresponding sales
agreement, which allow Suncor and the third party to optimize their logistics. These volumes may also include purchases of
third-party diluent to support sales of bitumen, required when the company is unable to meet diluent demands internally.
Information on average daily sales volumes and the corresponding percentage of Oil Sands segment operating revenues by
product for each of the last two years are as follows:
Sales Volumes and Operating Revenues – Principal Products
2011
2010
Light sweet SCO and diesel (including Syncrude)
Light sour SCO and bitumen
Non-proprietary, byproducts and other operating revenues
% operating
revenues
44
45
11
mbbls/d
144.4
194.6
n/a
339.0
% operating
revenues
43
46
11
mbbls/d
137.9
176.6
n/a
314.5
In the normal course of business, Suncor enters into long-term strategic supply agreements for its proprietary sour SCO, which
contain varying terms with respect to pricing, volume, expiry and terminations.
Distribution of Products
Production from Oil Sands Base operations is gathered from our Fort McMurray facilities at the Athabasca Terminal, which is
operated by Enbridge Inc. (Enbridge). Suncor has various arrangements with Enbridge at this facility to store SCO, diluted
bitumen and diesel. Production from Firebag is transported to the Athabasca Terminal via a pipeline that is operated by Suncor,
while production from MacKay River is transported to the Athabasca Terminal via an insulated pipeline.
Product moves from the Athabasca Terminal in the following ways:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
SCO is sent to Edmonton via the Oil Sands pipeline, which is owned by Suncor and operated by the Refining and Marketing
segment. At Edmonton, the product is sold to local refiners or transferred onto the Enbridge Mainline system.
SCO and diluted bitumen is transported to Hardisty, Alberta via Cheecham, Alberta on the Enbridge Athabasca Pipeline.
SCO also reaches Edmonton via the Waupisoo pipeline, which is owned and operated by Enbridge. This pipeline begins from
the Enbridge Athabasca Pipeline at Cheecham.
From  Hardisty,  where  Suncor  has  storage  capacity  under  contract,  Suncor  has  various  options  for  delivering  product
to customers:
(cid:127)
SCO reaches Suncor’s Commerce City refinery via the Express and Platte pipelines. Suncor owns and operates a pipeline that
is connected to the Commerce City refinery, which originates from the Guernsey, Wyoming station that is part of the Platte
pipeline.
(cid:127)
SCO reaches Suncor’s Sarnia refinery on the Enbridge Mainline and Lakehead systems.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
13
(cid:127)
From Hardisty, which is also connected to the Enbridge Mainline pipeline from Edmonton, crude can reach most major
refining hubs via the Enbridge Mainline, Express/Platte and Keystone pipeline systems.
Natural gas is used in the production of SCO, particularly in our SAGD operations. Natural gas is delivered to Oil Sands Base and
In Situ facilities via the Nova Gas Transmission Limited (NGTL) regulated pipeline system. Suncor also transports natural gas to
our Oil Sands Base facilities on the company-owned and operated Albersun Pipeline, which has a capacity of 46 mmcf/d and
extends approximately 300 km south of the Oil Sands Base facilities and is connected to the NGTL.
Oil Sands Base facilities are readily accessible by public road. MacKay River facilities are accessible by a combination of public
and private roads. Firebag facilities are currently accessible by air and private road. In 2010, the East Athabasca Highway was
constructed to provide access to the Firebag site. This highway is owned by Suncor, Husky Energy Inc. and Imperial Oil Ltd., and
was constructed to provide each company with access to its oil sands operations in the area.
Royalty Agreements
New oil sands projects are subject to the New Royalty Framework issued by the Government of Alberta, and regulated by the
Oil Sands Royalty Regulation 2009 (OSRR 2009), and supporting regulations, which were approved on December 10, 2008.
In 2011, Oil Sands royalties (excluding Syncrude) were approximately 7% (2010 – 7%) of Oil Sands operating revenues before
royalties,  and  excluding  non-proprietary  sales  and  sales  of  byproducts.  In  2011,  Suncor  incurred  royalties  on  Syncrude
operations averaging approximately 8% of Syncrude gross revenue (2010 – 9%).
Oil Sands Base and Syncrude
As part of the New Royalty Framework, Suncor negotiated and entered into the Suncor Royalty Amending Agreement (Suncor
RAA) with the Government of Alberta in January 2008 for royalties pertaining to its Oil Sands Base operations. Prior to the
New Royalty Framework, Suncor exercised its option to transition to a bitumen-based royalty from an SCO-based royalty, which
became effective January 1, 2009. Royalty rates for 2009 remained at 25% of net revenue. For the period from January 1, 2010
to December 31, 2015, royalty rates are based on a sliding scale (depending on the Canadian dollar equivalent for WTI) from
25% to 30% of RⳮC (RevenueⳮCost), where R is gross revenues, net of bitumen quality adjustments and transportation
costs, and C is allowable costs including allowable capital expenditures, which excludes substantially all operating and capital
expenditures associated with upgrading facilities. The minimum royalty rate is 1.0% to 1.2% of R. In 2011 and 2010, Suncor
incurred royalties on Oil Sands Base mining operations at a rate of 30% of RⳮC because of high prices for WTI.
In November 2008, the Alberta government and the joint owners of the Syncrude joint venture reached an agreement for the
implementation of the New Royalty Framework for the Syncrude project (similar to the Suncor RAA). Under the new terms,
Syncrude would continue paying the greater of 1% gross revenue, or 25% of net revenue, until the end of 2015. For 2011, the
royalty rate was 25% of net revenue. As part of its agreement, Syncrude also exercised its option to transition to a bitumen-
based royalty from an SCO-based royalty. As such, the upgrader facility at the Syncrude project is no longer considered a part of
the royalty project. The Syncrude joint venture owners agreed to pay an additional royalty of $975 million over a six-year period
starting in 2010, which is contingent on achieving certain production levels.
As  part  of  the  implementation  of  the  New  Royalty  Framework,  the  Alberta  government  enacted  new  Bitumen  Valuation
Methodology (BVM) regulations effective January 1, 2009. These interim BVM regulations determine the valuation of bitumen
for 2009 to 2011. Final regulations to establish the BVM calculation for future years are still to be developed by the Crown. For
the year 2009, Suncor filed a non-compliance notice with the Crown, citing that reasonable adjustments were not considered
by the Crown in the determination of bitumen value as permitted by the Suncor RAA. In December 2010, the Minister of
Energy notified Suncor of a modification to the Suncor BVM, permitting adjustments for bitumen quality and transportation.
Suncor filed its second non-compliance notice with the Crown, for the years 2009 and 2010, related to the quality adjustment
made by the Minister, which Suncor believes is not reasonable. Pursuant to the OSRR 2009, Suncor provided replacement
royalty reports for 2009 and 2010 and remitted, under protest, the balance of royalty payable at the end of January 2011. For
2011, Suncor continued to remit royalty payments based on its view of reasonable quality adjustments; however, royalty
expense was calculated based on the Minister’s quality adjustment. The Suncor RAA provides for an arbitration procedure
failing settlement of these issues. Suncor filed a Notice of Commencement of Arbitration with the Crown on January 29, 2011.
The  joint  venture  owners  of  Syncrude  have  also  filed  a  non-compliance  notice  with  the  Crown,  citing  that  reasonable
adjustments in the determination of the bitumen value were not considered by the Crown, similar to the notice filed by Suncor
in respect of the Suncor RAA.
Beginning on January 1, 2016, Suncor’s Oil Sands Base and Syncrude operations will be subject to the generic royalty regime
under  OSRR  2009  that  is  currently  in  place  for  all  other  oil  sands  royalty  projects  in  Alberta,  including  Suncor’s  In  Situ
operations, as described below.
14
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
In Situ
Under the New Royalty Framework, royalties on Suncor’s Firebag and MacKay River projects are based on a sliding-scale rate of
25% to 40% of RⳮC, subject to a minimum royalty of 1% to 9% of R, depending on oil prices for WTI from Cdn$55/bbl to the
maximum rate at a WTI price of Cdn$120/bbl. A project remains subject to the minimum royalty (the pre-payout phase) until
the project’s cumulative gross revenue exceeds its cumulative costs, including an annual investment allowance (the post-payout
phase). In 2011, Suncor incurred royalties at a rate of 34% of RⳮC for MacKay River, which reached the post-payout phase in
November 2010, and royalties averaging 6% of R for Firebag, which continues in the pre-payout phase.
Exploration and Production
For a discussion of the environmental and other regulatory conditions, competitive conditions, foreign operations and seasonal
impacts affecting our Exploration and Production segment, refer to the Industry Conditions and Risk Factors sections of this AIF.
East Coast Canada – Assets and Operations
Based in St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, this business focuses on high-volume production from three existing fields,
interests  in  future  developments  and  expansions,  and  exploration  drilling  for  new  opportunities.  Suncor  holds  a  unique
position as the only company with interests in all current producing fields.
Terra Nova
The Terra Nova oilfield is approximately 350 km southeast of St. John’s, Newfoundland. Terra Nova was discovered by Petro-
Canada in 1984, and was the second oilfield to be developed offshore Newfoundland and Labrador. Operated by Suncor, the
production system uses a Floating Production, Storage and Offloading (FPSO) vessel that is moored on location, and has gross
production capacity of 180,000 bbls/d and oil storage capacity of 960,000 bbls. Terra Nova was the first harsh environment
development in North America to use a FPSO vessel. Actual production levels are lower than production capacity, reflecting
current reservoir capability. Production from Terra Nova began in January 2002. At December 31, 2011, there were 28 wells in
operation: 16 oil wells, nine water injection wells and three gas injection wells. Two of the oil wells have been shut in due to
hydrogen sulphide (H2S) flow line restrictions. In 2011, Suncor’s share of Terra Nova production averaged 16,200 bbls/d (2010 –
23,200 bbls/d).
H2S was detected in several oil wells in the fourth quarter of 2010. Wells and facilities directly and indirectly impacted by H2S
have been shut in while the company implements its mitigation plan to safely address the situation. In the fourth quarter of
2011, the company replaced a flow line that has remediated some of the H2S issues. Remaining H2S remediation is anticipated
to be completed as part of the dockside maintenance program scheduled to commence in the third quarter of 2012. The
dockside maintenance program also includes replacement of the FPSO swivel.
In  December  2010,  the  joint  venture  owners  of  the  Terra  Nova  oilfield  finalized  the  redetermination  of  working  interests
required under the Terra Nova Development and Operating Agreement following field payout on February 1, 2005. As a result,
Suncor’s working interest increased to 37.675% from 33.990% effective January 1, 2011.
Field production is transported by shuttle tanker from the FPSO and either delivered directly to customers (if tanker schedules
permit) or to the Newfoundland transshipment terminal in Placentia Bay, where it is subsequently loaded onto tankers for
transport to markets in Eastern Canada or the U.S. Suncor has a 14% ownership interest in the transshipment facility and is
part of a group of companies that share the operation of marine transportation assets for East Coast Canada.
Hibernia and the Hibernia Southern Extension Unit (HSEU)
The  Hibernia  oilfield,  encompassing  the  Hibernia  and  Ben  Nevis  Avalon  reservoirs,  is  approximately  315  km  southeast  of
St.  John’s  and  was  the  first  field  to  be  developed  in  the  Jeanne  d’Arc  Basin.  Operated  by  Hibernia  Management  and
Development Company Ltd., the production system is a fixed gravity base structure (GBS) that sits on the ocean floor, and has
gross  production  capacity  of  230,000  bbls/d  and  oil  storage  capacity  of  1.3  mmbbls.  Actual  production  levels  are  lower,
reflecting  current  reservoir  capability  and  natural  declines.  Hibernia  commenced  production  in  November  1997.  At
December 31, 2011, there were 64 wells in operation: 35 oil wells, 23 water injection wells and six gas injection. In 2011,
Suncor’s share of Hibernia production averaged 30,900 bbls/d (2010 – 30,900 bbls/d). Hibernia uses the same transshipment
terminal and system of shuttle tankers that are used for Terra Nova.
Final fiscal agreements were signed between the Hibernia joint venture owners and the Government of Newfoundland and
Labrador in 2010 that established the fiscal, equity and operational principles for the development of the HSEU. During 2011,
the first two development wells were completed and are producing oil. Current development plans include drilling up to two
additional producing wells and five water injection wells in a subsea, excavated drill centre, known as a glory hole. The number
of  producing  and  injection  wells  required  may  be  revised  as  the  development  proceeds  and  uncertainties  about  reservoir
capability are resolved.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
15
White Rose and the White Rose Extensions
White Rose, the third oilfield development offshore Newfoundland, is about 350 km southeast of St. John’s. Operated by Husky
Oil Operations Limited, White Rose uses a FPSO vessel and has gross production capacity of 140,000 bbls/d and oil storage
capacity of 940,000 bbls. Production from White Rose began in November 2005. At December 31, 2011, there were 25 wells
in  operation:  twelve  oil  wells  and  13  water  injection  wells.  In  2011,  Suncor’s  share  of  White  Rose  production  averaged
18,500 bbls/d (2010 – 14,500 bbls/d). White Rose uses the same transshipment terminal and the same system of shuttle
tankers that are used for Hibernia and Terra Nova.
In 2007, the White Rose joint venture owners signed a formal agreement with the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador for
the development of the White Rose Extensions, which include the South White Rose Extension, North Amethyst and West
White  Rose  satellite  fields.  In  May  2010,  first  oil  was  achieved  in  North  Amethyst,  and  development  drilling  is  ongoing.
Development of the West White Rose Extension will be divided into two stages. The first stage was approved in 2009 and first
oil was achieved during the third quarter of 2011 with the completion of the first production well. A water injection well to
support this initial production is expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2012. Results of the first stage, combined
with other ongoing evaluation, will help define the scope of the second stage.
An extended, 18-week off-station maintenance program is scheduled to commence in the second quarter of 2012 for the
White Rose FPSO, primarily to address issues with the FPSO propulsion system.
Hebron
Discovered in 1980, the Hebron oilfield is located 340 km southeast of St. John’s. In 2008, the Hebron joint venture owners
reached an agreement with the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador on commercial terms allowing development
activities to proceed. The project is operated by ExxonMobil Canada Properties.
Development of the Hebron project anticipates the construction of a concrete GBS that supports an integrated topsides deck to
be used for production, drilling and accommodations. Development plans include 1.2 mmbbls of oil storage capacity and
52 well slots with a gross oil production capacity of 150,000 bbls/d.
The  contract  for  the  front-end  engineering  and  design  of  topsides,  procurement  and  construction  was  awarded  in
September 2010. Initial construction on the GBS began in September 2011 in Newfoundland and Labrador. The decision from
the joint venture owners of Hebron to sanction the development of Hebron is anticipated in late 2012, with initial production
anticipated in late 2017.
Other Assets
The Ballicatters discovery well, located 22 km northeast of Hibernia, was completed earlier in 2011 and is comprised of gas and
oil. Suncor and its partner are currently evaluating potential options to commercialize the discovery.
Suncor continues to pursue opportunities offshore Newfoundland and Labrador. The company holds interests in 48 other
significant discovery licences and six other exploration licences offshore Newfoundland and Labrador.
International – Assets and Operations
Buzzard – North Sea
The Buzzard oilfield is located in the Outer Moray Firth, 95 km northeast of Aberdeen, Scotland. Operated by Nexen Petroleum
U.K.  Limited,  the  Buzzard  facilities  have  gross  installed  production  capacity  of  approximately  220,000  bbls/d  of  oil  and
80 mmcf/d of natural gas. Oil production rates at Buzzard are currently limited to a maximum of approximately 215,000 bbls/d
due to restrictions on third-party pipeline systems. Work is ongoing with the pipeline operator to increase the maximum
production rate closer to the gross oil production capacity. Buzzard commenced production in January 2007. Buzzard consists
of four bridge-linked platforms supporting wellhead facilities, production facilities, living quarters and utilities, and sulphur
handling.  In  2011,  commissioning  was  completed  for  the  fourth  platform,  which  was  installed  to  remove  H2S  from  oil
production from some segments of the field. At December 31, 2011, there were 40 wells in operation: 29 oil and gas wells and
11 water injection wells. In 2011, Suncor’s share of Buzzard production averaged 42,900 boe/d (2010 – 55,500 boe/d).
Crude oil is transported via the third-party operated Forties Pipeline System to the Kinneil terminal in Scotland. Natural gas is
transported via the third-party operated Frigg pipeline to the St. Fergus gas terminal in Scotland.
Golden Eagle – North Sea
During 2011, the Golden Eagle Area Development received regulatory approval from the U.K. Department of Energy and
Climate Change. This development is approximately 70 km from the Aberdeen shore and consists of the unitization of the Pink,
Hobby  and  Golden  Eagle  discoveries  completed  from  2007  to  2009.  The  development  plan  incorporates  a  combined
production, utilities and accommodation platform, linked to a separate wellhead platform, with an initial gross production rate
of 70,000 boe/d (gross) from 20 development wells. The operator, Nexen Petroleum U.K. Limited, estimates that the gross
16
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
development cost will be £2 billion (Cdn$3.3 billion). First production is expected late in 2014 or early 2015. The joint venture
owners of Golden Eagle also hold adjacent exploration licences and continue to explore the region.
Beta – North Sea
In the Norway portion of the North Sea, Suncor is the operator of the Beta discovery. Suncor has a 65% working interest in this
field,  which  is  currently  under  evaluation.  The  company  completed  the  first  exploration  well  in  early  2010,  encountering
hydrocarbons. An appraisal well was drilled and tested later in 2010 with positive results. Suncor has secured a rig to drill a third
appraisal well, which is scheduled to commence in the second quarter of 2012.
Other Assets – North Sea
During 2011, the operator for the PL405 licence (in the Norway portion of the North Sea) in which Suncor has a 30% interest,
drilled an exploration well resulting in a discovery, referred to as the Butch prospect. A sidetrack well subsequently drilled at this
prospect was abandoned early in 2012, due to well instability, before reaching its intended depth. In the U.K. portion of the
North Sea, Suncor, as operator, has secured a rig and expects to drill a joint exploration well for the Romeo joint venture
prospect (Block 30/11c). The joint well is to be drilled to comply with work commitments for two adjacent licences, one held by
Suncor and its co-venturers, and the other by Total E&P U.K. Limited.
In late 2010 and early 2011, the company disposed of non-core assets in the U.K portion of the North Sea, including its
working interests in production from the Guillemot and Scott/Telford areas. Also, in August 2010, the company disposed of
non-core assets in the Netherlands portion of the North Sea.
Syria
Located in the Central Syrian Gas Basin, the Ebla project includes all hydrocarbons in the Ash Shaer and Cherrife development
areas,  which  cover  more  than  300,000  acres.  Suncor  conducts  its  Syrian  operations  pursuant  to  a  PSC,  under  which  the
company is a joint owner of the Ebla project with the General Petroleum Corporation (GPC). Under the PSC, the company pays
100% of the development costs and recovers these costs from a 40% share of production after deduction for royalties of
12.5%. This petroleum revenue is referred to as Cost Recovery petroleum. The amount by which Cost Recovery petroleum
exceeds recoverable cost is referred to as Excess Cost Recovery petroleum; 50% of this amount is due to the GPC and the
remaining  50%  is  shared  between  Suncor  and  the  GPC  according  to  a  profit-sharing  schedule.  The  Ebla  PSC  expires  in
April 2035, but includes a five-year extension subject to GPC approval. First commercial gas production from Ebla was achieved
in  April  2010  and  first  oil  was  achieved  in  December  2010.  In  2011,  Suncor’s  share  of  production  in  Syria  averaged
17,600 boe/d (2010 – 11,600 boe/d).
The Ebla development comprises six natural gas producing wells in the Ash Shaer field, a gas gathering and compression
station, approximately 80 km of pipeline, and a gas treatment plant. The facility is designed to produce 97 mmcf/d of natural
gas, along with related LPG and condensate volumes. Natural gas is delivered into the Syrian national gas grid for domestic
consumption. The Ebla development also includes three wells producing crude oil, which is sold to the GPC.
In December 2011, amid continuing unrest in Syria, sanctions were introduced and Suncor declared force majeure under its
contractual  obligations  and  suspended  its  operations  in  the  country.  Suncor  withdrew  its  expatriate  staff  and  undertook
measures to maintain support for its Syrian employees. Consequently, the company has ceased recording all production and
revenue associated with its Syrian assets.
Libya
In Libya, Suncor acts pursuant to several EPSAs that enable Suncor and the Libya National Oil Corporation (NOC) to jointly
design and implement the redevelopment of existing fields in the Sirte Basin. Existing reserves are associated with five separate
agreements (EPSAs I through V), which contain five primary production fields. Under the EPSAs, the company pays 100% of
the exploration costs, 50% of the development and 12% of the operating costs, and recovers these costs from a 12% share of
production, also referred to as Cost Recovery. Any petroleum remaining after Cost Recovery is referred to as Excess Petroleum,
and is shared between Suncor and the NOC based on a profit-sharing schedule affected by several factors, with Suncor’s share
of profit ranging from 4% to 12%. The EPSAs expire on December 31, 2032, but include an initial five-year extension through
the end of 2037. In 2011, Suncor’s share of production in Libya averaged 12,100 bbls/d (2010 – 35,200 bbls/d). Libya is a
member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and is subject to quotas that can affect the company’s
production in Libya.
For  most  of  the  period  from  March  to  September  2011,  the  operator  for  the  joint  venture,  Harouge  Oil  Operations  BV
(Harouge) shut in production as a result of political unrest that began earlier in the year. Sanctions prohibiting the purchase of
oil from Libya, among other things, were also introduced by many governments. In March 2011, Suncor declared force majeure
under its EPSAs. Beginning late in the third quarter of 2011, a new governing authority was formed in Libya and sanctions were
lifted. By January 2012, Harouge had successfully restarted production from all major producing fields and work continues to
stabilize production levels. Net production exiting December 2011 was approximately 30,000 bbls/d. Suncor remains optimistic
about a gradual return to full operations in Libya and is working to remove its ESPAs from force majeure, where possible.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
17
As a result of the merger, the company assumed the remaining US$500 million obligation for a signature bonus relating to
Petro-Canada’s ratification of the EPSAs in 2008. As at December 31, 2011, the undiscounted value of Suncor’s remaining
obligation is US$347 million, payable in several instalments through 2013. In addition, as part of its contractual obligations
under the EPSAs, Suncor is the exploration operator and has committed to fully fund an exploration program, at an estimated
remaining cost of US$360 million. As at December 31, 2011, Suncor is still under condition of force majeure with respect to its
EPSAs and has re-engaged Harouge to discuss current operations and future plans, including contractual obligations.
North America Onshore – Assets and Operations
The  North  America  Onshore  business  includes  the  assets  and  operations  previously  reported  under  Suncor’s  Natural  Gas
segment, which is now part of the Exploration and Production segment. This business explores for, develops and produces
natural  gas,  NGLs,  crude  oil  and  byproducts  in  Western  Canada.  After  the  merger  with  Petro-Canada,  this  business
implemented a strategy with greater emphasis on liquids-rich and unconventional sources, and, as a result, disposed of a
number of non-core assets throughout 2010 and 2011.
Given the vast amount of natural gas brought on-stream in North America by recent advances in shale gas technology, coupled
with the economic downturn in 2008 and 2009, natural gas producers in North America continue to face relatively low gas
prices. In light of this environment, Suncor has implemented a strategy to make its operations in this region more profitable.
One component of that strategy involved selling assets that were no longer deemed core to Suncor’s business strategy. As
market conditions for such divestitures worsened, Suncor has started to focus more on another component of its strategy –
becoming more profitable in this region, primarily by increasing activity in tight oil projects. The company is also assessing and
pursuing activities to grow the unconventional side of its North America Onshore operations.
In 2011, Suncor’s share of production from its North America Onshore properties was 388 mmcfe/d (2010 – 575 mmcfe/d)
with approximately 21 mmcfe/d of production in 2011 coming from assets that were disposed throughout the year (2010 –
143  mmcfe/d).  Natural  gas  represented  92%  of  production  in  2011  (2010 – 91%),  with  crude  oil  and  NGL  production
representing the remainder. North America Onshore also sells sulphur, a byproduct of processing operations.
Operations are primarily focused on multiple geological zones throughout Western Canada. The business is structured with the
following asset areas:
Zone / Area
Northeast B.C.
Southeast Alberta
Foothills – western Alberta, portions of northeast B.C.
Plains – western Alberta
Primary
Focus
Montney, Triassic and Slave Point
Sweet, dry gas
Mississippian sour gas
Cardium oil, Cretaceous gas
2011
mmcfe/d
113
70
161
44
388
In addition, Suncor holds assets that could allow the company to eventually explore long-term supply opportunities in northern
frontier areas.
Natural gas extracted from the wellhead requires further processing. In Western Canada, Suncor operates several natural gas
processing plants, with total licensed capacity of 772 mmcf/d, of which the company’s share is 470 mmcf/d. Capacity not
utilized by the company’s own production is optimized through processing agreements with third-party producers. Suncor also
has varying working interests in other natural gas processing plants and field gathering facilities operated by other oil and
natural gas companies. The company’s aggregate share from such interests is 91.5 mmcf/d of licensed capacity. The following
table  shows  Suncor’s  working  interest  ownership  and  the  licensed  capacity  of  operated  processing  plants  as  at
December 31, 2011.
Suncor Operated Natural Gas Processing Plants
Hanlan Sour
Hanlan Sweet
Ferrier
Gilby East
Wilson Creek
Progress
Boundary Lake Sour
Boundary Lake Sweet
Parkland 1
Parkland 2
Total
18
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Zone / Area
Foothills
Foothills
Plains
Plains
Plains
Northeast B.C.
Northeast B.C.
Northeast B.C.
Northeast B.C.
Northeast B.C.
Working
Interest
Ownership
%
49.86
40.73
100.00
100.00
52.17
38.01
50.00
100.00
43.98
34.75
Gross
Licensed
Capacity
mmcf/d
382.0
44.2
120.0
52.4
34.6
42.6
46.0
20.0
18.1
11.7
771.6
Net
Licensed
Capacity
mmcf/d
190.5
18.0
120.0
52.4
18.1
16.2
23.0
20.0
8.0
4.1
470.3
Natural gas production from Alberta is typically sold at the Nova Inventory Transfer point (NIT), which is one of the largest
natural gas trading hubs in North America. Natural gas at NIT generally receives a daily or monthly average AECO (Alberta) spot
price. Natural gas production from B.C. is typically sold at Station 2, part of the Spectra B.C. transmission system, and receives
the Station 2 Gas Daily Index price, but can also be moved on the Alliance Pipeline system to its terminus in Illinois. To provide
diversity in access to markets, Suncor holds firm capacity on the Alliance Pipeline system and the TransCanada PipeLines Gas
Transmission Northwest Pipeline (GTN). The GTN firm capacity enables Suncor to deliver natural gas to the Pacific Northwest
and California markets.
Conventional  crude  oil  production  from  North  America  Onshore  assets  is  shipped  on  pipelines  operated  by  independent
pipeline companies. We currently have no pipeline commitments related to the shipment of conventional crude oil. In most sale
arrangements, Suncor is responsible for transportation to the point of sale.
Sales of Principal Products
Oil and gas production from East Coast Canada and the North Sea, and substantially all production from North America
Onshore,  are  sold  to  our  Energy  Trading  business,  which  then  markets  the  products  to  customers  under  direct  sale
arrangements. Suncor does not typically enter into long-term supply arrangements to sell its production from its Exploration
and Production segment. Contracts for these direct sales arrangements are of varied terms, with a majority having terms of one
year or less, and incorporate pricing that is generally determined on a daily or monthly basis in relation to a specified market
reference price.
In Syria, the company entered into purchase and sale agreements with the Syrian government for all hydrocarbon production
from the Ebla project. In Libya, hydrocarbon production is marketed by the Libyan government on behalf of Suncor.
For each of Exploration and Production’s operations, and for Exploration and Production in total, the following table provides
information on average sales volumes for principal products and the corresponding percentage of operating revenues for 2011
and 2010:
Sales Volumes
East Coast Canada (1)
Crude oil
International
Crude oil and NGLs
Natural gas
North America Onshore
Crude oil and NGLs
Natural gas
Total Exploration and Production
Crude oil and NGLs
Natural gas
2011
2010
mboe/d
% operating
revenues
mboe/d
% operating
revenues
52.3
62.4
14.0
5.1
59.6
119.8
73.6
42
34
4
3
8
79
12
54.2
111.1
21.5
8.8
87.0
174.2
108.5
29
46
4
4
13
79
17
(1) Operating revenues for East Coast Canada include crude oil marketed on behalf of our partner in White Rose.
Royalty Agreements
East Coast Canada
The  Terra  Nova  royalty  consists  of  a  sliding-scale,  basic  royalty  payable  throughout  the  project’s  life,  with  two  tiers  of
incremental  royalties,  which  became  payable  upon  the  achievement  of  specified  levels  of  profitability  that  included  an
additional return allowance. The basic royalty is now capped at 10% of gross field revenue, based on the project reaching a
specified cumulative production level. The tier one royalty is the greater of the basic royalty or 30% of net revenue, and became
payable in 2005. Net revenue is gross revenue adjusted for eligible operating and capital costs. The tier two royalty, equal to
12.5% of net revenue, became payable in 2008. During 2011, Terra Nova royalty expense averaged 32% of gross revenue
(2010 – 35%).
The Hibernia royalty agreement for production from the original oilfields and the AA Block consists of a sliding-scale gross
royalty, two tiers of incremental royalty, and an additional net profits interest (NPI). The basic royalty is now capped at 5% of
gross revenue, as the project has reached a specified cumulative production level. The tier one royalty, which became payable in
2009, is the greater of the gross royalty or 30% of net revenue. The tier two royalty is 12.5% of net revenue, but has not yet
been triggered. Production from the AA Block, which commenced in late 2009, attracts an additional super royalty of 12.5% of
net revenue. The NPI, which also became payable in 2009, is an additional 10% of net revenue.
Limited production from the HSEU began in 2011. The HSEU has a similar royalty structure (gross, tier one and tier two) to that
described above for Hibernia. Currently, Suncor is only subject to a 5% gross royalty. HSEU production will be subject to an
additional super royalty that ranges between 2.5% and 7.5% of net revenue, depending on the price for WTI. The HSEU super
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
19
royalty will coincide with the triggering of the tier one net royalty. During 2011, Hibernia (including the HSEU) royalty expense
and net profits interest combined to average 37% of gross revenue (2010 – 38%).
The White Rose royalty for the base project consists of a sliding-scale basic royalty payable throughout the project’s life, with
two tiers of incremental royalties, which became payable upon the achievement of specified levels of profitability that included
an additional return allowance. The basic royalty is now capped at 7.5% of gross field revenue, based on the base project
reaching a specified cumulative production level. The tier one royalty is the greater of the basic royalty or 20% of net revenue,
and became payable in 2007. Net revenue adjusts gross revenue for eligible operating and capital costs. The tier two royalty,
equal to 10% of net revenue, became payable in 2008. The White Rose Extensions royalty is similar to the base project, except
that there is a tier three royalty, equal to 6.5% of net revenue, which is payable if WTI is greater than Cdn$50/bbl. None of the
tier royalties have been triggered for the White Rose Extensions. During 2011, total White Rose royalty expense averaged 14%
of gross revenue (2010 – 25%).
International
There are no royalties on oil and gas production from the North Sea; however, in the U.K., oil and gas profits are subject to a
62% income tax rate. For operations in Libya and Syria, all government interests, except for income taxes, are presented
as royalties.
North America Onshore
Royalties for Suncor’s North America Onshore production in Alberta are regulated by the Natural Gas Royalty Regulation 2009,
introduced as part of the New Royalty Framework, which came into effect on January 1, 2009, but was later modified by
changes that came into effect on January 1, 2011. Royalties for natural gas and conventional oil production are set by a sliding-
scale formula – ranging from 5% to 36% for natural gas and 0% to 40% for conventional crude oil – that is dependent on
factors such as well depth, production rate, and the price and quality of natural gas and crude oil. The maximum rates of 36%
and 40% for the sliding-scales became effective on January 1, 2011 and were both reduced from 50%. NGLs have royalty rates
of 30% for propane and butane and 40% for pentanes.
In response to the drop in commodity prices experienced during the second half of 2008, the provincial government introduced
the New Well Royalty Reduction Program with the intent of promoting new drilling. New wells drilled after April 1, 2009 are
subject to an initial 5% royalty for the first twelve months of production, subject to a 500 mmcfe or 50 mboe volume cap. After
May 1, 2010, new wells that started producing exclusively from shale formations qualify for a maximum 5% royalty on all
production for the first 36 months of production, and are not subject to volume caps.
The Alberta government’s Natural Gas Deep Drilling Program also provides royalty relief for wells drilled beyond 2000 metres
(true vertical depth). The maximum royalty rate for these wells is 5%, which applies for five years after the finished drilling date,
and is subject to dollar caps that are determined based on total depth and whether the well is exploratory or developmental.
Operating and capital costs for gathering, compressing and processing facilities, and processing costs on a fee-for-service basis
are allowable costs for deduction from gas and natural gas liquids gross royalties payable.
Royalties for Suncor’s North America Onshore production in British Columbia are regulated primarily by the Petroleum and
Natural Gas Royalty and Freehold Production Tax Regulation. Royalty rates for natural gas production are subject to different
formulas based on the date the well was drilled. Wells drilled before June 1998 attract a rate starting at 15%. Wells drilled after
June 1998 attract a royalty starting at 9% or 12%, depending on whether wells were completed within five years of the date
drilling rights were issued, and are subject to a sliding scale with a maximum royalty rate of 27% as prices increase. Similar to
Alberta,  royalty  programs  exist  in  British  Columbia  to  provide  relief  for  deep  drilling,  lower  production  rates,  and  unique
production methods. Royalties on NGLs are assessed at a flat rate of 20% of sales.
Expenses for field gathering, compression and field processing are allowed as cost of services deductions from gross royalties,
and royalty clients who use producer-owned processing facilities or distribution systems are also entitled to operating and
capital cost deduction for these facilities.
During 2011, royalty expense for North America Onshore production averaged 11% of gross revenue (2010 – 14%).
Refining and Marketing
For  a  discussion  of  the  environmental  and  other  regulatory  conditions,  and  competitive  conditions  and  seasonal  impacts
affecting our Refining and Marketing segment, refer to the Industry Conditions and Risk Factors sections of this AIF.
Operations – Refining and Product Supply
Eastern North America
Effective January 1, 2012, the Montreal refinery had a crude oil capacity of 137,000 bbls/d. The observed performance of the
refinery, after improvements in reliability and operations, enabled the nameplate capacity to be upwardly revised from the
previously reported capacity of 130,000 bbls/d.
20
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
The refinery processes primarily foreign conventional crude oil, with a flexible configuration that allows processing of light, sour
and heavy grades of crude oil, as well as intermediate feedstocks. Crude oil is procured from the market on a spot basis or
under contracts that can be terminated on short notice. Crude oil for the refinery is largely supplied by the Portland-Montreal
Pipeline.
Production yield from the Montreal refinery includes gasoline, distillates, asphalts, heavy fuel oil, petrochemicals and solvents,
which are distributed primarily across Quebec and Ontario. The Montreal refinery also produces feedstock for our lubricants
plant. Refined products are delivered to distribution terminals in Ontario via the Trans-Northern Pipeline and delivered to
customers directly by truck, rail and marine vessel.
The  Sarnia  refinery  has  a  crude  oil  capacity  of  85,000  bbls/d,  processing  both  SCO  supplied  by  the  company’s  Oil  Sands
operations and conventional crude oil purchased from third parties on a spot basis or under contracts that can be terminated
on  short  notice.  Crude  oil  is  supplied  to  the  Sarnia  refinery  primarily  via  the  Enbridge  pipelines  system.  Suncor  procures
conventional crude oil feedstock primarily from Western Canada, but periodically supplements supply with purchases from the
U.S. and other countries. Foreign crude oil is delivered to Sarnia via the Enbridge pipeline system from Montreal.
Production yield from the Sarnia refinery includes gasoline, distillates and petrochemicals, which are primarily distributed in
Ontario. Refined products are delivered to distribution terminals in Ontario via the Sun-Canadian Pipeline, or delivered to
customers directly via marine vessel and rail. The Sarnia refinery also has limited access to pipelines delivering refined product
into the U.S.
To  meet  the  demands  of  Suncor’s  marketing  network  in  Eastern  North  America,  the  company  also  imports  gasoline  and
distillates from refiners in Europe. Suncor enters into reciprocal exchange arrangements with other refiners in Eastern North
America, primarily for gasoline and distillates, as a means of minimizing transportation costs and balancing product availability.
Specialty products, such as asphalts and petrochemicals, are also exported to customers in the U.S.
Suncor holds a 51% interest in ParaChem Chemicals L.P. (ParaChem), which owns and operates a petrochemicals plant located
adjacent to the Montreal refinery. Feedstock for the plant includes xylene and toluene produced by the Montreal and Sarnia
refineries. The plant primarily produces up to 350,000 metric tons per year of paraxylene, which is used by customers to
manufacture polyester textiles and plastic bottles. ParaChem also produces benzene, hydrogen and heavy aromatics. Benzene
production is delivered back to the Montreal refinery to be marketed with production from that facility.
Suncor’s lubricants plant produces specialty lubricants and waxes that are marketed in Canada and internationally. The facility is
the largest producer of lubricant base stocks in Canada, with annual base oil production capacity in excess of 900 million litres.
Feedstock for the lubricants facility comes from Suncor’s Montreal refinery and other purchase contracts.
Western North America
The Edmonton refinery has a crude oil capacity of 135,000 bbls/d and has the potential to run entirely on feedstocks sourced
from oil sands and heavy crude oil from Alberta. Feedstock is supplied from Suncor’s Oil Sands Base operations, Syncrude
operations (including volumes purchased by Suncor from other joint venture owners’ share of production) and other producers
from the Athabasca and Cold Lake regions of Alberta. The refinery can process directly 35,000 bbls/d of blended feedstock
(comprised of 25,000 bbls/d of bitumen and 10,000 bbls/d of diluent) and process 45,000 bbls/d of sour SCO. The refinery can
also  process  55,000  bbls/d  of  sweet  SCO  through  its  synthetic  train.  Crude  oil  is  supplied  to  the  refinery  via  third-party
pipelines.
Production yield from the Edmonton refinery includes primarily gasoline and distillates, which are delivered to distribution
terminals across Western Canada via the Alberta Products Pipeline, the TransMountain Pipeline and the Enbridge pipeline
system, as well as via truck and rail.
Effective January 1, 2012, the Commerce City refinery had a crude oil capacity of 98,000 bbls/d. The observed performance of
the refinery, after improvements in reliability and operations, enabled the nameplate capacity to be upwardly revised from the
previously reported capacity of 93,000 bbls/d.
The refinery processes primarily conventional crude oil, but also has the capability of processing up to 15,000 bbls/d of sour
SCO from Suncor’s Oil Sands Base operations. A majority of crude feedstock is supplied from sources in the U.S., primarily the
Rocky Mountain region, while the remainder is purchased from Canadian sources. Crude oil purchase contracts have terms
ranging  from  month-to-month  to  multi-year.  Approximately  60%  of  crude  oil  supplied  to  the  refinery  is  transported  via
pipeline, with the remainder transported via truck.
Production yield from the Commerce City refinery includes primarily gasoline, diesel and asphalt. The majority of the refined
products from the refinery are sold to commercial and wholesale customers in Colorado and Wyoming, and a retail network in
Colorado. Refined products are distributed by truck, rail, and pipeline.
To support supply and demand balance in the Vancouver area, Suncor imports and exports finished products through its
Burrard distribution terminal on the west coast of Canada. Suncor also enters into reciprocal exchange arrangements with
other refiners in Western North America as a means of minimizing transportation costs and balancing product availability.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
21
Refinery Throughputs, Utilizations and Yields
The following table summarizes the crude feedstock and utilizations for Suncor’s refineries for the years ended December 31,
2011 and 2010. Refinery utilizations for 2011 include the impacts of planned maintenance events at the Sarnia, Edmonton and
Commerce City refineries, and the impacts of a month-long disruption to third-party hydrogen supply at Edmonton.
Average Daily Crude Throughput
(mbbls/d, except as noted)
Oil Sands Base sweet synthetic
Oil Sands Base sour synthetic
Other synthetic
East Coast Canada light conventional (1)
Other light conventional
Sour conventional
Heavy conventional
Total
Utilization (2) (%)
Montreal
Sarnia
Edmonton
2011
—
—
—
23.0
82.3
10.2
15.3
2010
—
—
—
41.5
54.7
6.4
19.2
130.8
101
121.8
94
2011
11.4
25.2
12.6
—
3.2
18.6
—
71.0
83
2010
14.1
17.4
17.0
—
3.0
19.3
—
70.8
83
2011
12.3
41.2
41.9
—
—
—
20.4
2010
11.4
42.5
39.6
—
2.4
—
22.7
115.8
118.6
86
88
Commerce City
2011
2010
—
7.7
—
—
67.0
16.0
90.7
98
0.1
9.4
—
—
72.0
17.5
99.0
106
Includes purchases of Suncor and third-party shares of production from East Coast Canada oilfields.
(1)
(2) Utilization rates for Montreal and Commerce City are determined based on refinery capacities in effect prior to January 1, 2012.
Refined petroleum production yield mix
(%)
Montreal
Sarnia
Edmonton
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
Commerce City
2011
2010
Gasoline
Distillates
Other
40
34
26
42
32
26
44
42
14
53
35
12
46
50
4
42
54
4
51
36
13
51
36
13
Distribution Terminals and Pipelines
Suncor  owns  and  operates  13  major  refined  products  terminals  across  Canada  and  two  product  terminals  in  Colorado.
Combined with access to facilities under long-term contractual arrangements with other parties, Suncor’s North American
assets are sufficient to meet Refining and Marketing’s current storage and distribution needs.
Suncor has ownership interests in the following pipelines:
Pipeline
Portland-Montreal Pipeline
Trans-Northern Pipeline
Sun-Canadian Pipeline
Alberta Products Pipeline
Rocky Mountain Crude Pipeline
Centennial Pipeline
Operations – Marketing
Ownership
Type
Origin
Destinations
23.8% Crude oil
33.3% Refined product
Portland, Maine
Montreal, Quebec
55.0% Refined product
Sarnia, Ontario
35.0% Refined product
100.0% Crude oil
100.0% Crude oil
Edmonton, Alberta
Guernsey, Wyoming
Guernsey, Wyoming
Montreal, Quebec
Ontario – Ottawa,
Toronto, Oakville
Ontario – Toronto,
London, Hamilton
Calgary, Alberta
Denver, Colorado
Cheyenne, Colorado
Suncor’s retail service station network operates nationally in Canada under the Petro-CanadaTM brand. As at December 31,
2011, Suncor’s branded retail service station network consisted of 1,465 outlets across Canada. Most of Suncor’s owned and
operated  SunocoTM-branded  retail  sites  were  re-branded  to  the  Petro-CanadaTM  brand  in  2010.  In  addition  to  marketing
through  proprietary  retail  outlets,  petroleum  product  is  marketed  through  independent  dealers  and  joint  arrangements.
Suncor’s network had annual sales of gasoline motor fuels averaging approximately 4.9 million litres per site in 2011 (2010 –
5.1 million litres per site) and attracted an estimated 18% share (2010 – 19% share) of the national retail market (based on
data  available  from  Statistics  Canada  for  the  period  from  January  to  August  2011).  The  decline  in  market  share  in  2011
primarily reflects the loss of volume associated with the disposal of numerous retail sites in 2010 as mandated by the Canadian
Competition Bureau as a result of the merger.
Suncor’s Colorado retail network consists of 44 owned outlets. Suncor has product supply agreements with an additional
195 Shell姞-branded sites and 62 Phillips 66姞-branded sites in Colorado.
Marketing activities also generate non-petroleum revenues from convenience stores and car washes.
Suncor’s wholesale operations sell petroleum products into farm, home heating, paving, small industrial, commercial and truck
markets. Through its PETRO-PASS network, Suncor is the leading national marketer to the commercial road transport segment
in Canada. Suncor also sells large volumes of petroleum products directly to large industrial and commercial customers and
independent marketers.
22
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
The following tables summarize the locations comprising Suncor’s retail and wholesale network and the daily sales volumes and
corresponding percentages of Refining and Marketing’s operating revenues for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010.
Locations
Retail Service Stations – Canada
Petro-CanadaTM-branded
SunocoTM-branded
Retail Service Stations – Colorado
Shell姞-branded retail service stations
Phillips 66姞-branded retail service stations
Wholesale Cardlock Sites – Canada
Petro-CanadaTM-branded cardlock sites (PETRO-PASS)
Sales Volumes
2011
As at December 31
2011
2010
1 447
10
1 457
37
7
44
249
1 456
9
1 465
38
6
44
245
2010
Gasoline (includes motor and aviation gasoline)
Eastern North America
Western North America
Distillates (includes diesel and heating oils, and aviation jet fuels)
Eastern North America
Western North America
Other (includes heavy fuel oil, asphalts, lubricants, petrochemicals, other)
Eastern North America
Western North America
thousands of
m3/d
% operating
revenues
thousands of
m3/d
% operating
revenues
20.9
18.8
39.7
12.8
17.6
30.4
9.8
3.2
13.0
83.1
45
41
14
22.2
18.9
41.1
12.4
18.0
30.4
10.7
5.1
15.8
87.3
48
37
15
Sales volumes for specific products are somewhat impacted by seasonal cycles: gasoline sales are typically higher during the
summer driving season; heating oil sales are typically higher during the winter season; diesel sales are typically higher during
the drilling season at the beginning of the year in Western Canada, and during agricultural planting and harvest seasons in
early spring and late summer, respectively; and asphalt sales are typically higher during the summer construction paving period.
Suncor has the flexibility to modify refinery inputs and outputs to match production yields with anticipated product demands.
Sales volumes can also be impacted when refineries undergo planned maintenance events, which reduce production. Suncor is
able to partially mitigate this impact through its integrated facilities: the Edmonton refinery and Oil Sands Base upgrading
facilities in Western North America, and the Sarnia and Montreal refineries in Eastern North America. In addition, Suncor may
purchase refined products from third-party suppliers.
Other Suncor Businesses
Energy Trading
Suncor’s  Energy  Trading  business  is  organized  around  four  main  commodity  groups – crude  oil,  natural  gas,  sulphur  and
petroleum coke. Each commodity group provides value to customers through innovative commodity supply, transportation and
pricing solutions. Our customers include mid- to large-sized commercial and industrial consumers, utility companies and energy
producers, all of which demand specialized solutions to meet unique energy requirements.
The Energy Trading business supports the company’s Oil Sands production by optimizing price realizations, managing inventory
levels  during  unplanned  outages  at  Suncor’s  facilities  and  managing  the  impacts  of  external  market  factors,  like  pipeline
disruptions or outages at refining customers. The Energy Trading business has entered into arrangements for other midstream
infrastructure, such as pipeline and storage capacity, to optimize delivery of existing and future growth production, while
generating trading earnings on select strategies and opportunities.
The Energy Trading business continues to evaluate additional pipeline agreements to support planned increases in production
capacity. Until the company completes its Oil Sands growth projects, Suncor’s Energy Trading business expects to optimize the
capacities associated with existing arrangements.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
23
Renewable Energy
Suncor’s renewable energy interests include a corn-based ethanol facility in southwest Ontario and six wind power projects in
operation. Suncor is a Canadian pioneer in wind power with its investments in wind farms, which have a gross generating
capacity of 255 MW and reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions by approximately 470,000 tonnes each year, compared with
traditional power generation sources. We continue to evaluate new opportunities to build our renewable energy portfolio, and
have a number of potential wind power project sites in various stages of evaluation.
Wind Farm
Operated by Suncor
Wintering Hills
Kent Breeze
Non-operated
Ripley
Chin Chute
Magrath
SunBridge
Ownership
Interest (%)
Size (MW)
Turbines
Commissioned
Drumheller, Alberta
Thamesville, Ontario
Ripley, Ontario
Taber, Alberta
Magrath, Alberta
Gull Lake, Saskatchewan
70.0
100.0
50.0
33.3
33.3
50 .0
88
20
76
30
30
11
55
8
38
20
20
17
2011
2011
2007
2006
2004
2002
Since 2006, Suncor has invested in Canada’s emerging biofuels industry. Suncor operates Canada’s largest ethanol facility, the
St. Clair Ethanol Plant in the Sarnia-Lambton region of Ontario. Our ethanol plant had an original production capacity of
200 million litres per year, which has since doubled with the completion of the plant expansion in January 2011. In 2011, the
plant produced 381.5 million litres of ethanol (2010 – 206.0 million litres).
The following table shows the distribution of employees among our business units and corporate office for the past two years.
SUNCOR EMPLOYEES
As of December 31
Oil Sands
Exploration and Production
Refining and Marketing
Corporate, Energy Trading and Renewable Energy
Total
2011
5 464
768
3 161
3 633
2010
4 753
898
3 151
3 274
13 026
12 076
Corporate includes employees from our Major Projects group, which supports the business units. In addition to our employees,
the company also uses independent contractors to supply a range of services.
Approximately 36% of the company’s employees were covered by collective bargaining agreements at the end of 2011. The
Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union (CEP) represented the majority of the company’s unionized employees. A
collective agreement with CEP Local 707 representing approximately 3,200 Oil Sands employees is in force and expires in
May  2013.  Collective  agreements  that  will  expire  in  January  2013  are  also  in  place  with  the  CEP  for  approximately
1,000 employees in the company’s refinery, lubricants, natural gas, and terminal operations. A collective agreement with the
CEP  representing  approximately  65  employees  for  the  Terra  Nova  facility  was  renewed  in  2011  and  will  expire  in
September 2013.
A collective agreement with the United Steel Workers Union representing approximately 260 employees at the Commerce City
refinery  was  recently  renewed  and  will  expire  in  January  2015.  An  independent  union,  the  Suncor  Employee  Bargaining
Association, represents approximately 200 employees at the Sarnia refinery under an agreement that will expire in May 2012.
24
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
SIGNIFICANT POLICIES
Suncor has a Standards of Business Conduct Code (the Code), which applies to Suncor’s directors, officers, employees and
contractors. The Code requires strict compliance with legal requirements and sets Suncor’s standards for the ethical conduct of
our business. Topics addressed in the Code include competition, conflict of interest, the protection and proper use of corporate
assets and opportunities, confidentiality, disclosure of material information, trading in shares and securities, communications
to the public, improper payments, fair dealing in trade relations, and accounting, reporting and business controls. The Code is
supported by detailed policy guidance and standards and a Code compliance program, under which every Suncor director,
officer, employee and contract worker is required to annually read a summary of the Code and affirm that he or she has
reviewed the summary, affirm that he or she understands the requirements of the Code, and provide confirmation of his or her
compliance with the Code during the preceding year. Compliance is then reported to the Audit Committee.
Suncor has a Human Rights Policy, which affirms Suncor’s responsibility to respect human rights and ensures that Suncor is not
complicit in human rights abuses. Suncor is subject to the laws of the countries in which it operates and is committed to
complying with all such laws while honouring the spirit of international human rights principles, such as those described in the
Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  and  the  Voluntary  Principles  on  Security  and  Human  Rights.  The  policy  includes
principles committed to a harassment-free and violence-free working environment, which respects the cultures, customs and
values of the communities in which we operate. The policy makes it clear that the scope of Suncor’s human rights due diligence
includes its own operations and, where we can influence our third-party business relationships, the operations of others.
Suncor  has  a  Stakeholder  Relations  Policy,  which  reflects  Suncor’s  values  and  beliefs.  The  policy  provides  that  Suncor  is
committed to developing and maintaining positive, meaningful relationships with stakeholders in all of its operating areas and
provides  Suncor’s  principles  for  guiding  the  development  of  stakeholder  relations  (respect,  responsibility,  transparency,
timeliness and mutual benefit). The policy makes it clear that successful stakeholder engagement fosters informed decision-
making, resolving issues with timely, cost-effective and mutually beneficial solutions and supporting shared learning.
Suncor has an Aboriginal Affairs Policy, which affirms Suncor’s desire to work in collaboration with Canada’s Aboriginal People
to develop a thriving energy industry that allows Aboriginal communities to be vibrant, diversified and sustainable. The policy
provides  a  consistent  approach  to  the  company’s  relationships  with  Canada’s  Aboriginal  People  and  outlines  Suncor’s
responsibilities  and  commitments,  and  is  intended  to  guide  Suncor’s  business  decisions  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  Suncor  is
committed to work closely with Canada’s Aboriginal People and communities to build and maintain effective, long-term and
mutually beneficial relationships. The policy makes it clear that responsible development takes into account Aboriginal issues
and concerns about the effects, positive and negative, of energy development on communities and their traditional and current
uses of lands and resources.
Suncor has an Environment, Health and Safety (EH&S) policy, which affirms Suncor’s aspirations to be a sustainable energy
company  by  meeting  or  exceeding  the  environmental,  social  and  economic  expectations  of  our  current  and  future
stakeholders.  The  policy  reflect  Suncor’s  beliefs  that  our  EH&S  efforts  are  complementary  and  interdependent  with  our
economic  and  social  performance.  The  policy  makes  it  clear  that  Suncor  management  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that
employees under their direction are competent to manage their EH&S responsibilities and knowledgeable of the hazards and
risks associated with their jobs, and that all Suncor employees and contractors are accountable for compliance with relevant
acts, codes, regulations, standards and procedures, and for their own personal safety and the safety of their co-workers.
STATEMENT OF RESERVES DATA AND OTHER OIL AND GAS INFORMATION
Date of Statement
The statement of reserves data and other oil and gas information outlined below is dated March 1, 2012, with an effective date
of December 31, 2011. The preparation date of the information is as of February 16, 2012.
Disclosure of Reserves Data
As a Canadian issuer, Suncor is subject to the reporting requirements of Canadian securities regulatory authorities, including
the  reporting  of  our  reserves  in  accordance  with  National  Instrument  51-101 – Standards  of  Disclosure  for  Oil  and  Gas
Activities (NI 51-101).
The reserves data set forth in this section of the AIF for Suncor’s Mining (includes Oil Sands Base and Syncrude, unless otherwise
noted) and In Situ operations is based upon evaluations conducted by GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. (GLJ) with an effective
date of December 31, 2011, contained in their reports (the GLJ Reports). The reserves data set forth below for all other reserves,
which includes Suncor’s interests in its conventional natural gas assets primarily located in Western Canada (North America
Onshore), conventional assets offshore Newfoundland and Labrador (East Coast Canada), conventional assets offshore the
U.K.  (North  Sea),  and  conventional  assets  in  Syria  and  Libya  (collectively,  Other  International),  is  based  upon  evaluations
conducted  by  Sproule  Associates  Limited  or  Sproule  International  Limited  (collectively,  Sproule)  with  an  effective  date  of
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
25
December 31, 2011 contained in their reports (the Sproule Reports). Each of GLJ and Sproule (collectively, the Evaluators) are
independent qualified reserves evaluators as defined in NI 51-101. All factual data supplied to the Evaluators was accepted as
presented. For general interest purposes, GLJ conducted field tours of Suncor’s Millennium mine and the Syncrude Aurora
North mine. No other field inspections were deemed necessary by the Evaluators.
The reserves data summarizes Suncor’s SCO, bitumen, light and medium oil, NGL and natural gas reserves and the net present
values of future net revenue for these reserves using forecast prices and costs (unless otherwise indicated) prior to provision for
interest,  and  general  and  administrative  expenses.  Net  present  values  of  future  revenues  include  the  impact  of  certain
abandonment  costs.  For  more  information  on  abandonment  costs,  see  the  Future  Net  Revenues  Tables  and  Notes –
Abandonment and Reclamation Costs section of this AIF.
Future  net  revenues  are  presented  on  before-tax  and  after-tax  bases.  The  reserves  data  conforms  to  the  requirements  of
NI 51-101. See also the Notes to Reserves Data Tables and the Definitions for Reserves Data Tables discussions presented
subsequently in this section of the AIF.
Advisories – Future Net Revenues
It should not be assumed that the estimates of future net revenues presented in the tables below represent the fair market
value of the reserves. There is no assurance that the forecast prices and costs assumptions will be attained and variances could
be material. There is no guarantee that the estimates for SCO, bitumen, light and medium oil, NGL and natural gas reserves
provided herein will be recovered. Actual SCO, bitumen, light and medium oil, NGL and natural gas reserves may be greater
than or less than the estimates provided herein. Readers should review the definitions and information contained in the Notes
to  Reserves  Data  Tables,  Definitions  for  Reserves  Data  Tables  and  Notes  to  Future  Net  Revenues  Tables  discussions  in
conjunction with the following notes and tables.
Significant Factors or Uncertainties Affecting Reserves Data
The evaluation of reserves is a continuous process, one that can be significantly impacted by a variety of internal and external
influences. Revisions are often required as a result of newly acquired technical data, technology improvements, or changes in
historical performance, pricing, economic conditions, market availability, and regulatory requirements. Additional technical
information  regarding  geology,  reservoir  properties,  reservoir  fluid  properties  and  well  performance  are  obtained  through
seismic programs, drilling programs, updated reservoir performance studies and analysis, and production history, and may
result in upward or downward revisions to reserves. Pricing, market availability and economic conditions affect the profitability
of  reserves  exploitation.  Depending  on  the  current  business  environment,  higher  commodity  prices  may  result  in  higher
reserves by making more projects economically viable and extending their economic life, while lower commodity prices may
result in lower reserves, although this generally does not result for assets under Production Sharing Contracts. Regulatory
changes, including royalty regimes and environmental regulations, cannot be predicted but may have positive or negative
effects on reserves. Future technology improvements would be expected to have a favourable impact on the economics of
reserves development and exploitation, and therefore result in an increase to reserves.
While the above factors, and many others, can be considered, certain judgments and assumptions are always required. As new
information becomes available, these areas are reviewed and revised accordingly.
In 2011, the company’s assets in Syria were impacted by political unrest. As a result of the current situation in Syria, reserves
previously reported as proved developed producing and probable developed producing have been reclassified to the respective
non-producing categories. In addition, estimated 2012 production from Syria has not been included as reserves, but has been
reflected as contingent resources, as current sanctions prohibit Suncor from receiving payment for any production that may
occur during the force majeure period.
For more information as to the risks involved when estimating reserves and resources, see the Risk Factors – Uncertainty of
Reserves and Resources Estimates section in this AIF.
Disclosure of Resources Data
GLJ conducted an independent evaluation of Best Estimate contingent resources volumes for all of Suncor’s Mining properties
and for Suncor’s In Situ properties for which they also evaluated reserves. For Suncor’s In Situ properties without attributed
reserves, GLJ audited Suncor’s internal evaluation of Best Estimate contingent resources volumes. Best Estimate contingent
resources for conventional properties were prepared by Suncor’s qualified reserves evaluators in accordance with the Canadian
Oil and Gas Evaluation (COGE) Handbook. For more information on contingent resources, see the discussion in the Additional
Information Relating to Reserves Data – Contingent Resources section of this AIF.
26
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Oil and Gas Reserves Tables and Notes
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves (1)(2)(3)
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
SCO
Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil
Natural Gas
NGLs
Total
Proved Developed
Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Producing
Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Proved Undeveloped
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Undeveloped
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus
Probable
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls
2 022.5
203.0
—
—
2 225.5
—
—
1 722.1
191.0
—
—
1 913.1
—
—
—
47.7
—
—
47.7
—
—
—
39.4
—
—
39.4
—
—
—
—
48.1
11.2
59.3
71.5
96.0
—
—
38.2
9.2
47.4
71.5
35.7
Gross
bcf
—
—
—
805.7
805.7
3.3
—
—
—
—
688.8
688.8
3.3
—
2 225.5
1 913.1
47.7
39.4
226.8
154.6
809.0
692.1
Net
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
bcf mmbbls mmbbls
mmboe
mmboe
—
—
—
6.3
6.3
0.3
—
6.6
—
—
—
0.2
0.2
0.1
11.9
— 2 022.5
250.7
—
48.1
—
151.7
4.6
2 473.0
4.6
0.3
72.3
96.0
—
1 722.1
230.4
38.2
128.6
2 119.3
72.3
35.7
4.9
2 641.3
2 227.3
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
0.1
7.0
—
—
—
7.0
7.0
21.6
104.2
—
—
—
5.4
5.4
21.6
55.8
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
502.0
—
—
502.0
—
—
502.0
2 022.5
705.0
—
—
2 727.5
—
—
2 727.5
552.7
1 271.9
—
—
1 824.6
—
—
1 824.6
2 575.2
1 976.9
—
—
4 552.1
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
430.0
—
—
430.0
—
—
430.0
1 722.1
621.0
—
—
2 343.1
—
—
2 343.1
478.4
1 061.2
—
—
1 539.6
—
—
1 539.6
2 200.5
1 682.2
—
—
3 882.7
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
661.1
—
—
661.1
—
—
661.1
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
572.4
—
—
572.4
—
—
572.4
—
611.8
—
—
611.8
—
—
611.8
—
552.0
—
—
552.0
—
—
552.0
—
1 402.7
—
—
1 402.7
—
—
—
1 163.8
—
—
1 163.8
—
—
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
21.4
36.6
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
21.4
14.3
—
—
—
40.5
40.5
1.1
334.5
—
—
—
31.3
31.3
1.1
206.9
58.1
35.8
376.1
239.3
12.2
7.2
132.8
82.8
—
—
26.6
0.3
26.9
43.3
5.8
76.0
—
—
74.7
11.5
86.2
136.2
138.4
360.8
—
—
275.3
5.0
280.3
36.1
104.9
421.3
—
—
350.0
16.5
366.5
172.3
243.3
—
—
20.7
0.3
21.0
43.3
2.4
66.7
—
—
58.9
9.6
68.5
136.2
52.4
257.1
—
—
201.0
4.1
205.1
36.1
40.3
281.5
—
—
259.9
13.7
273.6
172.3
92.7
—
—
—
78.7
78.7
2.7
—
81.4
—
—
—
72.8
72.8
2.7
—
75.5
—
—
—
924.9
924.9
7.1
334.5
1 266.5
—
—
—
792.9
792.9
7.1
207.1
1 007.1
—
—
—
320.4
320.4
2.9
405.5
728.8
—
—
—
262.8
262.8
2.9
168.8
434.5
—
—
—
1 245.3
1 245.3
10.0
740.0
—
—
—
1 055.7
1 055.7
10.0
375.9
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
0.1
—
0.2
—
—
—
6.6
6.6
0.5
11.9
19.0
—
—
—
2.9
2.9
0.1
14.5
17.5
—
—
—
9.5
9.5
0.6
26.4
—
—
— 1 163.1
26.6
—
—
13.5
— 1 203.2
43.8
0.1
—
5.8
1 252.8
0.1
— 2 022.5
— 1 413.8
74.7
—
172.3
4.7
3 683.3
4.7
137.9
0.5
206.1
7.0
12.2
4 027.3
—
552.7
— 1 965.8
275.3
—
2.1
61.3
2 855.1
2.1
36.7
0.1
187.0
7.0
9.2
3 078.8
— 2 575.2
— 3 379.6
350.0
—
233.6
6.8
6 538.4
6.8
0.6
174.5
393.0
14.0
—
1 002.4
20.7
12.4
1 035.5
43.8
2.4
1 081.7
1 722.1
1 232.8
58.9
146.4
3 160.2
137.9
93.9
3 392.0
478.4
1 613.2
201.0
50.0
2 342.6
36.7
75.4
2 454.7
2 200.5
2 846.0
259.9
196.5
5 502.9
174.5
169.3
4 552.1
3 882.7
1 402.7
1 163.8
782.1
538.6
1 995.3
1 441.6
36.5
21.4
7 105.9
5 846.7
Please see Notes (1) through (3) at the end of the reserves data section for important information about volumes in this table.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
27
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves (1)(2)(3)
as at December 31, 2011
(constant prices and costs)
SCO
Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil
Natural Gas
NGLs
Total
Proved Developed
Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Producing
Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Proved Undeveloped
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Undeveloped
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus
Probable
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls mmbbls
2 022.5
202.9
—
—
2 225.4
—
—
1 718.2
194.0
—
—
1 912.2
—
—
—
47.7
—
—
47.7
—
—
—
40.2
—
—
40.2
—
—
—
—
48.1
11.2
59.3
71.7
96.3
—
—
37.2
9.6
46.8
71.7
36.4
Gross
bcf
—
—
—
731.8
731.8
3.3
—
—
—
—
640.1
640.1
3.3
—
2 225.4
1 912.2
47.7
40.2
227.3
154.9
735.1
643.4
Net
Gross
Net
Gross
Net
bcf mmbbls mmbbls
mmboe
mmboe
—
—
—
6.1
6.1
0.3
—
6.4
—
—
—
0.2
0.2
0.1
12.0
— 2 022.5
250.6
—
—
48.1
139.2
4.4
2 460.4
4.4
72.5
0.3
—
96.3
1 718.2
234.2
37.2
120.7
2 110.3
72.5
36.4
4.7
2 629.2
2 219.2
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
0.1
6.7
—
—
—
3.3
3.3
22.0
105.1
—
—
—
2.6
2.6
22.0
54.2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
502.0
—
—
502.0
—
—
502.0
2 022.5
704.9
—
—
2 727.4
—
—
2 727.4
552.7
1 271.9
—
—
1 824.6
—
—
1 824.6
2 575.2
1 976.8
—
—
4 552.0
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
446.5
—
—
446.5
—
—
446.5
1 718.2
640.5
—
—
2 358.7
—
—
2 358.7
480.0
1 114.5
—
—
1 594.5
—
—
1 594.5
2 198.2
1 755.0
—
—
3 953.2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
661.1
—
—
661.1
—
—
661.1
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
584.0
—
—
584.0
—
—
584.0
—
624.2
—
—
624.2
—
—
624.2
—
566.0
—
—
566.0
—
—
566.0
—
1 402.7
—
—
1 402.7
—
—
—
1 190.2
—
—
1 190.2
—
—
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
21.7
36.7
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
21.7
14.3
—
—
—
18.3
18.3
1.1
338.6
—
—
—
14.7
14.7
1.1
199.0
58.5
36.1
358.0
214.8
12.3
6.9
130.4
78.8
—
—
26.6
0.3
26.9
43.9
5.8
76.6
—
—
74.7
11.5
86.2
137.3
138.8
362.3
—
—
275.3
5.0
280.3
35.6
104.5
420.4
—
—
350.0
16.5
366.5
172.9
243.3
—
—
20.2
0.3
20.5
43.9
2.4
66.8
—
—
57.4
10.0
67.4
137.3
53.1
257.8
—
—
197.1
4.3
201.4
35.6
37.7
274.7
—
—
254.5
14.3
268.8
172.9
90.8
—
—
—
11.5
11.5
2.7
—
14.2
—
—
—
761.6
761.6
7.1
338.6
1 107.3
—
—
—
227.4
227.4
2.9
401.4
631.7
—
—
—
989.0
989.0
10.0
740.0
—
—
—
10.5
10.5
2.7
—
13.2
—
—
—
665.3
665.3
7.1
199.0
871.4
—
—
—
197.1
197.1
2.9
157.0
357.0
—
—
—
862.4
862.4
10.0
356.0
—
—
—
—
—
0.1
—
0.1
—
—
—
6.3
6.3
0.5
12.0
18.8
—
—
—
2.3
2.3
0.1
14.4
16.8
—
—
—
8.6
8.6
0.6
26.4
—
—
— 1 163.1
—
26.6
—
2.2
— 1 191.9
44.4
0.1
5.8
—
0.1
1 242.1
— 2 022.5
— 1 413.7
74.7
—
144.7
4.5
3 655.6
4.5
0.5
138.9
207.3
6.7
11.7
4 001.8
552.7
—
— 1 965.8
275.3
—
45.2
1.6
2 839.0
1.6
36.2
0.1
185.8
6.6
3 061.0
8.3
— 2 575.2
— 3 379.5
—
350.0
189.9
6.1
6 494.6
6.1
175.1
0.6
13.3
393.1
—
1 030.5
20.2
2.1
1 052.8
44.4
2.4
1 099.6
1 718.2
1 264.7
57.4
125.4
3 165.7
138.9
93.0
3 397.6
480.0
1 680.5
197.1
38.8
2 396.4
36.2
70.5
2 503.1
2 198.2
2 945.2
254.5
164.2
5 562.1
175.1
163.5
4 552.0
3 953.2
1 402.7
1 190.2
782.7
532.5
1 739.0
1 228.4
35.6
20.0
7 062.8
5 900.7
Please see Notes (1) through (3) at the end of the reserves data section for important information about volumes in this table.
28
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Reconciliation of Gross Oil Reserves (1)(2)(3)
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
SCO
Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
2 084.3
821.6
—
—
2 905.9
—
—
541.5
461.5
—
—
2 625.8
1 283.1
—
—
—
397.3
—
—
36.7
1 849.9
36.7
2 247.2
—
—
—
—
1 003.0
3 908.9
397.3
1 886.6
2 283.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2 905.9
1 003.0
3 908.9
397.3
1 886.6
2 283.9
—
—
80.8
10.5
91.3
117.9
140.5
349.7
—
93.8
—
—
93.8
—
—
93.8
33.8
(191.3)
—
—
(157.5)
—
—
(157.5)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(93.8)
—
—
(93.8)
—
—
(93.8)
11.2
904.2
—
—
915.4
—
—
915.4
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
45.0
712.9
—
—
757.9
—
—
757.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
87.1
—
—
87.1
—
—
87.1
—
233.2
—
—
233.2
—
—
233.2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(87.1)
—
—
(87.1)
—
—
(87.1)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(36.7)
(1068.9)
—
—
(1105.6)
—
—
(36.7)
(835.7)
—
—
(872.4)
—
—
(1105.6)
(872.4)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2.2
1.3
3.5
—
1.2
4.7
—
—
15.7
0.6
16.3
26.3
1.8
44.4
—
—
—
—
—
24.6
—
24.6
—
—
148.7
6.5
155.2
57.4
100.7
313.3
—
—
143.7
(0.4)
143.3
—
1.5
144.8
—
—
(17.1)
(1.1)
(18.2)
(25.8)
2.8
(41.2)
—
—
—
—
—
13.8
—
13.8
—
—
229.5
17.0
246.5
175.3
241.2
663.0
—
—
145.9
0.9
146.8
—
2.7
149.5
—
—
(1.4)
(0.5)
(1.9)
0.5
4.6
3.2
—
—
—
—
—
38.4
—
38.4
December 31, 2010
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Extensions & Improved Recovery (4)
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Technical Revisions (5)
Mining
In Situ (8)
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Discoveries (6)
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Please see Notes (1) through (8) at the end of the reserves data section for important information about volumes in this table.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
29
Reconciliation of Gross Oil Reserves (1)(2)(3) (continued)
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
SCO
Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(95.6)
(19.2)
—
—
(114.8)
—
—
(114.8)
2 022.5
704.9
—
—
2 727.4
—
—
2 727.4
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
552.7
1 271.9
—
—
1 824.6
—
—
1 824.6
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(95.6)
(19.2)
—
—
(114.8)
—
—
(114.8)
2 575.2
1 976.8
—
—
4 552.0
—
—
4 552.0
—
(8.8)
—
—
(8.8)
—
—
(8.8)
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
—
708.8
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(8.8)
—
—
(8.8)
—
—
(8.8)
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
—
693.9
—
1 402.7
—
—
1 402.7
—
—
1 402.7
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(15.7)
—
(15.7)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(24.0)
(0.9)
(24.9)
(16.9)
(5.1)
(46.9)
—
—
74.7
11.5
86.2
136.2
138.4
360.8
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(9.4)
—
(9.4)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
275.3
5.0
280.3
36.0
105.0
421.3
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(25.1)
—
(25.1)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(24.0)
(0.9)
(24.9)
(16.9)
(5.1)
(46.9)
—
—
350.0
16.5
366.5
172.2
243.4
782.1
Acquisitions
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Dispositions
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Economic Factors (7)
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Production
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
December 31, 2011
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total
Please see Notes (1) through (8) at the end of the reserves data section for important information about volumes in this table.
30
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Reconciliation of Natural Gas and NGL Reserves (1)(2)(3)
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
Natural Gas
Probable
bcf
373.9
4.4
281.1
659.4
11.1
—
—
11.1
(1.0)
(2.3)
125.3
122.0
—
1.2
—
1.2
—
—
—
—
(31.5)
(0.4)
—
(31.9)
(32.1)
—
(0.9)
(33.0)
—
—
—
—
320.4
2.9
405.5
728.8
Proved
bcf
1 113.2
11.5
251.1
1 375.8
5.1
—
—
5.1
41.4
(0.1)
114.7
156.0
—
1.5
—
1.5
0.2
—
—
0.2
(55.6)
(4.0)
—
(59.6)
(52.2)
—
(2.1)
(54.3)
(127.2)
(1.8)
(29.2)
(158.2)
924.9
7.1
334.5
1 266.5
Proved
Plus
Probable
bcf
1 487.1
15.9
532.2
2 035.2
16.2
—
—
16.2
40.4
(2.4)
240.0
278.0
—
2.7
—
2.7
0.2
—
—
0.2
(87.1)
(4.4)
—
(91.5)
(84.3)
—
(3.0)
(87.3)
(127.2)
(1.8)
(29.2)
(158.2)
1 245.3
10.0
740.0
1 995.3
NGLs
Proved
mmbbls
Probable
mmbbls
Proved
Plus
Probable
mmbbls
8.0
0.8
7.9
16.7
0.1
—
—
0.1
0.2
—
5.4
5.6
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(0.6)
(0.2)
—
(0.8)
(0.1)
—
(0.1)
(0.2)
(1.0)
(0.1)
(1.3)
(2.4)
6.6
0.5
11.9
19.0
3.4
0.3
9.2
12.9
—
—
—
—
(0.3)
(0.2)
5.3
4.8
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(0.2)
—
—
(0.2)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
2.9
0.1
14.5
17.5
11.4
1.1
17.1
29.6
0.1
—
—
0.1
(0.1)
(0.2)
10.7
10.4
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(0.8)
(0.2)
—
(1.0)
(0.1)
—
(0.1)
(0.2)
(1.0)
(0.1)
(1.3)
(2.4)
9.5
0.6
26.4
36.5
December 31, 2010
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Extensions & Improved Recovery (4)
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Technical Revisions (5)
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Discoveries (6)
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Acquisitions
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Dispositions
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Economic Factors (7)
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Production
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
December 31, 2011
Canada – North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Please see Notes (1) through (8) at the end of the reserves data section for important information about volumes in this table.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
31
Notes to Reserves Data Tables
as at December 31, 2011
(1) The reserves data is based upon evaluations by the Evaluators with an effective date of December 31, 2011.
(2) See the Notes to Future Net Revenues Tables discussion for information on forecast and constant prices and costs.
(3) Other International reserves, which include Libya and Syria, include quantities of crude oil and natural gas, which are
expected to be produced under PSCs, which involve the company in upstream risks and rewards, but which do not transfer
title of the product to the company. Under these PSCs, net proved and probable reserves have been determined using the
economic interest method. See the Definitions for Reserves Data Tables.
(4) Extensions  and  Improved  Recovery  are  additions  to  the  reserves  resulting  from  step-out  drilling,  infill  drilling  and
implementation of improved recovery schemes.
(5) Technical Revisions include changes in previous estimates, upward or downward, resulting from new technical data or
revised interpretations.
(6) Discoveries are additions to reserves in reservoirs where no reserves were previously booked.
(7) Economic Factors are changes due to product pricing.
(8) Technical revisions for In Situ probable reserves included a large increase in SCO probable reserves and a large decrease in
bitumen probable reserves due to the inclusion of an assumption that the company’s upgrading capacity will require
significantly more bitumen from In Situ assets when Mining reserves are eventually depleted.
Definitions for Reserves Data Tables
In the tables set forth above and elsewhere in this AIF, the following definitions and other notes are applicable:
Gross means:
(a)
(b)
(c)
in relation to Suncor’s interest in production, reserves and contingent resources, Suncor’s working interest (operating and
non-operating) share before deduction of royalties and without including any royalty interests of Suncor;
in relation to wells, the total number of wells in which Suncor has a working interest; and
in relation to properties, the total area of properties in which Suncor has an interest.
Net means:
(a)
(b)
(c)
in relation to Suncor’s interest in production, reserves and contingent resources, Suncor’s working interest (operating and
non-operating) share after deduction of royalty obligations, plus the company’s royalty interests in production, reserves or
contingent resources;
in relation to wells, the number of wells obtained by aggregating Suncor’s working interest in each of the company’s gross
wells; and
in relation to Suncor’s interest in a property, the total area in which Suncor has an interest multiplied by the working
interest owned by Suncor.
Reserves Categories
The oil, NGL and natural gas reserves estimates presented are based on the definitions and guidelines contained in the COGE
Handbook. A summary of those definitions is set forth below. The synthetic crude oil reserves include Suncor’s diesel sales
volumes.
Reserves are estimated remaining quantities of oil and natural gas and related substances anticipated to be recoverable from
known accumulations, as of a given date, based on analysis of drilling, geological, geophysical and engineering data, the use of
established technology, and specified economic conditions, which are generally accepted as being reasonable.
Reserves are classified according to the degree of certainty associated with the estimates.
Proved reserves are those reserves that can be estimated with a high degree of certainty to be recoverable. It is likely that the
actual remaining quantities recovered will exceed the estimated proved reserves.
Probable reserves are those additional reserves that are less certain to be recovered than proved reserves. It is equally likely
that the actual remaining quantities recovered will be greater or less than the sum of the estimated proved plus probable
reserves.
Other criteria that must also be met for the categorization of reserves are provided in the COGE Handbook.
32
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Each of the reserves categories (proved and probable) may be divided into developed and undeveloped categories:
Developed reserves are those reserves that are expected to be recovered (i) from existing wells and installed facilities or, if
facilities have not been installed, that would involve a low expenditure (for example, when compared to the cost of drilling a
well) to put the reserves on production, or (ii) through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure that is operational at
the time of the reserves estimate, if the extraction is by means not involving a well. The developed category may be subdivided
into producing and non-producing.
(a) Developed producing reserves are those reserves that are expected to be recovered from completion intervals open at the
time  of  the  estimate.  These  reserves  may  be  currently  producing  or,  if  shut in,  they  must  have  previously  been  on
production, and the date of resumption of production must be known with reasonable certainty.
(b) Developed non-producing reserves are those reserves that either have not been on production, or have previously been on
production but are shut in, and the date of resumption of production is unknown.
Undeveloped  reserves  are  those  reserves  expected  to  be  recovered  from  known  accumulations  where  a  significant
expenditure (for example, when compared to the cost of drilling a well) is required to render them capable of production. They
must fully meet the requirements of the reserves category (proved or probable) to which they are assigned.
In multi-well pools, it may be appropriate to allocate total pool reserves between the developed and undeveloped categories or
to subdivide the developed reserves for the pool between developed producing and developed non-producing. This allocation
should be based on the evaluator’s assessment as to the reserves that will be recovered from specific wells, facilities and
completion intervals in the pool and their respective development and production status.
In the economic interest method used for PSCs, the contractor’s (i.e. Suncor’s) share of profit revenue plus cost recovery
revenue  is  divided  by  the  associated  oil  or  gas  price  forecast  to  determine  the  contractor’s  net  volume  entitlement,  or
entitlement reserves. The entitlement reserves are then adjusted to include reserves relating to income taxes payable. Under
this  method,  reported  reserves  will  increase  as  commodity  prices  decrease  (and  vice  versa),  since  the  production  barrels
necessary to achieve cost recovery change with the prevailing commodity prices.
Levels of Certainty for Reported Reserves
The qualitative certainty levels referred to in the definitions above are applicable to individual reserves entities (which refers to
the lowest level at which reserves calculations are performed) and to reported reserves (which refers to the highest level sum of
individual entity estimates for which reserves are presented). Reported reserves should target the following levels of certainty
under a specific set of economic conditions:
(a) at least a 90% probability that the quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the estimated proved reserves; and
(b) at least a 50% probability that the quantities actually recovered will equal or exceed the sum of the estimated proved plus
probable reserves.
A qualitative measure of the certainty levels pertaining to estimates prepared for the various reserves categories is desirable to
provide a clearer understanding of the associated risks and uncertainties. However, the majority of reserves estimates are
prepared using deterministic methods that do not provide a mathematically derived quantitative measure of probability. In
principle, there should be no difference between estimates prepared using probabilistic or deterministic methods. Additional
clarification  of  certainty  levels  associated  with  reserves  estimates  and  the  effect  of  aggregation  is  provided  in  the
COGE Handbook.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
33
Future Net Revenues Tables and Notes
Net Present Value of Future Net Revenues Before Income Taxes
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
Proved Developed Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed Producing
Proved Developed Non-Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed Non-Producing
Proved Undeveloped
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Undeveloped
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus Probable
(in $ millions, discounted at % per year)
Unit Value (1)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
$/boe
65 036
7 694
1 959
3 026
77 715
6 469
3 235
87 419
—
—
—
65
65
1 707
3 797
5 569
—
23 112
1 070
167
24 349
2 629
135
27 113
65 036
30 806
3 029
3 258
102 129
10 805
7 167
120 101
28 852
70 038
15 139
1 350
115 379
3 347
6 257
124 983
93 888
100 844
18 168
4 608
217 508
14 152
13 424
245 084
40 083
6 467
1 774
2 136
50 460
5 636
2 368
58 464
—
—
—
46
46
1 293
2 783
4 122
—
10 338
742
92
11 172
1 860
91
13 123
40 083
16 805
2 516
2 274
61 678
8 789
5 242
75 709
9 564
19 720
8 910
666
38 860
2 265
3 468
44 593
49 647
36 525
11 426
2 940
100 538
11 054
8 710
120 302
27 354
5 546
1 617
1 657
36 174
5 016
1 862
43 052
—
—
—
34
34
1 033
2 145
3 212
—
4 649
542
49
5 240
1 338
62
6 640
27 354
10 195
2 159
1 740
41 448
7 387
4 069
52 904
4 403
7 052
5 745
386
17 586
1 639
2 126
21 351
31 757
17 247
7 904
2 126
59 034
9 026
6 195
74 255
20 207
4 835
1 487
1 361
27 890
4 542
1 534
33 966
—
—
—
26
26
858
1 718
2 602
—
1 928
410
22
2 360
972
43
3 375
20 207
6 763
1 897
1 409
30 276
6 372
3 295
39 943
2 563
3 055
3 957
245
9 820
1 247
1 406
12 473
22 770
9 818
5 854
1 654
40 096
7 619
4 701
52 416
15 843
4 275
1 381
1 158
22 657
4 167
1 306
28 130
—
—
—
19
19
735
1 416
2 170
—
543
316
7
866
706
29
1 601
15 843
4 819
1 696
1 184
23 542
5 608
2 751
31 901
1 755
1 503
2 867
165
6 290
987
983
8 260
17 598
6 322
4 563
1 349
29 832
6 595
3 734
40 161
15.88
24.06
42.38
12.89
17.07
69.33
52.12
19.33
—
—
—
6.34
6.34
47.76
38.46
38.80
—
4.64
26.15
3.91
5.06
30.55
25.88
6.14
15.88
8.27
36.67
11.88
13.11
53.61
43.33
15.60
9.21
4.37
28.58
7.65
7.51
44.67
28.19
8.70
14.43
6.06
30.41
10.80
10.73
51.73
36.59
12.70
(1) Unit values are future net revenues before income taxes, discounted at 10%, using net reserves.
34
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Net Present Value of Future Net Revenues After Income Taxes
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
Proved Developed Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed Producing
Proved Developed Non-Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed Non-Producing
Proved Undeveloped
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Undeveloped
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus Probable
(in $ millions, discounted at % per year)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
49 438
6 845
1 486
2 470
60 239
2 086
1 132
63 457
—
—
—
48
48
659
2 360
3 067
—
16 996
790
124
17 910
1 010
58
18 978
49 438
23 841
2 276
2 642
78 197
3 755
3 550
85 502
22 121
51 925
11 081
1 007
86 134
1 284
2 911
90 329
71 559
75 766
13 357
3 649
164 331
5 039
6 461
175 831
30 108
5 746
1 377
1 754
38 985
1 850
842
41 677
—
—
—
33
33
506
1 775
2 314
—
7 154
515
63
7 732
731
40
8 503
30 108
12 900
1 892
1 850
46 750
3 087
2 657
52 494
7 194
14 182
6 063
493
27 932
885
1 566
30 383
37 302
27 082
7 955
2 343
74 682
3 972
4 223
82 877
20 375
4 925
1 243
1 369
27 912
1 663
671
30 246
—
—
—
23
23
411
1 396
1 830
—
2 851
376
28
3 255
537
28
3 820
20 375
7 776
1 619
1 420
31 190
2 611
2 095
35 896
3 232
4 837
3 932
280
12 281
651
934
13 866
23 607
12 613
5 551
1 700
43 471
3 262
3 029
49 762
14 962
4 295
1 138
1 128
21 523
1 515
561
23 599
—
—
—
16
16
348
1 135
1 499
—
839
279
8
1 126
397
19
1 542
14 962
5 134
1 417
1 152
22 665
2 260
1 715
26 640
1 843
1 932
2 676
173
6 624
504
601
7 729
16 805
7 066
4 093
1 325
29 289
2 764
2 316
34 369
11 681
3 801
1 052
963
17 497
1 397
483
19 377
—
—
—
12
12
303
947
1 262
—
(156)
208
(4)
48
293
13
354
11 681
3 645
1 260
971
17 557
1 993
1 443
20 993
1 246
823
1 893
113
4 075
405
410
4 890
12 927
4 468
3 153
1 084
21 632
2 398
1 853
25 883
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
35
Total Future Net Revenues
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
(in $ millions, undiscounted)
Revenue
Royalties
Operating
Costs
Development
Costs
Abandonment
Expenses
Future Net
Revenue Before
Deducting
Future
Income Tax
Expenses
Future Net
Revenue After
Deducting
Future
Income Tax
Expenses
Future
Income Tax
Expenses
Proved Developed
Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Producing
Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Developed
Non-Producing
Proved Undeveloped
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Undeveloped
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus
Probable
223 537
23 124
5 009
6 719
258 389
7 550
3 868
33 649
1 701
1 038
897
37 285
—
—
88 270
10 809
1 305
2 639
103 023
935
441
36 582
2 843
448
14
39 887
66
180
269 807
37 285
104 399
40 133
—
—
—
237
237
2 342
5 835
8 414
—
108 481
2 833
515
111 829
4 585
277
—
—
—
42
42
—
749
791
—
15 527
624
36
16 187
—
24
—
—
—
107
107
629
1 205
1 941
—
41 702
604
127
42 433
960
54
—
—
—
21
21
—
80
101
—
27 597
506
168
28 271
959
63
116 691
16 211
43 447
29 293
223 537
131 605
7 842
7 471
370 455
14 477
9 980
394 912
80 974
259 749
29 175
3 377
373 275
4 047
9 167
386 489
304 511
391 354
37 017
10 848
743 730
18 524
19 147
33 649
17 228
1 662
975
53 514
—
773
54 287
11 289
46 872
7 906
498
66 565
—
1 113
67 678
44 938
64 100
9 568
1 473
120 079
—
1 886
88 270
52 511
1 909
2 873
145 563
2 524
1 700
149 787
29 877
90 543
3 349
1 329
125 098
597
1 313
127 008
118 147
143 054
5 258
4 202
270 661
3 121
3 013
36 582
30 440
954
203
68 179
1 025
323
69 527
10 956
51 537
2 632
177
65 302
86
481
65 869
47 538
81 977
3 586
380
133 481
1 111
804
781 401
121 965
276 795
135 396
—
77
259
143
479
80
12
571
—
—
—
2
2
6
4
12
—
543
29
17
589
37
1
627
—
620
288
162
1 070
123
17
1 210
—
759
149
23
931
17
3
951
—
1 379
437
185
2 001
140
20
2 161
65 036
7 694
1 959
3 026
77 715
6 469
3 235
15 598
849
473
556
17 476
4 383
2 103
49 438
6 845
1 486
2 470
60 239
2 086
1 132
87 419
23 962
63 457
—
—
—
65
65
1 707
3 797
—
—
—
17
17
1 048
1 437
5 569
2 502
—
23 112
1 070
167
24 349
2 629
135
—
6 116
280
43
6 439
1 619
77
—
—
—
48
48
659
2 360
3 067
—
16 996
790
124
17 910
1 010
58
27 113
8 135
18 978
65 036
30 806
3 029
3 258
102 129
10 805
7 167
120 101
28 852
70 038
15 139
1 350
115 379
3 347
6 257
124 983
93 888
100 844
18 168
4 608
217 508
14 152
13 424
15 598
6 965
753
616
23 932
7 050
3 617
34 599
6 731
18 113
4 058
343
29 245
2 063
3 346
34 654
22 329
25 078
4 811
959
53 177
9 113
6 963
49 438
23 841
2 276
2 642
78 197
3 755
3 550
85 502
22 121
51 925
11 081
1 007
86 134
1 284
2 911
90 329
71 559
75 766
13 357
3 649
164 331
5 039
6 461
245 084
69 253
175 831
36
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Future Net Revenues by Production Group
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
(before income taxes, discounted at 10% per year)
Proved Producing
Unconventional – Mining
Unconventional – In Situ
Total Unconventional (2)
Light & Medium Oil (3)
Natural Gas (4)
Total Proved Producing
Proved
Unconventional – Mining
Unconventional – In Situ
Total Unconventional (2)
Light & Medium Oil (3)
Natural Gas (4)
Total Proved
Proved Plus Probable
Unconventional – Mining
Unconventional – In Situ
Total Unconventional (2)
Light & Medium Oil (3)
Natural Gas (4)
Total Proved Plus Probable
(1) Per unit values use net reserves.
(2) Total Unconventional includes SCO and bitumen.
(3)
(4) Natural gas includes associated byproducts, including oil and NGLs.
Light & Medium Oil includes associated byproducts, including solution gas and NGLs.
Notes to Future Net Revenues Tables
Prices Realized
$ millions
$/boe (1)
27 354
5 546
32 900
8 822
1 330
43 052
27 354
10 195
37 549
12 466
2 889
52 904
31 757
17 247
49 004
21 432
3 819
74 255
15.88
24.06
16.85
56.02
11.34
19.33
15.88
8.27
12.71
47.95
16.32
15.60
14.43
6.06
9.71
39.48
14.82
12.70
For  prices  realized  by  Suncor  during  2011,  please  see  the  Production  History  section  contained  within  this  Statement  of
Reserves Data and Other Oil and Gas Information.
Forecast Prices and Costs
Crude oil, natural gas and other important benchmark reference pricing, as well as inflation and exchange rates utilized in the
GLJ Reports and the Sproule Reports, are as per GLJ’s price forecast dated January 1, 2012, as set out below. To the extent that
there  are  fixed  or  presently  determinable  future  prices  or  costs  to  which  Suncor  is  legally  bound  by  contractual  or  other
obligations to supply a physical product, including those for an extension period of a contract that is likely to be extended,
those prices or costs have been incorporated into the forecast prices as applied to the pertinent properties. The forecast cost
and price assumptions include increases in wellhead selling prices, take into account inflation with respect to future operating
and capital costs, and assume the continuance of current laws and regulations. Price adjustments relating to factors such as
product quality and transportation were applied on an individual property basis in cash flow calculations.
Forecast prices included a US$/Cdn$ exchange rate of 0.98, a Cdn$/c exchange rate of 1.35 and a Cdn$/£ exchange rate of
1.60. Forecast costs included a 2% inflation factor, except for costs for Mining, which included 4% inflation for 2013-2015,
3% inflation for 2016 and 2% thereafter.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
37
Constant Prices and Costs
For purposes of comparison to those issuers who are required to report reserves estimates using constant prices and costs in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Suncor also presents reserves
estimates using constant prices and costs. Benchmark prices utilized for the purpose of disclosing supplementary reserves
estimates under constant pricing assumptions are also set out in the table below. Prices are based on the arithmetic average of
the first-day-of-the-month price for the product for each month of 2011.
Constant prices included a US$/Cdn$ exchange rate of 1.02, a Cdn$/c exchange rate of 1.38 and a Cdn$/£ exchange rate of
1.58.
Prices used in Reserves Tables (1)
Forecast
Year
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022+
Constant
All years
WTI (2)
US$/bbl
97.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
101.35
103.38
105.45
107.56
B.C. Gas (9)
Cdn$/mmbtu
3.29
3.93
4.39
4.85
5.31
5.77
6.01
6.13
6.26
6.38
+2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year +2.0%/year
NBP (8)
Cdn$/mmbtu
9.32
9.74
9.91
10.20
10.20
10.20
10.34
10.55
10.76
10.98
Brent (7)
US$/bbl
105.00
105.00
102.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
101.35
103.38
105.45
107.56
WCS (3)
Cdn$/bbl
81.61
82.63
82.63
82.63
82.63
82.63
83.75
85.44
87.16
88.92
Pentanes (4)
Cdn$/bbl
107.76
108.09
105.06
105.06
105.06
105.06
106.49
108.65
110.84
113.08
AECO (5)
Cdn$/mmbtu
3.49
4.13
4.59
5.05
5.51
5.97
6.21
6.33
6.46
6.58
Light
Sweet (6)
Cdn$/bbl
97.96
101.02
101.02
101.02
101.02
101.02
102.40
104.47
106.58
108.73
US$/bbl
96.19
Cdn$/bbl
78.81
Cdn$/bbl
105.28
Cdn$/mmbtu
3.71
Cdn$/bbl
96.04
US$/bbl
111.85
Cdn$/mmbtu
9.43
Cdn$/mmbtu
3.32
(1) Each price from the GLJ forecast was adjusted for quality differentials and transportation costs applicable to the specific product group and country or area of production.
(2) NYMEX WTI crude oil at Cushing, Oklahoma. Price used when determining SCO reserves presented as In Situ and Mining reserves.
(3) WCS stream at Hardisty, Alberta. Price used when determining bitumen reserves presented as In Situ reserves.
(4) Edmonton  pentanes  plus.  Price  used  when  determining  the  cost  of  diluent  associated  with  bitumen  reserves  presented  as  In  Situ  reserves.  A  bitumen/diluent  ratio  of
approximately 2:1 was used. Price also used when determining certain NGL reserves.
(5) Natural gas price at AECO. Price used when determining natural gas reserves (primarily in Alberta) presented as North America Onshore reserves. Price also used when
determining natural gas input costs for the production of SCO and bitumen reserves.
(6)
Light sweet crude oil (40 API, 0.3% sulphur) at Edmonton, Alberta. Price used when determining light and medium oil reserves presented as North America Onshore reserves.
(7) Brent blend crude oil FOB North Sea. Price used when determining light and medium oil reserves presented as East Coast Canada reserves, North Sea reserves and Other
International reserves.
(8) National Balancing Point (U.K.). Price used when determining natural gas reserves presented as North Sea reserves and Other International reserves.
(9) Natural gas prices at B.C. Westcoast Station 2. Price used when determining natural gas reserves (primarily in B.C.) presented as North America Onshore reserves.
Disclosure of After-Tax Net Present Values of Future Net Revenue
Values presented in the table for Net Present Value of Future Net Revenues After Income Taxes reflect income tax burdens of
assets at an individual asset level (for Mining, In Situ and East Coast Canada) or at a business area or legal entity level (for North
Sea and North America Onshore) based on tax pools associated with that business area or legal entity. Income taxes for Other
International assets are determined by their respective PSCs. Suncor’s actual corporate legal entity structure for income taxes
and income tax planning have not been considered, and, therefore, the total value for income taxes presented in the table may
not provide an estimate of the value at the corporate entity level, which may be significantly different. The 2011 audited
Consolidated Financial Statements and the MD&A should be consulted for information on income taxes at the corporate
entity level.
38
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Future Development Costs
as at December 31, 2011
(forecast prices and costs)
($ millions)
Proved
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved
Proved Plus Probable
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea
Other International
Total Proved Plus Probable
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Remainder
Total
2 173
1 643
515
15
4 346
406
118
4 870
2 254
1 600
741
62
4 657
406
118
5 181
2 231
1 337
129
73
3 770
318
132
4 220
2 321
1 681
661
156
4 819
318
283
5 420
1 634
1 048
111
39
2 832
183
47
3 062
1 697
1 974
648
87
4 406
213
111
4 730
1 332
1 130
17
24
2 503
77
11
2 591
1 389
3 099
441
24
4 953
102
106
5 161
1 345
1 521
47
23
2 936
41
10
2 987
1 411
2 873
352
23
4 659
72
106
4 837
27 867
23 761
135
29
51 792
—
5
51 797
36 582
30 440
954
203
68 179
1 025
323
69 527
38 466
70 750
743
28
109 987
—
80
110 067
47 538
81 977
3 586
380
133 481
1 111
804
135 396
Discounted
At 10%
16 661
13 426
794
157
31 038
899
282
32 219
18 779
21 419
2 656
310
43 164
963
632
44 759
Development costs include costs associated with both developed and undeveloped reserves. Significant development activities
for 2012 are expected to include:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
For Mining, costs for mine train relocations and mine train replacements at Syncrude and new tailings management facilities
for Oil Sands Base. Remaining development costs are sustaining capital investments, which maintain production capacities at
existing facilities, and include costs for major maintenance, catalyst, truck and shovel replacement, and the replacements for
utilities, roads and other facilities.
For In Situ, facility and new well costs for the Firebag Stage 4 expansion and new wells at MacKay River and Firebag to sustain
bitumen supply for existing central processing facilities.
For East Coast Canada, costs for development drilling at Terra Nova, White Rose and Hibernia, procurement of subsea
infrastructure  for  the  HSEU,  H2S  remediation  activities,  the  FPSO  swivel  replacement  and  other  dockside  maintenance
activities at Terra Nova, and early development activities for Hebron.
For  North  Sea,  costs  for  development  drilling  and  facility  upgrades  at  Buzzard,  including  accommodations,  sand
management, and produced water reinjection, and early development activities for Golden Eagle.
For North America Onshore, costs for the development of the Wilson Creek and Ferrier fields in the Cardium oil formation.
For Other International, costs for upgrades and maintenance to facilities in Libya. Due to the sanctions and suspension of
operations in Syria, no development costs were included for 2012.
Management  currently  believes  existing  cash  balances,  internally  generated  cash  flows  and  existing  credit  facilities  are
sufficient to fund future development costs. There can be no guarantee that funds will be available or that Suncor will allocate
funding to develop all of the reserves attributed in the GLJ Reports and the Sproule Reports. Failure to develop those reserves
would have a negative impact on future cash flow from operating activities.
The interest or other costs of external funding are not included in the reserves and future net revenue estimates and would
reduce  reserves  and  future  net  revenue  to  some  degree  depending  upon  the  funding  sources  utilized.  Suncor  does  not
anticipate that interest or other funding costs would make development of any property uneconomic.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
39
Abandonment and Reclamation Costs
The company completes an annual review of its abandonment and reclamation costs as they relate to our overall operations.
The specific estimates established for forecasted abandonment and reclamation costs are based on available information,
consistent  with  that  assumed  in  our  long  range  planning.  These  estimates  consider  the  nature  of  all  our  forecasted
abandonment and reclamation costs, where determinable, for our mining, in situ and conventional operations. Where no legal
liability or constructive obligation for reclamation exists, potential costs have been excluded from the company’s abandonment
and reclamation cost estimates.
At December 31, 2011, Suncor estimated its undiscounted, uninflated abandonment and reclamation costs, net of estimated
salvage value, for surface leases, wells, facilities and pipelines pertaining to its upstream assets to be approximately $7.2 billion
(discounted  at  10%,  approximately  $2.1  billion).  Suncor  estimates  that  it  will  incur  $1.284  billion  (undiscounted:  2012 –
$408 million, 2013 – $463 million, 2014 – $413 million) of its identified abandonment and reclamation costs during the next
three years, over 85% of which is associated with mining operations. This cost estimate does not include the company’s
estimated  abandonment  and  reclamation  costs  for  its  Refining  and  Marketing  assets  ($71  million,  undiscounted  and
uninflated).
Approximately $2.2 billion (undiscounted) has been deducted as abandonment costs in estimating the future net revenues
from proved plus probable reserves. This $2.2 billion represents the abandonment obligation for approximately 6,300 net
reserves  wells,  including  a  forecasted  number  of  future  wells  for  undeveloped  reserves,  for  our  in  situ  and  conventional
activities. This figure counts in situ well pairs as one abandonment, whereas previous figures reported by Suncor counted in situ
well pairs as two separate abandonments.
Abandonment and reclamation costs included in Suncor’s $7.2 billion total that are excluded from the determination of future
net revenues from reserves include, but are not limited to, costs related to the reclamation of disturbed land from oil sands
mining activities, the treatment of oil sands tailings, the decommissioning of oil sands and natural gas processing facilities and
well pads, lease sites, and the abandonment of wells to which no reserves have been assigned.
40
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Additional Information Relating to Reserves Data
Gross Proved and Probable Undeveloped Reserves (1)(2)
The tables below outline the gross proved and probable undeveloped reserves, by product type, attributed to the company over
the three most recent years specifically, and in aggregate for those beyond three years.
Both proved and probable undeveloped reserves are attributed by the Evaluators in accordance with standards and procedures
contained in the COGE Handbook. Proved undeveloped reserves are those reserves that are expected to be recovered from
known accumulations with a high degree of certainty and where a significant expenditure is required to render them capable of
production. Probable undeveloped reserves are those reserves in known accumulations that are less certain to be recovered
than proved reserves and where a significant expenditure is required to render them capable of production.
Gross Proved Undeveloped Reserves
(forecast prices and costs)
Prior
2009
2010
2011
Total at
First December 31
2008
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2009
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2010
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2011
Attributed
SCO (mmbbls)
Mining
In Situ
Total SCO
Bitumen (mmbbls)
Mining
In Situ
Total Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil (mmbbls)
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea (3)
United States (4)
Other International (5)
Total Light & Medium Oil
Natural Gas (bcf)
North America Onshore – Canada
North Sea (3)
United States (4)
Other International (5)
Total Natural Gas
NGLs (mmbbls)
North America Onshore – Canada
North Sea (3)
Other International (5)
Total NGLs
Total (mmboe)
—
766.0
766.0
—
766.0
766.0
—
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
—
—
—
0.1
31.2
—
—
—
31.2
0.1
—
—
0.1
—
—
—
—
0.1
0.1
—
—
—
0.1
31.2
—
—
—
31.2
0.1
—
—
0.1
771.4
771.4
29.1
—
23.9
413.0
466.0
0.3
1.0
9.0
10.3
320.5
15.6
—
23.9
413.0
452.5
0.4
1.0
9.0
10.4
—
121.0
121.0
—
—
—
35.0
0.2
35.2
68.0
8.3
—
—
564.0
564.0
—
427.0
427.0
35.0
0.3
35.3
68.0
8.3
—
111.5
111.6
—
14.0
14.0
—
2.0
2.0
3.0
—
3.0
—
—
6.0
9.0
32.0
—
—
—
32.0
—
—
—
—
—
651.0
651.0
—
360.0
360.0
28.0
0.2
28.2
19.0
—
6.0
53.2
118.4
1.0
—
—
119.4
0.1
—
—
0.1
—
—
—
—
315.0
315.0
1.4
0.1
1.5
24.6
—
1.8
27.9
2.1
1.5
—
—
3.6
—
—
—
—
—
502.0
502.0
—
661.1
661.1
26.6
0.3
26.9
43.3
—
5.8
76.0
78.7
2.7
—
—
81.4
0.1
0.1
—
0.2
1 188.4
30.4
1 084.2
343.5
1 252.8
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
41
Gross Probable Undeveloped Reserves
(forecast prices and costs)
Prior
2009
2010
2011
Total at
First December 31
2008
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2009
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2010
Attributed
Total at
First December 31
2011
Attributed
617.0
1 746.0
2 363.0
617.0
1 746.0
2 363.0
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
76.3
—
—
—
76.3
0.2
—
—
0.2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
76.3
—
—
—
76.3
0.2
—
—
0.2
264.0
174.0
438.0
—
—
—
80.0
5.1
85.1
35.0
3.8
62.0
264.0
595.0
859.0
—
1 550.0
1 550.0
80.0
5.1
85.1
35.0
3.8
62.0
—
6.0
6.0
—
8.0
8.0
7.0
0.3
7.3
—
—
8.0
215.0
400.0
615.0
37.0
1 835.0
1 872.0
85.0
3.5
88.5
15.0
—
11.0
185.9
185.9
15.3
114.5
235.2
50.0
12.0
651.0
948.2
0.9
1.0
18.0
19.9
233.2
50.0
12.0
651.0
946.2
1.0
1.0
18.0
20.0
75.2
—
—
—
75.2
0.1
—
—
0.1
136.2
1.0
—
240.0
377.2
1.0
—
8.0
9.0
—
916.0
916.0
—
38.0
38.0
143.2
0.7
143.9
13.8
—
3.8
161.5
3.2
1.2
—
221.4
225.8
—
—
6.0
6.0
263.0
1 212.0
1 475.0
—
669.0
669.0
217.4
2.0
219.4
17.1
—
14.5
251.0
86.9
1.5
—
347.4
435.8
0.8
—
11.5
12.3
2 375.9
2 375.9
801.8
2 772.6
41.9
2 673.4
1 159.1
2 479.9
SCO (mmbbls)
Mining
In Situ
Total SCO
Bitumen (mmbbls)
Mining
In Situ
Total Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil (mmbbls)
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore
Total Canada
North Sea (3)
United States (4)
Other International (5)
Total Light & Medium Oil
Natural Gas (bcf)
North America Onshore – Canada
North Sea (3)
United States (4)
Other International (5)
Total Natural Gas
NGLs (mmbbls)
North America Onshore – Canada
North Sea (3)
Other International (5)
Total NGLs
Total (mmboe)
(1) The term First Attributed represents undeveloped reserves additions including acquisitions, discoveries and extensions pertaining to the year in which the events first occurred.
Undeveloped reserves first attributed in 2009 primarily include those acquired as a result of the merger with Petro-Canada.
(2) Year-end reserves may not reflect the summation of First Attributed reserves due to changes in reserves resulting from other factors such as economic factors, improved
recovery and technical revisions, which are not reflected in this table.
In these tables, ‘‘North Sea’’ includes additional properties previously held by Suncor in the Netherlands portion of the North Sea.
(3)
(4) Undeveloped U.S. reserves were acquired in the merger with Petro-Canada in 2009 and subsequently disposed in 2010.
(5)
In these tables ‘‘Other International’’ includes additional properties previously held by Suncor in Trinidad and Tobago.
Undeveloped In Situ reserves, which constitute approximately 93% of Suncor’s gross proved undeveloped reserves and 76% of
Suncor’s gross probable undeveloped reserves, will take more than two years to develop. Management uses integrated plans to
forecast  future  development.  These  detailed  plans  align  current  production,  processing  and  pipeline  capacities,  capital
spending commitments and future development for the next ten years, and are reviewed and updated annually for internal and
external factors affecting planned activity. Reserves are developed as required to keep processing capacity full. The timing
associated with developing undeveloped reserves is a function of the forecasts of the declining production from existing well
pairs. Suncor has delineated In Situ reserves to a high degree of certainty through seismic data and core hole drilling, consistent
with COGE guidelines. In most cases, proved reserves have been drilled to a density of 16 wells per section, well in excess of the
eight wells per section required for regulatory approval. In order to determine the economic cutoffs of undeveloped reserves,
geological information is tested against existing production analogues that use established technology.
Undeveloped Mining reserves, which constitute approximately 11% of Suncor’s gross probable undeveloped reserves, relate
solely to the Syncrude Aurora South mine, which has regulatory approvals substantially in place and is well-delineated by core
hole drilling. The owners of the Syncrude joint venture do not expect that the Aurora South mine will come on-stream in this
decade.
Undeveloped conventional (light and medium oil, natural gas and NGLs) reserves constitute approximately 7% of Suncor’s
gross proved undeveloped reserves and approximately 13% of Suncor’s gross probable undeveloped reserves. As part of its
active  portfolio  management  process,  Suncor  reviews  the  economic  viability  of  its  conventional  properties  containing
42
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
undeveloped reserves using industry standard economic evaluation techniques and its own pricing and economic environment
assumptions. Through this active management process, Suncor selects some properties for further development activities,
while others are held in abeyance, sold, or swapped. In developing the company’s reserves, Suncor considers existing facility
and gathering system capacity, capital allocation plans and remaining recoverable resources availability. Accordingly, in some
cases, it will take longer than two years to develop all of the currently assigned undeveloped conventional reserves. With the
exception of undeveloped reserves that Suncor may divest, Suncor plans to develop the majority of the conventional proved
undeveloped reserves over the next five years and the majority of the conventional probable undeveloped reserves over the
next seven years. Exceptions are development of some offshore properties which are limited by production facility capacity and
development of some international properties constrained by daily contract quantities stipulated by PSCs.
Properties with no Attributed Reserves
The following table is a summary of properties to which no reserves are attributed as at December 31, 2011. For lands in which
Suncor holds interests in different formations under the same surface area pursuant to separate leases, the area has been
counted for each lease.
Country
Canada
Libya
U.S. – Alaska
Norway
Syria
U.K.
Australia (overriding royalty interest only)
Total
Gross
Hectares
5 093 830
2 950 978
1 161 123
501 791
345 194
138 437
113 027
10 304 380
Net
Hectares
3 740 853
1 339 489
387 002
209 691
345 194
44 574
—
6 066 803
Suncor holds interests in a diverse portfolio of undeveloped petroleum assets in Canada and in several international areas.
These assets range from exploration properties in a very preliminary phase of evaluation, to discovery areas where tenure to the
property is held indefinitely on the basis of hydrocarbon test results, but where economic development is not currently possible
or has not yet been sanctioned. In many cases where reserves are not attributed to lands containing one or more discovery
wells, the key limiting factor is the lack of available production infrastructure. Each year, as part of the company’s active
management process to review the economic viability of its conventional properties, some properties are selected for further
development activities, while others are held in abeyance, sold, swapped or relinquished back to the mineral rights owner.
In 2012, Suncor’s rights to explore, develop and exploit will expire for 189,374 net hectares in Canada, 131,308 net hectares in
Alaska and 39,840 net hectares in the U.K. portion of the North Sea. No land tenure expiries are scheduled to occur for either
Mining or In Situ properties for 2012. Substantial portions of expiring lands may have their tenure continued beyond 2012
through the conduct of work programs and/or the payment of prescribed fees to the rights owner.
Oil and Gas Properties and Wells
For a description of the company’s important properties, plants, facilities and installations, see the Narrative Description of
Suncor’s Businesses section in this AIF.
Suncor’s  Oil  Sands  operations  recover  bitumen  through  oil  sands  mining  and  in  situ  development  in  northern  Alberta.
Conventional activities are focused on the development and production of oil, natural gas, and NGLs from onshore reserves in
Western Canada, Libya and Syria, and from reserves offshore Newfoundland and in the North Sea.
The following table is a summary of operated and non-operated oil and gas wells associated with the company’s reserves as at
December 31, 2011:
Alberta
British Columbia
Saskatchewan
Newfoundland
North Sea
Other International
Total
Oil Wells
Natural Gas Wells
Producing
Non-Producing
Producing
Non-Producing
Gross
253.0
15.0
–
61.0
26.0
213.0
568.0
Net
236.9
9.6
–
15.6
7.8
106.5
376.4
Gross
134.0
6.0
–
2.0
4.0
77.0
223.0
Net
Gross
Net
130.7
5.8
–
0.8
1.2
40.0
178.5
4 268.0
235.0
738.0
–
–
–
5 241.0
2 916.4
200.5
268.1
–
–
–
3 385.0
Gross
206.0
87.0
91.0
–
–
6.0
390.0
Net
168.6
70.2
43.5
–
–
6.0
288.3
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
43
There are no production wells associated with Mining properties. Suncor has no proved developed non-producing reserves or
probable developed non-producing reserves in its Mining reserves.
For In Situ properties, proved non-producing reserves and probable non-producing reserves are associated with wells that have
been drilled within the last two years, which require further capital for completion and tie in to facilities to bring the wells
on-stream. This capital requirement is significant enough that the reserves are not classified as developed. SAGD well pairs are
counted as one well.
In Syria, wells previously reported as producing have been reclassified to non-producing, consistent with the reclassification of
proved  developed  producing  reserves  and  probable  developed  producing  reserves  to  their  respective  non-producing
categories.
The majority of remaining conventional non-producing reserves have been in their current non-producing state for less than
four years and are forecast to be brought on-stream within the next two years. These remaining non-producing reserves are
primarily associated with:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Recently drilled wells to be brought on production in 2012;
Secondary zones forecast to be brought on-stream over the next two years;
Wells requiring workovers;
Wells temporarily shut in due to operational issues at facilities; and
Gas production being re-injected to maintain gas cap pressure on oil producing zones until depletion of the oil zones.
Costs Incurred
The  table  below  summarizes  the  company’s  capital  expenditures  related  to  its  reserves  activities  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2011.
($ millions)
Canada – Mining and In Situ
Canada – East Coast Canada and North America Onshore
North Sea
Other International
Total
Exploration
Costs
57
77
97
36
267
Proved
Property
Acquisition
Costs
Unproved
Property
Acquisition
Costs
Development
Costs
—
—
—
—
—
200
1
29
—
230
4 362
476
74
37
4 949
Total
4 619
554
200
73
5 446
44
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Exploration and Development Activities
The table below outlines the gross and net exploratory and development wells the company completed during the year ended
December 31, 2011.
Total number of wells completed
Exploratory Wells
Development Wells
Canada
Oil
Natural Gas
Dry Hole
Service
Stratigraphic Test
Total
North Sea
Oil
Natural Gas
Dry Hole
Service
Stratigraphic Test
Total
Other International
Oil
Natural Gas
Dry Hole
Service
Stratigraphic Test
Total
Gross
—
1.0
2.0
—
22.0
25.0
—
—
1.0
—
—
1.0
—
—
1.0
—
—
1.0
Net
—
0.5
2.0
—
13.8
16.3
—
—
0.3
—
—
0.3
—
—
0.5
—
—
0.5
Gross
73.0
105.0
2.0
8.0
617.0
805.0
4.0
—
—
1.0
—
5.0
4.0
—
1.0
—
—
5.0
Net
64.6
52.3
1.2
5.0
311.6
434.7
1.2
—
—
0.3
—
1.5
2.5
—
1.0
—
—
3.5
Significant exploration and development wells completed in 2011 included:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
For  Mining,  core  hole  drilling  programs  and  other  survey  work  at  Oil  Sands  Base  and  Syncrude  to  provide  additional
information on areas the company expects to mine in the near term.
For In Situ, infill wells at Firebag Stage 1 and Stage 2 well pads, new wells at MacKay River and Firebag to help sustain
bitumen supply for existing central processing facilities, and core hole drilling at Firebag, MacKay River and Meadow Creek to
further delineate reserves and resources.
For East Coast Canada, the Ballicatters exploration well, a production well at Terra Nova, and development drilling for
Hibernia, the HSEU and the White Rose Extensions.
For International, exploration drilling on the Butch prospect in the Norway portion of the North Sea, development drilling at
Buzzard, oil development wells in Libya, and one oil development well in Syria (prior to sanctions related to oil investment
and, later, the suspension of operations).
For North America Onshore, development drilling of the Wilson Creek and Ferrier fields in the Cardium oil formation, the
Medicine Hat shallow gas region, and the Kobes area of the Montney shale gas formation.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
45
Production History
The table below outlines the company’s historical production information, by product type, for each of the four financial
quarters,  as  an  average  daily  measure,  for  Canada,  North  Sea  and  Other  International.  Average  price  realized  is  net  of
transportation costs, but before royalties.
2011
Three months ended
Mar 31
Jun 30
Sept 30
Dec 31
Canada
Oil Sands (1)
Average total production (mbbls/d)
Average In Situ bitumen production (mbbls/d)
Average price realized ($/bbl)
Royalties ($/bbl)
Total cash operating costs ($/bbl)
In Situ cash operating costs ($/bbl)
Light & Medium Oil
Average total production (mbbls/d)
Average price realized ($/bbl)
Royalties ($/bbl)
Production costs ($/bbl)
Netback ($/bbl)
Natural Gas (2)
Average total production (mmcfe/d)
Average price realized ($/mcfe)
Royalties ($/mcfe)
Production costs ($/mcfe)
Netback ($/mcfe)
North Sea
Light & Medium Oil (3)
Average total production (mboe/d)
Average price realized ($/boe)
Royalties ($/boe)
Production costs ($/boe)
Netback ($/boe)
Other International
Light & Medium Oil
Average total production (mboe/d)
Average price realized ($/boe)
Royalties ($/boe)
Production costs ($/boe)
Netback ($/boe)
Natural Gas (4)
Average total production (mboe/d)
Average price realized ($/boe)
Royalties ($/boe)
Production costs ($/boe)
Netback ($/boe)
360.6
87.3
83.74
(3.33)
(36.42)
(22.00)
65.0
104.01
(32.04)
(8.14)
63.83
411
4.52
(0.44)
(1.49)
2.59
65.7
93.74
(0.00)
(6.86)
86.88
24.2
99.07
(80.75)
(2.85)
15.47
17.1
84.58
(32.04)
(6.19)
46.35
277.2
85.8
93.16
(5.49)
(49.73)
(24.15)
65.0
112.19
(34.99)
(7.26)
69.94
402
4.90
(0.54)
(1.35)
3.01
32.7
113.24
(0.00)
(6.66)
106.58
362.5
83.8
86.40
(6.28)
(37.06)
(27.05)
69.1
111.30
(33.56)
(6.69)
71.05
375
4.56
(0.48)
(1.71)
2.37
33.1
111.60
(0.00)
(6.34)
105.26
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
16.9
95.28
(38.54)
(7.66)
49.08
18.9
95.49
(43.28)
(6.06)
46.15
356.8
101.4
98.01
(8.17)
(40.42)
(29.15)
63.4
111.77
(36.95)
(9.36)
65.46
365
4.31
(0.48)
(1.66)
2.17
55.0
106.41
(0.00)
(3.64)
102.77
24.8
109.58
(61.85)
(8.12)
39.61
16.0
91.69
(35.11)
(8.20)
48.38
(1) Suncor tracks cash operating cost for its Oil Sands operations, which includes more expenses than strictly production costs. For this reason, a netback calculation is not
presented in this table. Also, most of Suncor’s bitumen production is upgraded; therefore, a bitumen netback is not presented. Amounts presented include results from the
company’s share in the Syncrude joint venture.
(2) Volumes include NGLs and crude oil from natural gas wells.
(3) Volumes include field production for natural gas and NGLs.
(4) Volumes include approximate annual oil production of 1.5 mboe/d from Syria.
46
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
The  following  table  provides  the  production  volumes  for  each  of  Suncor’s  important  fields  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2011.
Mining – Suncor (1)
Mining – Syncrude (1)
Firebag (2)
MacKay River (2)
Buzzard
Hibernia
White Rose
Terra Nova
SCO and
Bitumen
mbbls/d
Light &
Medium Oil
mbbls/d
Natural Gas
mmcfe/d
NGLs
mbbls/d
228.6
34.6
48.1
27.9
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
41.9
30.9
18.5
16.2
—
—
—
—
4.3
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
0.3
—
—
—
Total
mboe/d
228.6
34.6
48.1
27.9
42.9
30.9
18.5
16.2
(1) All production attributed to Mining represents SCO.
(2) Estimates of production representing a mixture of upgraded SCO and non-upgraded bitumen.
Production Estimates
The table below outlines the volume of the company’s production of gross proved and gross proved plus probable reserves
estimated for the year ending December 31, 2012, as is reflected in the estimates of gross proved reserves and gross probable
reserves previously disclosed in the Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves tables. Production estimates for 2012 for proved plus
probable reserves from: Suncor’s mining operations (excluding Syncrude) are 232 mbbls/d of SCO, approximately 47% of total
estimated production for 2012; and from Firebag are 72 mbbls/d of SCO and bitumen, approximately 15% of total estimated
production for 2012.
SCO
Bitumen
Light & Medium Oil
Natural Gas
NGLs
Gross
mbbls/d
Net
mbbls/d
Gross
mbbls/d
Net
mbbls/d
Gross
mboe/d
Net
Gross
Net
mboe/d
mmcfe/d
mmcfe/d
Gross
mboe/d
Net
mboe/d
325.3
24.2
349.5
296.9
21.7
318.6
21.2
0.4
21.6
19.4
(0.7)
18.7
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
40.9
14.3
55.2
54.0
—
54.0
37.0
—
37.0
32.9
10.3
43.2
54.0
—
54.0
13.8
—
13.8
287.1
8.7
295.8
243.9
7.1
251.0
5.8
—
5.8
—
—
—
5.8
—
5.8
—
—
—
2.3
0.2
2.5
0.5
—
0.5
—
—
—
1.7
0.1
1.8
0.5
—
0.5
—
—
—
Canada
Proved
Probable
Proved Plus Probable
North Sea
Proved
Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Other International
Proved
Probable
Proved Plus Probable
Work Commitments
The practice of governments requiring companies to pledge to carry out work commitments in exchange for the right to carry
out exploration for and development of hydrocarbons is common, particularly in unexplored or lightly explored regions of the
world. The following table shows the estimated values of work commitments Suncor has made in regard to the lands it holds as
at December 31, 2011. These commitments run through 2013 and are primarily for conducting seismic programs and drilling
exploration wells.
Country/Area
($ millions)
Canada
North Sea
Other International
2012
1
158
128
Total
24
216
369
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
47
Forward Contracts and Transportation Obligations
Suncor may use financial derivatives to manage its exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices; however, Suncor did not have
any such material financial derivative transactions in 2011. A description of Suncor’s use of such instruments is provided in the
2011 audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related MD&A for the year ended December 31, 2011.
As a result of the merger, Suncor holds a commitment of 85,000 mcf/d of contract capacity on the Alliance Pipeline that expires
in November 2015, which enables Suncor to transport high-energy, rich natural gas from northeastern B.C. and northwestern
Alberta  to  the  Alliance  Pipeline  terminus  in  Illinois.  Subsequent  to  Suncor’s  2010  divestitures,  this  commitment  exceeds
Suncor’s production from the area. Suncor estimates its minimum commitment on the Alliance Pipeline to be approximately
US$50 million per year. Natural gas for the Alliance Pipeline commitment is expected to be supplemented by supply purchased
from third parties. Deliveries to Illinois are expected to continue for the term of the contract provided the sales price in Illinois
exceeds, at a minimum, the variable cost of the transportation.
Tax Horizon
In 2011, Suncor was subject to cash tax in the local jurisdictions related to earnings from its North Sea and Other International
production, but was not cash taxable in Canada on the majority of its Canadian earnings. Suncor’s 2011 audited Consolidated
Financial Statements were prepared using the 2014 effective Canadian tax rate to record income taxes, as this rate would apply
to the reversal of long-term temporary differences. Based on projected future net earnings, Suncor may be cash taxable in
Canada by 2013.
Contingent Resources
GLJ conducted an independent assessment of Best Estimate contingent resources volumes for all of Suncor’s Mining properties
and for Suncor’s In Situ properties to which reserves are attributed (Firebag and MacKay River). For In Situ properties without
attributed reserves, GLJ audited assessments of Best Estimate contingent resources volumes (approximately 41% of In Situ
contingent resources) prepared by Suncor’s internal qualified reserves evaluators. Best Estimate contingent resources for other
properties were prepared by Suncor’s internal qualified reserves evaluators. All contingent resources estimates were conducted
in accordance with the COGE Handbook.
Contingent resources are those quantities of petroleum estimated, as of a given date, to be potentially recoverable from known
accumulations using established technology or technology under development, but which are not currently considered to be
recoverable due to one or more contingencies. Contingencies may include factors such as economic, legal, environmental,
political and regulatory matters or lack of infrastructure or markets. Best Estimate is considered to be the best estimate of the
quantity that will actually be recovered. It is equally likely that the actual remaining quantities recovered will be greater or less
than the best estimate. The best estimate of potentially recoverable volumes is generally prepared independent of the risks
associated with achieving commercial production.
There is no certainty that all or any portion of the contingent resources will be commercially viable to produce. Estimates of
contingent resources have not been adjusted for risk based on the chance of development. There is no certainty as to the
timing of such development. For movement of contingent resources to reserves categories, all projects must have an economic
depletion plan and may require, among other things, additional delineation drilling, regulatory applications, or sanction from
the company’s Board and any joint venture owners to proceed with development.
In general, significant factors that may change contingent resources estimates include further delineation drilling, which could
change  the  estimates  either  positively  or  negatively,  future  technology  improvements,  which  would  positively  affect  the
estimates, and additional processing capacity that could affect the volumes recoverable or type of production. Additional
facility  design  work,  development  plans,  reservoir  studies  and  delineation  drilling  are  often  completed  in  the  course  of
preparing the company’s application for regulatory approvals. Once there is a high level of certainty of receiving all regulatory
and corporate approvals, and all other contingencies are removed, the resources may then be reclassified as reserves.
48
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Effective December 31, 2011, Suncor’s Best Estimate of gross contingent resources is set out in the table below. Volumes
represent Suncor’s working interest in properties with contingent resources.
Best Estimate Gross Contingent Resources
Mining
In Situ
East Coast Canada
North America Onshore (1)
Total Canada
North America Onshore – U.S.
North Sea (2)
Other International
As at December 31, 2011
As at December 31, 2010
SCO
mmbbls
4 582
6 432
—
—
11 014
—
—
—
11 014
12 462
Bitumen
mmbbls
2 156
6 020
—
—
8 176
—
—
—
8 176
5 291
Light &
Medium Oil
mmbbls
Natural Gas
bcf
NGLs
mmbbls
—
—
247
116
363
—
45
481
889
956
—
—
2 203
8 017
10 220
133
36
245
10 634
10 370
—
—
—
13
13
—
—
1
14
17
Total
mmboe
6 738
12 452
614
1 465
21 269
22
52
522
21 865
20 454
(1) Contingent resources include offshore fields in the Arctic Islands.
(2) Contingent resources are offshore Norway.
Contingent  resources  increased  to  21,865  mmboe  at  December  31,  2011  from  20,454  mmboe  at  December  31,  2010.
Increases to contingent resources included extensions of the MacKay River and Meadow Creek leases, acquisition of additional
leases in the Audet area, technical revisions for In Situ assets, recognition of potential Hibernia secondary zones, and volumes
attributed to discoveries in the Ballicatters, Butch and Wilson Creek areas. The net effects of Suncor’s transactions with Total
E&P, which included the acquisition of an interest in Joslyn, the partial disposition of our interest in Fort Hills and a change in
assumption that reclassified remaining Fort Hills reserves from SCO to bitumen, also increased total contingent resources.
These increases were partially offset by the transfer of resources to proved plus probable reserves for Golden Eagle and Hebron,
and asset dispositions.
Suncor has assumed that some Mining and some In Situ contingent resources will be upgraded and sold as SCO. To the extent
that these volumes are not upgraded, but rather sold as bitumen, contingent resources volumes reported would be lower for
SCO and higher for bitumen, and total contingent resources volumes would be higher because of the yield factor applied to
bitumen volumes when upgraded into SCO. Conversely, to the extent that more volumes are upgraded, total contingent
resources volumes would be lower.
Generally, the timing for the economic assessments of contingent resources will be determined by Suncor’s long-term resource
development plan and its forecast for economic conditions. Management uses integrated plans to forecast future development
of resources. These plans align current and planned production, current and forecasted market conditions, processing and
pipeline  capacities,  capital  spending  commitments  and  related  future  development  plans.  These  plans  are  reviewed  and
updated annually for internal and external factors affecting these planned activities. In particular, as Suncor’s Oil Sands reserves
base depletes, the company anticipates that it will look to develop its other Mining and In Situ properties, at which time the
assessment of the economic viability of specific properties with contingent resources will be made.
Details  of  Suncor’s  contingent  resources  and  a  categorization  of  the  contingencies  ascribed  to  these  resources  are
provided below.
Mining Contingent Resources
Mining  contingent  resources  comprise  approximately  31%  of  Suncor’s  total  contingent  resources,  with  59%  of  these
contingent resources on properties in which Suncor has a 100% working interest and the remainder forming part of joint
arrangements where Suncor has working interests varying from 12% to 40.8%.
Economic Contingencies
GLJ has tested the economic viability of the Fort Hills and Joslyn North projects, which constitute approximately 25% of total
Mining contingent resources, and determined them to be economic. The economic status of remaining Mining contingent
resources is currently undetermined; however, the company anticipates that the contingent resources will be economic to
develop  under  current  market  conditions,  as  the  potential  development  of  these  contingent  resources  would  reflect  the
application of established technology and reasonable assumptions for mine pit design.
Non-Technical Contingencies
Given the concern within the industry with respect to the potential cost escalation of large mining projects, the reclassification
of Mining contingent resources to reserves is largely contingent upon an assessment that development will be sanctioned and
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
49
commence within a reasonable time frame. The Fort Hills and Joslyn North mining projects have substantially all regulatory
approvals in place, but final investment decisions based on development plans currently being finalized await decision by the
joint venture owners, and, as a result, it is Suncor’s view that the development of these contingent resources in the near term is
not sufficiently assured to support reclassification to reserves. For Suncor’s remaining Mining contingent resources, regulatory
permits  must  be  obtained  before  a  project  sanction  decision  by  Suncor’s  Board  and  joint  venture  owners,  as  applicable,
is considered.
In Situ Contingent Resources
In  Situ  contingent  resources  comprise  approximately  57%  of  Suncor’s  total  contingent  resources,  with  59%  of  these
contingent resources on properties in which Suncor has a 100% working interest and the remainder forming part of joint
arrangements  where  Suncor  has  working  interests  varying  from  10%  to  75%.  These  contingent  resources  are  all  in  the
Athabasca oil sands area and over 80% of the contingent resources are in, or immediately adjacent to, existing MacKay River or
Firebag operations.
The primary risk associated with developing In Situ contingent resources relates to actual production performance versus
performance estimated based on the geological data used in the production forecast. The geological data varies substantially
as a result of the density of core holes used in the analysis. The density can be as low as one well per section, and as high as
16 wells per section.
Economic Contingencies
The economic status of In Situ contingent resources is currently undetermined; however, the company anticipates that the
contingent resources will be economic to develop under current market conditions. Technical net pay cutoffs are consistent
with, and based upon, the same fiscal conditions as those used in the determination of proved plus probable reserves for
Firebag and MacKay River, or are analogous to existing in situ operations successfully developed by other entities in the oil
sands industry. Suncor anticipates that its In Situ contingent resources will be recoverable using established SAGD processes.
Contingent resources have been assigned to certain sections associated with Firebag and MacKay River development areas.
These volumes have not been classified as proved plus probable reserves in part because drilling density is inadequate for
reliable mapping of effective pay intervals. However, the company has two-dimensional seismic control, minimum mapped
effective pay thicknesses of 15 metres for Firebag and 14 metres for MacKay River, and drilling density greater than or equal to
one vertical well per section (except when that section is bound by sections with greater than or equal to one well per section).
The company expects that an assessment of the economic viability of these resources will be undertaken when drilling density
has increased such that it is adequate for reliable mapping of effective pay intervals and as the company’s long-term plans
require additional bitumen to keep existing processing capacities associated with these assets full.
Contingent  resources  for  other  In  Situ  properties  (Chard,  Kirby,  Lewis,  Meadow  Creek  and  MacKay  River  outside  of  the
development  areas  noted  above)  were  assigned  to  sections  with  core  holes,  or  lands  within  two  legal  subdivisions  of  a
delineation well and having net continuous bitumen pay greater than 15 metres. These contingent resources require the
completion of further reservoir studies and delineation drilling, as well as the preparation of development plans and facility
designs prior to reserves being assigned. The company expects that an assessment of the economic viability of these contingent
resources will be undertaken as the company’s long-term plans require additional bitumen.
Non-Technical Contingencies
The reclassification of In Situ contingent resources to reserves is also largely contingent upon an assessment that development
will be sanctioned and commence within a reasonable time frame. The contingent resources associated with development
areas  for  Firebag  and  MacKay  River  have  regulatory  approvals  in  place,  but  a  final  investment  decision  is  subject  to  an
assessment of economic viability and approval by Suncor’s Board. For remaining In Situ contingent resources, the company
must still obtain regulatory approvals and project sanction by Suncor’s Board and joint venture owners, as applicable.
Other Contingent Resources
Other contingent resources are mainly conventional sources of oil and gas associated with Suncor’s Exploration and Production
segment.  These  other  contingent  resources  comprise  approximately  12%  of  Suncor’s  total  contingent  resources  and  are
anticipated to be recoverable using established technologies. These other contingent resources primarily include:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
For North America Onshore, discovered resources in the Arctic Islands, Mackenzie Delta, Mackenzie Corridor, Beaufort Sea,
and in the Alaska Foothills, and a tight oil play in the Gilby/Wilson area of Alberta.
For East Coast Canada, extensions of existing producing oilfields and Hebron, natural gas resources associated with existing
producing  oilfields,  and  other  hydrocarbon  accumulations  that  are  not  currently  producing,  including  those  offshore
Newfoundland and Labrador.
For North Sea, discoveries offshore Norway.
For Other International, in both Libya and Syria, undeveloped portions within existing producing fields and other discovered
hydrocarbon accumulations that are not currently producing, and, for Syria, 2012 production estimates.
50
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Economic Contingencies
Except as noted below, the economic status of other contingent resources is undetermined. In general, further reservoir studies
and delineation drilling, and preparation of development plans and facility designs are required to make a determination as to
whether these contingent resources would be economic or not under current conditions.
For North America Onshore, contingent resources associated with the Gilby/Wilson tight oil play have been determined to be
economic. The economic status of contingent resources associated with certain fields in the Arctic Islands is undetermined, but
anticipated to be economic provided the natural gas resources are able to be delivered to markets outside of North America.
Remaining North America Onshore contingent resources are primarily in geographically remote areas and are sub-economic
due to lack of processing and transportation infrastructure in these areas. These areas require commitments to identify the
existence  of  sufficient  resources  for  economic  development,  following  which  construction  of  processing  facilities  and/or
transportation infrastructure would be required, which is not anticipated to occur within the next five years.
For East Coast Canada, contingent resources for Hebron and some for Terra Nova have been determined to be economic. The
company anticipates that it will assess the economic viability of contingent resources for Hibernia and White Rose within the
next five years and that these contingent resources will be economic to develop under current market conditions. Timing for
completion of economic evaluation of remaining contingent resources is not anticipated to occur within the next five years.
For the North Sea, contingent resources are in the appraisal stage. The economic status of these contingent resources is
undetermined, but the company anticipates that it will assess their economic viability within the next five years and that these
contingent resources will be economic to develop under current market conditions.
For Other International, contingent resources in Syria are currently sub-economic, but would be economic in the absence of
force majeure under the company’s contractual obligations. In Libya, contingent resources associated with producing fields are
economic, while the economic viability of resources associated with non-producing fields is undetermined, but the company
anticipates that it will complete economic assessments for these fields in the next five years.
Non-Technical Contingencies
The reclassification of contingent resources associated with the Exploration and Production segment to proved plus probable
reserves is primarily contingent upon the receipt of appropriate regulatory approvals, and an assessment that development will
be sanctioned by Suncor’s Board and joint venture partners, as applicable, and commence within a reasonable time frame.
Contingent resources for some North America Onshore properties in geographically remote areas are also contingent upon the
development of a suitable regulatory framework.
The estimated production for Syria for 2012 has been classified as contingent resources, contingent upon Suncor being able to
record production and receive payment. In order for this to occur, sanctions that are applicable to Suncor and that were
initiated as a result of political unrest in Syria must be lifted so that the company can conduct business with its joint venture
partner  in  Syria.  For  remaining  contingent  resources  associated  with  Suncor’s  Syrian  assets,  a  daily  contract  quantity  for
production, which limits the rate at which gas can be produced, is the primary contingency. This production constraint prevents
a  portion  of  the  resources  from  being  produced  within  the  contract  period.  This  contingency  could  be  removed  through
contract extension or a higher daily contract quantity at a sufficient sales price.
INDUSTRY CONDITIONS
The oil and natural gas industry is subject to extensive controls and regulations governing its operations (including land tenure,
exploration, environmental, development, production, refining, transportation, and marketing) imposed by legislation enacted
by various levels of government and with respect to export and taxation of oil and natural gas by agreements among the
governments  of  Canada  and  Alberta,  among  others,  as  well  as  the  governments  of  the  United  States  and  other  foreign
jurisdictions in which we operate, all of which should be carefully considered by investors in the oil and gas industry. It is not
expected that any of these controls or regulations will affect the company’s operations in a manner materially different than
they would affect other oil and gas companies of similar size and with similar assets. All current legislation is a matter of public
record, and the company is unable to predict what additional legislation or amendments may be enacted. The following
discussion outlines some of the principal aspects of legislation, regulations and agreements governing Suncor’s operations.
Pricing, Marketing and Exporting Crude Oil and Natural Gas
The producers of oil are entitled to negotiate sales and purchase agreements directly with oil purchasers. Most agreements are
linked to global oil prices. Global oil prices are set by daily, weekly and monthly physical and financial transactions for crude oil
around the world. Those prices are primarily based on worldwide fundamentals of supply and demand. Specific prices depend
in part on oil quality, prices of competing fuels, distance to the markets, the value of refined products, the supply/demand
balance, and other contractual terms. In Canada, oil exporters are also entitled to enter into export contracts. If the term of an
export contract exceeds one year for light crude oil or exceeds two years for heavy crude oil (to a maximum of 25 years), the
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
51
exporter is required to obtain an export licence from the National Energy Board (NEB), and the issuance of such licence requires
a public hearing and the approval of the Governor in Council. If the term of an export contract does not exceed one year for
light crude oil or does not exceed two years for heavy crude oil, the exporter is required to obtain an order approving such
export from the NEB.
The price of natural gas is also determined by negotiation between buyers and sellers. Natural gas exported from Canada is
subject to regulation by the NEB and the Government of Canada. Exporters are free to negotiate prices and other terms with
purchasers,  provided  that  the  export  contracts  continue  to  meet  certain  other  criteria  prescribed  by  the  NEB  and  the
Government of Canada. Natural gas (other than propane, butane and ethane) export contracts with a term that exceeds two
years (to a maximum of 25 years) require the exporter to obtain an export licence from the NEB, and the issuance of such
licence requires a public hearing and the approval of the Governor in Council. Natural gas (other than propane, butane and
ethane)  export  contracts  for  volumes  of  more  than  30,000  m 3/d  with  a  term  that  does  not  exceed  two  years,  or  export
contracts for volumes of 30,000 m 3/d or less for a term of two to 20 years, must be made pursuant to an NEB order. The
Government of Alberta also regulates the volume of natural gas that may be removed from the province for consumption
elsewhere based on such factors as reserves availability, transportation arrangements, and market considerations.
Internationally, prices for crude oil and natural gas fluctuate in response to changes in the supply of and demand for crude oil
and natural gas, market uncertainty and a variety of other factors beyond Suncor’s control. These factors include, but are not
limited to, the actions of OPEC, world economic conditions, government regulation, political developments, the foreign supply
of oil, the price of foreign imports, the availability of alternate fuel sources and weather conditions.
Pipeline Capacity
Although pipeline expansions are ongoing, the apportionment of capacity on pipeline systems can occur from time-to-time
due to pipeline and downstream operating problems that can affect the ability to market western Canadian crude oil and
natural gas.
Recently, pipeline capacity to support the growth of the oil sands industry in Canada has been the subject of political and
environmental debate. Suncor supports the responsible development of pipeline infrastructure that would open access to
other markets.
Royalties, Incentives and Income Taxes
Canada
In addition to federal regulation, each province has legislation and regulations governing land tenure, royalties, production
rates,  environmental  protection,  and  other  matters.  The  royalty  regime  is  a  significant  factor  in  the  profitability  of  SCO,
bitumen, crude oil, NGL and natural gas production. Royalties payable on production from lands other than Crown lands are
determined by negotiations between the mineral freehold owner and the lessee, although production from such lands may be
subject to certain provincial taxes. Crown royalties are determined by governmental regulation and are generally calculated as a
percentage of revenues received from the value of the gross production. The rate of royalties payable generally depends in part
on prescribed reference prices, well productivity, geographical location, field discovery date, method of recovery, depth of well,
and the type or quality of the petroleum product produced. Other royalties and royalty-like interests are, from time-to-time,
carved out of the owner’s working interest through non-public transactions. These are often referred to as overriding royalties,
gross overriding royalties, net profits interests or net carried interests.
Occasionally, the governments of the western Canadian provinces create incentive programs for exploration and development.
Such  programs  provide  for  royalty  rate  reductions,  royalty  holidays  and  tax  credits,  and  are  generally  introduced  when
commodity  prices  are  low.  The  programs  are  designed  to  encourage  exploration  and  development  activity  by  improving
earnings and cash flow within the industry. Royalty holidays and reductions would reduce the amount of Crown royalties paid
by oil and gas producers to the provincial governments and would increase the net income and funds from operations of
such producers.
The Canadian federal corporate income tax rate levied on taxable income was 16.5% effective January 1, 2011 for active
business income, including resource income, and decreased to 15% on January 1, 2012. The average provincial income tax rate
for Suncor in 2011 was 10.69%, which is expected to decrease to 10.39% in 2014 when enacted provincial income tax rate
reductions become effective.
Other Jurisdictions
Operations in the U.S are subject to the U.S. federal tax rate of 35% and various state-level taxes, primarily 4.63% in Colorado.
There are no royalties on production from the U.K. portion of the North Sea; however, the income tax rate on oil and gas profits
is 62%. This rate increased from 50% effective March 23, 2011 after the U.K. government announced an increase in its
supplementary charge from 20% to 32%.
52
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Suncor earns refundable tax credits related to eligible exploration spending in Norway at a rate of 78%.
Amounts presented as royalties for production from our Libya and Syria operations are determined pursuant to PSCs. The
amounts calculated reflect the difference between Suncor’s working interest in the particular project and the net revenue
attributable to Suncor under the terms of the PSC. All government interests in the operations, except for income taxes, are
presented as royalties.
Under our EPSAs in Libya, income taxes are payable. Suncor prepares corporate income tax declarations that are processed by
the NOC who, in turn, obtains a tax clearance certificate from tax authorities that is forwarded to Suncor. The NOC remits taxes
on Suncor’s behalf. Until tax certificates are received, Suncor records both an income tax payable to the taxation authority and
an offsetting income tax receivable from the NOC.
For our PSCs in Syria, Suncor has been advised that income taxes are not payable until the Ebla project reaches payout. When
payable, income taxes shall be assumed, paid and discharged on behalf of Suncor by the GPC.
Land Tenure
In Canada, petroleum, bitumen and natural gas located in the western provinces are owned predominantly by the respective
provincial governments. Provincial governments grant rights to explore for and produce oil and natural gas pursuant to leases,
licences, and permits for varying terms, and on conditions set forth in provincial legislation, including requirements to perform
specific work or make payments. Oil and natural gas located in such provinces can also be privately owned and rights to explore
for and produce such oil and natural gas are granted by lease on such terms and conditions as may be negotiated. In frontier
areas of Canada, the mineral rights are primarily owned by the Canadian federal government, which, either directly or through
shared jurisdiction agreements with the relevant provincial authorities, grant tenure in the form of exploration, significant
discovery and production licences.
In many other international jurisdictions, petroleum and natural gas are most commonly owned by national governments that
grant rights in the form of exploration licences and permits, production licences, production sharing agreements and other
similar forms of tenure. In all cases, Suncor’s right to explore, develop and produce petroleum and natural gas is subject to
ongoing compliance with the regulatory requirements established by the relevant country.
Environmental Regulation
The  company  is  subject  to  environmental  regulation  under  a  variety  of  Canadian,  U.S.,  U.K.,  and  other  foreign,  federal,
provincial, territorial, state and municipal laws and regulations. These regulatory regimes are laws of general application that
apply to us in the same manner as they apply to other international companies and enterprises in the energy industry. The
regulatory regimes require us to obtain operating licences and permits in order to operate, and impose certain standards and
controls on activities relating to mining, oil and gas exploration, development and production, and the refining, distribution
and marketing of petroleum products and petrochemicals. Environmental assessments and regulatory approvals are generally
required before initiating most new major projects or undertaking significant changes to existing operations. In addition, this
legislation requires that the company abandon and reclaim well and facility sites to the satisfaction of provincial authorities and,
in some cases, this burden may remain with the company even after disposition of an asset to a third party. Compliance with
such legislation can require significant expenditures, and a breach of these requirements may result in suspension or revocation
of necessary licences and authorizations, civil liability for pollution damage, and the imposition of material fines and penalties.
In addition to these specific, known requirements, we expect future changes to environmental legislation, including anticipated
legislation  for  air  pollution  (Criteria  Air  Contaminants)  and  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions  that  will  impose  further
requirements on companies operating in the energy industry.
A number of statutes, regulations and frameworks are under development or have been issued by various provincial regulators
that oversee oil sands development, including the recently announced Joint Canada-Alberta Implementation Plan for Oil Sands
Monitoring. These statutes, regulations and frameworks relate to such issues as tailings management, water use and land use.
While the financial implications of statutes, regulations and frameworks under development are not yet known, the company is
committed to working with the appropriate regulatory bodies as they develop new policies, and to fully complying with all
existing and new statutes, regulations and frameworks as they apply to the company’s operations.
In  general,  there  remains  uncertainty  around  the  outcomes  and  impacts  of  climate  change  and  environmental  laws  and
regulations, whether currently in force or proposed laws and regulations as described herein, or future laws and regulations. It
is not currently possible to predict the nature of any future requirements or the impact on the company and its business,
financial condition, results of operations and cash flow at this time. We continue to actively work to mitigate our environmental
impact, including taking action to reduce GHG emissions, investing in renewable forms of energy such as wind power and
biofuels, persisting with land reclamation activities, installing new emissions abatement equipment and working to advance
other environmental technologies such as carbon capture and sequestration.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
53
The  scope  of  recent  environmental  regulation  and  initiatives  has  had  an  impact  on  many  areas  important  to  Suncor’s
operations, some of which are summarized in the following subsections:
Climate Change
Suncor operates in many jurisdictions that have regulated, or have proposed to regulate, industrial GHG emissions. Those
jurisdictions that have regulated GHG emissions generally support policies based on (i) caps on the intensity of GHG emissions,
(ii) a carbon price, possibly through a cap-and-trade system, (iii) a tax, (iv) a hybrid of a tax and a cap-and-trade system, and
(v)  policies  including  other  measures  such  as  low  carbon  fuel  and  renewable  fuel  standards.  Suncor  participates  in  the
consultation process for the design of proposed regulations and other efforts to harmonize regulations across jurisdictions
within North America, both directly and indirectly through industry associations.
Suncor believes that the responsibility for managing environmental and climate change related issues should be a shared
responsibility across the company. A comprehensive roles and responsibilities matrix has been developed as part of Suncor’s
GHG management program. Suncor’s CEO and COO hold top executive responsibility for sustainability issues. Together with
the Vice President, Sustainable Development, the business units and selected internal technical representatives are responsible
for setting operational sustainability goals and assessing progress, including energy efficiency across all areas of our business.
The Environment, Health, Safety and Sustainable Development Committee of the Board of Directors meets quarterly to review
Suncor’s  effectiveness  in  meeting  its  obligations  pertaining  to  environment,  health  and  safety  (EHS).  The  committee  also
reviews the effectiveness with which Suncor establishes appropriate environment, health and safety policies, including GHG
performance  and  emissions  reduction  plans  given  legal,  industry  and  community  standards.  Management  systems  are
maintained by the committee to implement such policies and ensure compliance with them.
International Climate Change Agreements and Treaties
At the end of 2009, the United Nations Framework on Climate Change Conference of the Parties (UNFCC COP 15) was held in
Copenhagen, Denmark. One of the major outcomes of this conference was the Copenhagen Accord. To signify agreement
with the Copenhagen Accord, Canada subsequently committed to reducing its GHG emissions by 17% below 2005 levels by
2020, in line with the reduction commitment made by the U.S. However, the Copenhagen Accord does not contain any
binding commitments for reducing CO2 emissions, nor does it include any discussion of compliance mechanisms. The other
focal  point  of  the  Copenhagen  Accord  was  a  commitment  by  all  major  emitting  countries  to  provide  funding,  including
$30 billion from 2010 to 2012, for developing countries for climate change mitigation and adaptation.
During COP 17 in Durban, South Africa, several nations, including Canada, Japan and Russia, announced their intentions not
to commit to a second period under the Kyoto Protocol; however, Canada reaffirmed commitments for GHG reductions and
funding under the Copenhagen Accord.
Canadian Federal GHG Regulations
The Canadian federal government has started to address emissions of specific sectors of the economy, including implementing
vehicle emissions standards in line with the U.S., as well as performance standards for the thermal electrical power generating
sector. Also in line with the U.S., Canada has adopted a renewable fuels standard, mandating that 5% of the gasoline supply
come from renewable sources such as ethanol and that 2% of diesel supply come from bio-diesel. The Canadian federal
government has stated that it will align its approach to GHG regulation with the approach of the U.S. and, in 2011, entered
into preliminary discussions with the Canadian oil and gas industry on proposed regulations for the sector.
Canadian Provincial GHG Regulations
In the absence of a federal GHG emissions policy, various Canadian provinces have responded with their own GHG emissions
reduction  targets  and  passed  legislation  enabling  regulation  of  large  GHG  emitters.  Suncor  will  continue  to  engage  the
appropriate  governmental  bodies  in  meaningful  dialogue  in  an  effort  to  develop  a  harmonized  system  which  focuses  on
achieving actual reduction goals and sustainable resource development.
In July 2007, pursuant to the Specified Gas Emitters Regulation enacted under the Climate Change and Emissions Management
Act (Alberta), facilities emitting more than 100,000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent (CO2e) per year are subject to intensity limits
(GHG emissions per unit of production) and are required to reduce their intensity limits by 12% from an established baseline.
Five facilities operated by Suncor in Alberta (Oil Sands Base plants, MacKay River operations, Firebag operations, the Edmonton
refinery and the Hanlan gas processing plant) are subject to, and continue to comply with, this legislation. In 2010, the total
cost to comply with the Alberta regulations was approximately $11 million. Compliance in 2010 was achieved through reduced
emissions per unit of production, purchase and retirement of offset credits and payments to Alberta’s Climate Change and
Emissions Management Fund (Alberta Technology Fund). In March 2012, Suncor expects to file compliance reports that show
what actions the company took during 2011 to demonstrate that each facility either met its intensity target or took action to
offset its emissions intensity. Compliance options available to Suncor include reducing emissions, using Alberta-sanctioned
54
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
offset projects, or contributing to the Alberta Technology Fund. For the compliance period of January 1 to December 31, 2011,
the compliance costs to Suncor are estimated to be between $10 million and $15 million, based on a cost of $15/tonne, which
was in effect for 2011. Future costs may be subject to change, given that late in 2011, the Specified Gas Emitters Regulation
was amended by the Government of Alberta, such that the contribution cost is no longer specified at the $15/tonne level.
Instead, the contribution cost will be established by Order of the Minister.
Several Canadian provinces (including British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec) are members of the Western Climate Initiative
(WCI), a multi-jurisdictional partnership created in 2007 to address climate change. Effective January 1, 2010, the Greenhouse
Gas  Reduction  Act  (Cap  and  Trade)  enabled  the  British  Columbia  government  to  participate  in  the  trading  system  being
implemented by the WCI. Draft regulations, as well as offset regulations, have been posted by the British Columbia Climate
Action Secretariat, but have yet to be finalized. The Province of British Columbia also enacted a carbon tax in 2008, which
began at $10/tonne of CO2e and escalates at $5/tonne per year until 2012 when it reaches its maximum of $30/tonne. This
carbon tax is carbon neutral, in that revenues are recycled back to taxpayers via tax reductions and is applied on consumption.
Under these regulations, Suncor’s natural gas production and gathering facilities in B.C. are classified as one facility, which in
aggregate exceed the 100,000 tonne threshold that requires the reporting of emissions to be verified by third parties. Suncor’s
refined product distribution terminals in B.C. are required to report emissions, but do not exceed the threshold that requires
third-party verification.
In 2007, Quebec introduced a tax on hydrocarbon production and imports, with the revenues going into a Green Fund, to
support  transit  and  other  emissions-reducing  projects.  This  tax  impacts  Suncor’s  refining  and  marketing  activities  in
the province.
During 2011, Quebec introduced regulations for a cap-and-trade system for GHG emissions. This system required Suncor to
register as an emitter because the Montreal refinery produces more than 25,000 tonnes of CO2e per year. Emitters must verify
their emissions during specified compliance periods (the first period commencing January 1, 2013 and ending December 31,
2014), and must either reduce their emissions or purchase eligible compliance mechanisms to cover their emissions above a
specified cap. Quebec is responsible for setting the cap for the province and allocating allowances to emitters in its jurisdiction.
Quebec has deemed 2012 a transition year, with no cap imposed. Allowances are fungible across the WCI, such that Quebec-
issued allowances can be bought and sold with the larger trading system, which currently consists solely of Quebec and
California. It is anticipated that the Green Fund will eventually be merged with the cap-and-trade system.
Ontario is also a member of the WCI and implemented mandatory reporting regulations beginning with 2010 emissions, but
has delayed action on any further GHG emissions regulations.
U.S. GHG Regulations
Several attempts were made during the past two years to enact GHG legislation in the United States, none of which made it
through both the Senate and the House. In an effort to build a green economy, the President has opted to push for a clean
energy standard that would reduce GHG emissions from the power sector and increase the use of cleaner sources of energy,
including  natural  gas,  nuclear  power  and  ‘‘clean’’  coal.  In  addition,  the  President  is  pressing  ahead  by  endorsing  the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to regulate GHG emissions under the Clean Air Act. The implications of industry
being  regulated  under  the  EPA  and  the  timing  of  such  regulation  are  as  yet  unknown.  In  the  meantime,  the  EPA  has
implemented a mandatory GHG reporting rule for all large (emitting greater than 25,000 tonnes per year) facilities, which
includes Suncor’s Commerce City refinery.
The EPA has also mandated Renewable Fuel Standards 2, which encourages ethanol blending up to 15%, from the current
10% limit. Several factors will impact the ability of refiners and producers to achieve these requirements, including the lead
time required for fleet turnover, the ability of retail stations to simultaneously provide both 10% and 15% fuels, and the
inherent liability for ensuring consumers use the appropriate fuel for their vehicle.
The State of California has passed AB32, which provides for a Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). In December 2011, the United
States District court ruled against California’s LCFS, stating that it was in violation of the Commerce Clause of the United States
Constitution. Suncor does not actively market into California; however, there were two aspects of the ruling that are pertinent
to Suncor – the discrimination against out-of-state producers (in this case, those that are reliant on coal-fired electrical power
generation for the production of ethanol), and the attempt by California to use a life-cycle analysis as the basis for the LCFS that
includes exploration and production processes outside of the State’s jurisdiction. The State of California has stated that it will
appeal the ruling. The outcome of this appeal is anticipated during 2012.
International Regulations
Phase  II  (2008-2012)  of  the  European  Union  Emissions  Trading  Scheme  (EU  ETS)  impacts  Suncor’s  non-operated  offshore
production in the U.K. and Norway sectors of the North Sea. The EU ETS requires that member countries set emissions limits for
installations in their country covered by the scheme and assigns such installations an emissions cap. Installations may meet their
cap by reducing emissions or by buying allowances from other participants. Phase III of the EU ETS is scheduled to begin in 2013
and will run until 2020.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
55
Land Use
In 2011, the Government of Alberta issued its draft Lower Athabasca Regional Plan (LARP), which covers the Lower Athabasca
Region and includes Suncor’s Oil Sands segment. The LARP, developed as part of the Land-Use Framework under the Alberta
Land Stewardship Act, identifies new conservation areas, as well as management frameworks for the quality of air, surface
water and groundwater. The new conservation areas do not overlap any of Suncor’s leases. The management frameworks
formalize a number of regulatory tools that are already used by the government to manage environmental aspects of oil sands
development, and may require Suncor to have greater participation in the evaluation of environmental issues. The frameworks
include the following:
(cid:127) Air. The framework is designed to maintain flexibility and to manage cumulative effects of development on air quality
within the region, setting triggers and limits for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and sulphur dioxide (SO2). The framework
includes ambient air quality triggers and limits. Management actions are required when triggers are exceeded or limits
are reduced.
(cid:127) Surface water. The framework builds on, but does not replace, existing provincial legislation and policy on water
quality, and provides a framework in which to monitor and manage long-term, cumulative changes in water quality
within the lower Athabasca River. The framework includes quality limits and triggers for various indicators, based on
existing  Alberta,  Canadian  Council  of  Ministers  of  the  Environment,  Health  Canada  and  U.S.  EPA  guidelines.
Management actions are required when triggers or limits are reached.
(cid:127) Groundwater. The framework aims to manage non-saline groundwater resources in a sustainable manner and protect
resources  from  contamination  and  over-use.  The  framework  aims  to  ensure  timely  detection  of  key  changes  to
indicators and describes the management response that will be initiated if triggers or limits, including site-specific
measures, are reached.
Reclamation and Tailings
In  February  2009,  the  ERCB  released  Directive  74  Tailings  Performance  Criteria  and  Requirements  for  Oil  Sands  Mining
Schemes. The directive establishes performance criteria for tailings operations and requirements for the approval, monitoring
and reporting of tailings ponds and plans. Suncor is in the final stages of its transition from a consolidated tailings management
plan to TROTM operations, which is Suncor’s new tailings management strategy. TROTM was approved by the ERCB in June 2010.
Suncor’s mine plan is designed to facilitate the implementation of TROTM through providing space for the drying of tailings and
ensuring adequate and timely storage capacity for extraction tailings from both the Millennium and NSE mines.
The  Government  of  Alberta  also  has  in  place  the  Mine  Financial  Security  Program  (MFSP),  which  holds  oil  sands  miners
responsible for all aspects of the suspension, abandonment, remediation and surface reclamation work at their mine sites, and
custody of the site until a reclamation certificate has been issued by the government. The MFSP requires a base amount of
security for each project in the form of letters of credit, which would provide the funds necessary to safely secure the site.
Additional security is required under other conditions, such as failure to meet current reclamation plans or when the estimated
remaining production life of the mine reaches certain levels; however, Suncor has not been required to provide any additional
security. In 2011, the Government of Alberta finalized changes to the MFSP, but these changes did not significantly impact
Suncor’s existing or near-term requirements for providing additional security.
Hydraulic Fracturing
Hydraulic fracturing is the process of pumping a fluid or a gas under pressure down a well, which causes the surrounding rock
to crack or fracture. The fluid, typically consisting of water, sand, chemicals and other additives, flows into the cracks where the
sand remains to keep the cracks open and allow natural gas or liquids to be recovered. Fracturing fluids are produced back to
the surface through the wellbore and are stored for reuse or future disposal in accordance with regional regulations, which may
include injection into underground wells.
The Government of Canada manages use of chemicals through its Chemical Management Plan and New Substances Program.
Some provinces require the details of fracturing fluids to be submitted to regulators. In Alberta, the ERCB requires that all
fracturing operations submit regarding the quantity of fluids and additives.
While this process has been in use and improved upon for many generations, the proliferation of fracturing in recent years to
access  hydrocarbons  in  unconventional  reservoirs,  such  as  shale  formations,  has  raised  concerns  about  the  interaction  of
fracturing fluids with the water supply. In the U.S., the process is regulated by state and local governments, but the EPA is
considering undertaking a broad study as it pertains to the national Clean Water Act. Any U.S. rules on hydraulic fracturing
could influence other jurisdictional regulation and force oil and gas companies, including Suncor, to cease using the process or
to add pollution control technology to their operations. The implications of this activity being regulated under the EPA are as yet
unknown.
56
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Industry Collaboration Initiatives
For areas of environmental concern, the need for energy companies to increase collaboration with each other, and with their
respective stakeholders, is a particularly critical issue for the oil sands industry. As part of the Oil Sands Leadership Initiative
(OSLI), Suncor is working closely with like-minded companies to make tangible improvements to environmental, social and
economic  performance  in  the  oil  sands  industry.  These  companies  have  come  together  to  pool  financial  resources  and
expertise. In 2010, members of OSLI investigated new technologies to improve industry-wide reuse of tailings waste water and
to make oil recovery more energy efficient, while also engaging new stakeholders and opinion leaders.
In  addition,  Suncor  and  six  other  oil  sands  companies  announced  the  creation  of  the  Oil  Sands  Tailings  Consortium  in
December 2010, and agreed to work together in a unified effort to advance tailings management. Each company has pledged
to share its existing tailings research and technology and to remove barriers to collaborating on future tailings research and
development. In turn, the companies are committing to future research investments to further accelerate tailings technology
advances.
Suncor’s Sustainability Commitment
Suncor remains committed to reducing overall GHG emissions intensity, in addition to other goals related to improving energy
efficiency, reducing water use, increasing land reclamation and reducing air emissions. We continue to actively work to mitigate
our environmental impact, including taking action to reduce GHG emissions, investing in renewable forms of energy such as
wind power and biofuels, accelerating land reclamation, installing new emissions abatement equipment and pursuing other
opportunities, both internally as well as through joint venture initiatives, such as our role in OSLI. For further information, please
see our Sustainability Report at www.suncor.com.
RISK FACTORS
The company is committed to a proactive program of enterprise risk management intended to enable decision-making through
consistent identification of risks inherent to the assets and activities of Suncor. The company’s enterprise risk committee (ERC),
comprised of senior representatives from business and functional groups across Suncor, oversees entity-wide processes to
identify, assess and report on the company’s principal risks. A principal risk is an exposure that has the potential to materially
impact the ability of one of our businesses or functions to meet or support a Suncor objective.
Commodity Price Volatility
Our financial performance is closely linked to prices for crude oil in our upstream business and prices for refined petroleum
products in our downstream business, and, to a lesser extent, to natural gas prices in our upstream business, where natural gas
is both an input and output of production processes. The values for all of these commodity prices can be influenced by global
and regional supply and demand factors.
Crude oil prices are also affected by, among other things, global economic health and global economic growth (particularly in
emerging markets), political developments, compliance or non-compliance with quotas imposed on OPEC members, access to
markets for crude oil and weather. These factors impact the various types of crude oil and refined products differently and can
impact differentials between light and heavy grades of crude oil (including blended bitumen), and between conventional and
synthetic crude oil.
Suncor anticipates higher production of non-upgraded bitumen in future years, due mainly to expansion at Firebag. Due to its
low viscosity, bitumen is blended with a light diluent or SCO and sold as a heavy crude oil. The markets for heavy crude are
more limited than those for light crude, making them more susceptible to supply and demand changes. Heavy crude oil
receives lower market prices than light crude, due principally to the lower quality and value of the refined product yield, and the
higher  cost  to  transport  the  more  viscous  product  on  pipelines.  The  price  differential  between  light  crude  and  WCS  is
particularly important for Suncor. WCS is a pool of heavy crude oil and blended bitumen production from Western Canada. The
market price for WCS is influenced by regional supply and demand factors, including the availability and price of diluent, and by
the availability and cost of accessing primary markets through pipeline systems. Future price differentials are uncertain and
widening light/heavy differentials could have a negative impact on our business, especially price realizations for bitumen that
Suncor is unable to upgrade.
Refined petroleum product prices and refining margins are also affected by, among other things, crude oil prices, the availability
of  crude  oil  and  other  feedstocks,  levels  of  refined  product  inventories,  regional  refinery  availability,  marketplace
competitiveness, and other local market factors.
Natural gas prices in North America are affected primarily by supply and demand, and by prices for alternative energy sources.
All of these factors are beyond our control and can result in a high degree of price volatility.
Commodity prices and refining margins have fluctuated widely in recent years. Given the recent global economic uncertainty,
we expect continued volatility and uncertainty in commodity prices in the near term, with the possibility that crude oil and
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
57
refined petroleum products prices could revert to the low levels experienced in 2008 and 2009. A prolonged period of low
prices could affect the value of our upstream and downstream assets and the level of spending on growth projects, could result
in the curtailment of production on some properties and include an impairment of carrying value. Accordingly, low commodity
prices,  particularly  for  crude  oil,  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  Suncor’s  business,  financial  condition,  results  of
operations and cash flow.
Government Policy
Suncor operates under federal, provincial, state and municipal legislation in numerous countries. The company is also subject to
regulation and intervention by governments in oil and gas industry matters, such as land tenure, royalties, taxes (including
income taxes), government fees, production rates, environmental protection controls, safety performance, the reduction of
GHG and other emissions, the export of crude oil, natural gas and other products, the company’s interactions with foreign
governments,  the  awarding  or  acquisition  of  exploration  and  production  rights,  oil  sands  leases  or  other  interests,  the
imposition of specific drilling obligations, control over the development and abandonment of fields and mine sites (including
restrictions on production) and possibly expropriation or cancellation of contract rights.
Changes in government policy or regulation have a direct impact on Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations
and cash flow, as evidenced by such initiatives as the Alberta government’s royalty review program in 2007, and, more recently,
by trade sanctions in Libya and Syria imposed by Canadian and other international governments, and increased production
taxes in the U.K. Changes in government policy or regulation can also have an indirect impact on Suncor, such as opposition to
new  North  American  pipeline  systems,  such  as  Keystone  XL,  or  incrementally  over  time,  through  increasingly  stringent
environmental  regulations  or  unfavourable  income  tax  and  royalty  regimes.  The  result  of  such  changes  can  also  lead  to
additional compliance costs and staffing and resource levels, and also increase exposure to other principal risks of Suncor,
including environmental or safety non-compliance and permit approvals.
Environmental Regulation
Changes in environmental regulation could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of
operations and cash flow by impacting the demand, formulation or quality of our products, or by requiring increased capital
expenditures or distribution costs, which may or may not be recoverable in the marketplace. The complexity and breadth of
changes  in  environmental  regulation  make  it  extremely  difficult  to  predict  the  potential  impact  to  Suncor.  Management
anticipates capital expenditures and operating expenses could increase in the future as a result of the implementation of new
and  increasingly  stringent  environmental  regulations.  Failure  to  comply  with  environmental  regulation  may  result  in  the
imposition of significant fines and penalties, liability for cleanup costs and damages, and the loss of important licences and
permits, which may, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and
cash flow.
Some of the issues that are or may in future be subject to environmental regulation include:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
The possible cumulative regional impacts of oil sands development;
The manufacture, import, storage, treatment and disposal of hazardous or industrial waste and substances;
The need to reduce or stabilize various emissions to air;
Withdrawals, use of, and discharges to water;
The use of hydraulic fracturing to assist in the recovery and production of oil and natural gas;
Issues relating to land reclamation, restoration and wildlife habitat protection;
Reformulated gasoline to support lower vehicle emissions;
U.S. state or federal calculation and regulation of fuel life-cycle carbon content; and
Regulation or policy by foreign governments or other organizations to limit purchases of oil produced from unconventional
sources, such as the oil sands.
Climate Change Regulation
Future laws and regulations may impose significant liabilities on a failure to comply with their requirements; however, Suncor
expects the cost of meeting new environmental and climate change regulations will not be so high as to cause material
disadvantage  to  the  company  or  material  damage  to  its  competitive  positioning.  While  it  currently  appears  that  GHG
regulations and targets will continue to become more stringent, and while Suncor will continue efforts to reduce the CO2 unit
intensity of our operations, the absolute CO2 emissions of our company will continue to rise as we pursue a prudent and
planned growth strategy.
58
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
As part of our ongoing business planning, Suncor assesses potential costs associated with CO2 emissions in our evaluation of
future projects, based on our current understanding of pending and possible GHG regulations. Both the U.S. and Canada have
indicated that climate change policies that may be implemented will attempt to balance economic, environmental and energy
security concerns. In the future, we expect that regulation will evolve with a moderate carbon price signal, and that the price
regime  will  progress  cautiously.  Suncor  will  continue  to  review  the  impact  of  future  carbon  constrained  scenarios  on  our
strategy, using a price range of $15-$45 per tonne of CO2 equivalent as a base case, applied against a range of regulatory policy
options and price sensitivities.
Although Suncor does not actively market into California, the implications of other states or countries adopting similar LCFS
legislation could pose a significant barrier to our exports of oil sands crude if the importing jurisdictions do not acknowledge
efforts undertaken by the oil sands industry to meet the emissions intensity reductions legislated by the Government of Alberta.
In general, there remains uncertainty around the outcome and impacts of proposed or potential future climate change and
other related environmental regulation. The Canadian federal government has gone on record as saying that it will align GHG
emissions legislation with the U.S. Although it remains unclear what approach the U.S. will take, or when, the Canadian federal
government has indicated a preference for a sector specific approach; however, it is unclear what form any regulation will take
for the oil and gas sector, and what type of compliance mechanisms will be available to large emitters. At this time, the
company does not believe it is possible to predict the nature of any requirements or the impact on Suncor’s business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow. The impact of developing regulations cannot be quantified at this time given the
current lack of detail on how systems will operate.
Land Reclamation
There are risks associated specifically with our ability to reclaim tailings ponds containing mature fine tailings with TROTM or
other methods and technologies. Suncor expects that TROTM will help the company reclaim existing tailings ponds by reducing
tailings. The success of TROTM or any other methods or technology and the time to reclaim tailings ponds could increase or
decrease our decommissioning and restoration cost estimates. Our failure or inability to adequately implement our reclamation
plans, including our planned implementation of TROTM, could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow. In recent years, Suncor has increased collaboration with other participants in the
oil sands industry to share technology and knowledge and to research alternative methods for tailings management.
Royalties
Royalties can be impacted by changes in crude oil and natural gas pricing, production volumes, foreign exchange rates, and
capital and operating costs, by changes to existing legislation or PSCs, and by results of regulatory audits of prior year filings
and other unexpected events. Some of the issues where settlement with regulatory bodies may cause royalties expense or
royalties payable to differ materially from provisions currently recorded include:
(cid:127)
For Suncor’s mining operations (not including Syncrude), the BVM is based on the terms of Suncor’s RAA, which we believe
places  certain  limitations  on  the  interim  BVM  as  recently  enacted,  which  modified  the  BVM  for  additional  quality  and
transportation adjustments. For the years 2009 to 2010, Suncor filed non-compliance notices with the Alberta government,
citing that reasonable quality adjustments in the determination of the Suncor BVM were not considered by the Alberta
government as permitted by Suncor’s RAA. Suncor has also filed with the Alberta government a Notice of Commencement
of Arbitration under the Suncor RAA. The owners of the Syncrude joint venture have also filed a non-compliance notice in
respect of the determination of the bitumen value under its 2008 agreements with the Alberta government.
(cid:127)
Suncor has also appealed the disallowance of certain costs under the New Royalty Framework in Alberta and certain costs
under royalty agreements in Newfoundland and Labrador, such as insurance premiums.
The final determination of these matters may have a material impact on royalties payable to the respective governments and on
the company’s royalties expense.
Foreign Operations
The company has operations in a number of countries with different political, economic and social systems. As a result, the
company’s  operations  and  related  assets  are  subject  to  a  number  of  risks  and  other  uncertainties  arising  from  foreign
government sovereignty over the company’s international operations, which may include, among other things:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Currency restrictions and exchange rate fluctuations;
Loss of revenue, property and equipment as a result of expropriation, nationalization, war, insurrection and geopolitical and
other political risks;
Increases in taxes and governmental royalties;
Compliance  with  existing  and  emerging  anti-corruption  laws,  including  the  Foreign  Corrupt  Practices  Act  of  the
United States, the Corrupt Foreign Officials Act of Canada and the United Kingdom Bribery Act;
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
59
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Renegotiation of contracts with governmental entities and quasi-governmental agencies;
Changes in laws and policies governing operations of foreign-based companies; and
Economic and legal sanctions (such as restrictions against countries experiencing political violence, or countries that other
governments may deem to sponsor terrorism).
If a dispute arises in the company’s foreign operations, the company may be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of foreign
courts or may not be able to subject foreign persons to the jurisdiction of a court in Canada or the U.S. In addition, as a result of
activities  in  these  areas  and  a  continuing  evolution  of  an  international  framework  for  corporate  responsibility  and
accountability  for  international  crimes,  the  company  could  also  be  exposed  to  potential  claims  for  alleged  breaches  of
international law.
In 2011, operations in both Libya and Syria were suspended as a result of the outbreak of political unrest and the resulting
sanctions imposed by international governments. Discussions with the Libyan authorities continue on the status of existing
contract terms, including production volumes and exploration commitments. There is still sufficient unpredictability underlying
operations in this region, including the ramp up of production, the sustainability of current production rates and the extent of
damage to the company’s assets, which has not yet been fully assessed. As a result, there is no assurance that production will
return to previous levels or continue at current levels.
In response to sanctions and escalating political unrest in Syria, Suncor declared force majeure in December 2011, withdrew its
expatriate staff and stopped recording production from Syria. Suncor’s assessment of the situation as at December 31, 2011
did not require the company to record an impairment charge against its assets in Syria; however, should the current situation
persist or worsen, such that Suncor is unable to resume operations in the near term, the company believes its assets in Syria
could be impaired in the future. There is no assurance as to when Suncor’s production from Syrian assets will resume or return
to previous levels. Suncor’s operations in Syria represented approximately 3% of the company’s consolidated net earnings and
3% of the company’s cash flow from operations in 2011. The carrying value of Suncor’s net assets in Syria at December 31,
2011 was approximately $900 million.
The impact that future potential terrorist attacks, regional hostilities or political violence may have on the oil and gas industry,
and on our operations in particular, is not known at this time. This uncertainty may affect operations in unpredictable ways,
including  disruptions  of  fuel  supplies  and  markets,  particularly  crude  oil,  and  the  possibility  that  infrastructure  facilities,
including pipelines, production facilities, processing plants and refineries, could be direct targets of, or collateral damage of, an
act of terror, political violence or war. We may be required to incur significant costs in the future to safeguard our assets against
terrorist activities or to remediate potential damage to our facilities. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in
protecting ourselves against these risks and the related financial consequences.
EHS Regulatory Non-Compliance
The company is required to comply with a large number of EHS regulations under a variety of Canadian, U.S., U.K. and other
foreign, federal, provincial, territorial, state and municipal laws and regulations, as described in the Industry Conditions –
Environmental Regulation section of this AIF. Failure to comply with these regulations may result in the imposition of fines and
penalties, censure, liability for cleanup costs and damages, and the loss of important licences and permits, which could also
have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. Compliance can be
affected by the loss of skilled staff, inadequate internal processes and compliance auditing.
Operational Outages and Major Environmental or Safety Incidents
Each of our primary operating businesses – Oil Sands, Exploration and Production, and Refining and Marketing – demand
significant levels of investment in the design, operation and maintenance of facilities, and, therefore, carry the additional
economic risk associated with operating reliably or enduring a protracted operational outage. These businesses also carry the
risks associated with environmental and safety performance, which is closely scrutinized by governments, the public and the
media, and could result in a suspension of or inability to obtain regulatory approvals and permits, or, in the case of a major
environmental or safety incident, civil suits or charges against the company.
Generally, our operations are subject to operational hazards and risks such as fires, explosions, blow-outs, power outages,
severe winter climate conditions, and the migration of harmful substances such as oil spills, gaseous leaks, or a release of
tailings into water systems, any of which can interrupt operations or cause personal injury or death, or damage to property,
equipment, the environment, and information technology systems and related data and control systems.
The reliable operation of production and processing facilities at planned levels and our ability to produce higher value products
can also be impacted by failure to follow operating procedures or operate within established operating parameters, equipment
failure  through  inadequate  maintenance,  unanticipated  erosion  or  corrosion  of  facilities,  manufacturing  and  engineering
flaws, and labour shortage or interruption. We are also subject to operational risks such as sabotage, terrorism, trespass, theft
and malicious software or network attacks.
60
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
The efficient operation of our business is dependent on computer hardware and software systems. Information systems are
vulnerable to security breaches by computer hackers and cyberterrorists. We rely on industry accepted security measures and
technology to securely maintain confidential and proprietary information stored on our information systems. However, these
measures and technology may not adequately prevent security breaches. In addition, the unavailability of the information
systems or the failure of these systems to perform as anticipated for any reason could disrupt our business and could result in
decreased performance and increased operating costs, causing our business and results of operations to suffer. Any significant
interruption or failure of our information systems or any significant breach of security could adversely affect our business and
results of operations.
In addition, all of our operations are subject to all of the risks connected with transporting, processing and storing crude oil,
natural gas and other related products. Pipeline capacity constraints combined with plant capacity constraints could negatively
impact our ability to produce at capacity levels. Disruptions in pipeline service could adversely affect commodity prices, Suncor’s
price realizations, refining operations and sales volumes, or limit our ability to deliver production. These interruptions may be
caused by the inability of the pipeline to operate or by the oversupply of feedstock into the system that exceeds pipeline
capacity.  There  can  be  no  certainty  that  short-term  operational  constraints  on  pipeline  systems  arising  from  pipeline
interruption and/or increased supply of crude oil will not occur. In addition, planned or unplanned shutdowns or closures of our
refinery customers may limit our availability to deliver feedstock. All of these events could have negative implications on sales
and cash from operating activities.
For Suncor’s Oil Sands operations, mining oil sands ore, extracting bitumen from mined ore, producing bitumen through in situ
methods, and upgrading bitumen into SCO and other products involve particular risks and uncertainties. Oil Sands operations
are susceptible to loss of production, slowdowns, shutdowns or restrictions on our ability to produce higher value products,
due to the interdependence of its component systems. Through growth projects, we expect to further mitigate adverse impacts
of  interdependent  systems  and  to  reduce  the  production  and  cash  flow  impacts  of  complete  plant-wide  shutdowns.  For
example, Suncor has two upgrader facilities that include three secondary upgrading units, which provide us with the flexibility
to conduct periodic planned maintenance events on one facility while continuing production from the other.
For Suncor’s upstream businesses, there are risks and uncertainties associated with drilling for oil and natural gas, the operation
and development of such properties and wells (including encountering unexpected formations, pressures, ore grade qualities,
or the presence of H2S), premature declines of reservoirs, sour gas releases, uncontrollable flows of crude oil, natural gas or well
fluids, other accidents, and pollution and other environmental risks.
Our Exploration and Production operations include drilling offshore of Newfoundland and Labrador and in the North Sea
offshore of the U.K. and Norway, which are areas subject to hurricanes and other extreme weather conditions. Drilling rigs in
these regions may be exposed to damage or total loss by these storms, some of which may not be covered by insurance. The
consequence  of  catastrophic  events,  such  as  blow-outs,  occurring  in  offshore  operations  can  be  more  difficult  and
time-consuming to remedy. The occurrence of these events could result in the suspension of drilling operations, damage to or
destruction of the equipment involved and injury or death of rig personnel. Successful remediation of these events may be
adversely affected by the water depths, pressures and cold temperatures encountered in the ocean, shortages of equipment
and specialists required to work in these conditions, or the absence of appropriate technology to resolve the event. Damage to
the environment, particularly through oil spillage or extensive, uncontrolled fires or death, could result from these offshore
operations. Our offshore operations could also be affected by the actions of our contractors and agents that could result in
similar catastrophic events at their facilities, or could be indirectly affected by catastrophic events occurring at other third-party
offshore operations. In either case, this could give rise to liability, damage to our equipment, harm to individuals, force a
shutdown of our facilities or operations, or result in a shortage of appropriate equipment or specialists required to perform our
planned operations.
In particular, East Coast Canada operations can be impacted by winter storms, pack ice, icebergs and fog. During the winter
storm season (October to March), we may have to reduce production rates at our offshore facilities as a result of limited storage
capacity and the inability to offload to shuttle tankers due to wave height restrictions. During the spring, pack ice and icebergs
drifting in the area of our offshore facilities have resulted in precautionary shut in of FPSO production and drilling delays. In late
spring and early summer, fog also impacts our ability to transfer personnel to the offshore facilities by helicopter.
Our Refining and Marketing operations are subject to all of the risks normally inherent in the operation of refineries, terminals,
pipelines and other distribution facilities and service stations, including loss of product, slowdowns due to equipment failures,
unavailability of feedstock, price and quality of feedstock or other incidents.
Losses resulting from the occurrence of any of these risks identified above could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s
business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. Although we maintain a risk management program, which
includes an insurance component, such insurance may not provide adequate coverage in all circumstances, nor are all such risks
insurable. It is possible that our insurance coverage will not be sufficient to address the costs arising out of the allocation of
liabilities and risk of loss arising from offshore operations. Suncor also has a captive insurance entity to provide additional
business interruption coverage for potential losses.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
61
Project Execution and Partner Risk
There are certain risks associated with the execution of our major projects and the commissioning and integration of new
facilities within our existing asset base, the occurrence of which could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business,
financial condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Project execution risk consists of three related primary risks:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Engineering – a failure in the specification, design or technology selection;
Construction – a failure to build the project in the approved time and at the agreed cost; and
Commissioning  and  start-up – a  failure  of  the  facility  to  meet  agreed  performance  targets,  including  operating  costs,
efficiency, yield and maintenance costs.
Management believes the execution of major projects presents issues that require prudent risk management. Suncor may
provide cost estimates for major projects at the conceptual stage, prior to commencement or completion of the final scope
design and detailed engineering necessary to reduce the margin of error of such cost estimates. Accordingly, actual costs can
vary from estimates, and these differences can be material. Project execution can also be impacted by:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Failure to comply with Suncor’s project implementation model;
The availability, scheduling and cost of materials, equipment and qualified personnel;
The complexities associated with integrating and managing contractor staff and suppliers in a confined construction area;
Our ability to obtain the necessary environmental and other regulatory approvals;
The impact of general economic, business and market conditions;
The impact of weather conditions;
Our ability to finance growth if commodity prices were to decline and stay at low levels for an extended period;
Risks relating to restarting projects placed in safe mode, including increased capital costs; and
The effect of changing government regulation and public expectations in relation to the impact of oil sands development on
the environment.
Other entities operate a portion of the assets in which Suncor has ownership interests. Suncor’s dependence on its partners –
the operator and other working interest owners for these assets – and its limited ability to influence operations and associated
costs could materially adversely affect Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. The success
and timing of Suncor’s activities on assets operated by others depend upon a number of factors that are outside of Suncor’s
control, including the timing and amount of capital expenditures, the timing and amount of operational and maintenance
expenditures, the operator’s expertise, financial resources and risk management practices, the approval of other participants,
and the selection of technology.
These partners may have objectives and interests that do not coincide with and may conflict with Suncor’s interests. Major
capital decisions affecting jointly owned assets may require agreement among the partners, while certain operational decisions
may be made solely at the discretion of the operator of the applicable assets. While the partners generally seek consensus with
respect to major decisions concerning the direction and operation of the assets, no assurance can be provided that the future
demands or expectations of either party relating to such assets will be met satisfactorily or in a timely manner. Failure to
satisfactorily meet demands or expectations by either party may affect our participation in the operation of such assets, our
ability to obtain or maintain necessary licences or approvals, or the timing for undertaking various activities.
Corporate Reputation
The public perception of integrated oil and gas companies and their operations may pose issues related to development and
operating approvals or market access for products, which may have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Development of the oil sands has figured prominently in recent political, media and activist commentary on the subjects of
pipeline  transportation,  climate  change,  GHG  emissions,  water  usage  and  environmental  damage,  which  may  directly  or
indirectly harm the profitability of our current oil sands projects and the viability of future oil sands projects in a number of
ways, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Creating significant regulatory uncertainty that challenges economic modelling of future projects and potentially delays
sanctioning;
Motivating extraordinary environmental and emissions regulation of those projects by governmental authorities that could
result  in  changes  to  facility  design  and  operating  requirements,  thereby  potentially  increasing  the  cost  of  construction,
operation and abandonment; and
62
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
(cid:127)
Compelling legislation or policy that limits the purchase of crude oil produced from the Athabasca oil sands by governments
and other institutional consumers that, in turn, limits the market for this crude oil and reduces its price.
Concerns such as those raised above may also harm our corporate reputation and limit our ability to transport our products or
access land and joint venture opportunities in other jurisdictions throughout the world. Investors may respond by applying a
discount  to  Suncor’s  shares,  thereby  diminishing  the  company’s  value,  or  may  hinder  Suncor  in  its  ability  to  influence
government policy.
Permit Approvals
Before proceeding with most major projects, including significant changes to existing operations, Suncor must obtain various
federal, provincial or state permits and regulatory approvals. Suncor must also obtain licences to operate certain assets. These
processes can involve, among other things, stakeholder consultation, environmental impact assessments and public hearings,
and may be subject to conditions, including security deposit obligations and other commitments. Suncor can also be indirectly
impacted by a third party’s inability to obtain regulatory approval for a shared infrastructure project.
Failure to obtain regulatory approvals, or failure to obtain them on a timely basis or on satisfactory terms, could result in delays,
abandonment or restructuring of projects and increased costs, all of which could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s
business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Skills and Resource Shortage
The successful operation of Suncor’s businesses and our ability to expand operations will depend upon the availability of, and
competition for, skilled labour and materials supply. There is a risk that we may have difficulty sourcing the required labour for
current and future operations. The risk could manifest itself primarily through an inability to recruit new staff without a dilution
of talent, to train, develop and retain high quality and experienced staff without unacceptably high attrition, and to satisfy an
employee’s work/life balance and desire for competitive compensation. The labour market in Alberta is particularly tight due to
the growth of the oil sands industry and higher crude oil prices. The increasing age of our existing workforce adds further
pressure to this situation. Materials may also be in short supply due to smaller labour forces in many manufacturing operations.
Our ability to operate safely and effectively and complete all our projects on time and on budget has the potential to be
significantly impacted by these risks.
Change Capacity
In order to achieve Suncor’s business objectives, the company must operate efficiently, reliably and safely, and, at the same
time,  deliver  growth  and  sustaining  projects  safely,  on  budget  and  on  schedule.  The  ability  to  balance  these  two  sets  of
objectives is critically important to Suncor to deliver value to shareholders and stakeholders. These objectives demand a large
number of improvement initiatives that compete for resources, and may negatively impact the company should there be
inadequate screening of project requests or consideration of the cumulative impacts of prior and parallel initiatives on people,
processes and systems. There is a risk that these objectives may exceed Suncor’s capacity to adopt and implement change.
Cost Management
Production from oil sands through mining, upgrading and in situ recovery is, relative to most major conventional hydrocarbon
reserves, a higher cost resource to develop and produce. There is also a perception among many stakeholders that the oil sands
industry,  including  Suncor,  has  little  ability  to  control  costs.  Suncor  is  exposed  to  the  risks  of  growing  or  uncontrollable
operating costs, which could reduce profitability and cash flow that might otherwise be directed towards growth or dividends,
and  major  project  capital  costs,  which  could  constrain  Suncor’s  ability  to  execute  high quality  projects  that  deliver  lower
operating  costs.  Factors  contributing  to  these  risks  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  the  skills  and  resource  shortage,  the
long-term success of existing and new in situ technologies, and the geology and reserves characterization of in situ reserves
that can lead to higher SORs and lower production.
Exchange Rate Fluctuations
Our audited Consolidated Financial Statements are presented in Canadian dollars. The majority of Suncor’s revenues from the
sale of oil and natural gas are based on prices that are determined by, or referenced to, U.S. dollar benchmark prices, while the
majority of Suncor’s expenditures are realized in Canadian dollars. The company also holds substantial amounts of U.S. dollar
debt. Suncor’s results, therefore, can be affected significantly by the exchange rates between the Canadian dollar and the
U.S. dollar. The company also undertakes operations administered through international subsidiaries, and so, to a lesser extent,
Suncor’s results can be affected by the exchange rates between the Canadian dollar and the euro, and the Canadian dollar and
the  British  pound.  These  exchange  rates  may  vary  substantially  and  may  give  rise  to  favourable  or  unfavourable  foreign
currency exposure, which could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations
and cash flow.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
63
Reliance on Key Personnel
Our success, in a large measure, is dependent on certain key personnel. The loss of services from such key personnel could have
a material adverse effect on the company. The contributions of the existing management team to the immediate and near-term
operations of the company are likely to continue to be of central importance for the foreseeable future. In addition, the
competition for qualified personnel in the oil and natural gas industry is intense, and there can be no assurance that we will be
able to continue to attract and retain all personnel necessary for the development and operation of our business.
Labour Relations
Hourly  employees  at  our  Oil  Sands  facilities  near  Fort  McMurray,  Alberta,  all  of  our  refineries,  certain  of  our  lubricants
operations, certain of our terminalling and distribution operations, and our Terra Nova FPSO are represented by labour unions
or  employee  associations.  Approximately  36%  of  our  employees  are  members  of  the  Communications,  Energy  and
Paperworkers Union. Any work interruptions involving our employees, contract trades utilized in our projects or operations, or
any joint venture facilities operated by another entity could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Dependence on Oil Sands Business
Our significant capital commitment to further our growth projects and sustain operations at our Oil Sands business may require
us to forego investment opportunities in other segments of our operations. The completion of future projects to increase
production at our Oil Sands business will further increase our dependence on the Oil Sands business.
Uncertainty of Reserves and Resources Estimates
The reserves and contingent resources estimates included in this AIF represent estimates only. There are numerous uncertainties
inherent in estimating quantities and quality of these proved and probable reserves and contingent resources, including many
factors beyond our control. In general, estimates of economically recoverable reserves and the future net cash flow from these
assets are based upon a number of variable factors and assumptions, such as historical production from the properties, the
assumed effect of regulation by governmental agencies, pricing assumptions, the timing and amount of capital expenditures,
future royalties, future operating costs, and yield rates for upgraded production of synthetic crude oil from bitumen – all of
which  may  vary  considerably  from  actual  results.  The  accuracy  of  any  reserves  and  resources  estimates  is  a  matter  of
interpretation and judgment and is a function of the quality and quantity of available data, which may have been gathered
over time.
Reserves and resources estimates are based upon a geological assessment, including drilling and laboratory tests. Mining
reserves  and  resources  estimates  also  consider  production  capacity  and  upgrading  yields,  mine  plans,  operating  life  and
regulatory constraints. In Situ reserves and resources estimates are also based upon the testing of core samples and seismic
operations, trends of well performance, and demonstrated commercial success of in situ processes. Our actual production,
revenues,  royalties,  taxes,  and  development  and  operating  expenditures  with  respect  to  our  reserves  will  vary  from  such
estimates, and such variances could be material. Production performance subsequent to the date of the estimate may justify
revision, either upward or downward, if material.
The reserves evaluations are based in part on the assumed success of activities we intend to undertake in future years. The
reserves and estimated cash flow to be derived from the reserves contained in the reserves evaluations will be reduced to the
extent that such activities do not achieve the level of success assumed in the reserves evaluations. The reserves evaluations are
effective as of a specific effective date and have not been updated, and thus do not reflect changes in our reserves since
that date.
For these reasons, estimates of the economically recoverable reserves and resources attributable to any particular group of
properties, and classification of such reserves and resources based on the risk of recovery, prepared by different engineers or by
the same engineers at different times, may vary.
Need to Replace Conventional Reserves
In  our  Exploration  and  Production  business,  conventional  oil  and  natural  gas  reserves  and  future  production  are  highly
dependent on the successful discovery or acquisition of additional reserves, without which production rates will decline as
reserves are depleted. Decline rates will vary with the nature of the reservoir, the life cycle of the well and other factors, and are
not necessarily indicative of future performance. Exploring for, developing and acquiring reserves is highly capital intensive. To
the  extent  the  company  is  unable  to  generate  sufficient  capital  and/or  external  sources  of  capital  become  limited  or
unavailable, our ability to make the necessary capital investments to maintain and expand our conventional oil and natural gas
reserves could be constrained. In addition, the long-term performance of the Exploration and Production business is dependent
on our ability to consistently and competitively find and develop low cost, high quality reserves that can be brought on-stream
economically.
64
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
In Situ Recovery and Other Technology Risk
There are risks associated with growth and other capital projects that rely largely or partly on new technologies and the
incorporation  of  such  technologies  into  new  or  existing  operations,  particularly  as  the  results  of  the  application  of  new
technologies may differ from simulated or test environments. The success of projects incorporating new technologies, such as
in situ technology, cannot be assured.
Current  SAGD  technologies  for  in  situ  recovery  of  heavy  oil  and  bitumen  are  energy  intensive,  requiring  significant
consumption of natural gas and other fuels in the production of the steam used in the recovery process. The amount of steam
required in the production process can also vary and impact costs. The performance of the reservoir can also impact the timing
and levels of production using this technology. While SAGD technology is now being used by several producers in the industry,
commercial application of this technology is still in the early stages relative to other methods of production and, accordingly, in
the  absence  of  an  extended  operating  history,  there  can  be  no  assurances  with  respect  to  the  sustainability  of  SAGD
operations.
Energy Trading and Risk Management Activities and the Exposure to Counterparties
The  nature  of  energy  trading  and  risk  management  activities,  which  may  make  use  of  hedging  and  derivative  financial
instruments, creates exposure to significant financial risks, which include, but are not limited to, the following:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Movements in prices or values could result in a financial loss to the company;
A lack of counterparties, due to market conditions or other circumstances, could leave us unable to liquidate or offset a
position, or unable to do so at or near the previous market price;
We may not receive funds or instruments from our counterparty at the expected time;
The counterparty could fail to perform an obligation owed to us;
Loss as a result of human error or deficiency in our systems or controls; and
Loss as a result of contracts being unenforceable or transactions being inadequately documented.
(cid:127)
In the normal course of business, the company enters into contractual relationships with counterparties in the energy industry
and other industries, including counterparties for interest rate, foreign exchange and commodity hedging arrangements. If
such counterparties do not fulfil their contractual obligations, the company may suffer losses, may have to proceed on a sole
risk basis, may have to forego opportunities or may have to relinquish leases or blocks.
Suncor has adopted a Trading Risk Management Policy (the Trading Policy), which requires all trading activities to occur in the
group responsible for trading, so that trading risks can be properly monitored, controlled and reported. The Board has set the
trading commodities, trading term limits, value-at-risk limits and stop-loss limits under the Trading Policy. Any changes to the
foregoing require Board approval. The Board reviews and monitors Suncor’s compliance with the Trading Policy through the
Audit Committee, which receives a quarterly report that summarizes Suncor’s trading activities and provides an assessment of
Suncor’s financial exposure to risk from these activities.
To reduce exposure to unfavourable movements in commodity prices, interest rates and foreign exchange rates, the company
also periodically enters into contracts involving derivative financial instruments. The terms of these contracts or instruments
may limit the benefit of favourable changes in commodity prices, interest rates and currency values and may result in financial
or opportunity loss due to delivery commitments, royalty rates and counterparty risks associated with the contracts.
While the company limits its exposure to any one counterparty to a level that management deems to be reasonable, losses due
to counterparties failing to fulfil their contractual obligations may have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Control Environment
Based on their evaluation as of December 31, 2011, our chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that our
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the United States Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 (the Exchange Act)) are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or
submit to Canadian and U.S. securities authorities is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods
specified in Canadian and U.S. securities laws. In addition, as of December 31, 2011, there were no changes in our internal
control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) to 15d-15(f)) that occurred during the year ended
December 31, 2011 that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial
reporting. We will continue to periodically evaluate our disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial
reporting and will make any modifications from time-to-time as deemed necessary.
Based on their inherent limitations, disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting may not
prevent or detect misstatements, and even those controls determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance
with respect to financial statement preparation and presentation.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
65
Dividends
Our payment of future dividends on our common shares will be dependent on, among other things, our financial condition,
results  of  operations,  cash  flow,  the  need  for  funds  to  finance  ongoing  operations,  debt  covenants  and  other  business
considerations as the company’s Board considers relevant. There can be no assurance that we will continue to pay dividends in
the future, at current levels, or at all.
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to fluctuations in short-term Canadian and U.S. interest rates as Suncor maintains a portion of its debt capacity
in revolving and floating rate bank facilities and commercial paper, and invests surplus cash in short-term debt instruments. We
are also exposed to interest rate risk when debt instruments are maturing and require refinancing, or when new debt capital
needs to be raised.
Capital Markets
Suncor expects that future capital expenditures will be financed out of cash generated from operations and borrowings. This
ability is dependent on, among other factors, commodity prices, the overall state of the capital markets and investor appetite
for investments in the energy industry generally and our securities in particular.
The market events and conditions witnessed over the past several years, including disruptions in international credit markets
and  other  financial  systems  and  the  deterioration  of  global  economic  conditions,  have  caused  significant  volatility  in
commodity prices and increases in the rates at which we are able to borrow funds for our capital programs. The continued
uncertainty in the global economic situation means that the company, along with all other oil and gas entities, may continue to
face restricted access to capital and increased borrowing costs. To the extent that external sources of capital become limited or
unavailable or available on unfavourable terms, our ability to make capital investments and maintain existing properties may be
constrained, and, as a result, Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow may be materially
adversely affected.
At December 31, 2011, we had approximately $4.4 billion of unused credit available under bank credit facilities. Based on
current cash and cash equivalents balances and expected cash from operations, we believe that we have sufficient funds
available to fund our planned capital expenditures for 2012. If cash flow from operations is lower than expected, if capital
expenditures in 2012 exceed current estimates, or if we incur major unanticipated expenses related to the development or
maintenance of our existing assets, Suncor may need to re-evaluate its capital program or seek additional capital. Choosing not
to  obtain  the  financing  necessary  for  our  capital  expenditure  plans  may  result  in  a  delay  in  the  planned  development  of
production from our operations and strand significant capital, while increasing costs to keep projects in safe mode. Choosing
to seek additional capital might adversely affect our credit ratings. Either of these events could have a material adverse effect on
Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Issuance of Debt and Debt Covenants
From time-to-time, we may finance capital expenditures in whole or in part with debt, which may increase our debt levels
above industry standards for oil and gas companies of similar size. Depending on future development plans, we may require
additional debt financing that may not be available or, if available, may not be available on favourable terms, including higher
interest rates and fees. Neither the company’s articles nor its bylaws limit the amount of indebtedness that we may incur;
however, we are subject to covenants in our existing bank facilities and seek to avoid an unfavourable cost of debt. The level of
our indebtedness, from time-to-time, could impair our ability to obtain additional financing on a timely basis to take advantage
of business opportunities that may arise and could negatively affect our credit ratings, which could have a material adverse
effect on Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flow.
Suncor currently has $5.8 billion in credit facilities, the majority of which matures in 2016, with the remainder maturing in 2013
or on demand. At December 31, 2011, Suncor’s total debt was $10.8 billion. We are required to comply with financial and
operating covenants under these credit facilities and debt securities. We routinely review the covenants based on actual and
forecast results and have the ability to make changes to our development plans, capital structure and/or dividend policy to
comply with covenants under the credit facilities. If Suncor does not comply with the covenants under its credit facilities and
debt securities, repayment could be required and/or the company’s access to capital could be restricted or only be available on
unfavourable terms, all of which could have a material adverse effect on Suncor’s business, financial condition, results of
operations and cash flow.
Suncor’s debt instruments are rated by various credit rating agencies. These ratings affect Suncor’s ability to gain access to
reasonably priced debt financing. If any of Suncor’s credit rating agencies downgrade Suncor’s debt instruments, it may restrict
Suncor’s ability to issue debt and may also increase the cost of borrowing, including under existing credit facilities.
Rating agencies regularly evaluate the company and our subsidiaries. Their ratings of our long-term and short-term debt are
based on a number of factors, including our financial strength, as well as factors not entirely within our control, including
conditions affecting the oil and gas industry generally, and the wider state of the economy. We cannot be assured that one or
66
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
more of our credit ratings will not be downgraded. Our borrowing costs and ability to raise funds are directly impacted by our
credit ratings. In addition, credit ratings may be important to customers or counterparties when we compete in certain markets
and when we seek to engage in certain transactions, including transactions involving over-the-counter derivatives.
It is our objective to maintain high quality credit ratings appropriate for our business activities. A credit-rating downgrade could
potentially limit our access to private and public credit markets and increase the costs of borrowing under existing facilities. A
reduction in our credit ratings also could have a significant impact on certain trading revenues, particularly in those businesses
where counterparty creditworthiness is critical. It could trigger collateralization requirements related to physical and financial
derivative liabilities with certain marketing counterparties and facility construction contracts. The occurrence of any of the
foregoing could adversely affect our ability to execute portions of our business strategy and could have a material adverse
effect on our liquidity and capital position.
Competition
The global petroleum industry is highly competitive in many aspects, including the exploration for and the development of new
sources of supply, the acquisition of crude oil and natural gas interests, and the refining, distribution and marketing of refined
petroleum  products.  We  compete  in  virtually  every  aspect  of  our  business  with  other  energy  companies.  The  petroleum
industry also competes with other industries in supplying energy, fuel and related products to consumers. We believe the
primary competition for our crude oil production is other major international oil and natural gas producers and integrated
companies.
For Suncor’s Oil Sands segment, a number of other companies have entered, or have indicated their intention to enter, the oil
sands business and begin producing bitumen and SCO, or expand their existing operations. It is difficult to assess the number,
level of production and ultimate timing of all potential new projects or when existing production levels may increase. During
recent years, a global focus on the oil sands through increasing industry consolidation that has created competitors with
financial capacity has significantly increased the supply of bitumen, SCO and heavy crude oil in the marketplace and increased
land values and the number of new oil sands leases available. The impact of this level of activity on regional infrastructure,
including pipelines, has placed stress on the availability and cost of all resources required to build and run new and existing oil
sands operations.
For  Suncor’s  Refining  and  Marketing  businesses,  management  expects  that  fluctuations  in  demand  for  refined  products,
margin  volatility  and  overall  marketplace  competitiveness  will  continue.  In  addition,  to  the  extent  that  our  downstream
business unit participates in new product markets, it could be exposed to margin risk and volatility from either cost and/or
selling price fluctuations.
Land Claims
First Nations people have claimed Aboriginal title and rights to portions of Western Canada. In addition, First Nations people
have filed claims against industry participants relating in part to land claims, which may affect our business. At the present time,
we are unable to assess the effect, if any, that these land claims may have on our business.
DIVIDENDS
Suncor’s Board of Directors has established a policy of paying dividends on a quarterly basis. We review our dividend policy from
time-to-time with regard to our financial position, financing requirements for growth, cash flow and other factors which our
Board of Directors considers relevant. The company’s Board approved an increase in the quarterly dividend to $0.11 per share
from $0.10 per share in the second quarter of 2011. Dividends are paid subject to applicable law, if, as and when declared by
the Board. The following table sets forth the amount of dividends we paid per common share to shareholders during the last
three years.
Year ended December 31
Cash dividends per common share ($)
2011
0.43
2010
0.40
2009
0.30
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
67
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE
The company’s authorized share capital is comprised of an unlimited number of common shares, an unlimited number of
preferred shares issuable in series designated as senior preferred shares, and an unlimited number of preferred shares issuable
in series designated as junior preferred shares.
As at December 31, 2011, there were 1,558,636,368 common shares issued and outstanding. To the knowledge of the Board
of Directors and executive officers of Suncor, no person beneficially owns, or exercises control or direction over, securities
carrying 10% or more of the voting rights attached to any class of voting securities of the company. The holders of common
shares are entitled to attend all meetings of shareholders and vote at any such meeting on the basis of one vote for each
common share held. As no senior preferred shares or junior preferred shares are issued and outstanding, common shareholders
are entitled to receive any dividend declared by the company’s Board on the common shares and to participate in a distribution
of the company’s assets among its shareholders for the purpose of winding up its affairs. The holders of the common shares
shall be entitled to share equally, share for share, in all distributions of such assets.
Petro-Canada Public Participation Act
The Petro-Canada Public Participation Act requires that the Articles of Suncor include certain restrictions on the ownership and
voting of voting shares of the company. The common shares of Suncor are voting shares. No person, together with associates
of that person, may subscribe for, have transferred to that person, hold, beneficially own or control otherwise than by way of
security only, or vote in the aggregate, voting shares of Suncor to which are attached more than 20% of the votes attached to
all outstanding voting shares of Suncor. Additional restrictions include provisions for suspension of voting rights, forfeiture of
dividends, prohibitions against share transfer, compulsory sale of shares, and redemption and suspension of other shareholder
rights. The company’s Board may at any time require holders of, or subscribers for, voting shares, and certain other persons, to
furnish statutory declarations as to ownership of voting shares and certain other matters relevant to the enforcement of the
restrictions. Suncor is prohibited from accepting any subscription for, and issuing or registering a transfer of, any voting shares
if a contravention of the individual ownership restrictions results.
Suncor’s Articles, as required by the Petro-Canada Public Participation Act, also include provisions requiring Suncor to maintain
its head office in Calgary, Alberta; prohibiting Suncor from selling, transferring or otherwise disposing of all or substantially all
of  its  assets  in  one  transaction,  or  several  related  transactions,  to  any  one  person  or  group  of  associated  persons,  or  to
non-residents, other than by way of security only in connection with the financing of Suncor; and requiring Suncor to ensure
(and to adopt, from time-to-time, policies describing the manner in which Suncor will fulfil the requirement to ensure) that any
member of the public can, in either official language of Canada (English or French), communicate with and obtain available
services  from  Suncor’s  head  office  and  any  other  facilities  where  Suncor  determines  there  is  significant  demand  for
communication with, and services from, that facility in that language.
Credit Ratings
The following information regarding the company’s credit ratings is provided as it relates to the company’s cost of funds and
liquidity and indicates whether or not the company’s credit ratings have changed. In particular, the company’s ability to access
unsecured funding markets and to engage in certain collateralized business activities on a cost-effective basis is primarily
dependent upon maintaining competitive credit ratings. A lowering of the company’s credit rating may also have potentially
adverse consequences for the company’s funding capacity for growth projects or access to the capital markets, may affect the
company’s ability, and the cost, to enter into normal course derivative or hedging transactions and may require the company to
post additional collateral under certain contracts.
The following table shows the ratings issued by the rating agencies noted therein as of December 31, 2011. The credit ratings
are not recommendations to purchase, hold or sell the debt securities inasmuch as such ratings do not comment as to the
market price or suitability for a particular investor. Any rating may not remain in effect for any given period of time or may be
revised or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency in the future if, in its judgment, circumstances so warrant.
Standard & Poor’s (S&P)
Dominion Bond Rating Service (DBRS)
Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s)
Senior
Unsecured
BBB+
A (low)
Baa2
Outlook
Stable
Stable
Positive
Cdn$
Commercial
Paper
A-1 (low)
R-1 (low)
Not rated
US$
Commercial
Paper
A-2
Not rated
P-2
S&P credit ratings on long-term debt are on a rating scale that ranges from AAA to D, representing the range of such securities
rated from highest to lowest quality. A rating of BBB by S&P is the fourth highest of 10 categories and indicates that the obligor
had adequate capacity to meet its financial commitments. However, adverse economic conditions or changing circumstances
are more likely to lead to a weakened capacity of the obligor to meet its financial commitment on the obligation. The addition
68
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
of a plus (+) or minus (ⳮ) designation after the rating indicates the relative standing within a particular rating category. S&P
credit ratings on commercial paper are on a short-term debt rating scale that ranges from A-1 (High) to C, representing the
range  of  such  securities  rated  from  highest  to  lowest  quality.  A  rating  of  A-1  (low)  by  S&P  is  the  third  highest  of  seven
categories, with a (low) designation after the rating indicating a slightly higher susceptibility to the adverse effects of changes
in circumstances and economic conditions, although the obligor’s capacity to meet its financial commitment on the obligation
is satisfactory. Obligations rated A-1 (low) on the Canadian commercial paper rating scale qualify for a rating of A-2 on the S&P
global short-term rating scale. A rating of A-2 by S&P means the obligor is somewhat more susceptible to the adverse effects of
changes  in  circumstances  and  economic  conditions  than  the  A-1  rating,  but  the  obligor’s  capacity  to  meet  its  financial
commitment is satisfactory.
DBRS credit ratings on long-term debt are on a rating scale that ranges from AAA to D, representing the range of such
securities rated from highest to lowest. A rating of A by DBRS is the third highest of 10 categories and is assigned to debt
securities considered to be of good credit quality, with the capacity for the payment of financial obligations being substantial,
but of a lesser credit quality than an AA rating. Entities in the A category may be vulnerable to future events, but qualifying
negative factors are considered manageable. All rating categories other than AAA and D also contain designations for (high)
and  (low).  The  absence  of  either  a  (high)  or  (low)  designation  indicates  the  rating  is  in  the  middle  of  the  category.  The
assignment of a (high) or (low) designation within a rating category indicates relative standing within that category. DBRS’s
credit ratings on commercial paper are on a short-term debt rating scale that ranges from R-1 (high) to D, representing the
range of such securities rated from highest to lowest quality. A rating of R-1 (low) by DBRS is the third highest of 10 categories
and is assigned to debt securities considered to be of good credit quality. The capacity for the payment of short-term financial
obligations as they become due is substantial, with overall strength not as favourable as higher rating categories. Entities in this
category may be vulnerable to future events, but qualifying negative factors are considered manageable. Certain commercial
paper categories are further denoted by (high), (medium) and (low) designations.
Moody’s credit ratings are on a long-term debt rating scale that ranges from AAA to C, which represents the range from
highest  to  lowest  quality  of  such  securities  rated.  A  rating  of  Baa  by  Moody’s  is  the  fourth  highest  of  nine  categories.
Obligations rated Baa are subject to moderate credit risk. They are considered medium grade and, as such, may possess certain
speculative  characteristics.  For  certain  ratings,  Moody’s  appends  numerical  modifiers  1,  2  or  3  to  each  generic  rating
classification. The modifier 1 indicates that the obligation ranks in the higher end of its generic rating category; the modifier
2 indicates a mid-range ranking; and the modifier 3 indicates a ranking in the lower end of that generic rating category. A
rating of P-2 by Moody’s for commercial paper is the second highest of four rating categories and indicates a strong ability to
repay short-term obligations.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
69
MARKET FOR SECURITIES
Our common shares are listed on the TSX in Canada, and on the NYSE in the U.S. The price ranges and the volumes traded on
the TSX and NYSE for the year ended December 31, 2011, are as follows:
TSX
2011
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
NYSE
2011
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Price Range (Cdn$)
High
Low
Trading Volume
(000’s)
41.73
47.27
47.09
44.78
44.56
40.70
39.60
36.81
31.56
33.10
33.75
31.87
36.31
39.64
39.91
40.61
37.94
36.31
36.35
28.71
25.61
23.97
28.07
27.30
86 963
113 291
114 219
78 958
97 689
88 738
64 996
152 854
130 795
124 137
110 485
98 747
Price Range (US$)
High
Low
Trading Volume
(000’s)
41.67
47.62
48.53
46.84
47.00
41.95
41.88
39.69
32.39
33.40
33.27
31.45
36.54
40.01
40.25
41.93
38.76
36.93
37.96
29.00
24.94
22.55
27.06
26.30
137 363
182 199
179 965
111 993
158 992
131 743
111 901
220 108
167 997
176 408
149 786
120 119
For information in respect of options to purchase common shares of Suncor and common shares issued upon the exercise of
options and pursuant to our dividend reinvestment plan in 2011, see the Share Capital note to the 2011 audited Consolidated
Financial Statements, which is incorporated by reference into this AIF.
70
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
Directors
The following individuals are directors of Suncor. The term of each director is from the date of the meeting at which he or she is
elected or appointed until the next annual meeting of shareholders or until a successor is elected or appointed. Richard L.
George and Brian MacNeill are not standing for re-election at Suncor’s 2012 annual general meeting, scheduled to be held on
May 1, 2012.
Suncor Directors
Name and Jurisdiction of Residence
Period Served and
Independence
Mel E. Benson (1)(2)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 2000
Independent
Dominic D‘Alessandro (3)(4)
Ontario, Canada
Director since 2009
Independent
John T. Ferguson
Alberta, Canada
Director since 1995
Independent
W. Douglas Ford (1)(4)
Florida, USA
Director since 2004
Independent
Richard L. George
Alberta, Canada
Director since 1991
Non-independent, management
Paul Haseldonckx (2)(3)
Essen, Germany
Director since 2009
(Petro-Canada 2002 to July 31,
2009)
Independent
Biography
Mel Benson is president of Mel E. Benson Management
Services Inc., an international management consulting firm based in
Calgary, Alberta. In 2000, Mr. Benson retired from a major
international oil company. Mr. Benson is an owner of Tenex
Energy Inc. and a director of Winalta Inc. and Fort McKay Group of
Companies, a community trust. He is also a director of Hull Child
and Family Services, a non-profit organization.
Dominic D’Alessandro was president and chief executive officer of
Manulife Financial Corporation from 1994 to 2009 and is currently
a director of CGI Group Inc. and Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce. For his many business accomplishments,
Mr. D’Alessandro was recognized as Canada’s Most Respected CEO
in 2004 and CEO of the Year in 2002, and was inducted into the
Insurance Hall of Fame in 2008. Mr. D’Alessandro is an officer of
the Order of Canada and has been appointed as a Commendatore
of the Order of the Star of Italy. In 2009, he received the Woodrow
Wilson Award for Corporate Citizenship and in 2005 was granted
the Horatio Alger Award for community leadership.
Mr. D’Alessandro is an FCA, and holds a Bachelor of Science from
Concordia University in Montreal. He has also been awarded
honorary doctorates from York University, the University of Ottawa,
Ryerson University and Concordia University.
John Ferguson is founder and chairman of the board of Princeton
Developments Ltd. and Princeton Ventures Ltd. Mr. Ferguson is also
a director of Fountain Tire Ltd. and Strategy Summit Ltd. and until
March 1, 2012 was a director of the Royal Bank of Canada. In
addition, he is a member of the Order of Canada, a board member
of the Alberta Bone and Joint Institute, an advisory member of the
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Honorary Colonel – South
Alberta Light Horse and chancellor emeritus and chairman emeritus
of the University of Alberta. Mr. Ferguson is a fellow of the Alberta
Institute of Chartered Accountants and of the Institute of Corporate
Directors.
W. Douglas Ford was chief executive, refining and marketing for BP
p.l.c. from 1998 to 2002 and was responsible for the refining,
marketing and transportation network of BP as well as the aviation
fuels business, the marine business and BP shipping. Mr. Ford
currently serves as a director of USG Corporation and Air Products
and Chemicals Inc. He is also a member of the board of trustees of
the University of Notre Dame.
Richard George is CEO of Suncor Energy Inc. He currently serves as
a director of Canadian Pacific Railway and he chaired the 2008
Governor General’s Canadian Leadership Conference. Mr. George
was named a member of the Order of Canada in 2007.
Paul Haseldonckx was a director of Petro-Canada and a member of
the management board of Veba Oel AG, Germany’s largest
downstream company, including Aral AG gas stations in Europe.
Mr. Haseldonckx represented Veba’s interests at the board of the
Cerro Negro joint venture, an in situ oil sands development
including an upgrader, during the construction and early production
phase. Mr. Haseldonckx holds a Master of Science and completed
Executive Programs at INSEAD, Fontainebleau and IMD, Lausanne.
John R. Huff (1)(2)
Texas, USA
Director since 1998
Independent
John Huff is chairman of Oceaneering International Inc., an oilfield
services company. He also serves as director of KBR Inc.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
71
Suncor Directors
Name and Jurisdiction of Residence
Period Served and
Independence
Jacques Lamarre (1)(2)
Quebec, Canada
Director since 2009
Independent
Brian MacNeill (3)(4)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 2009
(Petro-Canada 1995 to July 31,
2009)
Independent
Maureen McCaw (1)(2)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 2009
(Petro-Canada 2004 to July 31,
2009)
Independent
Michael W. O’Brien (3)(4)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 2002
Independent
James Simpson (1)(4)
Alberta, Canada
Director since 2009
(Petro-Canada 2004 to July 31,
2009)
Independent
Eira M. Thomas (3)(4)
British Columbia, Canada
Director since 2006
Independent
Biography
Jacques Lamarre is a strategic advisor to the law firm Heenan
Blaikie LLP. He was the president and chief executive officer of SNC-
Lavalin from 1996 to 2009. Mr. Lamarre is an Officer of the Order
of Canada and a founding member and past chair of the
Commonwealth Business Council. He is also past chair of the board
of directors of the Conference Board of Canada and a founding
member of the World Economic Forum’s Governors for
Engineering & Construction. Currently, he serves as director of the
Royal Bank of Canada, PPP Canada Inc. and the Canadian Institute
for Advanced Research, and as a member of the Engineering
Institute of Canada, Engineers Canada and the Ordre des ing ´enieurs
du Qu ´ebec. Mr. Lamarre holds a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of
Arts and Science in Civil Engineering from Universit ´e Laval in
Quebec City. He also completed Harvard University’s Executive
Development Program. In addition, Mr. Lamarre holds honorary
doctorates from the University of Waterloo, the University of
Moncton and Universit ´e Laval.
Brian MacNeill is a Chartered Accountant, a Certified Public
Accountant and holds a Bachelor of Commerce. Previously,
Mr. MacNeill was a director and chairman of the board of Petro-
Canada. He is a director of West Fraser Timber Co. Ltd., Capital
Power Corp. and Oilsands Quest Inc. Mr. MacNeill is a member of
the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Financial
Executives Institute. He is also a fellow of the Alberta Institute of
Chartered Accountants and of the Institute of Corporate Directors.
Mr. MacNeill is also a member of the Order of Canada.
Maureen McCaw was a director of Petro-Canada and is past
president (Edmonton) of Leger Marketing, formerly Criterion
Research Corp., a company she founded in 1986. Ms. McCaw holds
a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Alberta and an Institute of
Corporate Directors certification (ICD.D). In addition to being
president of Tinnakilly Inc. and a director of the Edmonton
International Airport, Women Building Futures, Nature Conservancy
of Canada, Alberta chapter, and Royal Alexandra Hospital, she is
also managing partner at Prism Ventures. She is a past chair of the
Edmonton Chamber of Commerce and serves on a number of
Alberta boards and advisory committees.
Michael O’Brien served as executive vice president, corporate
development, and chief financial officer of Suncor Energy Inc.
before retiring in 2002. Mr. O’Brien is lead director of Shaw
Communications Inc. In addition, he is past chair of the board of
trustees for Nature Conservancy Canada, past chair of the Canadian
Petroleum Products Institute and past chair of Canada’s Voluntary
Challenge for Global Climate Change.
James Simpson was a director of Petro-Canada and is past president
of Chevron Canada Resources (oil and gas). He serves as lead
director for Canadian Utilities Limited and is on its Corporate
Governance, Nomination, Compensation and Succession Committee
and Risk Review Committee, as well as being the chairman for the
Audit Committee. Mr. Simpson holds a Bachelor of Science and
Master of Science, and graduated from the Program for Senior
Executives at M.I.T.’s Sloan School of Business. He is also past
chairman of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers and
past vice chairman of the Canadian Association of the World
Petroleum Congresses.
Eira Thomas is a Canadian geologist with over twenty years of
experience in the Canadian diamond business, including her
previous roles as vice president of Aber Resources, now Harry
Winston Diamond Corp., and as founder and CEO of Stornoway
Diamond Corp. Currently, Ms. Thomas is a director of Lucara
Diamond Corp. and Strongbow Exploration Inc. She also serves on
the board of the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada.
72
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Suncor Directors
Name and Jurisdiction of Residence
Period Served and
Independence
Biography
Steven W. Williams
Alberta, Canada
Director since December 2011
Non-independent, management
Steve Williams has served as the chief operating officer of Suncor
Energy Inc. since 2007. He was appointed as President of Suncor
Energy Inc. in December of 2011. Mr. Williams is a fellow of the
Institute of Chemical Engineers and is a member of the Institute of
Directors. He is also co-chair of the Oil Sands Leadership Initiative
(OSLI), a member of the CEO Committee of Syncrude Canada
Limited, and a member of the Business Advisory Council, School of
Business at the University of Alberta. In October of 2010, he was
appointed to the Alberta Government Oil and Gas Economics
Advisory Council.
(1) Human Resources and Compensation Committee
(2) Environment, Health, Safety and Sustainable Development Committee
(3) Audit Committee
(4) Governance Committee
Executive Officers
The following individuals are the executive officers of Suncor:
Name
Jurisdiction of Residence
Office
Richard L. George
Steven W. Williams
Bart W. Demosky
Eric Axford
Boris Jackman
Mark Little
Mike MacSween
Steve Reynish
Paul Gardner
Francois Langlois
Janice Odegaard
Kris Smith
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Ontario, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Alberta, Canada
Chief Executive Officer
President and Chief Operating Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Executive Vice President, Business Services
Executive Vice President, Refining and Marketing
Executive Vice President, Oil Sands and In Situ
Executive Vice President, Major Projects
Executive Vice President, Oil Sands Ventures
Senior Vice President, Human Resources
Senior Vice President, Exploration and Production
Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary
Senior Vice President, Supply, Trading and Corporate Development
As at December 31, 2011, the directors and executive officers of Suncor as a group beneficially owned, or controlled or
directed, directly or indirectly, common shares of Suncor representing less than 1% of the then outstanding common shares.
Cease Trade Orders, Bankruptcies, Penalties or Sanctions
To the best of our knowledge, having made due inquiry, we confirm that, as at the date hereof, no director or executive officer
of Suncor is or has been within the last ten years a director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer of a company that:
(a) was the subject of a cease trade or similar order, or an order that denied the relevant issuer access to any exemption under
Canadian securities legislation that was in effect for a period of more than 30 consecutive days while the director or officer was
acting in that capacity, other than Mr. MacNeill, who is presently a director of Oilsands Quest Inc. (Oilsands Quest), a company
that has been subject to a cease trade order of the NYSE Amex since November 2011 for failure to meet certain NYSE Amex
continued listing standards; or (b) was subject to a cease trade order or similar order, or an order that denied the relevant
company access to any exemption under securities legislation that was in effect for a period of more than 30 consecutive days,
that was issued after the director or executive officer ceased to be a director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer and
which resulted from an event that occurred while that person was acting in that capacity.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
73
To the best of our knowledge, having made due inquiry, we confirm that, as at the date hereof, no director or executive officer
of Suncor, or any of their respective personal holding companies, nor any shareholders holding a sufficient number of securities
to affect materially the control of Suncor: (a) is, or has been within the last ten years, a director or executive officer of any
company (including Suncor) that, while that person was acting in that capacity, or within a year of that person ceasing to act in
that capacity, became bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency or was subject to or
instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise with creditors or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed
to hold its assets, other than: (i) Mr. Ford, a director of Suncor who is currently a director of USG Corporation, which was in
bankruptcy protection until June 2006 and who was also a director of United Airlines (until February 2006), which was in
Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection until February 2006; and (ii) Mr. MacNeill, a director of Suncor who is currently a director of
Oilsands Quest, which is currently operating under the protection of the Canada Companies’ Creditors Arrangement Act; or
(b) has, within the last ten years, become bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency
or become subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or compromise with creditors, or had a receiver, receiver
manager or trustee appointed to hold the assets of the director, executive officer or shareholder.
No director or executive officer of Suncor has been subject to: (a) any penalties or sanctions imposed by a court relating to
securities  legislation  or  by  a  securities  regulatory  authority  or  has  entered  into  a  settlement  agreement  with  a  securities
regulatory  authority;  or (b)  any  other  penalties  or  sanctions  imposed  by  a  court  or  regulatory  body  that  would  likely  be
considered important to a reasonable investor in making an investment decision.
AUDIT COMMITTEE INFORMATION
The Audit Committee Mandate is attached as Schedule ‘‘A’’ to this AIF.
Composition of the Audit Committee
The  Audit  Committee  is  comprised  of  Mr.  O’Brien  (Chairman),  Mr.  D’Alessandro,  Mr.  MacNeill,  Mr.  Haseldonckx  and
Ms. Thomas. All members are independent and financially literate. The education and expertise of each member is described in
the Directors and Executive Officers section of this AIF.
For  the  purpose  of  making  appointments  to  the  company’s  Audit  Committee,  and  in  addition  to  the  independence
requirements, all directors nominated to the Audit Committee must meet the test of financial literacy as determined in the
judgment  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  Also,  at  least  one  director  so  nominated  must  meet  the  test  of  financial  expert  as
determined  in  the  judgment  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  The  designated  financial  experts  on  the  Audit  Committee  are
Mr. O’Brien and Mr. D’Alessandro.
Financial Literacy
Financial literacy can be generally defined as the ability to read and understand a balance sheet, an income statement and a
cash flow statement. In assessing a potential appointee’s level of financial literacy, the Board of Directors must evaluate the
totality of the individual’s education and experience, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
the level of the person’s accounting or financial education, including whether the person has earned an advanced degree in
finance or accounting;
whether the person is a professional accountant, or the equivalent, in good standing, and the length of time that the person
actively has practiced as a professional accountant, or the equivalent;
whether the person is certified or otherwise identified as having accounting or financial experience by a recognized private
body that establishes and administers standards in respect of such expertise, whether that person is in good standing with
the recognized private body, and the length of time that the person has been actively certified or identified as having
this expertise;
whether the person has served as a principal financial officer, controller or principal accounting officer of a corporation that,
at the time the person held such position, was required to file reports pursuant to securities laws and, if so, for how long;
the  person’s  specific  duties  while  serving  as  a  public  accountant,  auditor,  principal  financial  officer,  controller,  principal
accounting officer or position involving the performance of similar functions;
the person’s level of familiarity and experience with all applicable laws and regulations regarding the preparation of financial
statements that must be included in reports filed under securities laws;
the level and amount of the person’s direct experience reviewing, preparing, auditing or analyzing financial statements that
must be included in reports filed under provisions of securities laws;
74
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
the person’s past or current membership on one or more audit committees of companies that, at the time the person held
such membership, were required to file reports pursuant to provisions of securities laws;
the person’s level of familiarity and experience with the use and analysis of financial statements of public companies; and
whether the person has any other relevant qualifications or experience that would assist him or her in understanding and
evaluating the company’s financial statements and other financial information and to make knowledgeable and thorough
inquiries whether the financial statements fairly present the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the
company  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  or  whether  the  financial  statements  and  other
financial  information,  taken  together,  fairly  present  the  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows  of
the company.
Audit Committee Financial Expert
An ‘‘Audit Committee Financial Expert’’ means a person who, in the judgment of the company’s Board of Directors, has the
following attributes:
(a) an understanding of Canadian generally accepted accounting principles and financial statements;
(b)
(c)
the ability to assess the general application of such principles in connection with the accounting for estimates, accruals,
and reserves;
experience  preparing,  auditing,  or  analyzing  or  evaluating  financial  statements  that  present  a  breadth  and  level  of
complexity of accounting issues that are generally comparable to the breadth and complexity of issues that can reasonably
be expected to be raised by Suncor’s financial statements, or experience actively supervising one or more persons engaged
in such activities;
(d) an understanding of internal controls and procedures for financial reporting; and
(e) an understanding of audit committee functions.
A person shall have acquired the attributes referred to in items (a) through (e) inclusive above through:
(a) education and experience as a principal financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller, public accountant or
auditor, or experience in one or more positions that involve the performance of similar functions;
(b) experience  actively  supervising  a  principal  financial  officer,  principal  accounting  officer,  controller,  public  accountant,
auditor or person performing similar functions;
(c)
experience overseeing or assessing the performance of companies or public accountants with respect to the preparation,
auditing or evaluation of financial statements; or
(d) other relevant experience.
Audit Committee Pre-Approval Policies for Non-Audit Services
Our Audit Committee has considered whether the provision of services other than audit services is compatible with maintaining
the auditors’ independence and has a policy governing the provision of these services. A copy of our policy relating to Audit
Committee approval of fees paid to our auditors, in compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and applicable Canadian
law, is attached as Schedule ‘‘B’’ to this AIF.
Fees Paid to Auditors
Fees payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in 2011 and 2010, the nature of which are described below, were as follows:
($ thousands)
Audit Fees
Audit-Related Fees
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
Total
2011
6 145
423
50
9
6 627
2010
4 873
637
—
4
5 514
Audit Fees were paid for professional services rendered by the auditors for the audit of Suncor’s annual financial statements, or
services  provided  in  connection  with  statutory  and  regulatory  filings  or  engagements.  Audit-Related  Fees  were  paid  for
professional services rendered by the auditors for the review of quarterly financial statements and for the preparation of reports
on specified procedures as they relate to joint venture audits and attest services not required by statute or regulation. Tax Fees
for corporate tax filings and tax planning were paid in a foreign jurisdiction where Suncor has limited activity. All Other Fees
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
75
were subscriptions to auditor-provided and supported tools. The services described for Audit Fees, Audit-Related Fees and Tax
Fees and All Other Fees were approved by the Audit Committee pursuant to paragraph (c)(7)(i) of Rule 2-01 of Regulation S-X.
See Schedule ‘‘B’’ in this AIF for the company’s Policy and Procedures for Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS AND REGULATORY ACTIONS
There are no legal proceedings to which we are or were a party, or of which any of our property is or was the subject since the
beginning  of  the  company’s  most  recently  completed  financial  year,  nor  are  there  any  proceedings  known  by  us  to  be
contemplated, that involve a claim for damages exceeding 10% of our current assets. In addition, there have not been any
(a) penalties or sanctions imposed against the company by a court relating to securities legislation or by a securities regulatory
authority during our financial year, (b) penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body against the company that
would likely be considered important to a reasonable investor in making an investment decision, or (c) settlement agreements
entered into by the company before a court relating to securities legislation or with a securities regulatory authority during the
financial year.
INTEREST OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
No director or executive officer, or any associate or affiliate of these persons has, or has had, any material interests, direct or
indirect, in any transaction or any proposed transaction that has materially affected or is reasonably expected to materially
affect us or any of our affiliates within the three most recently completed financial years or during the current financial year.
TRANSFER AGENT AND REGISTRAR
The transfer agent and registrar for our common shares is Computershare Trust Company of Canada at its principal offices in
Calgary, Alberta, Montreal, Quebec, Toronto, Ontario and Vancouver, British Columbia and Computershare Trust Company Inc.
in Denver, Colorado.
MATERIAL CONTRACTS
During the year ended December 31, 2011, we have not entered into any contracts, nor are there any contracts still in effect,
that are material to our business, other than contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business, and that are not required
to be filed by Section 12.2 of National Instrument 51-102 Continuous Disclosure Obligations.
INTERESTS OF EXPERTS
Reserves and resources estimates contained in this AIF are based in part upon reports prepared by GLJ and Sproule, Suncor’s
independent qualified reserves evaluators. The 2011 audited Consolidated Financial Statements of the company have been
audited  by  PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  Suncor’s  auditors.  As  at  the  date  hereof,  none  of  the  partners,  employees  or
consultants of GLJ or Sproule, respectively, as a group, through registered or beneficial interests, directly or indirectly, held or
are entitled to receive more than 1% of any class of our outstanding securities, including the securities of our associates and
affiliates, and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP has advised Suncor’s Audit Committee that they are independent with respect to
Suncor within the meaning of the Rules of Professional Conduct of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Alberta.
DISCLOSURE PURSUANT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE
As a Canadian issuer listed on the NYSE, we are not required to comply with most of the NYSE rules and listing standards and
instead may comply with domestic requirements. As a foreign private issuer, we are only required to comply with four of the
NYSE rules: (i) have an audit committee that satisfies the requirements of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended; (ii) the Chief Executive Officer must promptly notify the NYSE in writing after an executive officer becomes aware of
any material non-compliance with the applicable NYSE rules; (iii) provide a brief description of any significant differences
between our corporate governance practices and those followed by U.S. companies listed under the NYSE; and (iv) provide
annual and, as required, written affirmations of compliance with applicable NYSE Corporate Governance rules. The company
has disclosed in its 2012 management proxy circular, which is available on our website at www.suncor.com, that, in certain
instances, it is not required to obtain shareholder approval for material amendments to equity compensation plans and that
76
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Suncor, while in compliance with the independence requirements of applicable securities laws in Canada (specifically National
Instrument 52-110 Audit Committees) and the U.S. (specifically Rule 10A-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934), it has not
adopted the director independence standards contained in Section 303A.02 of the NYSE’s Listed Company Manual. Except as
described herein, the company is in compliance with the NYSE corporate governance standards in all other significant respects.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Additional information, including directors’ and officers’ remuneration and indebtedness, principal holders of our securities,
securities authorized for issuance under equity compensation plans and interests of insiders in material transactions, where
applicable, is contained in our most recent management proxy circular for our most recent annual meeting of our shareholders
that involved the election of directors. Additional financial information is provided in our 2011 audited Consolidated Financial
Statements for our most recently completed financial year and in the MD&A.
Further information about Suncor, filed with Canadian securities commissions and the SEC, including periodic quarterly and
annual reports and the AIF/40-F is available online on SEDAR at www.sedar.com and on EDGAR at www.sec.gov. In addition,
our  Standards  of  Business  Conduct  Code  is  available  online  at  www.suncor.com.  Information  contained  in  or  otherwise
accessible through our website does not form part of this AIF, and is not incorporated into the AIF by reference.
ADVISORY – FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION
This AIF contains certain forward-looking statements and other information based on information available at the time the
statement  was  made  and  in  light  of  Suncor’s  experience  and  perception  of  historical  trends,  including  expectations  and
assumptions  concerning  the  accuracy  of  reserves  and  resources  estimates,  commodity  prices  and  interest  and  foreign
exchange  rates,  capital  efficiencies  and  cost-savings,  applicable  royalty  rates  and  tax  laws,  future  production  rates,  the
sufficiency of budgeted capital expenditures in carrying out planned activities, the availability and cost of labour and services,
and the receipt, in a timely manner, of regulatory and third-party approvals. In addition, all other statements that address
expectations  or  projections  about  the  future,  and  other  statements  and  information  about  Suncor’s  strategy  for  growth,
expected and future expenditures or investment decisions, commodity prices, costs, schedules, production volumes, operating
and financial results, future financing and capital activities, and expected impact of future commitments are forward-looking
statements. Some of the forward-looking statements and information may be identified by words like ‘‘expects’’, ‘‘anticipates’’,
‘‘estimates’’, ‘‘plans’’, ‘‘scheduled’’, ‘‘intends’’, ‘‘believes’’, ‘‘projects’’, ‘‘indicates’’, ‘‘could’’, ‘‘focus’’, ‘‘vision’’, ‘‘goal’’, ‘‘outlook’’,
‘‘proposed’’, ‘‘target’’, ‘‘objective’’, ‘‘continue’’ and similar expressions.
Forward-looking statements in this AIF include references to:
Suncor’s expectations about production volumes and the performance of its existing assets, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
The TROTM process is expected to significantly reduce the area required for tailings management, increase the speed at which
Suncor is able to reclaim its tailings ponds, enable Suncor to meet the requirements of the Tailings Directive issued by the
ERCB in 2009, eliminate the need for new tailings ponds at existing mining operations, improve tailings management going
forward and, in the years ahead, reduce the number of tailings ponds presently in operation;
Gross design capacities for Suncor’s operated and non-operated facilities;
Suncor’s plans to develop its proved undeveloped reserves and its probable undeveloped reserves;
Production estimates for 2012; and
The company’s expectation that, as production from the Firebag Stage 3 expansion increases, the Firebag SOR will decrease.
The anticipated duration and impact of planned maintenance events, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Remaining H2S remediation for Terra Nova that is anticipated to be completed concurrent with the dockside maintenance
program, which includes the replacement of the FPSO swivel, scheduled to commence in the third quarter of 2012; and
The 18-week off-station maintenance program for the White Rose FPSO scheduled to commence in the second quarter of
2012, primarily to address issues with the FPSO propulsion system.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
77
Suncor’s expectations about where future capital expenditures will be directed, the timing for completion of growth and other
significant projects, and the results of such projects, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Suncor’s ten-year growth strategy to increase production to over one million boe/d by 2020, which is expected to include
arrangements with respective joint venture owners for the development of the Fort Hills and Joslyn oil sands mining projects
and the restart of construction of the Voyageur upgrader, the continued development of the company’s Firebag and MacKay
River in situ operations, and investments in and ongoing production from international and offshore operations;
The company’s expectations that the Voyageur South and Audet leases can be developed using mining techniques, and that
the Meadow Creek, Lewis, Chard and Kirby leases can be developed using in situ techniques;
Suncor’s plans for the Firebag Stage 4 expansion, scheduled to be completed in 2013, which include two well pads, a central
processing facility and two cogeneration units;
The design capacities for the Firebag Stage 3 and Stage 4 expansions are 62,500 bbls/d of bitumen each;
Suncor’s expectation that the commissioning of the cogeneration units for Firebag Stage 3 will be completed in the first
quarter of 2012;
Suncor’s integrated plans for the entire Firebag operation, such that steam and electricity generated by any of the central
processing facilities and cogeneration units can be used to power operations at any of the well pads, and that bitumen
extracted from any well pad can be processed at any of the central processing facilities;
Plans for centrifuge technology at Syncrude that separates water from tailings;
Preliminary  designs  for  Fort  Hills  plan  for  164,000  bbls/d  of  bitumen  production  (gross)  and  for  Joslyn  North  plan  for
100,000 bbls/d of bitumen production (gross);
The company’s expectations that bitumen production from the Fort Hills and Joslyn mines will be upgraded into SCO and
other products by the Voyageur upgrader, and preliminary design plans for 200,000 bbls/d (gross) of upgrading capacity for
the Voyageur upgrader;
Development plans for the HSEU, which include drilling up to two additional producing wells and five water injection wells in
a subsea glory hole;
A water injection well to support initial production from the West White Rose Extension that is expected be completed in the
second quarter of 2012;
The plans of the joint venture owners of Hebron to make a decision to sanction the project in late 2012, and the company’s
expectations that initial production will occur in late 2017;
Plans for Hebron that include a concrete GBS, integrated topsides deck, 1.2 mmbbls of oil storage capacity, and 52 well slots,
with a gross oil production capacity of 150,000 bbls/d;
Development plans for Golden Eagle, which include an initial gross production rate of 70,000 boe/d from 20 development
wells, development cost of £2 billion (Cdn$3.3 billion) and the company’s expectations that first production will occur late in
2014 or early 2015;
Plans for the drilling of the third appraisal well for the Beta discovery, which is scheduled to commence in the second quarter
of 2012;
Plans to drill an exploration well in the Romeo prospect; and
Suncor’s future development costs and expected development activities identified in the Statement of Reserves Data and
Other Oil and Gas Information section of this AIF.
78
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Also:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Anticipated abandonment and reclamation costs;
Anticipated royalty and tax rates and the impact of these rates on Suncor;
Suncor’s expectations that the cost of meeting new environmental and climate change regulations will not be so high as to
cause material disadvantage to the company or material damage to its competitive positioning, and that GHG regulation will
evolve with a moderate carbon price signal, and that the price regime will progress cautiously;
Suncor’s expectations that it will continue to engage the appropriate governmental bodies in meaningful dialogue in an
effort to develop a harmonized system for GHG emissions regulations that focuses on achieving actual reduction goals and
sustainable resource development;
Suncor’s belief that it will have sufficient funds available to fund its planned expenditures for 2012;
Suncor’s belief that existing cash balances, internally generated cash flows and existing credit facilities are sufficient to fund
future development activities;
Suncor’s estimates for its compliance costs for GHG regulations in Alberta will be between $10 million and $15 million; and
Limitations on the interim BVM, as recently enacted.
Forward-looking statements and information are not guarantees of future performance and involve a number of risks and
uncertainties, some that are similar to other oil and gas companies and some that are unique to Suncor. Suncor’s actual results
may differ materially from those expressed or implied by its forward-looking statements, so readers are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on them.
The financial and operating performance of the company’s reportable operating segments, specifically Oil Sands, Exploration
and Production, and Refining and Marketing, may be affected by a number of factors:
Factors  that  affect  our  Oil  Sands  segment  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  volatility  in  the  prices  for  crude  oil  and  other
production, and the related impacts of fluctuating light/heavy and sweet/sour crude oil differentials; changes in the demand
for refinery feedstock and diesel fuel, including the possibility that refiners that process our proprietary production will be
closed, experience equipment failure or other accidents; our ability to operate facilities reliably in order to meet production
targets;  the  output  of  newly commissioned  facilities,  the  performance  of  which  may  be  difficult  to  predict  during  initial
operations; the possibility that completed maintenance activities may not improve operational performance or the output of
related facilities; our dependence on pipeline capacity and other logistical constraints, which may affect our ability to distribute
our products to market; our ability to finance growth and sustaining capital expenditures; the availability of bitumen feedstock
for  upgrading  operations,  which  can  be  negatively  affected  by  poor  ore  grade  quality,  unplanned  mine  equipment  and
extraction plant maintenance, tailings storage, in situ reservoir and equipment performance, or the unavailability of third-party
bitumen;  inflationary  pressures  on  operating  costs,  including  labour,  natural  gas  and  other  energy  sources  in  oil  sands
processes; our ability to complete projects, including planned maintenance events, both on time and on budget, which could
be impacted by competition from other projects (including other oil sands projects) for goods and services and demands on
infrastructure  in  Fort  McMurray  and  the  surrounding  area  (including  housing,  roads  and  schools);  risks  and  uncertainties
associated with obtaining regulatory and stakeholder approval for exploration and development activities; changes to royalty
and  tax  legislation  and  related  agreements  that  could  impact  our  business,  such  as  our  current  dispute  with  the  Alberta
Department of Energy in respect of the Bitumen Valuation Methodology Regulation; the potential for disruptions to operations
and construction projects as a result of our relationships with labour unions that represent employees at our facilities; and
changes to environmental regulations or legislation.
Factors that affect our Exploration and Production segment include, but are not limited to, volatility in crude oil and natural gas
prices; operational risks and uncertainties associated with oil and gas activities, including unexpected formations or pressures,
premature declines of reservoirs, fires, blow-outs, equipment failures and other accidents, uncontrollable flows of crude oil,
natural gas or well fluids, and pollution and other environmental risks; the possibility that completed maintenance activities
may not improve operational performance or the output of related facilities; adverse weather conditions, which could disrupt
output  from  producing  assets  or  impact  drilling  programs,  resulting  in  increased  costs  and/or  delays  in  bringing  on  new
production;  political,  economic  and  socio-economic  risks  associated  with  Suncor’s  foreign  operations,  including  the
unpredictability of operating in Libya and the possibility that operations in Syria may be constrained by civil and political unrest;
risks  and  uncertainties  associated  with  obtaining  regulatory  and  stakeholder  approval  for  exploration  and  development
activities; the potential for disruptions to operations and construction projects as a result of our relationships with labour
unions that represent employees at our facilities; and market demand for mineral rights and producing properties, potentially
leading to losses on disposition or increased property acquisition costs.
Factors that affect our Refining and Marketing segment include, but are not limited to, fluctuations in demand and supply for
refined products that impact the company’s margins; market competition, including potential new market entrants; our ability
to reliably operate refining and marketing facilities in order to meet production or sales targets; the possibility that completed
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
79
maintenance activities may not improve operational performance or the output of related facilities; risks and uncertainties
affecting construction or planned maintenance schedules, including the availability of labour and other impacts of competing
projects drawing on the same resources during the same time period; and the potential for disruptions to operations and
construction projects as a result of our relationships with labour unions or employee associations that represent employees at
our refineries and distribution facilities.
Additional risks, uncertainties and other factors that could influence financial and operating performance of all of Suncor’s
operating  segments  and  activities  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  changes  in  general  economic,  market  and  business
conditions, such as commodity prices, interest rates and currency exchange rates; fluctuations in supply and demand for
Suncor’s products; the successful and timely implementation of capital projects, including growth projects and regulatory
projects; competitive actions of other companies, including increased competition from other oil and gas companies or from
companies  that  provide  alternative  sources  of  energy;  labour  and  material  shortages;  actions  by  government  authorities,
including the imposition of taxes or changes to fees and royalties, and changes in environmental and other regulations; the
ability and willingness of parties with whom we have material relationships to perform their obligations to us; the occurrence of
unexpected  events  such  as  fires,  equipment  failures  and  other  similar  events  affecting  Suncor  or  other  parties  whose
operations or assets directly or indirectly affect Suncor; the potential for security breaches of Suncor’s information systems by
computer hackers or cyberterrorists, and the unavailability or failure of such systems to perform as anticipated as a result of
such breaches; our ability to find new oil and gas reserves that can be developed economically; the accuracy of Suncor’s
reserves, resources and future production estimates; market instability affecting Suncor’s ability to borrow in the capital debt
markets at acceptable rates; maintaining an optimal debt to cash flow ratio; the success of the company’s risk management
activities using derivatives and other financial instruments; the cost of compliance with current and future environmental laws;
risks and uncertainties associated with closing a transaction for the purchase or sale of an oil and gas property, including
estimates of the final consideration to be paid or received, the ability of counterparties to comply with their obligations in a
timely manner and the receipt of any required regulatory or other third-party approvals outside of Suncor’s control that are
customary to transactions of this nature; the accuracy of cost estimates, some of which are provided at the conceptual or other
preliminary stage of projects and prior to commencement or conception of the detailed engineering that is needed to reduce
the margin of error and increase the level of accuracy; failure to realize anticipated synergies or cost-savings; risks regarding the
integration of Suncor and Petro-Canada after the merger; and incorrect assessments of the values of assets acquired and
liabilities assumed in the merger with Petro-Canada. The foregoing important factors are not exhaustive.
Many  of  these  risk  factors  and  other  assumptions  related  to  Suncor’s  forward-looking  statements  and  information  are
discussed in further detail throughout this AIF and in our MD&A. Readers are also referred to the risk factors and assumptions
described  in  other  documents  that  Suncor  files  from  time-to-time  with  securities  regulatory  authorities.  Copies  of  these
documents  are  available  without  charge  from  Suncor  at  150 – 6th  Avenue  S.W.,  Calgary,  Alberta,  T2P  3E3,  by  calling
1-800-558-9071, or by email request to info@suncor.com or by referring to SEDAR at www.sedar.com or by referring to
EDGAR at www.sec.gov. Information contained in or otherwise accessible through our website does not form a part of this AIF,
and is not incorporated into this AIF by reference.
80
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
SCHEDULE ‘‘A’’
AUDIT COMMITTEE MANDATE
The Audit Committee
The bylaws of Suncor Energy Inc. provide that the Board of Directors may establish Board committees to whom certain duties
may be delegated by the Board. The Board has established, among others, the Audit Committee, and has approved this
mandate, which sets out the objectives, functions and responsibilities of the Audit Committee.
Objectives
The Audit Committee assists the Board of Directors by:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Monitoring  the  effectiveness  and  integrity  of  the  Corporation’s  financial  reporting  systems,  management  information
systems and internal control systems, and by monitoring financial reports and other financial matters.
Selecting, monitoring and reviewing the independence and effectiveness of, and where appropriate replacing, subject to
shareholder approval as required by law, external auditors, and ensuring that external auditors are ultimately accountable to
the Board of Directors and to the shareholders of the Corporation.
Reviewing  the  effectiveness  of  the  internal  auditors,  excluding  the  Operations  Integrity  Audit  department,  which  is
specifically within the mandate of the Environment, Health and Safety Committee (references throughout this mandate to
‘‘Internal Audit’’ shall not include the Operations Integrity Audit department); and
Approving on behalf of the Board of Directors certain financial matters as delegated by the Board, including the matters
outlined in this mandate.
The Committee does not have decision-making authority, except in the very limited circumstances described herein or where
and to the extent that such authority is expressly delegated by the Board of Directors. The Committee conveys its findings and
recommendations to the Board of Directors for consideration and, where required, decision by the Board of Directors.
Constitution
The Terms of Reference of Suncor’s Board of Directors set out requirements for the composition of Board Committees and the
qualifications for committee membership, and specify that the Chair and membership of the committees are determined
annually by the Board. As required by Suncor’s bylaws, unless otherwise determined by resolution of the Board of Directors, a
majority of the members of a committee constitute a quorum for meetings of committees, and, in all other respects, each
committee determines its own rules of procedure.
Functions and Responsibilities
The Audit Committee has the following functions and responsibilities:
Internal Controls
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Inquire as to the adequacy of the Corporation’s system of internal controls, and review the evaluation of internal controls
by Internal Auditors, and the evaluation of financial and internal controls by external auditors.
Review management’s monitoring of compliance with the Corporation’s Standards of Business Conduct Code.
Establish procedures for the confidential submission by employees of complaints relating to any concerns with accounting,
internal  control,  auditing  or  Standards  of  Business  Conduct  Code  matters,  and  periodically  review  a  summary  of
complaints and their related resolution.
Review the findings of any significant examination by regulatory agencies concerning the Corporation’s financial matters.
Periodically  review  management’s  governance  processes  for  information  technology  resources,  to  assess  their
effectiveness  in  addressing  the  integrity,  the  protection  and  the  security  of  the  Corporation’s  electronic  information
systems and records.
6.
Review the management practices overseeing officers’ expenses and perquisites.
External and Internal Auditors
7.
Evaluate the performance of the external auditors and initiate and approve the engagement or termination of the external
auditors, subject to shareholder approval as required by applicable law.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
A-1
8.
9.
Review the audit scope and approach of the external auditors, and approve their terms of engagement and fees.
Review any relationships or services that may impact the objectivity and independence of the external auditor, including
annual review of the auditor’s written statement of all relationships between the auditor (including its affiliates) and the
Corporation; review and approve all engagements for non-audit services to be provided by external auditors or their
affiliates.
10. Review the external auditor’s quality control procedures including any material issues raised by the most recent quality
control review or peer review and any issues raised by a government authority or professional authority investigation of the
external auditor, providing details on actions taken by the firm to address such issues.
11. Review and approve the appointment or termination of the Head of Internal Audit, annually review a summary of the
remuneration of the Head of Internal Audit, and periodically review the performance and effectiveness of the Internal
Audit  function  including  compliance  with  The  Institute  of  Internal  Auditors’  International  Professional  Practices
Framework for Internal Auditing.
12. Review the Internal Audit Department Charter, and the plans, activities, organizational structure and qualifications of the
Internal Auditors, and monitor the department’s independence.
13. Provide an open avenue of communication between management, the Internal Auditors or the external auditors, and the
Board of Directors.
Financial Reporting and other Public Disclosure
14. Review the external auditor’s management comment letter and management’s responses thereto, and inquire as to any
disagreements between management and external auditors or restrictions imposed by management on external auditors.
Review any unadjusted differences brought to the attention of management by the external auditor and the resolution
thereof.
15. Review with management and the external auditors the financial materials and other disclosure documents referred to in
paragraph 16, including any significant financial reporting issues, the presentation and impact of significant risks and
uncertainties, and key estimates and judgments of management that may be material to financial reporting, including
alternative treatments and their impacts.
16. Review  and  approve  the  Corporation’s  interim  Consolidated  Financial  Statements  and  accompanying  management’s
discussion  and  analysis  (MD&A).  Review  and  make  recommendations  to  the  Board  of  Directors  on  approval  of  the
Corporation’s annual audited Consolidated Financial Statements and MD&A, Annual Information Form and Form 40-F.
Review  other  material  annual  and  quarterly  disclosure  documents  or  regulatory  filings  containing  or  accompanying
audited or unaudited financial information.
17. Authorize any changes to the categories of documents and information requiring audit committee review or approval
prior to external disclosure, as set out in the Corporation’s policy on external communication and disclosure of material
information.
18. Review any change in the Corporation’s accounting policies.
19. Review with legal counsel any legal matters having a significant impact on the financial reports.
Oil and Gas Reserves
20. Review with reasonable frequency Suncor’s procedures for:
(A)
the  disclosure,  in  accordance  with  applicable  law,  of  information  with  respect  to  Suncor’s  oil  and  gas  activities,
including procedures for complying with applicable disclosure requirements; and
(B) providing information to the qualified reserves evaluators (the Evaluators) engaged annually by Suncor to evaluate
Suncor’s reserves data for the purpose of public disclosure of such data in accordance with applicable law.
21. Annually  approve  the  appointment  and  terms  of  engagement  of  the  Evaluators,  including  the  qualifications  and
independence of the Evaluators; review and approve any proposed change in the appointment of the Evaluators, and the
reasons  for  such  proposed  change,  including  whether  there  have  been  disputes  between  the  Evaluators
and management.
22. Annually  review  Suncor’s  reserves  data  and  the  report  of  the  Evaluators  thereon,  and  annually  review  and  make
recommendations to the Board of Directors on the approval of:
(i)
(ii)
the content and filing by the company of a statement of reserves data (the Statement) and the report thereon of
management and the directors to be included in or filed with the Statement, and
the  filing  of  the  report  of  the  Evaluators  to  be  included  in  or  filed  with  the  Statement,  all  in  accordance  with
applicable law.
A-2
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Risk Management
23. Periodically  review  the  policies  and  practices  of  the  Corporation  respecting  cash  management,  financial  derivatives,
financing, credit, insurance, taxation, commodities trading and related matters. Oversee the Board’s risk management
governance model by conducting periodic reviews with the objective of appropriately reflecting the principal risks of the
Corporation’s business in the mandate of the Board and its committees.
Pension Plan
24. Review the assets, financial performance, funding status, investment strategy and actuarial reports of the Corporation’s
pension plan including the terms of engagement of the plan’s actuary and fund manager.
Security
25. Review on a summary basis any significant physical security management, information technology, security or business
recovery risks and strategies to address such risks.
Other Matters
26. Conduct any independent investigations into any matters which come under its scope of responsibilities.
27. Review any recommended appointees to the office of Chief Financial Officer.
28. Review and/or approve other financial matters delegated specifically to it by the Board of Directors.
Reporting to the Board
29. Report to the Board of Directors on the activities of the Audit Committee with respect to the foregoing matters as required
at each Board meeting and at any other time deemed appropriate by the Committee or upon request of the Board
of Directors.
Approved by resolution of the Board of Directors on February 1, 2011.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
A-3
SCHEDULE ‘‘B’’
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
POLICY AND PROCEDURES FOR PRE-APPROVAL
OF AUDIT AND NON-AUDIT SERVICES
Pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and Multilateral Instrument 52-110, the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) and the Ontario Securities Commission respectively have adopted final rules relating to audit committees and auditor
independence.  These  rules  require  the  Audit  Committee  of  Suncor  Energy  Inc  (‘‘Suncor’’)  to  be  responsible  for  the
appointment, compensation, retention and oversight of the work of its independent auditor. The Audit Committee must also
pre-approve any audit and non-audit services performed by the independent auditor or such services must be entered into
pursuant to pre-approval policies and procedures established by the Audit Committee pursuant to this policy.
I.
STATEMENT OF POLICY
The Audit Committee has adopted this Policy and Procedures for Pre-Approval of Audit and Non-Audit Services (the Policy),
which sets forth the procedures and the conditions pursuant to which services proposed to be performed by the independent
auditor will be pre-approved. The procedures outlined in this Policy are applicable to all Audit, Audit-Related, Tax Services and
All Other Services provided by the independent auditor.
II. RESPONSIBILITY
Responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  this  Policy  rests  with  the  Audit  Committee.  The  Audit  Committee  delegates  its
responsibility for administration of this policy to management. The Audit Committee shall not delegate its responsibilities to
pre-approve services performed by the independent auditor to management.
III. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these policies and procedures and any pre-approvals:
(a) Audit Services include services that are a necessary part of the annual audit process and any activity that is a necessary
procedure used by the auditor in reaching an opinion on the financial statements as is required under generally accepted
auditing standards (GAAS), including technical reviews to reach audit judgment on accounting standards. The term Audit
Services is broader than those services strictly required to perform an audit pursuant to GAAS and include such services as:
(i)
(ii)
The issuance of comfort letters and consents in connections with offerings of securities;
The performance of domestic and foreign statutory audits;
(iii) Attest services required by statute or regulation;
(iv)
Internal control reviews; and
(v) Assistance  with  and  review  of  documents  filed  with  the  Canadian  Securities  Administrators,  the  SEC and  other
regulators having jurisdiction over Suncor and its subsidiaries, and responding to comments from such regulators;
(b) Audit-Related  Services  are  assurance  (e.g.  due  diligence  services)  and  related  services  traditionally  performed  by  the
external auditors, which are reasonably related to the performance of the audit or review of financial statements and not
categorized under Audit Services for disclosure purposes.
Audit-Related Services include:
(i)
Employee benefit plan audits, including audits of employee pension plans;
(ii) Due diligence related to mergers and acquisitions;
(iii) Consultations  and  audits  in  connection  with  acquisitions,  including  evaluating  the  accounting  treatment  for
proposed transactions;
(iv)
Internal control reviews;
(v) Attest services not required by statute or regulation; and
(vi) Consultations regarding financial accounting and reporting standards.
Non-financial operational audits are not Audit-Related Services.
(c)
Tax Services include, but are not limited to, services related to the preparation of corporate and/or personal tax filings, tax
due diligence as it pertains to mergers, acquisitions and/or divestitures, and tax planning; and
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
B-1
(d) All Other Services consist of any other work that is neither an Audit Service, nor an Audit-Related Service nor a Tax Service,
the provision of which by the independent auditor is not expressly prohibited by Rule 2-01(c)(7) of Regulation S-X under
the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. (See Appendix A for a summary of the prohibited services.)
IV. GENERAL POLICY
The following general policy applies to all services provided by the independent auditor.
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
All services to be provided by the independent auditor will require specific pre-approval by the Audit Committee. The Audit
Committee will not approve engaging the independent auditor for services that can reasonably be classified as Tax Services
or All Other Services unless a compelling business case can be made for retaining the independent auditor instead of another
service provider.
The Audit Committee will not provide pre-approval for services to be provided in excess of twelve months from the date of
the pre-approval, unless the Audit Committee specifically provides for a different period.
The Audit Committee has delegated authority to pre-approve services with an estimated cost not exceeding $100,000 in
accordance with this Policy to the Chairman of the Audit Committee. The delegate member of the Audit Committee must
report any pre-approval decision to the Audit Committee at its next meeting.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee may delegate his authority to pre-approve services to another sitting member of the
Audit  Committee  provided  that  the  recipient  has  also  been  delegated  the  authority  to  act  as  Chairman  of  the  Audit
Committee  in  the  Chairman’s  absence.  A  resolution  of  the  Audit  Committee  is  required  to  evidence  the  Chairman’s
delegation of authority to another Audit Committee member under this policy.
The Audit Committee will, from time to time, but no less than annually, review and pre-approve the services that may be
provided by the independent auditor.
The Audit Committee must establish pre-approval fee levels for services provided by the independent auditor on an annual
basis. On at least a quarterly basis, the Audit Committee will be provided with a detailed summary of fees paid to the
independent auditor and the nature of the services provided, and a forecast of fees and services that are expected to be
provided during the remainder of the fiscal year.
(cid:127)
The Audit Committee will not approve engaging the independent auditor to provide any prohibited non-audit services as set
forth in Appendix A.
(cid:127)
The Audit Committee shall evidence their pre-approval for services to be provided by the independent auditor as follows:
(a)
In situations where the Chairman of the Audit Committee pre-approves work under his delegation of authority, the
Chairman will evidence his pre-approval by signing and dating the pre-approval request form, attached as Appendix B. If
it is not practicable for the Chairman to complete the form and transmit it to the Company prior to engagement of the
independent audit, the Chairman may provide verbal or email approval of the engagement, followed up by completion
of the request form at the first practical opportunity.
(b)
In all other situations, a resolution of the Audit Committee is required.
(cid:127)
All audit and non-audit services to be provided by the independent auditors shall be provided pursuant to an engagement
letter that shall:
(a) Be in writing and signed by the auditors;
(b) Specify the particular services to be provided;
(c)
Specify the period in which the services will be performed;
(d) Specify the estimated total fees to be paid, which shall not exceed the estimated total fees approved by the Audit
Committee pursuant to these procedures, prior to application of the 10% overrun; and
(e)
Include a confirmation by the auditors that the services are not within a category of services the provision of which
would  impair  their  independence  under  applicable  law  and  Canadian  and  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting
standards.
(cid:127)
The Audit Committee pre-approval permits an overrun of fees pertaining to a particular engagement of no greater than 10%
of the estimate identified in the associated engagement letter. The intent of the overrun authorization is to ensure on an
interim basis only, that services can continue pending a review of the fee estimate, and, if required, further Audit Committee
approval of the overrun. If an overrun is expected to exceed the 10% threshold, as soon as the overrun is identified, the Audit
Committee or its designate must be notified and an additional pre-approval must be obtained prior to the engagement
continuing.
B-2
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
V. RESPONSIBILITIES OF EXTERNAL AUDITORS
To support the independence process, the independent auditors will:
(a) Confirm in each engagement letter that performance of the work will not impair independence;
(b) Satisfy the Audit Committee that they have in place comprehensive internal policies and processes to ensure adherence,
worldwide, to independence requirements, including robust monitoring and communications;
(c)
Provide communication and confirmation to the Audit Committee regarding independence on at least a quarterly basis;
(d) Maintain registration by the Canadian Public Accountability Board and the U.S. Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board;
(e) Review their partner rotation plan and advise the Audit Committee on an annual basis.
In addition, the external auditors will:
(f)
Provide regular, detailed fee reporting including balances in the work in progress account; and
(g) Monitor fees and notify the Audit Committee as soon as a potential overrun is identified.
VI. DISCLOSURES
Suncor will, as required by applicable law, annually disclose its pre-approval policies and procedures, and will provide the
required disclosure concerning the amounts of audit fees, audit-related fees, tax fees and all other fees paid to its outside
auditors in its filings with the SEC.
Approved and Accepted April 28, 2004.
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
B-3
Appendix A
Prohibited Non-Audit Services
An external auditor is not independent if, at any point during the audit and professional engagement period, the auditor
provides the following non-audit services to an audit client.
Bookkeeping or other services related to the accounting records or financial statements of the audit client. Any service, unless it
is reasonable to conclude that the results of these services will not be subject to audit procedures during an audit of Suncor’s
financial statements, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Maintaining or preparing the audit client’s accounting records;
Preparing Suncor’s financial statements that are filed with the SEC or that form the basis of financial statements filed with the
SEC; or
(cid:127)
Preparing or originating source data underlying Suncor’s financial statements.
Financial information systems design and implementation. Any service, unless it is reasonable to conclude that the results of
these services will not be subject to audit procedures during an audit of Suncor’s financial statements, including:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Directly or indirectly operating, or supervising the operation of, Suncor’s information systems or managing Suncor’s local area
network; or
Designing or implementing a hardware or software system that aggregates source data underlying the financial statements
or generates information that is significant to Suncor’s financial statements or other financial information systems taken as
a whole.
Appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinions or contribution-in-kind reports. Any appraisal service, valuation service or any
service involving a fairness opinion or contribution-in-kind report for Suncor, unless it is reasonable to conclude that the results
of these services will not be subject to audit procedures during an audit of Suncor’s financial statements.
Actuarial services. Any actuarially-oriented advisory service involving the determination of amounts recorded in the financial
statements and related accounts for Suncor other than assisting Suncor in understanding the methods, models, assumptions,
and inputs used in computing an amount, unless it is reasonable to conclude that the results of these services will not be subject
to audit procedures during an audit of Suncor’s financial statements.
Internal audit outsourcing services. Any internal audit service that has been outsourced by Suncor that relates to Suncor’s
internal accounting controls, financial systems or financial statements, unless it is reasonable to conclude that the result of
these services will not be subject to audit procedures during an audit of Suncor’s financial statements.
Management functions. Acting, temporarily or permanently, as a director, officer, or employee of Suncor, or performing any
decision-making, supervisory, or ongoing monitoring function for Suncor.
Human resources. Any of the following:
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
(cid:127)
Searching for or seeking out prospective candidates for managerial, executive, or director positions;
Engaging in psychological testing, or other formal testing or evaluation programs;
Undertaking reference checks of prospective candidates for an executive or director position;
Acting as a negotiator on Suncor’s behalf, such as determining position, status or title, compensation, fringe benefits, or
other conditions of employment; or
Recommending, or advising Suncor to hire a specific candidate for a specific job (except that an accounting firm may, upon
request  by  Suncor,  interview  candidates  and  advise  Suncor  on  the  candidate’s  competence  for  financial  accounting,
administrative, or control positions).
Broker-dealer,  investment  adviser  or  investment  banking  services. Acting  as  a  broker-dealer  (registered  or  unregistered),
promoter,  or  underwriter,  on  behalf  of  Suncor,  making  investment  decisions  on  behalf  of  Suncor  or  otherwise  having
discretionary authority over Suncor’s investments, executing a transaction to buy or sell Suncor’s investment, or having custody
of Suncor’s assets, such as taking temporary possession of securities purchased by Suncor.
Legal services. Providing any service to Suncor that, under circumstances in which the service is provided, could be provided
only by someone licensed, admitted, or otherwise qualified to practice law in the jurisdiction in which the service is prohibited.
B-4
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
Expert  services  unrelated  to  the  audit. Providing  an  expert  opinion  or  other  expert  service  for  Suncor,  or  Suncor’s  legal
representative, for the purpose of advocating Suncor’s interest in litigation or in a regulatory or administrative proceeding or
investigation. In any litigation or regulatory or administrative proceeding or investigation, an accountant’s independence shall
not be deemed to be impaired if the accountant provides factual accounts, including testimony, of work performed or explains
the positions taken or conclusions reached during the performance of any service provided by the accountant for Suncor.
Appendix B
Pre-Approval Request Form
NATURE OF WORK
ESTIMATED FEES
(Cdn $)
Total
Date
Signature
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
B-5
SCHEDULE ‘‘C’’
FORM 51-101F2
REPORT ON RESERVES DATA BY
INDEPENDENT QUALIFIED RESERVES
EVALUATOR OR AUDITOR
To the board of directors of Suncor Energy Inc. (the ‘‘Company’’):
1. We have evaluated the Company’s reserves data as at December 31, 2011. The reserves data are estimates of proved
reserves and probable reserves and related future net revenues as at December 31, 2011, estimated using forecast prices
and costs.
2.
The reserves data are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
reserves data based on our evaluation.
We carried out our evaluation in accordance with standards set out in the Canadian Oil and Gas Evaluation Handbook
(the ‘‘COGE Handbook’’) prepared jointly by the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (Calgary Chapter) and the
Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy & Petroleum (Petroleum Society).
3.
4.
Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  an  evaluation  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  as  to  whether  the
reserves data are free of material misstatement. An evaluation also includes assessing whether the reserves data are in
accordance with principles and definitions presented in the COGE Handbook.
The following table sets forth the estimated future net revenues (before deduction of income taxes) attributed to proved
plus probable reserves, estimated using forecast prices and costs and calculated using a discount rate of 10 percent,
included in the reserves data of the Company evaluated by us for the year ended December 31, 2011, and identifies the
respective  portions  thereof  that  we  have  evaluated  and  reported  on  to  the  Company’s  management  and  board
of directors:
Independent Qualified
Reserves Evaluator
GLJ Petroleum Consultants
GLJ Petroleum Consultants
Description and
Preparation Date of
Evaluation Report
Location of Reserves
(Country or Foreign
Geographic Area)
Net Present Value of Future Net Revenues
(before income taxes, 10% discount rate-$MM)
Audited
Evaluated
Reviewed
Total
Oil Sands In-Situ
January 12, 2012
Oil Sands Mining
January 12, 2012
Canada
Canada
—
—
17 247
31 757
—
—
17 247
31 757
49 004
5.
In our opinion, the reserves data respectively evaluated by us have, in all material respects, been determined and are in
accordance with the COGE Handbook, consistently applied. We express no opinion on the reserves data that we reviewed
but did not audit or evaluate.
6. We have no responsibility to update our reports referred to in paragraph 4 for events and circumstances occurring after
their respective preparation dates.
7.
Because the reserves data are based on judgments regarding future events, actual results will vary and the variations may
be material.
EXECUTED as to our report referred to above:
GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, Canada, March 1, 2012
‘‘Caralyn P. Bennett’’
Caralyn P. Bennett, P. Eng.
Vice-President
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
C-1
SCHEDULE ‘‘D’’
FORM 51-101F2
REPORT ON RESERVES DATA BY
INDEPENDENT QUALIFIED RESERVES
EVALUATOR OR AUDITOR
To the board of directors of Suncor Energy Inc. (the ‘‘Company’’):
1. We have evaluated the Company’s reserves data as at December 31, 2011. The reserves data are estimates of proved
reserves and probable reserves and related future net revenues as at December 31, 2011, estimated using forecast prices
and costs.
2.
The reserves data are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the
reserves data based on our evaluation.
We carried out our evaluation in accordance with standards set out in the Canadian Oil and Gas Evaluation Handbook
(the ‘‘COGE Handbook’’) prepared jointly by the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (Calgary Chapter) and the
Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy & Petroleum (Petroleum Society).
3.
4.
Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  an  evaluation  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  as  to  whether  the
reserves data are free of material misstatement. An evaluation also includes assessing whether the reserves data are in
accordance with principles and definitions presented in the COGE Handbook.
The following table sets forth the estimated future net revenues (before deduction of income taxes) attributed to proved
plus probable reserves, estimated using forecast prices and costs and calculated using a discount rate of 10 percent,
included in the reserves data of the Company evaluated by us for the year ended December 31, 2011, and identifies the
respective  portions  thereof  that  we  have  evaluated  and  reported  on  to  the  Company’s  management  and  board
of directors:
Independent Qualified
Reserves Evaluator
Sproule Associates Limited
Sproule Associates Limited
Sproule International Limited
Sproule International Limited
Description and
Preparation Date of
Evaluation Report
East Coast Canada
February 16, 2012
North America Onshore
February 16, 2012
North Sea
February 16, 2012
Other International
February 16, 2012
Location of Reserves
(Country or Foreign
Geographic Area)
Newfoundland
Offshore, Canada
Western Canada
North Sea,
United Kingdom
Libya, Syria
Net Present Value of Future Net Revenue
(before income taxes, 10% discount rate)
($MM)
Audited
Evaluated
Reviewed
Total
—
—
—
—
—
7 904
2 126
9 026
6 195
25 251
—
—
—
—
—
7 904
2 126
9 026
6 195
25 251
5.
In our opinion, the reserves data respectively evaluated by us have, in all material respects, been determined and are in
accordance with the COGE Handbook, consistently applied. We express no opinion on the reserves data that we reviewed
but did not audit or evaluate.
6. We have no responsibility to update our reports referred to in paragraph 4 for events and circumstances occurring after
their respective preparation dates.
7.
Because the reserves data are based on judgments regarding future events, actual results will vary and the variations may
be material.
EXECUTED as to our report referred to above:
Sproule Associates Limited and Sproule International Limited, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, March 1, 2012
‘‘Harry J. Helwerda’’
Harry J. Helwerda, P. Eng., FEC
Executive Vice-President and Director
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
D-1
SCHEDULE ‘‘E’’
FORM 51-101F3
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT AND DIRECTORS
ON RESERVES DATA AND OTHER INFORMATION
Management of Suncor Energy Inc. (the ‘‘Company’’) are responsible for the preparation and disclosure of information with
respect to the Company’s oil and gas activities in accordance with securities regulatory requirements. This information includes
reserves data which are estimates of proved reserves and probable reserves and related future net revenues as at December 31,
2011, estimated using forecast prices and costs.
Independent  qualified  reserves  evaluators  have  evaluated  the  Company’s  reserves  data.  The  reports  of  the  independent
qualified reserves evaluators will be filed with securities regulatory authorities concurrently with this report.
The Audit Committee of the board of directors of the Company has
(a)
reviewed the Company’s procedures for providing information to the independent qualified reserves evaluators;
(b) met with the independent qualified reserves evaluators to determine whether any restrictions affected the ability of the
independent qualified reserves evaluators to report without reservation; and
(c)
reviewed the reserves data with management and the independent qualified reserves evaluators.
The Audit Committee of the board of directors has reviewed the Company’s procedures for assembling and reporting other
information associated with oil and gas activities and has reviewed that information with management. The board of directors
has, on the recommendation of the Audit Committee, approved
(a)
(b)
(c)
the content and filing with securities regulatory authorities of Form 51-101F1 containing reserves data and other oil and
gas information;
the filing of Form 51-101F2 which is the report of the independent qualified reserves evaluators on the reserves data; and
the content and filing of this report.
Because the reserves data are based on judgments regarding future events, actual results will vary and the variations may
be material.
‘‘Richard L. George’’
RICHARD L. GEORGE
Chief Executive Officer
‘‘Bart W. Demosky’’
BART W. DEMOSKY
Chief Financial Officer
‘‘John T. Ferguson’’
JOHN T. FERGUSON
Chairman of the Board of Directors
‘‘Michael W. O’Brien’’
MICHAEL W. O’BRIEN
Chair of the Audit Committee
March 1, 2012
SUNCOR ENERGY INC.
2012
ANNUAL INFORMATION FORM
E-1
17FEB201020112127
Box 2844, 150 - 6th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 3E3
tel: (403) 296-6000 fax: (403) 296-3030 info@suncor.com www.suncor.com