
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 1 of 63
10-K 1 form10k.htm ANNUAL REPORT
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549 
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
[X] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2011
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from [   ] to [   ]
Commission file number 000-52499
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or
Nevada
organization)
320 North Carson Street, Carson City, NV
(Address of principal executive offices)
99-0515290
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
89701
(Zip Code)
Registrant's telephone number, including area code: 775.782.3999
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of Each Class
N/A
Name of Each Exchange On Which Registered
N/A
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, par value of $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 the Securities Act.
Yes [   ] No [ x ]
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act
Yes [   ] No [ x ]
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 2 of 63
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant: (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to
file such reports) and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the last 90 days.
Yes [ x ] No [   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every 
Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this chapter) 
during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
Yes [ x ] No [   ]
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§229.405 of this chapter) is
not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information
statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.
[   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a
smaller reporting company. See definition of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer [   ]
Non-accelerated filer [   ]
Accelerated filer [   ]
Smaller reporting company [ x ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
Yes [   ] No [ x ]
State the aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates computed by reference to the
price at which the common equity was last sold, or the average bid and ask price of such common equity, as of the last
business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter.
The aggregate market value of Common Stock held by non-affiliates of the Registrant on April 29, 2011 was $555,652 based 
on a $0.08 closing price for the Common Stock on April 29, 2011. For purposes of this computation, all executive officers and 
directors have been deemed to be affiliates. Such determination should not be deemed to be an admission that such executive
officers and directors are, in fact, affiliates of the Registrant.
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock as of the latest practicable date.
15,462,240 shares of common stock issued & outstanding as of January 30, 2012
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
None.
2
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 3 of 63
Table of Contents
PART I 
Item 1. 
Item 1A. 
Item 1B. 
Item 2. 
Item 3. 
Item 4. 
PART II 
Item 5.
Item 6. 
Item 7. 
Item 7A. 
Item 8. 
Item 9. 
Item 9A. 
Item 9B. 
PART III 
Item 10. 
Item 11. 
Item 12.
Item 13. 
Item 14. 
PART IV 
Item 15. 
SIGNATURES
Business 
Risk Factors 
Unresolved Staff Comments 
Properties 
Legal Proceedings 
[Removed and Reserved] 
  
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of 
Equity Securities 
Selected Financial Data 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 
Controls and Procedures 
Other Information 
  
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance 
Executive Compensation 
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder 
Matters 
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 
Principal Accounting Fees and Services 
  
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
4 
4 
9 
14 
14 
20 
20 
20 
20
22 
22 
31 
31 
18 
18 
19 
19 
19 
23 
25
25 
26 
26 
26 
29
3
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 4 of 63
Item 1.
Business
PART I
This  annual  report  contains  forward-looking  statements.  These  statements  relate  to  future  events  or  our  future  financial
performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “expects”, 
“plans”,  “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates”, “predicts”, “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other 
comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other
factors, including the risks in the section entitled “Risk Factors”, that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of 
activity,  performance  or  achievements  to  be  materially  different  from  any  future  results,  levels  of  activity,  performance  or
achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee 
future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities
laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to 
actual results.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles.
In this annual report, unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars and all references to
“common shares” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
As  used in this annual report, the terms “we”,  “us”,  “our” and “our company”  refer  to Del Toro  Silver Corp., and,  unless 
otherwise indicated, our wholly-owned subsidiary, Minera Plata Del Toro S.A. de C.V., a Mexican corporation.
Corporate Overview
Our  company  was  incorporated  on  January  9,  2006  as  Candev  Resource  Exploration,  Inc.  under  the  laws  of  the  State  of
Nevada and extra-provincially registered under the laws of the Province of British Columbia on August 15, 2006. Effective
July  28,  2009,  our  company  completed  a  merger  with  our  wholly  owned  subsidiary,  Del  Toro  Silver  Corp.,  a  Nevada
corporation which was incorporated on July 7, 2009 solely to change our company’s name to Del Toro Silver Corp.
Our head office is located at 320 North Carson Street, Carson City, Nevada 89701.
Corporate History
We were incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Nevada on January 9, 2006.
Effective July 9, 2009, we completed the acquisition of a 50% undivided interest, and the Option to acquire a further 30%
interest in, the Dos Naciones Property, located in state of Sonora, Mexico, in accordance with the terms of a Property Option
Agreement with Yale dated July 7, 2009. We entered into an amendment agreement dated June 25, 2010, amending certain
terms of the option agreement.
We  entered  into  an  amendment  agreement  with  Yale  Resources  Ltd.  dated  as  of  October  21,  2010  pursuant  to  which  we
amended the Option Agreement with Yale dated July 7, 2009, as earlier amended on June 25, 2010. Pursuant to the terms of
the further-amended agreement Yale agreed to grant Del Toro an option to acquire a further 20% interest in the Property (for a
total of 70%) in consideration of the issuance of 250,000 more shares of our common stock upon signing of the agreement and
400,000 more shares of our common stock to Yale on or before July 7, 2012. Under the terms of the amendment Yale also
agreed to rescind its option to repurchase the property during the option period.
4
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 5 of 63
In October, 2010 we announced that we expanded the Josefina target at Dos Naciones. Fieldwork completed by our company
was successful in identifying multiple new exposures of veins as well as a historic working that was previously unknown. The
Josefina target now consists of a series of at least six sub-parallel veins with the core of the silver/lead system having been
traced  along  surface  for  approximately  600  meters  along  the  strike  and  over  250  meters  in  width.  Highlights  from  the  38
samples submitted are channel chip samples from the interior of the Josefina working returning 129g/t Ag with 5.23% Pb over
1.0 meters and 105g/t Ag with 4.21% Pb over 0.50 meters.
In December, 2010 we completed an ASTER (Satellite Imaging) study on the Dos Naciones property and surrounding mines,
and continued our field work consisting of detailed geological mapping, sampling and prospecting towards identifying drill
targets. A follow up field program in the area was commenced in January, 2011 to expand the mapping and sampling of the
surrounding areas based on the ASTER report study. Based on the results of our past field program we intend to commence a
drill program in April, 2011 on the La Espanola target to obtain further information on mineralization occurrences on the area.
In October, 2011,  we were  notified by  our joint venture participant, Yale Resources Ltd., that  a drilling contract has  been
signed with Geometrics Mineral Services S.A. de C.V. Drilling on the property began in November 2011.
In November 2011, our management announced that our company will begin to change our corporate strategy to target high
grade precious metals properties, located in the western US, that have the potential for near-term production and positive cash 
flow.
Also  on  November  14,  2011,  we  entered  into  an  Asset  Sale  Agreement  with  Bowerman  Holdings  LLC  to  acquire  up  to
seventy-five percent (75%) of one hundred percent (100%) of Bowerman’s right, title and interest in and to thirty one (31) KM 
mining  claims  and  seventeen  (17)  Raddlefinger  mining  claims  located  in  Siskiyou  County,  California.  Closing  of  the
acquisition  is  scheduled  to  occur  by  May  12,  2012,  unless  otherwise  agreed  by  the  parties,  and  is  subject  to  satisfactory
completion of due diligence by our company.
In consideration of a sixty percent (60%) interest in the property, we have agreed to pay to Bowerman an aggregate purchase
price of $6,525,000.00, payable as follows:
(cid:122) $25,000.00 payable by December 14, 2011 (the date of the payment has been extended to March 14, 2012);  
(cid:122) $4,500,000  payable  upon  closing  by  execution  and  delivery  of  a  promissory  note  and  a  first  position  deed  of  trust
against the property, which secures our company’s full repayment of the amount due under the Promissory Note; and  
(cid:122) $2,000,000 payable upon closing by delivery of 40,000,000 shares of our common stock at $0.05 per Share (issued to
Bowerman and certain assignees of Bowerman). We have agreed to use our good faith efforts to file with the SEC a
reseller prospectus registering the Shares within 160 days of the closing, failing which we will be required to pay a
$10,000 fee to Bowerman in lieu of registration.
The $4,500,000 secured by the promissory note and deed of trust shall accrue interest (on unpaid principal and interest) from
November 14, 2011 at the rate of ten percent (10%) interest per annum, compounded monthly. Principal and interest shall be 
due and payable in full on November 14, 2014 by way of a balloon payment equal to the amount of the entire balance then-
due. We may prepay all or any part of the sum due under the promissory note any time without penalty. Delinquent payments
under the note will be subject to a late fee equal to 10% of the delinquent payment amount. Subject to timely payment of the
promissory note and all consideration due and payable, our company is entitled to acquire, within 48 months from closing, up
to an additional fifteen percent (15%) interest in the Property at a rate of $300,000 per 1%.
In addition to the $6,525,000 aggregate purchase price, we have agreed to incur, within 36 months of the closing, not less than
$1,500,000 in exploration, development, or operating expenses in respect of the property. Our company’s work commitment 
shall be carried out in accordance with a joint operations agreement between our company and Bowerman, also entered into on
November 14, 2011, whereby Bowerman and our company have agreed to jointly develop the property through January 1,
2017.
5
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 6 of 63
Pursuant to the agreement, our company and Bowerman shall form a single purpose entity to serve as the sole operator of the
property, with our company serving as manager of the entity. Subject to and upon completion of the $1,500,000, 36-month 
work  commitment  to  be  financed  by  our  company,  subsequent  work  programs  and  budgets  shall  be  determined  by  our
company at our sole discretion, and the operating costs of the entity shall be shared by our company and Bowerman on a pro-
rata basis with their respective ownership interest in the property. Net proceeds of the entity shall also be divided between our
company and Bowerman on a pro-rata basis with their respective ownership interest in the property.
Bowerman's parent company has caused one of its wholly owned subsidiaries to conditionally license to the entity the use of
all equipment, improvements and other items of personal property and improvements overlying the Property. Our company
shall have the option to exercise the license by paying to Bowerman a license fee of $100,000.00 per year. At our company’s 
election  and  sole determination,  our company may pay each license fee either in cash, in common shares of our company
discounted by twenty percent (20%) of the then-market value, or by crediting the value of the license fee toward Bowerman’s 
financial  obligation  to  pay  its  pro  rata  interest  for  work  performed  under  the  Joint  Operations  Agreement,  provided  that
Bowerman’s  obligation  shall  not  accrue  until  our  company’s  $1,500,000  work  commitment  has  been  fully  expended.  Our
company shall also have the option to buy out the licensed equipment and improvements. The entity shall be charged with
maintaining,  repairing,  servicing,  supplying,  insuring  and  otherwise  keeping  in  good  condition  through  due  care  all  of  the
equipment and improvements for the duration of the license.
Our Current Business
We are presently an exploration stage company focused on conducting exploration activities on our Dos Naciones property in
Mexico.  In  November  2011,  our  management  announced  that  our  company  will  begin  to  change  our  corporate  strategy  to
target  high  grade  precious  metals  properties,  located  in  the  western  US,  with  the  potential  for  near-term  production  and 
positive  cash  flow.  In  keeping  with  this  strategy  on  November  14,  2011,  we  entered  into  an  Asset  Sale  Agreement  with
Bowerman Holdings LLC to acquire up to seventy-five percent (75%) of one hundred percent (100%) of the Bowerman’s 
right, title and interest in and to thirty one (31) KM mining claims and seventeen (17) Raddlefinger mining claims located in
Siskiyou County, California. Closing of the acquisition is scheduled to occur by May 12, 2012, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, and is subject to satisfactory completion of due diligence by our company.
While our corporate strategy has changed we remain focused on exercising our option under an option agreement with Yale
Resources Ltd. dated July 7, 2009, as amended June 25, 2010 and October 21, 2010. The Dos Naciones property is located
approximately 140 km north northeast of the city of Hermosillo, in north-central Sonora, Mexico and is approximately 75 km 
southwest of the important Cananea mining district. The Dos Naciones property is comprised of one mineral concession that
covers approximately 2,391 hectares.
Our company received a technical report dated March 25, 2009 from our consulting geologist David J. Pawliuk respecting the
Dos  Naciones  property.  Pursuant  to  the  report,  Mr.  Pawliuk  recommended  a  three  phase  exploration  program  on  the  Dos
Naciones  property  to  explore  potential  mineralization  on  the  property.  The  report  found  that  Dos  Naciones  property  hosts
different styles of significant metallic mineralization and that economic concentrations of silver and lead occur in quartz veins
at both the Josefina and the Dos Naciones occurrence areas within the property.
We  intend  to  conduct  a  three  phase  exploration  program  on  the  Dos  Naciones  Property  at  an  aggregate  estimated  cost  of
$450,000 subject to receiving additional financing. The first phase of our exploration program commenced in July, 2010. The
first phase consists of detailed geological mapping, sampling, hand trenching and prospecting. In July, 2010 our operator on
the Dos Naciones property engaged geological consultants to conduct mapping and sampling on the property.
We have submitted 38 samples from the July/August 2010 work program to an assay lab to confirm the sampling results. In
October, 2010, fieldwork completed by us was successful in identifying multiple new exposures of veins as well as a historic
working that was previously unknown. The Josefina target now consists of a series of at least six sub-parallel veins with the 
core of the silver/lead system having been traced along surface for approximately 600
6
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 7 of 63
meters along strike and over 250 meters wide. Highlights from the 38 samples submitted are channel chip samples from the
interior of the Josefina working returning 129g/t Ag with 5.23% Pb over 1.0 meters and 105g/t Ag with 4.21% Pb over 0.50
meters.
In December, 2010, we completed an ASTER (Satellite Imaging) study on the Dos Naciones property and surrounding mines,
and continued our field work consisting of detailed geological mapping, sampling and prospecting towards identifying drill
targets. A follow up field program in the area was commenced in January, 2011 to expand the mapping and sampling of the
surrounding areas based on the ASTER report study. Based on the results of our past field program, we commenced a drill
program at the end of 2011 October on the La Espanola target to obtain further information on mineralization occurrences on
the area.
We have completed Phase I and have commenced Phase II of exploration on our Dos Naciones property. Once we complete
each phase of exploration, we will make a decision as to whether or not we proceed with each successive phase based upon the
analysis of the results of that program. Our management will make these decisions based upon the recommendations of the
independent geologist who oversees the program and records the results.
Competition
We are a junior mineral resource exploration company. We compete with other mineral resource exploration companies for
financing and for the acquisition of new mineral properties. Many of the mineral resource exploration companies with whom
we compete have greater financial and technical resources than those available to us. Accordingly, these competitors may be
able to spend greater amounts on acquisitions of mineral properties of merit, on exploration of their mineral properties and on
development of their mineral properties. In addition, they may be able to afford more geological expertise in the targeting and
exploration of mineral properties. This competition could result in competitors having mineral properties of greater quality and
interest to prospective investors who may finance additional exploration and development. This competition could adversely
impact on our ability to achieve the financing necessary for us to conduct further exploration of our mineral properties.
We also compete with other junior mineral resource exploration companies for financing from a limited number of investors
that are prepared to make investments in junior mineral resource exploration companies. The presence of competing junior
mineral resource exploration companies may impact on our ability to raise additional capital in order to fund our exploration
programs if investors are of the view that investments in competitors are more attractive based on the merit of the mineral
properties under investigation and the price of the investment offered to investors. We also compete with other junior and
senior mineral resource exploration companies for available resources, including, but not limited to, professional geologists,
camp staff, helicopter or float planes, mineral exploration supplies and drill rigs.
Governmental Regulations
Mexico
In  Mexico,  mineral  resources  belong  to  the  Mexican  nation  and  all  mining  activity requires  a  concession  from  the  federal
government. A concession is granted over free land, pursuant to the first in time, first right principle, which establishes that the
first person to request a concession over a portion of land will have the right to the same, provided all other requirements under
the Mining Law of Mexico and its associated regulations are met.
A concession owner can perform:
(cid:122) exploration  works  on  the  ground  to  identify  mineral  deposits  and  quantifying  and  evaluating  economically  viable
reserves and accordingly perform work to develop areas containing mineral deposits; and
(cid:122) exploitation works to detach and extract minerals from such deposits.
Only  Mexican  nationals  or  legal  entities  incorporated  under  Mexican  law  may  hold  concessions,  although  there  are  no
restrictions on foreign ownership of such entities. Mining concessions are granted for 50 years, and can be
7
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 8 of 63
renewed for another 50 years. The main obligations to keep them are the semi-annual payment of mining duties (taxes), based 
on  the  surface  area  of  the  concession,  and  the  performance  of  work  in  the  areas  covered  by  the  concessions,  which  is
evidenced by minimum expenditures or by the production of ore.
In  connection  with  mining  and  exploration  activities  in  the  Dos  Naciones  Property,  we  are  subject  to  extensive  Mexican
federal,  state  and  local  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  protection  of  the  environment,  including  laws  and  regulations
relating to protection of air and water quality, hazardous waste management and mine reclamation as well as the protection of
endangered or threatened species.
Currently, we are not required to submit any environmental impact statement to the Mexican government for our proposed
three phase exploration program on the Dos Naciones Property because exploration activities such as mapping and sampling
do  not  require  the  preparation  of  the  environmental  impact  statement.  However,  if,  after  we  conduct  our  three  phase
exploration program on the Dos Naciones Property, we decided to conduct a full drilling program, we will have to prepare the
environmental  impact  statement  to  be  submitted  to  the  Mexican  government,  which  will  describe  the  anticipated
environmental  impact  of  our  planned  drilling  program,  as  well  as  outlining  our  planned  actions  to  minimize  any  potential
environmental damage. Studies required to support the environmental impact statement include a detailed analysis of the area,
among others: soil, water, vegetation, wildlife, cultural resources and socio-economic impacts.
In  reviewing  the  environmental  impact  statement,  the  Mexican  government  looks  at  potential  impact  on  national  Mexican
environment, as well as reviewing for local concerns such as proximity to water supplies or potential interference with local
farms. The Mexican government has ten days to respond after we file the environmental impact statement, and if it does not
respond, authorization is deemed to have been granted. If the Mexican government does respond, then the time within which
authorization will be granted can be increased to six to twelve months or longer. It is also possible that no authorization will be
granted if the Mexican government is not satisfied that appropriate measures will be taken to protect the environment.
United States
Mining operations and exploration activities are subject to various national, state, provincial and local laws and regulations in
the United States, as well as other jurisdictions, which govern prospecting, development, mining, production, exports, taxes,
labor  standards,  occupational  health,  waste  disposal,  protection  of  the  environment,  mine  safety,  hazardous  substances  and
other matters.
We  believe  that  we  are  and  will  continue  to  be  in  compliance  in  all  material  respects  with  applicable  statutes  and  the
regulations passed in the United States. There are no current orders or directions relating to our company with respect to the
foregoing laws and regulations.
Subsidiaries
We have a wholly-owned subsidiary, Minera Plata Del Toro S.A. de C.V. a Mexican corporation.
Research and Development Expenditures
We have incurred $nil in research and development expenditures over the last two fiscal years.
Employees
As of October 31, 2011, our employees were our directors and officers. We do not expect any material changes in the number
of employees over the next 12 month period. We currently conduct and anticipate that we will continue to conduct most of our
business  through  arrangements  with  consultants  and  third  parties.  Our  officers  and  directors  do  not  have  an  employment
agreement with us.
8
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 9 of 63
REPORTS TO SECURITY HOLDERS
We are required to file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other information with the Securities and
Exchange  Commission  and  our  filings  are  available  to  the  public  over  the  internet  at  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission’s website at http://www.sec.gov. The public may read and copy any materials filed by us with the Securities and
Exchange Commission at the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street N.E. Washington 
D.C. 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the Securities and
Exchange Commission at 1-800-732-0330. The SEC also maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy and formation
statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC, at http://www.sec.gov.
Item 1A.  Risk Factors
Risks Associated with Mining
All of our properties are in the exploration stage. There is no assurance that we can establish the existence of any mineral
resource on any of our properties in commercially exploitable quantities. Until we can do so, we cannot earn any revenues
from operations and if we do not do so we will lose all of the funds that we expend on exploration. If we do not discover any
mineral resource in a commercially exploitable quantity, our business could fail.
Despite exploration work on our mineral properties, we have not established that any of them contain any mineral reserve, nor
can there be any assurance that we will be able to do so. If we do not, our business could fail.
A mineral reserve is defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission in its Industry Guide 7 (which can be viewed over
the  Internet  at  http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/forms/industry.htm#secguide7)  as  that  part  of  a  mineral  deposit  which 
could  be  economically  and  legally  extracted  or  produced  at  the  time  of  the  reserve  determination.  The  probability  of  an
individual prospect ever having a “reserve” that meets the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Industry 
Guide 7 is extremely remote; in all probability our mineral resource property does not contain any "reserve" and any funds that
we spend on exploration will probably be lost.
Even if we do eventually discover a mineral reserve on one or more of our properties, there can be no assurance that we will be
able to develop our properties into producing mines and extract those resources. Both mineral exploration and development
involve a high degree of risk and few properties which are explored are ultimately developed into producing mines.
The commercial viability of an established mineral deposit will depend on a number of factors including, by way of example,
the size, grade and other attributes of the mineral deposit, the proximity of the resource to infrastructure such as a smelter,
roads and a point for shipping, government regulation and market prices. Most of these factors will be beyond our control, and
any of them could increase costs and make extraction of any identified mineral resource unprofitable.
Mineral operations are subject to applicable law and government regulation. Even if we discover a mineral resource in a
commercially  exploitable  quantity,  these  laws  and  regulations  could  restrict  or  prohibit  the  exploitation  of  that  mineral
resource. If we cannot exploit any mineral resource that we might discover on our properties, our business may fail.
Both mineral exploration and extraction require permits from various foreign, federal, state, provincial and local governmental
authorities and are governed by laws and regulations, including those with respect to prospecting, mine development, mineral
production,  transport,  export,  taxation,  labour  standards,  occupational  health,  waste  disposal,  toxic  substances,  land  use,
environmental protection, mine safety and other matters. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or maintain
any of the permits required for the continued exploration of our mineral properties or for the construction and operation of a
mine on our properties at economically viable costs. If we cannot accomplish these objectives, our business could fail.
9
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 10 of 63
We believe that we are in compliance with all material laws and regulations that currently apply to our activities but there can
be no assurance that we can continue to remain in compliance. Current laws and regulations could be amended and we might
not be able to comply with them, as amended. Further, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or maintain all
permits necessary for our future operations, or that we will be able to obtain them on reasonable terms. To the extent such
approvals are required and are not obtained, we may be delayed or prohibited from proceeding with planned exploration or
development of our mineral properties.
If we establish the existence of a mineral resource on any of our properties in a commercially exploitable quantity, we will
require additional capital in order to develop the property into a producing mine. If we cannot raise this additional capital, we
will not be able to exploit the resource, and our business could fail.
If we do discover mineral resources in commercially exploitable quantities on any of our properties, we will be required to
expend substantial sums of money to establish the extent of the resource, develop processes to extract it and develop extraction
and processing facilities and infrastructure. Although we may derive substantial benefits from the discovery of a major deposit,
there can be no assurance that such a resource will be large enough to justify commercial operations, nor can there be any
assurance that we will be able to raise the funds required for development on a timely basis. If we cannot raise the necessary
capital or complete the necessary facilities and infrastructure, our business may fail.
Mineral exploration and development is subject to extraordinary operating risks. We do not currently insure against these
risks. In the event of a cave-in or similar occurrence, our liability may exceed our resources, which would have an adverse
impact on our company.
Mineral exploration, development and production involve many risks which even a combination of experience, knowledge and
careful evaluation may not be able to overcome. Our operations will be subject to all the hazards and risks inherent in the
exploration for mineral resources and, if we discover a mineral resource in commercially exploitable quantity, our operations
could be subject to all of the hazards and risks inherent in the development and production of resources, including liability for
pollution, cave-ins or similar hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. Any such
event  could  result  in  work  stoppages  and  damage  to  property,  including  damage  to  the  environment.  We  do  not  currently
maintain  any  insurance  coverage  against  these  operating  hazards.  The  payment  of  any  liabilities  that  arise  from  any  such
occurrence would have a material adverse impact on our company.
Mineral prices are subject to dramatic and unpredictable fluctuations.
We expect to derive revenues, if any, either from the sale of our mineral resource properties or from the extraction and sale of
precious and base metals such as gold, silver and copper. The price of those commodities has fluctuated widely in recent years,
and is affected by numerous factors beyond our control, including international, economic and political trends, expectations of
inflation,  currency  exchange  fluctuations,  interest  rates,  global  or  regional  consumptive  patterns,  speculative  activities  and
increased  production  due  to  new  extraction  developments  and  improved  extraction  and  production  methods.  The  effect  of
these factors on the price of base and precious metals, and therefore the economic viability of any of our exploration properties
and projects, cannot accurately be predicted.
The mining industry is highly competitive and there is no assurance that we will continue to be successful in acquiring mineral
claims. If we cannot continue to acquire properties to explore for mineral resources, we may be required to reduce or cease
operations.
The mineral exploration, development, and production industry is largely un-integrated. We compete with other exploration 
companies looking for mineral resource properties. While we compete with other exploration companies in the effort to locate
and acquire mineral resource properties, we will not compete with them for the removal or sales of mineral products from our
properties  if  we  should  eventually  discover  the  presence  of  them  in  quantities  sufficient  to  make  production  economically
feasible. Readily available markets exist worldwide for the sale of mineral products. Therefore, we will likely be able to sell
any mineral products that we identify and produce.
10
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 11 of 63
In  identifying  and  acquiring  mineral  resource  properties,  we  compete  with  many  companies  possessing  greater  financial
resources  and  technical  facilities.  This  competition  could  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  acquire  suitable  prospects  for
exploration  in  the  future.  Accordingly,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  acquire  any  interest  in  additional  mineral
resource properties that might yield reserves or result in commercial mining operations.
If our costs of exploration are greater than anticipated, then we may not be able to complete the exploration program for our
Dos Naciones Property without additional financing, of which there is no assurance that we would be able to obtain.
We are proceeding with the initial stages of exploration on our Dos Naciones Property. We intend to carry out an exploration
program that has been recommended by a consulting geologist. This exploration program outlines a budget for completion of
the  recommended  exploration  program.  However,  there  is  no  assurance  that  our  actual  costs  will  not  exceed  the  budgeted
costs. Factors that could cause actual costs to exceed budgeted costs include increased prices due to competition for personnel
and  supplies  during  the  exploration  season,  unanticipated  problems  in  completing  the  exploration  program  and  delays
experienced in completing the exploration program. Increases in exploration costs could result in our not being able to carry
out our exploration program without additional financing. There is no assurance that we would be able to obtain additional
financing in this event.
Because  of  the  speculative  nature  of  exploration  of  mining  properties,  there  is  substantial  risk  that  no  commercially
exploitable minerals will be found and our business will fail.
We are in the initial stage of exploration of our mineral property, and thus have no way to evaluate the likelihood that we will
be successful in establishing commercially exploitable reserves of gold, silver or other valuable minerals on our Dos Naciones
Property.  The  search  for  valuable  minerals  as  a  business  is  extremely  risky.  We  may  not  find  commercially  exploitable
reserves of gold, silver or other valuable minerals in our mineral property. Exploration for minerals is a speculative venture
necessarily involving substantial risk. The expenditures to be made by us on our exploration program may not result in the
discovery of commercial quantities of ore. The likelihood of success must be considered in light of the problems, expenses,
difficulties, complications and delays encountered in connection with the exploration of the mineral properties that we plan to
undertake. Problems such as unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions are involved in mineral exploration and
often result in unsuccessful exploration efforts. In such a case, we would be unable to complete our business plan.
Because of the inherent dangers involved in mineral exploration, there is a risk that we may incur liability or damages as we
conduct our business.
The search for valuable minerals involves numerous hazards. In the course of carrying out exploration of our Dos Naciones
Property, we may become subject to liability for such hazards, including pollution, cave-ins and other hazards against which 
we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. We currently have no such insurance nor do we expect to get
such insurance for the foreseeable future. If a hazard were to occur, the costs of rectifying the hazard may exceed our asset
value and cause us to liquidate all of our assets, resulting in the loss of your entire investment in our company.
Because access to our mineral property is often restricted by inclement weather, we may be delayed in our exploration and
any future mining efforts.
Access to the mineral property is restricted to the period between August to March of each year because the period between
April to July is typically rainy season in the area. We can attempt to visit, test or explore our mineral property only when
weather permits such activities. These limitations can result in significant delays in exploration efforts, as well as in mining
and production in the event that commercial amounts of minerals are found. Such delays can cause our business to fail.
11
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 12 of 63
As we undertake exploration of our mineral property, we will be subject to compliance with government regulation that may
increase the anticipated time and cost of our exploration program, which could increase our expenses.
We will be subject to the mining laws and regulations in Mexico as we carry out our exploration program. We will be required
to  pay  mining  taxes  to  the  Mexican  government.  We  will  be  required  to  prove  our  compliance  with  relevant  Mexican
environmental and workplace safety laws, regulations and standards by submitting receipts showing the purchase of equipment
used for workplace safety or the prevention of pollution or the undertaking of environmental remediation projects before we
are able to obtain drilling permits. If our exploration activities lead us to make a decision to go into mining production, before
we  initiate  a  major  drilling  program,  we  will  have  to  obtain  an  environmental  impact  statement  authorization.  This  could
potentially take more than 10 months to obtain and could potentially be refused. New regulations, if any, could increase our
time and costs of doing business and prevent us from carrying out our exploration program. These factors could prevent us
from becoming profitable.
Because our executive officers have limited experience in mineral exploration and do not have formal training specific to the
technicalities of mineral exploration, there is a higher risk that our business will fail.
Our executive officers have limited experience in mineral exploration and do not have formal training as geologists or in the
technical aspects of management of a mineral resource exploration company. As a result of this inexperience, there is a higher
risk of our being unable to complete our business plan for the exploration of our mineral property. With no direct training or
experience in these areas, our management may not be fully aware of many of the specific requirements related to working
within  this  industry.  Our  decisions  and  choices  may  not  take  into  account  standard  engineering  or  managerial  approaches
mineral resource exploration companies commonly use. Consequently, the lack of training and experience of our management
in this industry could result in management making decisions that could result in a reduced likelihood of our being able to
locate commercially exploitable reserves on our mineral property with the result that we would not be able to achieve revenues
or raise further financing to continue exploration activities. In addition, we will have to rely on the technical services of others
with  expertise  in  geological  exploration  in  order  for  us  to  carry  out  our  planned  exploration  program.  If  we  are  unable  to
contract for the services of such individuals, it will make it difficult and maybe impossible to pursue our business plan. There
is thus a higher risk that our operations, earnings and ultimate financial success could suffer irreparable harm and our business
will likely fail.
Because our executive officers have other business interests, they may not be able or willing to devote a sufficient amount of
time to our business operation, causing our business to fail.
Greg  Painter,  our  president  and  chief  executive  officer,  devotes  approximately  80%  of  his  working  time  on  providing
management services to us and Patrick Fagen our chief financial officer, devotes approximately 40% of his working time on
providing management services to us. If the demands on our executive officers from their other obligations increase, they may
no longer be able to  devote sufficient time  to  the  management  of  our business. This  could negatively impact our business
development.
Risks Related to Our Company
We have a limited operating history on which to base an evaluation of our business and prospects.
We have been in the business of exploring mineral resource properties since January 2006 and we have not yet located any
mineral reserve. As a result, we have never had any revenues from our operations. In addition, our operating history has been
restricted  to  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  our  mineral  properties  and  this  does  not  provide  a  meaningful  basis  for  an
evaluation of our prospects if we ever determine that we have a mineral reserve and commence the construction and operation
of a mine. We have no way to evaluate the likelihood of whether our mineral properties contain any mineral reserve or, if they
do that we will be able to build or operate a mine successfully. We anticipate that we will continue to incur operating costs
without realizing any revenues during the period when we are exploring our properties. We therefore expect to continue to
incur significant losses into the foreseeable future. We recognize that if we are unable to generate significant revenues from
mining operations and any dispositions of our properties, we will not be able to earn profits or continue operations. At this
early stage of our operation, we also expect to face the risks, uncertainties, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by
companies at the start up stage of their business development. We cannot be sure that we will be successful in
12
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 13 of 63
addressing  these  risks  and  uncertainties  and  our  failure  to  do  so  could  have  a  materially  adverse  effect  on  our  financial
condition. There is no history upon which to base any assumption as to the likelihood that we will prove successful and we can
provide investors with no assurance that we will generate any operating revenues or ever achieve profitable operations.
The fact that we have not earned any operating revenues since our incorporation raises substantial doubt about our ability to
continue to explore our mineral properties as a going concern.
We have not generated any revenue from operations since our incorporation and we anticipate that we will continue to incur
operating expenses without revenues unless and until we are able to identify a mineral resource in a commercially exploitable
quantity on one or more of our mineral properties and we build and operate a mine. At October 31, 2011 we had a working
capital  deficit  of  $3,921.  We  incurred  a  net  loss  of  $243,763  for  the  year  ended  October  31,  2011  and  $1,071,969  since
inception. We will require additional financing to sustain our business operations if we are not successful in earning revenues
once exploration is complete. If our exploration programs are successful in discovering reserves of commercial tonnage and
grade, we will require significant additional funds in order to place the Dos Naciones Property into commercial production.
Should  the  results  of  our  planned  exploration  require  us  to  increase  our  current  operating  budget,  we  may  have  to  raise
additional funds to meet our currently budgeted operating requirements for the next 12 months. As we cannot assure a lender
that we will be able to successfully explore and develop our mineral properties, we will probably find it difficult to raise debt
financing from traditional lending sources. We have traditionally raised our operating capital from sales of equity and debt
securities, but there can be no assurance that we will continue to be able to do so. If we cannot raise the money that we need to
continue exploration of our mineral properties, we may be forced to delay, scale back, or eliminate our exploration activities. If
any of these were to occur, there is a substantial risk that our business would fail.
These  circumstances  lead  our  independent  registered  public  accounting  firm,  in  their  report  dated  January  24,  2012,  to
comment about our company’s ability to continue as a going concern. When an auditor issues a going concern opinion, the
auditor has substantial doubt that the company will continue to operate indefinitely and not go out of business and liquidate its
assets.  These  conditions  raise  substantial  doubt  about  our  company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The  financial 
statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts of
and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event our company cannot continue in existence. We continue to
experience net operating losses.
Risks Associated with Our Common Stock
Trading on the OTC Bulletin Board may be volatile and sporadic, which could depress the market price of our common stock
and make it difficult for our stockholders to resell their shares.
Our common stock is quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board service of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Trading in
stock quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board is often thin and characterized by wide fluctuations in trading prices, due to many
factors that may have little to do with our operations or business prospects. This volatility could depress the market price of
our common stock for reasons unrelated to operating performance. Moreover, the OTC Bulletin Board is not a stock exchange,
and trading of securities on the OTC Bulletin Board is often more sporadic than the trading of securities listed on a quotation
system like NASDAQ or a stock exchange like Amex. Accordingly, shareholders may have difficulty reselling any of their
shares.
Our stock is a penny stock. Trading of our stock may be restricted by the Securities and Exchange Commission’s penny stock 
regulations which may limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
Our stock is a penny stock. The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted Rule 15g-9 which generally defines “penny 
stock” to be any equity security that has a market price (as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than
$5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the penny stock rules, which impose additional
sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell to persons other than established customers and “accredited investors”. 
The term “accredited investor” refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or individuals with a net
worth in excess of $1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouse. The penny stock
rules  require  a  broker-dealer,  prior  to  a  transaction  in  a  penny  stock  not  otherwise  exempt  from  the  rules,  to  deliver  a
standardized risk disclosure document in a form
13
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 14 of 63
prepared by the Securities and Exchange Commission which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level
of risks in the penny stock market. The broker-dealer also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for
the penny stock, the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements
showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account. The bid and offer quotations, and the broker-
dealer and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the
transaction and must be given to the customer in writing before or with the customer’s confirmation. In addition, the penny 
stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from these rules, the broker-dealer must 
make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s 
written  agreement  to  the  transaction.  These  disclosure  requirements  may  have  the  effect  of  reducing  the  level  of  trading
activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules. Consequently, these penny stock rules
may  affect  the  ability  of  broker-dealers  to  trade  our  securities.  We  believe  that  the  penny  stock  rules  discourage  investor
interest in, and limit the marketability of, our common stock.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority sales practice requirements may also limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell 
our stock.
In  addition  to  the  “penny  stock”  rules  described  above,  the  Financial  Industry  Regulatory  Authority,  which  we  refer  to  as
FINRA,  has  adopted  rules  that  require  that  in  recommending  an  investment  to  a  customer,  a  broker-dealer  must  have 
reasonable grounds for believing that the investment is suitable for that customer. Prior to recommending speculative low-
priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about
the customer’s financial status, tax status, investment objectives and other information. Under interpretations of these rules, the
FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative low-priced securities will not be suitable for at least some 
customers.  The  FINRA  requirements  make  it  more  difficult  for  broker-dealers  to  recommend  that their  customers  buy  our 
common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market for shares of
our common stock.
Trends, Risks and Uncertainties
We have sought to identify what we believe to be the most significant risks to our business, but we cannot predict whether, or
to what extent, any of such risks may be realized nor can we guarantee that we have identified all possible risks that might 
arise. Investors should carefully consider all of such risk factors before making an investment decision with respect to our
common shares.
Item 1B.  Unresolved Staff Comments
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide the information required by this Item.
Item 2.
Properties
Our principal offices are located at 320 North Carson Street, Carson City, Nevada 89701. Our office space is provided to us
without cost. We believe that our office space and facilities are sufficient to meet our present needs and do not anticipate any
difficulty securing alternative or additional space, as needed, on terms acceptable to us.
Mineral Properties
We own a 50% undivided interest in the Dos Naciones Property and have the option to acquire an additional 20% pursuant to
the terms of our Option Agreement, as amended June 25, 2010 and October 21, 2010, with Yale Resources Ltd. The mineral
concession  that  forms  the  Dos  Naciones  property  was  staked  by  Minera  Alta  Vista,  S.A.  de  C.V.  (Minera  Alta  Vista),  a
Mexican  company  that  is  a  subsidiary  of  Yale  Resources  Ltd.  Mineral  concession  Dos  Naciones,  number  230649,  was
registered September 28, 2007 and expires September 27, 2057. The concession is registered by the Government of Mexico in
Book 366 Page 155 Act 309. This exploration concession covers an area of 2930.8269 ha, and is currently registered in the
name of Minera Alta Vista, S.A. de C.V. Title to the concession is currently held in the name of Minera Alta Vista, upon
exercise  of  the  Option  by  our  company,  title  to  70%  of  the  concession  will  be  transferred  to  our  wholly  owned  Mexican
subsidiary. The Dos Naciones mineral
14
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 15 of 63
concession  lies  within  the  municipalities  of  Opodepe  and  Cucurpe,  Sonora.  Payments  of  40,394.68  pesos  are  paid  every
semester, i.e., twice per year, to the Government of Mexico in order to maintain the rights to the mineral concession. This
amount  increases  every  two  years.  Our  joint  venture  partner  Yale  Resources  Ltd.  has  spent  approximately  $100,000  on
property exploration to date.
Technical Report
We received a technical report dated March 25, 2009 from its consulting geologist David J. Pawliuk, P. Geo, respecting the
Dos  Naciones  property.  Pursuant  to  the  report,  Mr.  Pawliuk  recommended  a  three  phase  exploration  program  on  the  Dos
Naciones  Property  to  explore  potential  mineralization  on  the  property.  The  report  found  that  Dos  Naciones  Property  hosts
different styles of metallic mineralization and that economic concentrations of silver and lead occur in quartz veins at both the
Josefina and the Dos Naciones occurrence areas within the property.
The  report  also  concluded  that  there  were  extensive  areas  of  skarn  occurring  within  the  Dos  Naciones  property  at  the  La
Espanola area, and at the Dos Naciones occurrence area. These skarns contain potentially economic concentrations of copper,
silver and gold. Skarns often form around the periphery of porphyry copper mineralizing systems. Lead- and silver-bearing 
quartz veining occurs along a fault zone that strikes 130 degrees and dips 55 degrees to the northeast at the east side of the Dos
Naciones occurrence area; this veining is approximately parallel to the mineralized quartz veins at Josefina. The report further
concluded  that  the  geological  setting  of  the  Dos  Naciones  property  area  is  favourable  for  bulk-tonnage  porphyry  copper 
deposits.
The report recommended a three phase exploration program on the Dos Naciones Property at an aggregate estimated cost of
$450,000. The first phase of our exploration program consisted of detailed geological mapping, sampling, hand trenching and
prospecting. In July, 2010 our operator on the Dos Naciones property engaged geological consultants to conduct mapping and
sampling on the property. In October 2011, we commenced the second phase of our exploration program with a planned 300
metre 3 hole diamond drilling program. The drilling was successful in confirming the high potential for multiple at-surface 
skarn  targets.  Drilling  in  the  strongly  altered  and  fractured  ground  proved  very  difficult  and  each  of  the  three  holes  was
terminated before reaching the target depth due to technical reasons. The table below summarizes the results received:
Drill Hole 
D2N-01 
D2N-01 
D2N-02 
D2N-03 
Including:
From 
0.00 
29.70
To 
10.50 
30.45
Interval 
10.50 
0.75
Cu (%) 
1.04 
0.21
Hole lost at 12.0 m 
4.50 
8.85
14.50 
9.45
10.00 
0.60
0.76 
5.45
Au (g/t)
Ag (g/t)
0.08 
1.50
0.12 
0.58
33.3 
88.3
9.3 
50.7
The results of this second phase of our exploration program warrant the continuation into the third phase of the program. The
timing and scale of the next phase of work has yet to be determined but the company is working with Yale to determine how
best to advance the exploration at Dos Naciones.
Description of Property, Location, Means and Access
The Dos Naciones Property is located approximately 140 km north northeast of the city of Hermosillo, in north-central Sonora, 
Mexico (See Figure 1 below). The Dos Naciones Property is located approximately 75 km southwest of the important Cananea
mining  district  (Figure  1).  The  Dos  Naciones  Property  is  comprised  of  one  mineral  concession,  or  lode,  that  covers
approximately 2,391 hectares. The Dos Naciones mineral concession measures approximately 5 km east-west by 5 km north-
south; it surrounds the “CRUZ” concession, which covers an area of
15
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 16 of 63
100 hectares. The Dos Naciones Property is accessible via a gravel road that leads to Rancho Los Janos; this gravel road leads
southward from the paved road between Magdalena de Kino and the village of Los Janos. The turnoff southwards to Rancho
Los  Janos  is  about  10  km  east  of  the  village  of  Cucurpe.  Four-wheel-drive  roads  extend  southwards  beyond  the  ranch 
buildings and provide good access to all parts of the property. About 3 hours is required to drive from Hermosillo to the Dos
Naciones Property.
There is a turf airstrip about 850 m long within the northeast corner of the concession area. However, this airstrip has been de-
activated by erecting fence posts at intervals along the length of the airstrip, in order to prevent it’s use. There is an electrical 
powerline extending north from the village of Cucurpe to the Mina Santa Gertrudis, a former gold-producing mine located 
about 45 km north of the Dos Naciones Property. Cucurpe is about 20 km northwest of the Dos Naciones Property.
16
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 17 of 63
Figure 1 – Location of Dos Naciones Claim
17
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 18 of 63
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 19 of 63
Climate, Local Resources, Infrastructure And Physiography
The  climate  within  the  property  area  is  semi-arid,  typical  of  higher  elevations  in  the  Sonoran  desert.  Seasonal  rains  occur
between April and July. The local ranchers have constructed dams along creek drainages within the property area, to collect
runoff water for their livestock. Magdalena de Kino is the nearest community with fuel and full services. Magdalena de Kino
is situated along the Pan-American Highway about 85 km south of the United States border at Nogales. The Dos Naciones
Property area forms part of the Sierra El Jucaral, a north northwest trending mountain range on the western fringe of the Sierra
Madre de Occidental. Elevations range between 1,140 and 1,690 m a.s.l. within the property area. The hillsides are moderately
steep and thinly forested by scrub oak trees. Rock outcrop is exposed over about 10 to 20 per cent of the Dos Naciones Project
property area.
North-central Sonora has undergone intermittent exploration since the time of the copper discoveries at Nacozari in 1660 and
at Cananea in 1760 (Heylmun, 1996). Northern Sonora is one of the most important mining areas in Mexico. A variety of
different types of mineral deposits have been mined within the region, including porphyry copper deposits at Cananea and
Nacozari,  Carlin-type  gold  deposits  at  Santa  Gertrudis  and  Amelia,  and  gold-silver  veins  at  Klondike  and  Las  Chispas 
(Heylmun, 1996; Figure 1).
History of Exploration
Silver- and lead-bearing quartz veins have been mined in at least two places on the Dos Naciones property, at Josefina and at
the Dos Naciones occurrence area. Historic workings on the Dos Naciones property include pits and short adits excavated to
extract copper from skarns. Silver- and lead-bearing quartz veins have been mined at the Dos Naciones occurrence area, in the
southwest corner of the Dos Naciones property. There is a 30 m deep shaft excavated within granitic intrusive rock at the Dos
Naciones occurrence area. From the size of the mine dump piles, the writer estimates that at least 1,000 tonnes of vein material
has  been  mined  at  Dos  Naciones  occurrence  area.  There  has  been  limited  historic  mining  of  the  copper-  and  iron-bearing 
skarns at the Dos Naciones occurrence area. One skarn body in this area extends across 100 m by 20 m, and the other skarn
body is 180 m long by 75 m wide.
La Espanola area is on the eastern side of the Dos Naciones property. Minera Alta Vista has determined that six drillholes have
been  completed  in  the  La  Espanola  area.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  these  holes  were  drilled  during  the  1990’s  by 
Penoles,  the  largest  mining  company  in  Mexico.  The  results  of  this  drilling  are  unknown  to  the  Company’s  consulting 
geologist. Minera Alta Vista is currently seeking additional information pertaining to these drill holes.
The  most  recent  known  exploration  work  on  the  Dos  Naciones  property  was  geological  mapping  and  geochemical  rock
sampling  by  Minera  Alta  Vista,  S.A.  de  C.V.,  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Yale  Resources  Ltd.  The  geochemical  rock
sampling was mainly done in areas of historic workings within the property area. Results of this work indicated that economic
concentrations of silver and lead are present in quartz veins which occur at two places on the property.
Geological Setting and Mineralization
The  economic  mineralization  encountered  to  date  on  the  Dos  Naciones  Project  property  is  quartz  veins  containing  galena,
silver and minor gold. In addition, skarn or calc-silicate rocks at Dos Naciones locally contain gold, silver and copper. Thus,
there have been at least two episodes of gold and silver mineralization at the Dos Naciones Property.
The geological setting of the Dos Naciones property is favourable for economic porphyry copper deposits. The Dos Naciones
Project property area is within the Cananea district of northern Sonora. The Cananea district was mapped by Teran Martinez et
al. (1999) of the Servicio Geologico Mexicano at 1:250,000 scale. A wide variety of sedimentary, igneous and metamorphic
rocks of various ages occur in the region; the geologic history of this region is relatively complex. The oldest rock units within
the property region are gneisses of Early Proterozoic age that belong to the Bamori Metamorphic Complex, which formed as a
result of the Mazatazal Orogeny. These gneisses occur about 15 km to the south, and to the southeast, of the Dos Naciones
property area. Granite of Proterozoic age is also exposed south of the property.
18
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 20 of 63
Areas of Cambrian age quartzite have been mapped within the Dos Naciones property. The next youngest rocks are extensive
sedimentary  and  volcanic  rocks  of  Jurassic  age.  These  include  rhyolite  and  sandstone  of  possible  Early  Jurassic  age  and
younger sandstone, siltstone, argillite and minor limestone of Late Jurassic age; andesite flows are locally interstratified with
the  Late  Jurassic  sedimentary  rocks.  Late  Jurassic  sandstone  hosts  most  of  the  gold  and  silver  occurrences  northeast  of
Cucurpe. Limestone and shale of Cretaceous age overlie the Late Jurassic sedimentary rocks to the west of the Dos Naciones
property.  The  stratified  rock  units  are  intruded  by  a  large  body  of  granodiorite  and  granite  of  Late  Cretaceous  and  Early
Tertiary age known as the Laramide Batholith. Cretaceous-aged limestone and shale are overlain by Tertiary rhyolite to the
east of Dos Naciones. Tertiary conglomerate covers much of the property region, especially the sides of the wide, northerly
trending valleys. Regional deformation has resulted in numerous faults crosscutting the Dos Naciones Property area. Most of
these faults have likely been reactivated at different times. Regional-scale, northerly trending normal faults indicate that east-
west crustal extension has occurred since the Tertiary Period.
Mineralization
The  economic  mineralization  encountered  to  date  on  the  Dos  Naciones  Project  property  is  quartz  veins  containing  galena,
silver and minor gold. In addition, skarn or calc-silicate rocks at Dos Naciones locally contain gold, silver and copper. Thus,
there have been at least two episodes of gold and silver mineralization at the Dos Naciones property. The geological setting of
the Dos Naciones property is favourable for economic porphyry copper deposits.
Dos Naciones Occurrence Area
Silver- and lead-bearing quartz veins have been mined at the Dos Naciones occurrence area, in the southwest corner of the Dos
Naciones property. There is a 30 m deep shaft excavated within granitic intrusive rock at the Dos Naciones occurrence area,
which shows the geology and sampling at the Dos Naciones  occurrence area. No vein  is exposed in the sides of  the shaft
opening,  and  David  Pawliuk  did  not  attempt  to  enter  the  shaft.  The  size  and  attitude  of  the  mineralized  vein  in  these
underground  workings  is  unknown.  However,  the  vein  is  at  least  30  cm  wide,  because  vein  quartz  pieces  up  to  30  cm  in
diameter  were  found  in  the  dump  pile.  The  mineralized  vein  may  possibly  occur  along  the  contact  between  the  argillite
wallrock and the intrusive granodiorite. A short quartz vein crosscutting argillite is exposed downslope of the old workings,
near the contact with the intrusive granodiorite; this vein dips to the southwest. The old mine workings at the Dos Naciones
occurrence area are spaced over a distance of about 250 m on surface, indicating that the mineralized silver-lead quartz vein 
here extends at least 250 m along strike.
From the size of the mine dump piles, David Pawliuk estimates that at least 1,000 tonnes of vein material has been mined at
Dos  Naciones  occurrence  area.  A  select  sample,  number  E51556,  of  the  better-mineralized  vein  material  from  this  dump 
collected  by  David  Pawliuk  contains  221  parts  per  million  (ppm)  or  221  g/t  silver,  4.44%  lead  and  0.636%  zinc.  Historic
sample 464311 of select material from the same dump contained 88 g/t silver, 1.75% lead and 1% zinc.
Josefina Area
Silver- and lead-bearing quartz veins have been mined at the Josefina area in the central part of the Dos Naciones property.
There are at least three quartz veins within the Josefina area. These veins dip steeply to the northeast, extend for at least 250 m
along strike, and are open along strike and at depth. A short shaft has been excavated within one of these quartz veins.
David Pawliuk collected rock sample E51559 from a mineralized quartz vein at Josefina, as a check on the results for historic
sample 464345. The quartz vein here is milky white with traces of light brown limonite along weathered fracture surfaces; no
sulphide minerals were seen. The vein dips at about 60 degrees to the east. This vein is almost certainly emplaced along a
fault; there is a 6 or 8 cm wide band within the central part of the vein that is finely banded on a mm scale. The vein quartz is
sugary and sandy within this band, indicating movement after the  vein  was emplaced. The quartz vein formed during at a
series of pulses; there are at least seven distinct bands within the vein; each of these bands is marked by subhedral quartz
crystals lining open spaces within the vein. The bands are up to 4 cm wide. Open cavities within the vein locally are up to 10
by 25 by 8 cm across. Sample E51559 contains 22.3 g/t silver, 0.044 g/t gold, 0.354% lead and 137 ppm zinc across 1.8 m.
Historic sample 464345 from the same site contained 39 g/t silver, less than 0.005 g/t gold, 0.40% lead and 69 ppm zinc.
19
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 21 of 63
In October, 2010, fieldwork completed by our company was successful in identifying multiple new exposures of veins as well
as a historic working that was previously unknown. The Josefina target now consists of a series of at least six sub-parallel 
veins with the core of the silver/lead system having been traced along surface for approximately 600 meters along strike and
over 250 meters wide. Highlights from the 38 samples submitted are channel chip samples from the interior of the Josefina
working returning 129g/t Ag with 5.23% Pb over 1.0 meters and 105g/t Ag with 4.21% Pb over 0.50 meters.
La Espanola
La Espanola area is on the east side of the Dos Naciones property. Here, David Pawliuk saw a reverse circulation drillsite that
appears to be several years old. Minera Alta Vista has determined that six drillholes were completed in the La Espanola area
during  the  1990’s.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  these  holes  were  drilled  by  Penoles,  the  largest  mining  company  in
Mexico.  The  results  of  this  drilling  are  unknown  to  David  Pawliuk.  Minera  Alta  Vista  is  currently  seeking  additional
information pertaining to these drill holes.
Sample Preparation, Analysis and Security
David Pawliuk collected four geochemical rock samples from the Dos Naciones Project property area on March 9, 2009. Three
of these samples were collected from Dos Naciones occurrence area, and one from the Josefina area. The rock samples were
bagged, and the bags were sealed by David Pawliuk. The samples were then transported via truck from Dos Naciones property
to Minera Alta Vista’s offices at Hermosillo, Sonora. The samples were delivered to ALS Chemex Laboratories in Hermosillo
on March 10, 2009 by David Pawliuk. David Pawliuk maintained custody of the samples from the time the samples were
collected until the samples were delivered to ALS Chemex Laboratories facility at Hermosillo. The rocks were analyzed for
gold by geochemical fire assay, solvent extraction and atomic adsorption spectrometry. A subsample of 30 gm was assayed.
The rock sample was also analyzed for silver, mercury, arsenic, antimony and 46 other elements by aqua regia acid digestion
ICPMS.
Data Verification
The results of geochemical rock sampling show that economic concentrations of silver and gold occur in quartz veins from two
separate areas within the Dos Naciones property. Limited historic production has occurred from these veins. The results of
geochemical rock sampling also show that copper-iron skarns within the Dos Naciones property also contain gold and silver.
Skarns have also been mined within the property area. As outlined above in the section on mineralization, the results of David
Pawliuk’s  geochemical  rock  sampling  confirmed  the  results  of  historic  sampling  on  the  property  by  Yale  Resources  Ltd.
during 2008.
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
There are no proceedings in which any of our directors, officers or affiliates, or any registered or beneficial shareholder, is an
adverse party or has a material interest adverse to our company.
Item 4.
[Removed and Reserved]
PART II
Item 5.  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
In the United States, our common shares are quoted on the Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board under the symbol “DTOR.” The 
following quotations, obtained from Yahoo Finance, reflect the high and low bids for our common shares based on inter-dealer 
prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission and may not represent actual transactions.
20
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 22 of 63
Our common shares were originally quoted for trading on the OTCBB on July 12, 2007 under the symbol “CVRX”.
The high and low bid prices of our common stock for the periods indicated below are as follows:
Quarter Ended 
October 31, 2011
July 31, 2011 
April 30, 2011 
January 31, 2011 
October 31, 2010
July 31, 2010 
April 30, 2010 
January 31, 2010 
October 31, 2009
OTC Bulletin Board(1)
High 
$0.095 
$0.10 
$0.20 
$0.28 
$0.35 
$0.35 
$0.15 
$0.15 
$0.28
Low 
$0.02 
$0.06 
$0.07 
$0.125 
$0.12 
$0.04 
$0.08 
$0.05 
$0.05
(1)  Over-the-counter  market  quotations  reflect  inter-dealer  prices  without  retail  mark-up,  mark-down  or 
commission, and may not represent actual transactions.
Our  transfer  agent  is  Valiant  Trust  Company,  of  600  –  750  Cambie  Street,  Vancouver,  BC,  Canada  V6B  0A2;  telephone
number: 604-699-4884; facsimile: 604-681-3067.
On October 31, 2011, the shareholders list showed 64 registered shareholders, 15,462,240 common shares.
Dividend Policy
There  are  no  restrictions  in  our  articles  of  incorporation  or  bylaws  that  prevent  us  from  declaring  dividends.  The  Nevada
Revised  Statutes,  however,  do  prohibit  us  from  declaring  dividends  where,  after  giving  effect  to  the  distribution  of  the
dividend:
1.  We would not be able to pay our debts as they become due in the usual course of business; or 
2.
Our total assets would be less than the sum of our total liabilities plus the amount that would be needed to satisfy the
rights of shareholders who have preferential rights superior to those receiving the distribution.
We have not declared any dividends and we do not plan to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities; Use of Proceeds from Registered Securities
We did not sell any equity securities which were not registered under the Securities Act during the year ended October 31,
2011 that were not otherwise disclosed on our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or our current reports on Form 8-K filed during 
the year ended October 31, 2011.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
We have no long-term incentive plans, other than the Stock Option Plan described below.
21
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 23 of 63
2010 Stock Option Plan
On September 7, 2010 our directors approved the adoption of our 2010 Stock Option Plan which permits our company to grant
up to 5,000,000 options to acquire shares of common stock, to directors, officers, employees and consultants of our company.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Plan category
Number of securities to  
be issued upon exercise  
of outstanding options,  
warrants and rights
Weighted-average  
exercise price of
outstanding options,  
warrants and rights
Number of securities  
remaining available for  
future issuance under equity
compensation plans  
(excluding securities  
reflected in column (a))
Equity compensation plans  
approved by security  
holders 
Equity compensation plans  
not approved by security  
holders
Total
Nil
1,000,000
1,000,000
Nil
$0.10
$0.10
Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Nil
Nil
Nil
We did not purchase any of our shares of common stock or other securities during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended
October 31, 2011.
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide the information required by this Item.
Item 7.  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The  following  discussion  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  our  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  related
notes for the years ended October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010 that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following
discussion  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  reflect  our  plans,  estimates  and  beliefs.  Our  actual  results  could  differ
materially from those discussed in the forward looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences
include, but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in the section entitled
"Risk Factors" beginning on page 9 of this annual report.
Our audited consolidated financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United
States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Our plan of operation is to carry out exploration work on our Dos Naciones Property in order to ascertain whether it possesses
commercially  exploitable  quantities  of  gold,  silver,  and  other  metals.  We  intend  to  primarily  explore  for  gold,  silver,  and
copper but if we discover that our mineral property holds potential for other minerals that our management determines are
worth exploring further, then we intend to explore for those other minerals. We will not be able to determine whether or not
the Dos Naciones Property contains a commercially exploitable mineral deposit, or reserve, until appropriate exploratory work
is done and an economic evaluation based on that work indicates economic viability.
22
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 24 of 63
The three phase exploration program on the Dos Naciones property carries an aggregate estimated cost of $450,000. The first
phase  of  our  exploration  program  was  completed  during  the  quarter  ended  October  31,  2010and  consisted  of  detailed
geological mapping, sampling, hand trenching and prospecting. In July, 2010 our company’s operator on the Dos Nactiones
property  engaged  geological  consultants  to  conduct  mapping  and  sampling  on  the  property.  Our  company  commenced  the
second  phase  of  its  exploration  program  in  September,  2011.  The  results  of  this  second  phase  of  our  exploration  program
warrant the continuation into the third phase of the program. The timing and scale of the next phase of work has yet to be
determined  but  the  company  is  working  with  Yale  to  determine  how  best  to  advance  the  exploration  at  Dos  Naciones.  A
detailed breakdown of the proposed budget and work exploration program is as follows:
Estimated Dos Naciones Work Program Costs
Phase One
Detailed geological mapping, stripping and trenching
1 Geologist for 50 days @ $300 per day: 
3 Field Assistants for 50 days @ $100 per day: 
Food and accommodation @ $30 per man-day: 
Field supplies: 
Vehicle rental, fuel and maintenance: 
Analytical costs: 300 samples @ $30 per sample: 
                                             Total geological mapping, stripping and trenching: 
Report preparation 
For reporting on all of the above work, including drafting: 
  
                                                                                                         Subtotal Phase 
One
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
Phase Two
IP surveying in area of aeromagnetic low 
15 days of surveying along cut grid lines with pickets at 25 m intervals (slope 
distance) at an all-inclusive cost 
Diamond drilling to test mineralized vein structures at Josefina
$
500 meters at an all-inclusive (drilled, logged, split, sampled, water haul) cost of $180 
per meter: 
Diamond drilling to test mineralized vein structures at Dos Naciones
300 meters at an all-inclusive (drilled, logged, split, sampled, water haul) 
cost of $180 per meter: 
  
                                                                                                             Subtotal Phase 
Two
$
$
$
Cost 
 
15,000  
15,000  
6,000  
1,000  
5,000  
9,000  
51,000  
 
2,500  
 
53,500
30,000
90,000
54,000  
 
174,000
Phase Three
Phase Three is contingent on IP anomalies from Phase Two work being determined to be favorable for testing with diamond
drill holes.
23
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 25 of 63
Diamond drilling in area of IP chargeability anomalies
1,000 meters at an all-inclusive (drilled, logged, split, sampled, water haul)
cost of $180 per meter: 
Subtotal Phase Three 
Contingency 10% 
TOTAL THREE PHASE PROGRAM:
$
$
$
$
180,000  
180,000 
42,500 
450,000
Our plan of operation is to carry out exploration work on our Dos Naciones Property in order to ascertain whether it possesses
commercially  exploitable  quantities  of  gold,  silver,  and  other  metals.  We  intend  to  primarily  explore  for  gold,  silver,  and
copper but if we discover that our mineral property holds potential for other minerals that our management determines are
worth exploring further, then we intend to explore for those other minerals. We will not be able to determine whether or not
the Dos Naciones Property contains a commercially exploitable mineral deposit, or reserve, until appropriate exploratory work
is done and an economic evaluation based on that work indicates economic viability.
Mineral property exploration is typically conducted in phases. Each subsequent phase of exploration work is recommended by
a geologist based on the results from the most recent phase of exploration. Once we complete each phase of exploration, we
will make a decision as to whether or not we proceed with each successive phase based upon the analysis of the results of that
program.  Our  management  will  make  these  decisions  based  upon  the  recommendations  of  the  independent  geologist  who
oversees the program and records the results.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
We anticipate that we will incur the following expenses over the next twelve months:
Expense Item
Expenditures on the Dos Naciones Property in accordance with the terms of our 
Option Agreement with Yale Resources Ltd. 
Ongoing professional expenses associated with our company being a reporting issuer 
under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
General and administrative expenses
Total
Cost
150,000
60,000
25,000  
235,000
$
$
$
$
As of October 31, 2011 we had cash of $24,088. Effective December 3, 2010, we issued 2,000,000 units at a price of $0.10 per
unit  for  gross  proceeds  of  $200,000.  Each  unit  consisted  of  one  share  of  common  stock  and  one  share  purchase  warrant
entitling the warrant holder to purchase an additional share of common stock at a price of $0.25 per share for a period of two
years from closing.
On March 11, 2011, we issued 165,517 shares of our common stock to Asher Enterprises, Inc. (“Asher”) pursuant to our 8% 
convertible note (the “Note”) with Asher dated August 25, 2010 in the amount of $55,000. Asher provided us with a notice to
convert $12,000 of the principal amount of the Note.
On June 3, 2011 $15,000 of the Note was converted into shares at a rate of $0.0493 per share for a total of 304,260 shares. On
September 20, 2011, $8,000 of the Note was converted into shares at a rate of $0.0232 per share for a total of 344,828 shares.
On October 26, 2011, we repaid the convertible debenture in full to the non-related party with $33,000.
On September 30, 2011, we issued 1,875,000 common shares for proceeds of $75,000.
Based on the above estimate of $235,000 for our expenses for the next twelve months we do not have enough funds to proceed
with our plan of operation over the next twelve months. We plan to rely on the equity financing in order to raise any additional
funds necessary to pursue our plan of operation and to fund our working capital deficit in
24
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 26 of 63
order to enable us to pay our accounts payable and accrued liabilities. We currently do not have any arrangements in place for
the  completion  of  any  equity  financings  and  there  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  successful  in  completing  any  equity
financings.
Results of Operations
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the
year ended October 31, 2011 which are included herein.
Our operating results for the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 are summarized as follows:
Revenue 
Operating Expenses 
Other Expenses 
Net Loss
Revenues
$
2011
2010
Years Ended October 31,  
 
- 
514,001  
- 
514,001
154,083
89,680 
243,763
- $
We have not earned any revenues to date. We do not anticipate earning revenues from our planned mineral operations until
such time as we enter into commercial production of the Doc Naciones Property, or other mineral properties we may acquire
from time to time, and of which there are no assurances.
Expenses
Our expenses for the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 are outlined in the table below:
Amortization 
Consulting 
Foreign Exchange Loss (gain) 
General and Administrative 
Impairment of capital assets 
Mineral property expense 
Professional Fees 
Accretion on discount of convertible debt 
Interest expense 
Loss on change in fair value of derivatives 
Loss on settlement of debt 
Total
General and Administrative
$
$
2011
2010
536  $
Years ended October 31,  
 
 703  
268,710  
1,422  
27,417  
- 
157,907  
57,842  
- 
- 
- 
- 
514,001
16,059 
1,987 
33,449 
1,838 
20,000 
80,214 
55,000 
7,535 
14,962 
12,183 
243,763 $
The $6,032 increase in our general and administrative expenses for year ended October 31, 2011 compared to October 31,
2010 was primarily due to increases in transfer agent fees relating to issuances of common shares.
Interest Expenses
Our interest expenses increased by $7,535 during the year ended October 31, 2011 primarily due to interest incurred on the
convertible debenture to Asher that was settled on October 26, 2011.
25
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 27 of 63
Professional Fees
Professional fees include our accounting and auditing expenses incurred in connection with the preparation and audit of our
financial statements and professional fees that we pay to our legal counsel. Our professional fees increased by $22,372 during
the year ended October 31, 2011 primarily due to due diligence work surrounding issuances of common shares and increased
costs  in  our  audit  and  legal  work.  Professional  fees  are  expected  to  increase  in  fiscal  2012  due  to  our  ongoing  reporting
obligations of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Consulting Expenses
Our  consulting  expenses  decreased  by  $252,651  during  year  ended  October  31,  2011  due  to  decreased  management  and
consulting expenses during the year.
Liquidity And Capital Resources
Working Capital
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Working Capital 
 
Cash Flows 
  
  
  
Cash used in Operating Activities 
Cash provided by Financing Activities 
Net Increase (Decrease) in Cash
As at
As at October
31, 2010
October 31, 2011   
46,637  $
50,549  $
(3,912) $
$
$
$
Percentage
Increase /
(Decrease)
(48.82%) 
(61.12%) 
(89.94%)
91,118 
 130,012 
 (38,894)
Year Ended
Year Ended
Percentage
Increase /
October 31, 2011 October 31, 2010 (Decrease)
140.82% 
$
(22.05%) 
$
$
(171.55%)
(181,420)$
122,701 $
(58,719)$
(75,335)
 157,404 
 82,069
We anticipate that we will incur approximately $235,000 in operating expenses, including professional, legal and accounting
expenses associated with our reporting requirements under the Exchange Act during the next twelve months. As of October
31, 2011 we had cash of $24,088. Accordingly, we will need to obtain additional financing in order to complete our business
plan.
Cash Used In Operating Activities
We used cash in operating activities in the amount of $181,420 during the year ended October 31, 2011 and $75,335 during
the year ended October 31, 2010. The increase in cash used for operating activities were attributed to an increase in operating
activity during the year, including repayment of outstanding obligations. Cash used in operating activities was funded by cash
from financing activities through debt and equity issuances.
Cash From Investing Activities
We generated cash of $Nil in investing activities during the year ended October 31, 2011 and 2010.
Cash from Financing Activities
We  generated  cash  of  $122,701  from  financing  activities  during  the  year  ended  October  31,  2011  compared  to  cash  of
$157,404 generated from financing activities during the year ended October 31, 2010. The decrease in cash received from
financing activities were attributed to the fact that the Company received $55,000 from Asher for financing in prior year that
was repeated in the current year, and repaid $33,000 for outstanding convertible debentures during the year. The decrease was
offset by an increase of $63,703 in proceeds from the issuance of common shares less share issuance costs of $16,494.
26
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 28 of 63
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 29 of 63
Disclosure of Outstanding Share Data
As  of  the  date  of  this  annual  report,  we  have  15,462,240  shares  of  common  stock  issued  and  outstanding,  and  2,000,000
warrants outstanding, exercisable at a price of $0.25 per share until December 6, 2012. We have 1,000,000 options to acquire
additional  shares  of  common  stock  at  a  price  of  $0.10  per  share.  We  do  not  have  shares  of  any  other  class  issued  and
outstanding as at the date of this report.
Going Concern
The  financial  statements  accompanying  this  report  have  been  prepared  on  a  going  concern  basis,  which  implies  that  our
company will continue to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. Our
company has not generated revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends and is unlikely to pay dividends or
generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation of our company as a going concern is dependent
upon the continued financial support from our shareholders, the ability of our company to obtain necessary equity financing to
achieve  our  operating  objectives,  and  the  attainment  of  profitable  operations.  As  at  October  31,  2011,  our  company  has
accumulated losses of $1,071,969 since inception. We do not have sufficient working capital to enable us to carry out our
stated plan of operation for the next twelve months.
Due to the  uncertainty  of our ability to meet our  current operating expenses and the capital expenses noted  above in their
report  on  the  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended  October  31,  2011,  our  independent  auditors  included  an  explanatory
paragraph regarding concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements contain additional note
disclosures describing the circumstances that lead to this disclosure by our independent auditors.
The continuation of our business is dependent upon us raising additional financial support. The issuance of additional equity
securities by us could result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial
loans, assuming those loans would be available, will increase our liabilities and future cash commitments.
Future Financings
We  anticipate continuing  to rely on  equity  sales  of  our  shares of  common  stock in  order to continue  to fund  our business
operations. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing stockholders. There is no assurance that we will
achieve any additional sales of our equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our planned activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial
condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital
resources that are material to stockholders.
Equity Compensation
Other than our 2010 Stock Option Plan adopted by or board of directors on September 7, 2010, under which we are able to
issue up to 5,000,000 stock options, we do not have any equity compensation plans or arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
27
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 30 of 63
Critical Accounting Policies
The financial statements and the related notes of our company are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States and are expressed in US dollars. Our fiscal year-end is October 31.
These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  our  company  and  our  wholly  owned  Mexican  subsidiary,
Mineral Plata Del Toro S.A. de C.V. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates
The preparation  of  financial statements  in  accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the
financial  statements  and  the  reported  amounts  of  revenue  and  expenses  in  the  reporting  period.  Our  company  regularly
evaluates estimates and assumptions related to long-lived assets, mineral property costs, asset retirement obligations, stock-
based compensation, and deferred income tax asset valuations. Our company bases our estimates and assumptions on current
facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of
which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and
expenses  that  are  not  readily  apparent  from  other  sources.  The  actual  results  experienced  by  our  company  may  differ
materially and adversely from our company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and
the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Our company considers all highly liquid investments with maturity of three months or less at the date of acquisition to be cash
equivalents.
Mineral Property Costs
Our company has been in the exploration stage since our inception and has not yet realized any revenues from its planned
operations. We are primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mining properties. Mineral property exploration
costs are expensed as incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized. Our company assesses the carrying
costs  for  impairment  under  ASC  360,  “Property,  Plant,  and  Equipment”  at  each  fiscal  quarter  end.  When  it  has  been 
determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the
costs  then  incurred  to  develop  such  property,  are  capitalized.  Such  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production 
method over the estimated life  of the probable reserve. If  mineral properties are subsequently abandoned  or  impaired, any
capitalized costs will be charged to operations.
Long-Lived Assets
In  accordance  with  ASC  360,  “Property,  Plant,  and  Equipment”,  our  company  tests  long-lived  assets  or  asset  groups  for
recoverability  when  events  or  changes  in  circumstances  indicate  that  their  carrying  amount  may  not  be  recoverable.
Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of the
asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the
amount  originally  expected  for  the  acquisition  or  construction  of  the  asset;  current  period  cash  flow  or  operating  losses
combined  with  a  history  of  losses  or  a  forecast  of  continuing  losses  associated  with  the  use  of  the  asset;  and  current
expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value which is generally determined based on
the  sum  of  the  undiscounted  cash  flows  expected  to  result  from  the  use  and  the  eventual  disposal  of  the  asset,  as  well  as
specific  appraisal  in  certain  instances. An  impairment  loss  is  recognized  when the  carrying  amount  is  not  recoverable  and
exceeds fair value.
28
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 31 of 63
Asset Retirement Obligations
Our company accounts for asset retirement obligations in accordance with the provisions of ASC 440, “Asset Retirement and 
Environmental Obligations” which requires our company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability
in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from 
the acquisition, construction, development, and/or normal use of the assets. As at October 31, 2011 and 2010, our company
had no asset retirement obligations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Amortization is provided using the declining balance method at the rate of 20%
per annum for furniture and equipment and 30% per annum for computer equipment.
Loss per Share
Our company computes loss per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share” which requires presentation of both 
basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net loss
available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during
the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury
stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price
for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or
warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Income Taxes
Our company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”. 
The  asset  and  liability  method  provides  that  deferred  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  recognized  for  the  expected  future  tax
consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating
loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws
that  will  be  in  effect  when  the  differences  are  expected  to  reverse.  Our  company  records  a  valuation  allowance  to  reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
As of October 31, 2011 and 2010, our company did not have any amounts recorded pertaining to uncertain tax positions.
Our company files federal and provincial income tax returns in Canada and federal, state and local income tax returns in the
U.S., as applicable. Our company may be subject to a reassessment of federal and provincial income taxes by Canadian tax
authorities for a period of three years from the date of the original notice of assessment in respect of any particular taxation
year. For Canadian and U.S. income tax returns, the open taxation years range from 2007 to 2010. In certain circumstances,
the U.S. federal statute of limitations can reach beyond the standard three year period. U.S. state statutes of limitations for
income tax assessment vary from state to state. Tax authorities of Canada and U.S. have not audited any of our company’s 
income tax returns for the open taxation years noted above.
Our  company  recognizes  interest  and  penalties  related  to  uncertain  tax  positions  in  tax  expense.  During  the  years  ended
October 31, 2011 and 2010, there were no charges for interest or penalties.
Foreign Currency Translation
The  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  our  company is the  United  States  dollar.  Occasional  transactions  may  occur  in  a
foreign  currency  and  our  company  has  adopted  ASC  740,  “Foreign  Currency  Translation  Matters”.  Monetary  assets  and 
liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated to United States dollars using the exchange rate prevailing at the
balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are
29
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 32 of 63
translated at rates of exchange in effect at the date of the transaction. Average monthly rates are used to translate revenues and
expenses. Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are
included in the determination of income. Our company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative
instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures
ASC  820,  “Fair  Value  Measurements  and  Disclosures”  requires  an  entity  to  maximize  the  use  of  observable  inputs  and
minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the
level  of  independent,  objective  evidence  surrounding  the  inputs  used  to  measure  fair  value.  A  financial  instrument’s 
categorization  within  the  fair  value  hierarchy  is  based  upon  the  lowest  level  of  input  that  is  significant  to  the  fair  value
measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or
liability such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in
markets  with  insufficient  volume  or  infrequent  transactions  (less  active  markets);  or  model-derived  valuations  in  which 
significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data.
Level 3
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant
to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Our company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash, amounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and
amounts due to related parties. Pursuant to ASC 820, the fair value of cash is determined based on “Level 1” inputs, which 
consist  of  quoted  prices  in  active  markets  for  identical  assets.  The  recorded  values  of  all  other  financial  instruments
approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective maturity dates or durations.
Comprehensive Loss
ASC  220,  “Comprehensive  Income”  establishes  standards  for  the  reporting  and  display  of  comprehensive  income  and  its
components  in  the  financial  statements.  As  at  October  31,  2011  and  2010,  our  company  had  no  items  that  represent
comprehensive income or loss.
Stock Based Compensation
Our company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation – Stock Based Compensation”
and  ASC  505,  “Equity  Based  Payments  to  Non-Employees”,  which  requires  the  measurement  and  recognition  of 
compensation expense based on estimated fair values for all share-based awards made to employees and directors, including 
stock options.
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing 
model.  Our  company  uses  the  Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model  as  its  method  of  determining  fair  value.  This  model  is
affected by our company’s stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These subjective
variables include, but are not limited to our company’s expected stock price volatility
30
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 33 of 63
over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The value of the portion of
the  award  that  is  ultimately  expected  to  vest  is  recognized  as  an  expense  in  the  statement  of  operations  over  the  requisite
service period.
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted
for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more
reliably measurable.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Our  company  has  implemented  all  new  accounting  pronouncements  that  are  in  effect  and  that  may  impact  its  financial
statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have
a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Item 7A.  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide the information required by this Item.
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
31
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 34 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010
(Expressed in US dollars)
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations 
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders' Equity (Deficit) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Index 
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 35 of 63
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of  
Del Toro Silver Corp. (An Exploration Stage Company)
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Del Toro Silver Corp. (An Exploration Stage Company) as
of October 31, 2011 and the related statements of operations, stockholders’ equity (deficit), and cash flows for the year then 
ended and accumulated from January 9, 2006 (date of inception) to October 31, 2011. These consolidated financial statements
are  the  responsibility  of  the  Company's  management.  Our  responsibility  is  to  express  an  opinion  on  these  consolidated
financial statements based on our audit. The financial statements of Del Toro Silver Corp. as at October 31, 2010 and 2009 and
for the years then ended and accumulated from January 9, 2006 (date of inception) to October 31, 2010 were audited by other
auditors whose report dated February 7, 2011 included an explanatory paragraph regarding the Company’s ability to continue 
as  a  going  concern.  The  financial  statements  for  the  period  from  January  9,  2006  (date  of  inception)  to  October  31,  2010
reflect a net loss of $828,206 of the related cumulative totals. The auditors’ report has been furnished to us, and our opinion, 
insofar as it related to amounts included for such periods, is based solely on the report of such auditors.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial
statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of
its internal control over financial reporting. An audit includes consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a
basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion
on  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Accordingly,  we  express  no  such  opinion.  An  audit  also
includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company as of October 31, 2011, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended and accumulated
from January 9, 2006 (date of inception) to October 31, 2011, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States.
The  accompanying  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  assuming  the  Company  will  continue  as  a  going  concern.  As
discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company has not generated any revenues and has incurred operating losses
since  inception.  These  factors  raise  substantial  doubt  about  the  Company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern. 
Management’s  plans  in  regard  to  these  matters  are  also  discussed  in  Note  1  to  the  financial  statements.  The  financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ SATURNA GROUP CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS LLP
Saturna Group Chartered Accountants LLP
Vancouver, Canada
February 10, 2012
F-1
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 36 of 63
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders of  
Del Toro Silver Corp. 
(an Exploration Stage Enterprise)
We have audited the balance sheets of Del Toro Silver Corp. (an Exploration Stage Enterprise) as at October 31, 2010 and the
statements  of  operations,  stockholders’  equity  (deficit),  and  cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended  and  the  period  from
incorporation  on  January  9,  2006  to October  31,  2010.  These financial  statements are the  responsibility  of the  Company’s 
management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We  conducted  our  audits  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United
States).  Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  an  audit  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  whether  the  financial
statements  are  free  of  material  misstatements.  The  Company  has  determined  that  it  is  not  required  to  have,  nor  were  we
engaged  to  perform,  an  audit  of  its  internal  control  over  financial  reporting.  Our  audits  included  consideration  of  internal
control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for
the  purpose  of  expressing  an  opinion  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting. 
Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and  disclosures  in  the  financial  statements,  assessing  the  accounting  principles  used  and  significant  estimates  made  by
management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, these financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as at
October 31, 2010 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended and the period from incorporation
on January 9, 2006 to October 31, 2010 in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
The accompanying financial statements referred to above have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a
going  concern.  As  discussed  in  Note  2  to  financial  statements,  the  Company  is  in  the  exploration  stage,  and  has  no
permanently established source of revenue and is dependent on its ability to raise capital from shareholders or other sources to
sustain operations. These factors, along with other matters as set forth in Note 2, raise substantial doubt that the Company will
be able to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the
outcome of this uncertainty.
Vancouver, Canada 
February 7, 2011
“MacKay LLP”
Chartered Accountants
F-2
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 37 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
  
  
  
Assets 
Current Assets 
   Cash 
   Amounts receivable 
   Prepaid expenses 
Total Current Assets 
Property and equipment (Note 3) 
Deferred financing costs 
Total Assets 
  
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Deficit 
Current Liabilities 
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
   Due to related party (Note 9) 
   Convertible debenture, net of unamortized discount of $nil (Note 5) 
Total Liabilities 
Nature of operations and continuance of business (Note 1) 
Subsequent event (Note 12) 
Stockholders’ Deficit 
   Preferred stock: 100,000,000 shares authorized, par value $0.001 
   Issued and outstanding: Nil shares 
   Common stock: 100,000,000 shares authorized, par value $0.001 
   Issued and outstanding:15,462,240 (2010 – 10,535,135) shares 
   Additional paid-in capital 
   Share subscriptions received (Note 7) 
   Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage 
Total Stockholders’ Deficit 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Deficit
October 31,
2011 
$
October 31,
2010 
$
82,807 
8,311
91,118 
2,374 
9,204 
102,696
73,354 
1,658 
55,000 
130,012
–
10,535 
680,405 
109,950 
(828,206) 
(27,316) 
102,696
24,088  
616  
21,933  
46,637  
– 
– 
46,637  
 
 
 
50,349  
200  
– 
50,549
–
15,462 
1,052,595  
–
(1,071,969)   
(3,912)   
46,637
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-3
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 38 of 63
–
–
2011 
$
2010 
$
2011 
$
to October 31,
536 
16,059 
1,987 
33,449 
20,000 
80,214 
1,838 
154,083 
(154,083)
Accumulated from 
    January 9, 2006 
Year ended  Year ended    (date of inception) 
October 31,  October 31,    
   
 
     
–   
     
     
703    
268,710    
1,422    
27,417    
157,907    
57,842    
–   
514,001    
(514,001)   
     
–   
–   
–   
–   
–   
(514,001)   
     
(0.05)     
     
9,961,162
2,692 
296,954 
(2,537) 
93,229 
253,093 
337,020 
1,838 
982,289 
(982,289)
(55,000) 
(7,535) 
(14,962) 
(12,183) 
(89,680) 
(1,071,969)
(55,000) 
(7,535) 
(14,962) 
(12,183) 
(89,680) 
(243,763)
13,991,709
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Operations 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Revenue 
  
Expenses 
   Amortization 
   Consulting fees (Note 10) 
   Foreign exchange loss (gain) 
   General and administrative 
   Mineral property costs 
   Professional fees 
   Write-down of property and equipment 
Total Expenses 
Loss Before Other Expenses 
Other Expenses 
 Accretion of discount on convertible debt (Note 5) 
 Interest expense 
 Loss on change in fair value of derivative liability (Note 6) 
 Loss on settlement of debt 
Total Other Expenses 
Net Loss 
  
Loss Per Share, Basic and Diluted 
  
Weighted Average Number of Shares Outstanding
(0.02)
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-4
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 39 of 63
#
Shares
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity (Deficit) 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Balance, January 9, 2006 (date of inception) 
Issuance of common stock for cash 
Net loss for the year 
Balance, October 31, 2006 
Issuance of common stock for mineral property 
Net loss for the year 
Balance, October 31, 2007 
Issuance of common stock for mineral property 
Net loss for the period 
Balance, October 31, 2008 
Issuance of common stock for cash 
Net loss for the year 
Balance, October 31, 2009 
Issuance of common stock for mineral property 
Issuance of common stock for consulting services 
Fair value of stock options granted 
Share subscriptions received in advance 
Net loss for the year 
Balance, October 31, 2010 
Issuance of common stock for cash 
Issuance of common stock to settle debt 
Issuance of common stock for conversion of 
debenture 
Share issuance costs 
Fair value of beneficial conversion feature recorded 
upon conversion of debenture 
Net loss for the year 
Balance, October 31, 2011
–
 
8,750,000
 
–
 
8,750,000
 
10,000 
 
–
 
8,760,000
 
20,000 
 
–
 
8,780,000
 
1,055,135
 
–
 
9,835,135
 
600,000
 
100,000
–
 
–
 
 
–
  10,535,135
3,875,000
 
237,500
 
 
814,605
–
  15,462,240
–
–
–
8,750 
–
8,750 
10
–
8,760 
20
–
8,780 
1,055 
–
9,835 
600 
100 
–
–
–
10,535
3,875 
237 
815
$
–
114,750
–
114,750
2,190 
–
116,940
9,740 
–
126,680
157,215
–
283,895
129,900
20,900
245,710
–
–
680,405
270,524
14,013
34,185
–
–
(16,494) 
69,962
–
15,462
–
1,052,595
Common Stock
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-In 
  Capital
Share
Subscriptions    
 
  Received
$
Deficit
Accumulated 
  During the 
  Development
Stage
Total
$
–
123,500
(22,176) 
101,324
2,200 
(69,538) 
33,986
9,760 
(86,666) 
(42,920) 
158,270
(135,825) 
(20,475) 
130,500
21,000
245,710
109,950
(514,001) 
(27,316) 
164,449
14,250
35,000
(16,494) 
69,962
(243,763) 
(3,912)
$
–
–
(22,176) 
(22,176)
(69,538) 
(91,714) 
–
(86,666) 
(178,380) 
–
(135,825) 
(314,205) 
–
–
–
–
(514,001) 
(828,206) 
–
–
–
–
–
(243,763) 
(1,071,969)
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
109,950  
– 
109,950  
(109,950) 
– 
–
– 
–
– 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-5
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 40 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Operating Activities 
Net loss for the year 
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities: 
   Accretion of discount on convertible debenture 
   Amortization 
   Loss on change in fair value of derivative liability 
   Loss on settlement of debt 
   Shares issued for mineral property 
   Shares issued to settle debt 
   Stock-based compensation 
   Write-down of property and equipment 
Changes in operating assets and liabilities: 
   Amounts receivable 
   Prepaid expenses 
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Net Cash Used In Operating Activities 
Investing Activities 
   Purchase of property and equipment 
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities 
Financing Activities 
   Proceeds from issuance of convertible debenture 
   Repayment of convertible debenture 
   Proceeds from related party 
   Repayments to related party 
   Proceeds from issuance of common shares/subscriptions received 
   Share issuance costs 
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities 
Increase (Decrease) in Cash 
Cash, Beginning of Period 
Cash, End of Period 
Non-cash investing and financing activities: 
   Shares issued for conversion of debenture 
   Shares issued to settle debt 
Supplemental disclosures: 
   Interest paid 
   Income tax paid
–
–
Accumulated from 
January 9, 2006
2011 
$
(243,763)
2011 
$
2010 
$
(1,071,969)
October 31,
7,695 
(21,933) 
(21,998) 
(181,420)
55,000
2,692 
14,962
12,183
142,460 
14,060
266,710 
1,838
55,000
536 
14,962
12,183
–
14,060
–
1,838
Year ended  Year ended   (Date of Inception) to
October 31, October 31,   
  
 
     
(514,001)  
   
–   
703    
–   
–   
130,500    
–   
266,710    
–   
     
(4,514)  
–   
45,267   
(75,335)  
     
–   
–   
     
55,000   
–   
1,658    
–   
109,950    
(9,204)  
157,404    
82,069   
738    
82,807   
     
–   
–   
     
378    
–
–
(33,000) 
–
(1,458) 
173,653
(16,494) 
122,701
(58,719) 
82,807
24,088
55,000
(33,000) 
1,658 
(1,458) 
565,373 
(25,698) 
561,875 
24,088
–
24,088
(616) 
(21,933) 
51,356
(533,257)
(4,530) 
(4,530)
35,000
14,250
35,000
14,250
5,757 
–
6,135 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
F-6
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 41 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
1.
Nature of Operations and Continuance of Business
 
Del Toro Silver Corp. (the Company”) was incorporated on January 9, 2006 as Candev Resource Exploration, Inc. under
the laws of the State of Nevada and extra-provincially registered under the laws of the province of British Columbia on
August 15, 2006. Effective July 28, 2009, the Company completed a merger with its wholly owned subsidiary, Del Toro
Silver Corp., a Nevada corporation which was incorporated on July 7, 2009 solely to change the Company’s name to
Del Toro Silver Corp. The Company is an exploration stage company as defined by Financial Accounting Standards
Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 915, “Development Stage Entities”, and is engaged in the 
acquisition, exploration and development of mineral properties.
 
These financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis, which assumes that the Company will be able
to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. As at October 31, 2011, the Company
has not generated any revenue, has a working capital deficit of $3,912, and an accumulated deficit of $1,071,969. The
continued  operations  of  the  Company  are  dependent  on  its  ability  to  generate  future  cash  flows  or  obtain  additional
financing.  These  factors  raise  substantial  doubt  about  the  Company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  These 
financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recorded assets or liabilities that might be necessary should
the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
 
Significant Accounting Policies 
 
(a)  Basis of Presentation
The financial statements and the related notes of the Company are prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting  principles  in  the  United  States  and  are  expressed  in  US  dollars.  The  Company’s  fiscal  year-end  is 
October 31.
These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  the  Company  and  its  wholly  owned  Mexican
subsidiary, Mineral Plata Del Toro S.A. de C.V. All significant intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
(b)  Consolidation
(c)  Use of Estimates
2.
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities
at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period.
The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to long-lived assets, mineral property costs, 
asset  retirement  obligations,  convertible  debt,  derivative  liabilities,  stock-based  compensation,  and  deferred 
income  tax  asset  valuation  allowances.  The  Company  bases  its  estimates  and  assumptions  on  current  facts,
historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results
of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of
costs  and  expenses  that  are  not  readily  apparent  from  other  sources.  The  actual  results  experienced  by  the
Company may differ materially and adversely from the Company’s estimates. To the extent there are material
differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
The  Company  considers  all  highly  liquid  investments  with  maturity  of  three  months  or  less  at  the  date  of
acquisition to be cash equivalents.
(d)  Cash and Cash Equivalents
F-7
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 42 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
2.
Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
(e)  Mineral Property Costs
(f)
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception and has not yet realized any revenues from its
planned  operations.  It  is  primarily  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mining  properties.  Mineral
property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized.
The Company assesses the carrying costs for impairment under ASC 360, “Property, Plant, and Equipment” at 
each fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a
result  of  establishing  proven  and  probable  reserves,  the  costs  then  incurred  to  develop  such  property,  are
capitalized.  Such  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the 
probable  reserve.  If  mineral  properties  are  subsequently  abandoned  or  impaired,  any  capitalized  costs  will  be
charged to operations. 
 
Long-Lived Assets 
 
In  accordance  with  ASC  360,  “Property,  Plant,  and  Equipment”,  the  Company  tests  long-lived  assets  or  asset
groups for recoverability when events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be
recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant decreases in
the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of
costs  significantly  in  excess  of  the amount  originally expected for  the acquisition or  construction  of  the  asset;
current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses
associated with the use of the asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or
disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying
amount of the asset and its fair value which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash
flows expected to result from the use and the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain
instances. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
(g)  Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company accounts for asset retirement obligations in accordance with the provisions of ASC 440, “Asset 
Retirement  and  Environmental  Obligations”  which  requires  the  Company  to  record  the  fair  value  of  an  asset
retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the retirement
of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development, and/or normal use of the
assets. As at October 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company had no asset retirement obligations. 
 
Property and Equipment 
 
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Amortization is provided using the declining balance method at the
rate of 20% per annum for furniture and equipment and 30% per annum for computer equipment.
(h)
F-8
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 43 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
2.
Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
(i)
Loss per Share 
 
The  Company  computes  loss  per  share  in  accordance  with  ASC  260,  “Earnings  per  Share” which  requires 
presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS
is computed by dividing net loss available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number
of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common
shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-
converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the
number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes
all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
 
Income Taxes 
 
The  Company  accounts  for  income  taxes  using  the  asset  and  liability  method  in  accordance  with  ASC  740,
“Income Taxes”. The asset and liability method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for
the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of
assets and liabilities, and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are
measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to
reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed
more likely than not to be realized. 
 
As of October 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company did not have any amounts recorded pertaining to uncertain tax
positions. 
 
The Company files federal and provincial income tax returns in Canada and federal, state and local income tax
returns  in  the  U.S.,  as  applicable.  The  Company  may  be  subject  to  a  reassessment  of  federal  and  provincial
income  taxes  by  Canadian  tax  authorities  for  a  period  of  three  years  from  the  date  of  the  original  notice  of
assessment in respect of any particular taxation year. For Canadian and U.S. income tax returns, the open taxation
years range from 2007 to 2010. In certain circumstances, the U.S. federal statute of limitations can reach beyond
the standard three year period. U.S. state statutes of limitations for income tax assessment vary from state to state.
Tax  authorities  of  Canada  and  U.S.  have  not  audited  any  of  the  Company’s  income  tax  returns  for  the  open 
taxation years noted above. 
 
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in tax expense. During the years
ended October 31, 2011 and 2010, there were no charges for interest or penalties. 
 
Foreign Currency Translation 
 
The functional and reporting currency of the Company is the United States dollar. Occasional transactions may
occur in a foreign currency and the  Company has adopted ASC 740, “Foreign Currency Translation Matters”.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated to United States dollars using the
exchange  rate  prevailing at the  balance sheet  date.  Non-monetary  assets  and liabilities denominated  in  foreign
currencies are translated at rates of exchange in effect at the date of the transaction. Average monthly rates are
used to translate revenues and expenses. Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency
denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income. The Company has not, to the
date  of  these  financial  statements,  entered  into  derivative  instruments  to  offset  the  impact  of  foreign  currency
fluctuations.
(j)
(k)
F-9
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 44 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
2.
Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
(l)
Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measures
 
ASC  820,  “Fair  Value  Measurements  and  Disclosures” requires  an  entity  to  maximize  the  use  of  observable 
inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value
hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value.
A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that
is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to
measure fair value: 
 
Level 1 
 
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities. 
 
Level 2 
 
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for
the  asset  or  liability  such  as  quoted  prices  for  similar  assets  or  liabilities  in  active  markets;  quoted  prices  for
identical assets or liabilities in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets);
or  model-derived  valuations  in  which  significant  inputs  are  observable  or  can  be  derived  principally  from,  or
corroborated by, observable market data.
 
Level 3 
 
Level 3 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that
are significant to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
 
The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash, amounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued
liabilities, and amounts due to related parties. Pursuant to ASC 820, the fair value of cash is determined based on
“Level 1” inputs, which consist of quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. The recorded values of all
other financial instruments approximate their current fair values because of their nature and respective maturity
dates or durations.
(m)  Comprehensive Loss
(n)
ASC 220, “Comprehensive Income” establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income
and its components in the financial statements. As at October 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company had no items that
represent comprehensive income or loss.
 
Stock Based Compensation 
 
The  Company  records  stock-based compensation  in  accordance  with  ASC  718,  “Compensation – Stock  Based
Compensation” and ASC 505, “Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees”, which requires the measurement and 
recognition  of  compensation  expense  based  on  estimated  fair  values  for  all  share-based  awards  made  to
employees and directors, including stock options.
F-10
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 45 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
2.
Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
(n)
Stock Based Compensation (continued)
 
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-
pricing  model.  The  Company  uses  the  Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model  as  its  method  of  determining  fair 
value.  This  model  is  affected  by  the  Company’s  stock  price  as  well  as  assumptions  regarding  a  number  of
subjective variables. These subjective variables include, but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock price
volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The
value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the statement of
operations over the requisite service period.
 
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments
are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument
issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
(o)  Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its
financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been
issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.
Property and Equipment
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Mineral Property
Computer equipment 
Furniture and equipment
Cost
$
1,477 
3,053 
4,530
$
Accumulated 
amortization  Write-down    
 
(431)  
(1,407)  
(1,838)
1,046
1,646
2,692
$
2011
Net carrying Net carrying
2010
value
$
–
–
–
value
$
615 
1,759 
2,374
On July 7, 2009, and amended on June 25, 2010 and October 21, 2010, the Company entered into an option agreement
(the “Agreement”) to acquire a 50% undivided interest in the Dos Naciones Property located in Sonora, Mexico. Under
the terms of the Agreement, the Company paid a purchase price of $29,658 (Cdn $35,000) and have an option to acquire
a further 20% interest in the property subject to the following terms:
 
(cid:122)  
(cid:122)  
(cid:122)  
(cid:122)  
(cid:122)  
 
If the Company exercises the option, the Company will be deemed to enter into a joint venture agreement in accordance
with the terms of the Agreement.
Issuance of 150,000 common shares on or before June 25, 2010 (issued);
Issuance of 200,000 common shares on or before July 7, 2010 (issued);
Issuance of 250,000 common shares on or before October 21, 2010 (issued);
Issuance of 400,000 common shares on or before July 7, 2012; and
Incur exploration expenditures of Cdn $800,000 on or before July 7, 2013.
F-11
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 46 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
5.
Convertible Debenture 
 
On September 8, 2010, the Company issued a convertible debenture for proceeds of $55,000 which is unsecured, due
interest at 8% per annum, and is due on or before May 27, 2011. The debenture is convertible into common shares of the
Company commencing February 21, 2011 (180 days from the issuance date), at a conversion price equal to 58% of the
market price on conversion date, where the market price is equal to the average of the three lowest trading prices in the
prior ten trading days of the conversion date. After the maturity date of May 27, 2011, any unpaid principal or interest
on the debenture will bear interest at a rate of 22% per annum. The Company has the right to repay the note within 180
days from August 25, 2010, in consideration of the payment of cash equal to 150% of the outstanding principal amount
of the debenture, plus accrued interest. 
 
On February 21, 2011, the Company calculated the beneficial conversion feature using the residual value method at an
estimated  fair  value  of  $55,000  with  a  corresponding  discount  to  the  convertible  debenture  and  credit  to  derivative
liability. Refer to Note 6. 
 
On March 9, 2011, the Company issued 165,517 common shares at $0.07 per share for the conversion of $12,000. On
June  3,  2011,  the  Company  issued  304,260  common  shares  at  $0.05  per  share  for  the  conversion  of  $15,000.  On
September 20, 2011, the Company issued 344,828 common shares at $0.0232 per share for the conversion of $8,000. On
October  26,  2011,  the  Company  paid  $33,000  to  settle  $20,000  for  the  remaining  principal  balance  and  $5,757  for
accrued interest, resulting in a loss on settlement of debt of $7,433.
 
Derivative Liability 
 
The conversion option of the convertible debenture disclosed in Note 5 is required to record a derivative at its estimated
fair value on each balance sheet date with changes in fair value reflected in the statement of operations. On October 26,
2011, the convertible debenture was repaid. Refer to Note 5.
 
During the year ended October 31, 2011, the Company recorded a loss on the change in fair value of the derivative
liability of $14,962 (2010 - $nil). The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair value 
of the derivative liabilities, using the following weighted average assumptions:
6.
7.
Expected dividend yield 
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected life (in years) 
Expected volatility
2011  
 
– 
1.30%  
0.26  
205%
2010
–
–
–
–
Common Stock 
 
Share issuances for the year ended October 31, 2010:
 
(a)  On June 25, 2010, the Company issued 150,000 common shares with a fair value of $25,500 pursuant to the terms
of the Dos Naciones Property agreement.
(b)  On July 7, 2010, the Company issued 200,000 common shares with a fair value of $50,000 pursuant to the terms
of the Dos Naciones Property agreement.
(c)  On October 20, 2010, the Company issued 100,000 common shares with a fair value of $21,000 pursuant to the
terms of a consulting agreement.
F-12
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 47 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
7.
Common Stock (continued) 
 
(d)  On October 21, 2010, the Company issued 250,000 common shares with a fair value of $55,000 pursuant to the
terms of the Dos Naciones Property agreement.
Share issuances for the year ended October 31, 2011:
 
(e)  On December 6, 2010, the Company issued 2,000,000 units at $0.10 per unit for proceeds of $200,000, of which
$109,950 was received prior to October 31, 2010. Each unit is comprised of one common share and one share
purchase  warrant  which  entitles  the  holder  to  purchase  one  additional  common  share  at  $0.25  per  share  until
December  6,  2012.  The  Company  incurred  share  issuance  costs  of  $14,000  in  connection  with  this  private
placement.
(f)  On March 9, 2011, the Company issued 165,517 common shares for the conversion of $12,000 of the debenture.
 
(g)  On June 3, 2011, the Company issued 304,260 common shares for the conversion of $15,000 of the debenture.
 
(h)  On  September  20,  2011,  the  Company  issued  344,828  common  shares  for  the  conversion  of  $8,000  of  the
debenture.
(i)  On August 19, 2011, the Company issued 237,500 common shares with a fair value of $14,250 to settle debt of
$9,500, resulting in a loss on settlement of debt of $4,750.
(j)  On September 30, 2011, the Company issued 1,875,000 common shares for proceeds of $75,000. The Company
8.
incurred share issuance costs of $2,494 in connection with this private placement.
Share Purchase Warrants 
 
The following table summarizes the continuity of share purchase warrants:
Balance, October 31, 2009 and 2010 
   Issued 
   Expired 
Balance, October 31, 2011
As at October 31, 2011, the following share purchase warrants were outstanding:
Weighted 
Average 
 
 
Exercise
Price 
$
Number of 
Warrants
1,055,135  
 
2,000,000  
 
(1,055,135)   
2,000,000
0.30
0.25
0.30
0.25
Number of 
Warrants 
2,000,000
Exercise
Price
$ 
0.25
Expiry Date 
December 6, 2012
F-13
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 48 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
9.
Stock Options 
 
On  September  7,  2010,  the  Company  adopted  a  stock  option  plan  (the  “2010  Stock  Option  Plan”)  allowing  for  the
issuance of stock options to acquire up to 5,000,000 common shares.  As at  October  31, 2011,  there were 4,000,000
shares available for issuance under the 2010 Stock Option Plan.
 
The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s stock options:
Outstanding, October 31, 2009 
   Granted 
Outstanding, October 31, 2010 
   Expired 
Outstanding and exercisable, October 31, 2011
Number
of options 
–
1,500,000 
1,500,000 
(500,000) 
1,000,000
Weighted 
average 
exercise 
price 
$
–
0.10 
0.10 
0.10 
0.10
Weighted 
  Aggregate 
 
average 
intrinsic 
  remaining 
 
  contractual    
value
$
life (years)   
 
    
 
    
 
    
    
 
0.9
–
Additional information regarding stock options as of October 31, 2011, is as follows:
Number of 
 Options 
 1,000,000
Exercise
Price
$ 
0.10
Expiry Date 
September 7, 2012
As of October 31, 2011, the Company had no unrecognized compensation expense relating to unvested options.
During  the  year  ended  October  31,  2010,  the  Company  recorded  stock-based  compensation  expense  of  $nil  (2010  -
$245,710) which was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model assuming no expected dividends and the
following weighted average assumptions:
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected life (in years) 
Expected volatility
2011
– 
– 
–
2010
1.36% 
2 
218%
The  weighted  average  fair  value  of  stock  options  granted  during  the  year  ended  October  31,  2011  was  $nil  (2010  -
$0.16) per stock option.
10.  Related Party Transactions
(a)  As at October 31, 2011, the Company owed $200 (2010 – $1,658) to the former President of the Company which
is unsecured, non-interest bearing, and due on demand.
(b)  During the year ended October 31, 2011, the Company incurred $15,000 (2010 - $2,000) in consulting fees to the
former President of the Company.
F-14
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 49 of 63
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 50 of 63
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
For the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010 
(Expressed in US dollars) 
 
11.
Income Taxes 
 
The Company has net operating losses carried forward of $631,400 available to offset taxable income in future years
which expire beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
The  Company  is  subject  to  United  States  federal  and  state  income  taxes  at  an  approximate  rate  of  34%.  The
reconciliation of the provision for income taxes at the United States federal statutory rate compared to the Company’s 
income tax expense as reported is as follows:
Net loss before income taxes per financial statements 
Income tax rate 
Income tax recovery 
Permanent differences and other 
Change in valuation allowance 
Provision for income taxes
34%
2011 
$ 
 
(243,764)   
 
(82,879)   
 
57,843  
 
25,036  
–
2010 
$ 
(514,001) 
34% 
(174,760) 
736 
174,024 
–
The significant components of deferred income tax assets and liabilities at October 31, 2011 and 2010 are as follows:
Mineral property costs 
Net operating losses carried forward 
Share issuance costs 
Valuation allowance 
  
Net deferred income tax asset
12.  Subsequent Event
2011 
$
86,052  
214,676  
5,608
(306,336)
–
2010 
$
115,600 
165,700 
–
(281,300)
–
On  November  14,  2011,  the  Company  entered  into  an  asset  sale  agreement  with  Bowerman  Holdings  LLC
(“Bowerman”), scheduled to close on February 12, 2012, to acquire 60% of the Seller’s right, title and interest to various 
mining claims located in Siskiyou County, California in exchange for $6,525,000 payable as follows: 
 
(cid:122)  
 
(cid:122)
$25,000 payable by December 14, 2011, which was extended to February 12, 2012; 
 
$4,500,000 payable upon closing of the agreement, by delivery of a promissory note secured by first position deed
of  trust  against  the  mining  claims  which  secures  the  Company’s  full  repayment  of  the  amount  due  under  the
promissory  note,  bearing  interest  at  10%  per  annum  commencing  on  the  closing  date  of  the  agreement,  and
payable within three years of the closing date of the agreement; and
 
$2,000,000  payable  upon  the  closing  of  the  agreement,  by  delivery  of  40,000,000  common  shares  of  the
Company.
The Company can earn up to an additional 15% interest in the mining claims, at the option of the Company at any time
within  four  years  of  the  closing  of  the  agreement,  at  a  rate  of  $300,000  per  additional  1%  interest  in  the  property.
Subsequent to year end, the closing date of the agreement was extended to May 12, 2012.
(cid:122)
F-15
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 51 of 63
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
On September 7, 2011, we formally informed MacKay LLP of their dismissal as our company’s independent registered public
accounting firm.
The reports of MacKay LLP on our company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the fiscal years ended October
31, 2010 and 2009 contained no adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion and were not qualified or modified as to uncertainty,
audit scope or accounting principle except to indicate that there was substantial doubt about our company’s ability to continue 
as a going concern.
Our Board of Directors participated in and approved the decision to change independent registered public accounting firms.
During the fiscal years ended October 31, 2010 and 2009, and through September 7, 2011, there were no disagreements with
MacKay  LLP  on  any  matter  of  accounting  principles  or  practices,  financial  statement  disclosure  or  auditing  scope  or
procedure, which disagreements if not resolved to the satisfaction of MacKay LLP would have caused them to make reference
thereto in connection with their report on the financial statements for such years.
There were no disagreements related to accounting principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, internal controls or
auditing scope or procedure during the two fiscal years and interim periods.
Item 9A.  Controls and Procedures
Management’s Report on Disclosure Controls and Procedures
We maintain disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in our
reports filed under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 , as amended, is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within
the  time  periods  specified  in  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission's  rules  and  forms,  and  that  such  information  is
accumulated and communicated to our management, including our president (our principal executive officer) and our chief
financial  officer  (our  principal  financial  officer  and  principal  accounting  officer)  to  allow  for  timely  decisions  regarding
required disclosure
As of October 31, 2011, the end of our fiscal year covered by this report, we carried out an evaluation, under the supervision
and  with  the  participation  of  our  president  (our  principal  executive  officer)  and  our  chief  financial  officer  (our  principal
financial officer and principle accounting officer), of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls
and procedures. Based on the foregoing, our president (our principal executive officer) and our chief financial officer (our
principal financial officer and principal accounting officer) concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were not
effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report.
The conclusion that our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective was due to the presence of material weaknesses
in internal control over financial reporting as identified below under the heading “Management’s Report on Internal Control 
Over Financial Reporting.” Management anticipates that such disclosure controls and procedures will not be effective until the
material weaknesses are remediated. Our company intends to remediate the material weaknesses as set out below.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting
(as  defined  in  Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of the Exchange  Act) for  our company. Our  company’s internal  control over 
financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance, not absolute assurance, regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States of America. Internal control over
18
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 52 of 63
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that: (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of our company’s assets; (ii) provide reasonable assurance 
that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in the United States of America, and that our company’s receipts and expenditures are being made only 
in  accordance  with  authorizations  of  our  management  and  directors;  and  (iii)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on
the financial statements.
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  In
addition,  projections  of  any  evaluation  of  effectiveness  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  controls  may  become
inadequate because of changes in conditions and that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Our Management, including our principal executive officer and our principal financial officer, conducted an evaluation of the
design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2011 based on the criteria set forth in
Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
This evaluation included review of the documentation of controls, evaluation of the design effectiveness of controls, testing of
the  operating  effectiveness  of  controls  and  a  conclusion  on  this  evaluation.  Based  on  this  evaluation,  our  management
concluded our internal control over financial reporting was not effective as at October 31, 2011 due to the following material
weaknesses which are indicative of many small companies with small staff: (i) inadequate segregation of duties and effective
risk assessment; and (ii) insufficient written policies and procedures for accounting and financial reporting with respect to the
requirements and application of both US GAAP and SEC guidelines.
Our company plans to take steps to enhance and improve the design of our internal controls over financial reporting. During
the period covered by this annual report on Form 10-K, we have not been able to remediate the material weaknesses identified
above. To remediate such weaknesses, we plan to implement the following changes during our fiscal year ending October 31,
2012: (i) appoint additional qualified personnel to address inadequate segregation of duties and ineffective risk management;
and (ii) adopt sufficient written policies and procedures for accounting and financial reporting. The remediation efforts set out
in (i) is largely dependent upon our company securing additional financing to cover the costs of implementing the changes
required. If we are unsuccessful in securing such funds, remediation efforts may be adversely effected in a material manner.
Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all
control issues, if any, within our company have been detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in
decision-making can be faulty and that breakdowns can occur because of simple error or mistake.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting that occurred during the year ended October 31,
2011 that have materially or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal controls over financial reporting.
Item 9B.  Other Information
None.
Item 10.  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
PART III
The following individuals serve as the directors and executive officers of our company as of the date of this annual report. All
directors of our company hold office until the next annual meeting of our shareholders or until their
19
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 53 of 63
successors have been elected and qualified. The executive officers of our company are appointed by our board of directors and
hold office until their death, resignation or removal from office.
Name
Greg Painter
Patrick Fagen
Position Held with Our
Company
President, Chief Executive
Officer, Secretary,  
Treasurer and Director
Chief Financial Officer and
Director
Age 
63
55
Date First Elected or
Appointed 
July 6, 2011
August 24, 2011
Business Experience
The following is a brief account of the education and business experience during at least the past five years of each director,
executive officer and key employee of our company, indicating the person’s principal occupation during that period, and the 
name and principal business of the organization in which such occupation and employment were carried out.
Greg Painter - President, Chief Executive Officer Secretary, Treasurer and Director
Mr. Painter was elected a director and appointed our president, chief executive officer, secretary and treasurer on July 6, 2011.
Mr.  Painter  has  a  Masters  in  Education  from  the  Stanford  University  and  a  BA  in  English  Literature  from  Stanford.  Mr.
Painter also received his General Contractor designation from the State of Nevada. Mr. Painter has been self employed since
1983 in various construction and development businesses.
Patrick Fagen – Chief Financial Officer and Director
Mr. Fagen was elected a director and appointed chief financial officer of our company on August 24, 2011.
Patrick Fagen is a founder and executive of three privately held oil exploration and mining companies. He graduated with a BS
degree  from  Auburn  University  in  1979  and  is  experienced  in  many  facets  of  the  mining  industry  including  exploration,
acquisitions, feasibility analysis, permitting, planning, construction, and management.
Mr. Fagen has been the owner/operator of several successful mining projects with a particular focus on the organization and
management  of  high  grade  underground  mines.  He  specializes  in  California  and  USFS  mine  permitting  and  serves  as  a
consultant to other mining companies in this capacity. In the past 10 years he has served as chief executive officer and been
responsible for the development of several natural resource companies including Tahoe Resources LLC, Lazarus Mining LLC,
Trinity Alps Resources Inc. and Tahoe Gold LLC.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among any of our directors, executive officers and proposed directors or executive officers.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
None of our directors, executive officers, promoters or control persons has been involved in any of the following events during
the past five years:
20
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 54 of 63
1. A petition under the Federal bankruptcy laws or any state insolvency law was filed by or against, or a receiver, fiscal agent
or similar officer was appointed by a court for the business or property of such person, or any partnership in which he was a
general partner at or within two years before the time of such filing, or any corporation or business association of which he
was an executive officer at or within two years before the time of such filing;
2. Such person was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding
traffic violations and other minor offenses);
3. Such person was the subject of any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any
court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining him from, or otherwise limiting, the following activities:
i.
Acting  as  a  futures  commission  merchant,  introducing  broker,  commodity  trading  advisor,  commodity  pool
operator,  floor  broker,  leverage  transaction  merchant,  any  other  person  regulated  by  the  Commodity  Futures
Trading Commission, or an associated person of any of the foregoing, or as an investment adviser, underwriter,
broker or dealer in securities, or as an affiliated person, director or employee of any investment company, bank,
savings  and  loan  association  or  insurance  company,  or  engaging  in  or  continuing  any  conduct  or  practice  in
connection with such activity 
 
Engaging in any type of business practice; or
ii. 
 
iii.  Engaging in any activity in connection with the purchase or sale of any security or commodity or in connection
with any violation of Federal or State securities laws or Federal commodities laws;
4. Such person was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any
Federal or State authority barring, suspending or otherwise limiting for more than 60 days the right of such person to engage in
any activity described in paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section, or to be associated with persons engaged in any such activity;
5. Such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commission to have violated any
Federal or State securities law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commission has not been subsequently
reversed, suspended, or vacated;
6.  Such  person  was  found  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  in  a  civil  action  or  by  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading
Commission  to  have  violated  any  Federal  commodities  law,  and  the  judgment  in  such  civil  action  or  finding  by  the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission has not been subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated;
7. Such person was the subject of, or a party to, any Federal or State judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or
finding, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation of:
i. 
 
ii.
Any Federal or State securities or commodities law or regulation; or
 
Any  law  or  regulation  respecting  financial  institutions  or  insurance  companies  including,  but  not  limited  to,  a
temporary  or  permanent  injunction,  order  of  disgorgement  or  restitution,  civil  money  penalty  or  temporary  or
permanent cease-and-desist order, or removal or prohibition order; or
iii.  Any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
8. Such person was the subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any
self-regulatory organization (as defined in Section 3(a)(26) of the Exchange Act (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(26))), any registered entity
(as defined in Section 1(a)(29) of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 1(a)(29))), or any equivalent exchange, association,
entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its members or persons associated with a member.
21
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 55 of 63
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, requires our executive officers and directors and persons
who own more than 10% of a registered class of our equity securities to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission
initial statements of beneficial ownership, reports of changes in ownership and annual reports concerning their ownership of
our shares of common stock and other equity securities, on Forms 3, 4 and 5, respectively. Executive officers, directors and
greater than 10% shareholders are required by the Securities and Exchange Commission regulations to furnish us with copies
of all Section 16(a) reports they file.
Based  solely  on  our  review  of  the  copies  of  such  forms  received  by  us,  or  written  representations  from  certain  reporting
persons, we believe that during fiscal year ended October 31, 2011, all filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors
and greater than 10% percent beneficial owners were complied with, with the exception of the following:
Name
Greg Painter 
Patrick Fagen
Number of Late
Reports
Number of Transactions
Not Reported on a
Timely Basis
Nil 
1(1)(2)
Nil 
7
Failure to File  
Required Forms
N/A 
N/A
(1)  The director or officer was late filing a Form 3, Initial Statement of Beneficial Ownership. 
(2)  The director or officer was late filing a Form 4, Change in Statement of Beneficial Ownership.
Code of Ethics
We adopted a Code of Ethics applicable to all of our directors, officers, employees and consultants, which is a “code of ethics”
as defined by applicable rules of the SEC. Our Code of Ethics was attached as an exhibit to our annual report filed on Form
10-KSB  with  the  SEC  on  September  19,  2007.  If  we  make  any  amendments  to  our  Code  of  Ethics  other  than  technical,
administrative, or other non-substantive amendments, or grant any waivers, including implicit waivers, from a provision of our
Code of Ethics to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or certain other finance executives, we will disclose the
nature of the amendment or waiver, its effective date and to whom it applies in a Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the 
SEC.
We will provide a copy of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics to any person without charge, upon request. Requests may
be sent in writing to: Del Toro Silver Corp., 320 North Carson Street, Carson City, Nevada 89701.
Audit Committee and Audit Committee Financial Expert
Our  board  of  directors  has  determined  that  it  does  not  have  a  member  of  its  audit  committee  that  qualifies  as  an  "audit
committee financial expert" as defined in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K, and is "independent" as the term is used in 
Item 7(d)(3)(iv) of Schedule 14A under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
We  believe  that  the  members  of  our  board  of  directors  are  collectively  capable  of  analyzing  and  evaluating  our  financial
statements  and  understanding  internal  controls  and  procedures  for  financial  reporting.  We  believe  that  retaining  an
independent director who would qualify as an "audit committee financial expert" would be overly costly and burdensome and
is not warranted in our circumstances given the early stages of our development and the fact that we have not generated any
material revenues to date. In addition, we currently do not have nominating, compensation or audit committees or committees
performing similar functions nor do we have a written nominating, compensation or audit committee charter. Our board of
directors does not believe that it is necessary to have such committees because it believes the functions of such committees can
be adequately performed by our board of directors.
22
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 56 of 63
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
The particulars of the compensation paid to the following persons:
our principal executive officer;
each of our two most highly compensated executive officers who were serving as executive officers at the end of the 
years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010; and
up to two additional individuals for whom disclosure would have been provided under (b) but for the fact that the 
individual was not serving as our executive officer at the end of the years ended October 31, 2011 and 2010,
who  we  will  collectively  refer  to  as  the  named  executive  officers  of  our  company,  are  set  out  in  the  following  summary
compensation table, except that no disclosure is provided for any named executive officer, other than our principal executive
officers, whose total compensation did not exceed $100,000 for the respective fiscal year:
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Stock  
Awards
($)
Option  
Awards
($)
Non-Equity 
incentive Plan 
Compensation
($)
Nonqualified  
Deferred
Compensation
Earnings
($)
All Other
Compensation
($)
Total  
($)
Nil  
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Year
2011  
2010
2011  
2010
Nil  
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
N/A
2011  
2010
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
2011  
2010
$15,000  
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
$15,000  
Nil
Name and  
principal  
position 
Greg Painter
(1)  
President, 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer, 
Secretary, 
Treasurer 
and Director 
Patrick Fagen
(2)  
Chief 
Financial 
Officer and 
Director 
Mark 
McLeary(3)  
former 
President, 
Secretary, 
Treasurer, 
Chief 
Financial 
Officer and 
Director 
Ezra Jimenez
(4)  
former Chief 
Financial 
Officer and 
director
Greg Painter was appointed president, secretary, treasurer, chief financial officer and as a director on July 6, 2011.
Patrick Fagen was appointed chief financial officer and as a director on August 24, 2011.
1. 
2. 
3.  Mark McLeary resigned as president, secretary, treasurer, chief financial officer and as a director on July 6, 2011.
4.
Ezra Jimenez resigned as chief financial officer and as a director on August 24, 2011.
There  are  no  arrangements  or  plans  in  which  we  provide  pension,  retirement  or  similar  benefits  for  directors  or  executive
officers. Our directors and executive officers may receive share options at the discretion of our board of directors in the future.
We do not have any material bonus or profit sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation is or may be paid 
to our directors or executive officers, except that share options may be granted at the discretion of our board of directors.
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 57 of 63
23
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 58 of 63
The board has determined that until such time as our company has sufficient liquidity, cash compensation will not be paid to
any of our executive officers. However, once our company has sufficient liquidity, executive officers will be compensated for
management services, including payment for past services provided, in amounts commensurate with industry standards.
Stock Option Plan
On September 7, 2010 our directors approved the adoption of our 2010 Stock Option Plan which permits our company to grant
up to 5,000,000 options to acquire shares of common stock, to directors, officers, employees and consultants of our company.
Grants of Plan-Based Awards
No equity or non-equity awards were granted to the named executives in 2011.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End
As at October 31, 2011, there were 1,000,000 outstanding and exercisable stock options, with an exercise price of $0.10 per
share expiring on September 7, 2012.
Option Exercises
During our Fiscal year ended October 31, 2011, there were no options exercised by our named officers.
Compensation of Directors
We do not have any agreements for compensating our directors for their services in their capacity as directors, although such
directors are expected in the future to receive stock options to purchase shares of our common stock as awarded by our board
of directors.
We  have  determined  that  none  of  our  directors  are  independent  directors,  as  that  term  is  used  in  Item  7(d)(3)(iv)(B)  of
Schedule 14A under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and as defined by Rule 4200(a)(15) of the NASDAQ
Marketplace Rules.
Pension, Retirement or Similar Benefit Plans
There  are  no  arrangements  or  plans  in  which  we  provide  pension,  retirement  or  similar  benefits  for  directors  or  executive
officers. We have no material bonus or profit sharing plans pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation is or may be
paid to our directors or executive officers, except that stock options may be granted at the discretion of the board of directors
or a committee thereof.
Indebtedness of Directors, Senior Officers, Executive Officers and Other Management
None of our directors or executive officers or any associate or affiliate of our company during the last two fiscal years, is or
has  been  indebted  to  our  company  by  way  of  guarantee,  support  agreement,  letter  of  credit  or  other  similar  agreement  or
understanding currently outstanding.
24
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 59 of 63
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The  following table sets  forth,  as  of January  30, 2012, certain  information with respect  to  the  beneficial ownership  of our
common shares by each shareholder known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our common shares, as well
as by each of our current directors and executive officers as a group. Each person has sole voting and investment power with
respect to the shares of common stock, except as otherwise indicated. Beneficial ownership consists of a direct interest in the
shares of common stock, except as otherwise indicated.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner 
Greg Painter  
2436 Jacks Valley Road, Genoa, NV 
Patrick Fagen  
2229 Tahoe Vista Dr  
South Lake Tahoe, CA 
Directors and Officers as a group 
Mark A McLeary  
2200 - 1177 W Hastings St  
Vancouver, BC, Canada
Title of Class
Common
Common
Amount and 
Nature of  
Beneficial  
Ownership
375,000
1,398,798
Common
1,773,798
Common
4,950,000
Percentage
of
Class (1)
2.42%
9.04%
11.47%
32.01%
(1)  Based  on  15,462,240  shares  of  common  stock  issued  and  outstanding  as  of  January  30,  2012.  Except  as  otherwise
indicated, we believe that the beneficial owners of the common shares listed above, based on information furnished by
such owners, have sole investment and voting power with respect to such shares, subject to community property laws
where  applicable.  Beneficial  ownership  is  determined  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission  and  generally  includes  voting  or  investment  power  with  respect  to  securities.  Shares  of  common  stock
subject to options or warrants currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for purposes
of computing the percentage ownership of the person holding such option or warrants, but are not deemed outstanding
for purposes of computing the percentage ownership of any other person.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract or other arrangement or provisions of our Articles or Bylaws the operation of which may at a
subsequent date result in a change of control of our company. There are not any provisions in our Articles or Bylaws, the
operation of which would delay, defer, or prevent a change in control of our company.
Item 13.  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Except as disclosed herein, no director, executive officer, shareholder holding at least 5% of shares of our common stock, or
any family member thereof, had any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction, or proposed transaction since the
year ended October 31, 2011, in which the amount involved in the transaction exceeded or exceeds the lesser of $120,000 or
one percent of the average of our total assets at the year end for the last three completed fiscal years.
Director Independence
We  currently  act  with  two  directors,  consisting  of  Greg  Painter  and  Patrick  Fagen.  We  have  determined  that  none  of  our
directors is an “independent director” as defined in NASDAQ Marketplace Rule 4200(a)(15).
25
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 60 of 63
We  do  not  have  a  standing  audit,  compensation  or  nominating  committee,  but  our  entire  board  of  directors  acts  in  such
capacities.  We  believe  that  our  members  of  our  board  of  directors  are  capable  of  analyzing  and  evaluating  our  financial
statements and understanding internal controls and procedures for financial reporting. The board of directors of our company
does not believe that it is necessary to have an audit committee because we believe that the functions of an audit committee
can  be  adequately performed  by the board  of  directors. In  addition, we believe  that retaining an independent director who
would qualify as an “audit committee financial expert” would be overly costly and burdensome and is not warranted in our
circumstances given the early stages of our development.
Item 14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The aggregate fees billed for the most recently completed fiscal year ended October 31, 2011 and for fiscal year ended October
31, 2010 for professional services rendered by the principal accountant for the audit of our annual financial statements and
review of the financial statements included in our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and services that are normally provided by 
the accountant in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements for these fiscal periods were as follows:
Audit Fees 
Audit Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
All Other Fees 
Total
Year Ended
October 31, 2011
$
October 31, 2010
$
19,500
Nil 
800 
Nil
20,300
16,300
Nil 
1,500 
Nil
17,800
Our board of directors pre-approves all services provided by our independent auditors. All of the above services and fees were
reviewed and approved by the board of directors either before or after the respective services were rendered.
Our board of directors has considered the nature and amount of fees billed by our independent auditors and believes that the
provision  of  services  for  activities  unrelated  to  the  audit  is  compatible  with  maintaining  our  independent  auditors’
independence.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
PART IV
Item 15. 
 
(a)
Financial Statements 
 
(1) 
 
(2)  All  financial  statement  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable,  not  material  or  the  required
Financial statements for our company are listed in the index under Item 8 of this document
information is shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
(b)  Exhibits
26
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 61 of 63
Exhibit 
Number  Description 
(3) 
3.1
Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
Articles of Incorporation (incorporated by reference to our Form SB-2 Registration Statement, filed on January
22, 2007)  
Bylaws (incorporated by reference to our Form SB-2 Registration Statement, filed on January 22, 2007) 
Articles of Merger filed with the Secretary of State of Nevada on July 24, 2009 dated effective July 28, 2009
(incorporated by reference t to our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on August 19, 2009)  
Material Contracts  
Property  Option  Agreement  dated  August  25,  2006  (incorporated  by  reference  to  our  Form  SB-2  Registration
Statement, filed on January 22, 2007) 
Amended Property Option Agreement dated January 15, 2008 (incorporated by reference to our Current Report
on Form 8-K, filed on January 16, 2008) 
Termination Agreement and Mutual Release dated December 3, 2008 (incorporated by reference to our Current
Report on Form 8-K, filed on December 12, 2008) 
Letter  of  Intent  between  Candev  Resource  Exploration  Inc.  and  Yale  Resources  Ltd.  dated  February  24,  2009
(incorporated by reference to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed on June 18, 2009)  
Amendment to Letter of Intent between Candev Resource Exploration Inc. and Yale Resources Ltd. dated March
11, 2009 (incorporated by reference to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed on June 18, 2009) 
Form  of  Subscription  Agreement  for  the  Private  Placement  Completed  on  June  30,  2009  (incorporated  by
reference to an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on July 8, 2009)  
Option Agreement dated July 7, 2009 between Yale Resources Ltd. and our company (incorporated by reference
to an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on July 15, 2009) 
Subscription  Agreement  between  Mark  McLeary  and  Candev  Resource  Exploration  Inc.  (incorporated  by
reference to an exhibit to Schedule 13D filed on July 16, 2009) 
Amendment to Option Agreement between Del Toro Silver Corp. and Yale Resources Ltd. dated June 25, 2010
(incorporated by reference to an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on June 29, 2010) 
Investor Relations Agreement with Goal Capital LLC dated July 15, 2010 (incorporated by reference to an exhibit
to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed on September 20, 2010) 
Convertible  Promissory  Note  dated  August  25,  2010  (incorporated  by  reference  to  an  exhibit  to  our  Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q, filed on September 20, 2010) 
Securities Purchase Agreement dated August 23, 2010 (incorporated by reference to an exhibit to our Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q, filed on September 20, 2010) 
2010 Stock Option Plan (incorporated by reference to an exhibit to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, filed on 
September 20, 2010)  
Amendment #2 to Option Agreement between Del Toro Silver Corp. and Yale Resources Ltd. dated October 21,
2010 (incorporated by reference to an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on October 25, 2010) 
Form  of  Subscription  Agreement  for  the  Private  Placement  completed  on  December  3,  2010  (incorporated  by
reference to an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 15, 2011)  
Form of US Subscription Agreement for the Private Placement completed on December 3, 2010 (incorporated by
reference to an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 15, 2011)  
Asset Sale Agreement with Bowerman Holdings, LLC dated November 14, 2011. (incorporated by reference to
an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 21, 2011)
3.2 
3.3
(10) 
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
27
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 62 of 63
Exhibit 
Number  Description 
10.18
(14) 
14.1 
(21) 
21.1 
(31) 
31.1* 
31.2* 
(32) 
32.1* 
32.2* 
(99) 
99.1
Joint Operations Agreement with Bowerman Holdings LLC dated November 14, 2011 (incorporated by reference 
to an exhibit to our Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 21, 2011) 
Code of Ethics 
Code of Ethics (incorporated by reference to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-QSB filed on September 19, 2007) 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant 
Subsidiary of Del Toro Silver Corp.: Minera Plata Del Toro S.A. de C.V., a Mexican corporation 
Section 302 Certifications 
Section 302 Certifications under Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 of Principal Executive Officer 
Section 302 Certifications under Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 of Principal Financial Officer 
Section 906 Certification 
Section 906 Certification under Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 of Principal Executive Officer 
Section 906 Certification under Sarbanes Oxley Act of 2002 of Principal Financial Officer 
Additional Exhibits 
Audit Committee Charter (incorporated by reference to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on January 29, 
2009)
* Filed herewith.
28
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012
Del Toro Silver Corp.: Form 10-K - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
Page 63 of 63
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, the registrant caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the
undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
Dated: February 13, 2012
  
  
  
  
  
Dated: February 13, 2012
DEL TORO SILVER CORP. 
                                                  (Registrant) 
 
 
/s/ Greg Painter
Greg Painter
President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, Treasurer 
and Director 
(Principal Executive Officer ) 
 
/s/ Patrick Fagen 
Patrick Fagen
Chief Financial Officer and Director 
(Principal Principal Financial Officer and Principal 
Accounting Officer)
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  this  report  has  been  signed  below  by  the  following
persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Dated: February 13, 2012
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Dated: February 13, 2012
/s/ Greg Painter
Greg Painter
President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, Treasurer 
and Director 
(Principal Executive Officer ) 
 
 
 
/s/ Patrick Fagen 
Patrick Fagen
Chief Financial Officer and Director 
(Principal Principal Financial Officer and Principal 
Accounting Officer)
29
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1382462/000106299312000491/form10k.htm
2/13/2012