
EX-99.1(A) 4 d579755dex991a.htm EX-99.1(A) EX-99.1(a)
Exhibit 99.1
News Release
Pioneer Natural Resources Company and Pioneer Southwest Energy
Partners L.P. Announce Merger Agreement
Dallas, Texas, August 12, 2013 – Pioneer Natural Resources Company (NYSE: PXD) (“Pioneer”) and Pioneer
Southwest Energy Partners L.P. (NYSE: PSE) (“Pioneer Southwest”) today announced the execution of a definitive
agreement and plan of merger (the “Merger Agreement”) that would result in a merger whereby Pioneer Southwest
would become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pioneer’s operating company, Pioneer Natural Resources USA, Inc.
(“Pioneer USA”), through a stock-for-unit exchange (the “Merger”). Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, Pioneer
Southwest’s public unitholders would receive 0.2325 of a share of common stock of Pioneer per Pioneer Southwest
common unit surrendered pursuant to the Merger Agreement, plus a whole share of Pioneer common stock in lieu of
any fractional share of Pioneer common stock otherwise issuable in the Merger. The transaction is expected to result
in 3.95 million additional shares of common stock being issued by Pioneer. Regular quarterly distributions on
the Pioneer Southwest common units will continue until the closing of the Merger. The terms of the Merger
Agreement were unanimously approved by the Conflicts Committee of the board of directors of the general
partner of Pioneer Southwest (the “Conflicts Committee”), who negotiated the terms on behalf of Pioneer
Southwest and is comprised solely of independent directors. The board of directors of the general partner of
Pioneer Southwest also approved the terms of the Merger Agreement. In addition, Evercore Partners acted as
financial advisor to the Conflicts Committee and delivered a fairness opinion to the Conflicts Committee in
connection with the transaction.
The closing of the Merger is subject to certain closing conditions, including the approval of the Merger
Agreement and the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, including the Merger (the “Merger
Proposal”), by the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding Pioneer Southwest common
units entitled to vote on the Merger Proposal at a special meeting of the unitholders. Pioneer USA owns 100%
of the membership interests in the general partner of Pioneer Southwest and 52.4% of the 35,713,700
outstanding common units of Pioneer Southwest. Pursuant to a voting agreement, Pioneer USA has agreed to
vote its common units in favor of the Merger Proposal. The parties anticipate that the Merger will close in the
fourth quarter of 2013.
The consolidation of the properties of Pioneer and Pioneer Southwest in the Midland Basin in West Texas
pursuant to the Merger is expected to facilitate Pioneer’s plans to fully and optimally develop the area
utilizing horizontal drilling and is expected to provide organizational, operational and administrative
efficiencies.
Pioneer is a large independent oil and gas exploration and production company, headquartered in Dallas,
Texas, with operations in the United States.
Pioneer Southwest is a Delaware limited partnership headquartered in Dallas, Texas, with current production
and drilling operations in the Spraberry field in West Texas.
This communication does not constitute an offer to sell any securities. Any such offer will be made only by
means of a prospectus, pursuant to a registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”).
In connection with the proposed Merger, a registration statement of Pioneer, which will include a proxy
statement and will constitute a prospectus of Pioneer, and other materials will be filed with the SEC. Investors
and security holders are urged to carefully read the documents filed with the SEC regarding the proposed
transaction when they become available, because they will contain important information about Pioneer,
Pioneer Southwest and the proposed Merger. When available, investors and security holders may obtain a
free copy of the proxy statement/prospectus and other documents containing information about Pioneer and
Pioneer Southwest, without charge, at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Pioneer, Pioneer Southwest and certain of their respective directors and executive officers may be deemed to
be participants in the solicitation of proxies from the unitholders of Pioneer Southwest in connection with the
proposed transaction. Information about the directors and executive officers of Pioneer is set forth in its proxy
statement for its 2013 annual meeting of stockholders, which was filed with the SEC on April 11, 2013.
Information about the directors and executive officers of the general partner of Pioneer Southwest is set forth
in Pioneer Southwest’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ending December 31, 2012, which was filed
with the SEC on March 14, 2013. These documents can be obtained without charge at the SEC’s website
indicated above. Additional information regarding the interests of these participants may be obtained by
reading the proxy statement/prospectus regarding the proposed transaction when it becomes available.
Except for historical information contained herein, the statements contained herein related to the Merger and
the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are forward-looking statements that are made in
reliance on the Safe Harbor Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-
looking statements of Pioneer and Pioneer Southwest are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that
may cause Pioneer’s or Pioneer Southwest’s actual results in future periods to differ materially from the
forward-looking statements, including the risk that the proposed Merger is not consummated. These and
other risks are described in Pioneer’s and Pioneer Southwest’s annual, quarterly and other reports filed with
the SEC. In addition, Pioneer and Pioneer Southwest may be subject to currently unforeseen risks that may
have a materially adverse effect on them. Neither Pioneer nor Pioneer Southwest undertakes any duty to
publicly update these statements except as required by law.
Pioneer Natural Resources Company and Pioneer Southwest Energy Partners L.P. Contacts:
Investors
Frank Hopkins - 972-969-4065
Josh Jones - 972-969-5822
Mike Bandy - 972-969-4513
Media and Public Affairs
Susan Spratlen - 972-969-4018
Suzanne Hicks - 972-969-4020
2