
FORM 52-109FV2
CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS 
VENTURE ISSUER BASIC CERTIFICATE
I,  JAIMIE MACPHERSON,  Chief  F i n a n c i a l   Officer  of  AFRICAN GOLD GROUP, INC. 
certify the following:
1.
2.
3.
Review:   I have reviewed the interim financial report and interim MD&A (together, 
the “Interim Filings”) of AFRICAN GOLD GROUP, INC. (the “Issuer”) for the 
interim period ended JUNE 30, 2016.
No  misrepresentations:    Based  on  my  knowledge,  having  exercised  reasonable 
diligence,  the  Interim  Filings  do  not  contain  any  untrue  statement  of  a  material 
fact  or  omit  to  state  a  material  fact  required  to  be  stated  or  that  is  necessary  to 
make  a  statement  not  misleading  in  light  of  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was 
made, with respect to the period covered by the interim filings.
Fair presentation:   Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, 
the interim financial report together with the other financial information included  in 
the  interim  filings  fairly  present in  all  material  respects the  financial condition, financial 
performance and cash flows of the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in 
the interim filings.
Date:  August 29, 2016 
 
 
“Jaimie MacPherson” 
--------------------------------------------------------- 
Jaimie MacPherson 
Chief Financial Officer
NOTE TO READER
In  contrast  to  the  certificate  required  for  non-venture  issuers  under  National  Instrument  52-109  Certification  of 
Disclosure  in Issuers' Annual  and Interim Filings (NI 52-109),  this  Venture  Issuer Basic Certificate does  not include 
representations  relating  to  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (DC&P)  and 
internal control over financial reporting (ICFR), as defined in NI 52-109. In particular, the certifying officers filing this 
certificate are not making any representations relating to the establishment and maintenance of
i)
ii)
controls  and  other  procedures  designed  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  that  information  required  to  be 
disclosed  by  the  Issuer  in  its  annual  filings,  Interim Filings  or  other  reports  filed  or  submitted  under 
securities  legislation  is  recorded,  processed,  summarized  and  reported  within  the  time  periods  specified  in 
securities legislation; and
a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of 
financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the Issuer's GAAP.
The  Issuer's  certifying  officers  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  processes  are  in  place  to  provide  them  with 
sufficient  knowledge  to  support  the  representations they  are  making  in  this certificate. Investors  should be  aware that 
inherent  limitations  on  the  ability  of  certifying  officers  of  a  venture  Issuer  to  design  and  implement  on  a  cost 
effective  basis  DC&P  and  ICFR  as  defined  in  NI  52-109  may  result  in  additional  risks  to  the  quality,  reliability, 
transparency and timeliness of interim and annual filings and other reports provided under securities legislation.
6475132.1