
PRE 14A 1 dpre14a.htm PRELIMINARY PROXY STATEMENT Preliminary Proxy Statement
PRELIMINARY PROXY STATEMENT
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Filed by the Registrant  x
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  ¨
Check the appropriate box:
x  Preliminary Proxy Statement
¨   Definitive Proxy Statement
¨   Definitive Additional Materials
¨   Soliciting Material Pursuant to Section 240.14a-12
permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
¨  Confidential, for use of the Commission only (as
BJ SERVICES COMPANY
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
x
¨
No fee required.
Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
(1) Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(3) Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (set
forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
(4) Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5) Total fee paid:
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for
which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the
Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1) Amount Previously Paid:
(2) Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3) Filing Party:
(4) Date Filed:
¨
¨
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON JANUARY 31, 2006
The Annual Meeting of the Stockholders of BJ Services Company (the “Company”) will be held on Tuesday,
January 31, 2006, at 11:00 a.m. local time, at The Westin Galleria Hotel, located at 5060 West Alabama, Houston,
Texas 77056, for the following purposes:
1.
To elect two Class I directors to serve a three-year term;
2.
To approve an amendment to BJ Services’ certificate of incorporation, as amended, to increase the total
number of shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, that BJ Services has the authority to issue
from 380,000,000 shares to 980,000,000 shares; and
3.
To transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting and any postponement or
adjournment.
The foregoing items of business are more fully described in the Proxy Statement that accompanies this Notice.
All stockholders of record at the close of business on December 6, 2005, are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the
meeting and any adjournment. Stockholders holding at least a majority of the outstanding shares of the Company are
required to be present or represented by proxy at the meeting to constitute a quorum.
Please note that space limitations make it necessary to limit attendance at the meeting to stockholders, though each
stockholder may be accompanied by one guest. Admission to the meeting will be on a first-come, first-served basis.
Registration will begin at 10:00 a.m. and seating will begin at 10:30 a.m. Each stockholder may be asked to present
valid picture identification, such as a driver’s license or passport. Stockholders holding stock in brokerage accounts
must bring a copy of a brokerage statement reflecting stock ownership as of the record date. Cameras, recording
devices and other electronic devices will not be permitted at the meeting.
By Order of the Board of Directors,
J. W. Stewart
Chairman of the Board, President
and Chief Executive Officer
Houston, Texas
December 30, 2005
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT
TO ASSURE YOUR REPRESENTATION AT THE MEETING, PLEASE SIGN, DATE AND RETURN YOUR PROXY
AS PROMPTLY AS POSSIBLE. AN ENVELOPE, WHICH REQUIRES NO POSTAGE IF MAILED IN THE UNITED
STATES, IS ENCLOSED FOR THIS PURPOSE.
PROXY STATEMENT
This proxy statement is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the Board of Directors in connection
with the Annual Meeting of Stockholders (the “2006 Annual Meeting”) of BJ Services Company, a Delaware
corporation (the “Company”), to be held at The Westin Galleria Hotel, located at 5060 West Alabama, Houston, Texas
77056, on Tuesday, January 31, 2006, at 11:00 a.m. local time. Stockholders of record at the close of business on
December 6, 2005, are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the meeting and at any postponement or adjournment.
When a properly executed proxy is received prior to the meeting, the shares represented will be voted at the meeting
in accordance with the directions noted on the proxy. A proxy may be revoked at any time before it is exercised by
submitting a written revocation or a later-dated proxy to the Secretary of the Company at the mailing address provided
below or by attending the meeting in person and so notifying the inspector of elections.
Management does not intend to present any business for a vote at the meeting, other than the election of directors
and the amendment of the Company’s certificate of incorporation, as amended (the “charter”) to increase the total
number of shares of authorized common stock, par value $0.10 per share (the “Authorized Shares Amendment”).
Unless stockholders specify otherwise in their proxy, their shares will be voted FOR the election of the
nominees listed in this proxy statement and FOR the Authorized Shares Amendment. If other matters requiring
the vote of stockholders properly come before the meeting, it is the intention of the persons named in the enclosed
proxy card to vote proxies held by them in accordance with their judgment.
The complete mailing address of the Company’s executive offices is 5500 Northwest Central Drive, Houston, Texas
77092. The approximate date on which this proxy statement and the accompanying proxy card are being sent or given
to the stockholders of the Company is December 30, 2005.
VOTING SECURITIES
On December 6, 2005, the record date, there were outstanding 323,802,752 shares of the common stock of the
Company (together with the associated preferred share purchase rights), held of record by approximately 1,495
persons. Stockholders are entitled to one vote, exercisable in person or by proxy, for each share of Common Stock
held on the record date. Stockholders do not have cumulative voting rights.
The following table lists all persons who beneficially own more than 5% of the outstanding voting securities of the
Company, to the knowledge of the Company’s management, as of December 15, 2005.
Title of Class
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
Common Stock
FMR Corp.
82 Devonshire Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02109
Amount and Nature
of Beneficial
Ownership
Percent
of Class
17,678,242(1)
5.5%
(1) Based on the Amendment No. 16 to Schedule 13G filed by FMR Corp., Edward C. Johnson 3d and Abigail P.
Johnson on February 14, 2005, (a) FMR Corp. has sole voting power over 2,606,887 shares and sole dispositive
power over 17,678,242 shares; (b) Mr. Johnson has sole voting power over 43,269 shares and sole dispositive
power over 17,678,242 shares, and (c) Ms. Johnson has sole dispositive power over 17,678,242 shares. Of the
17,678,242 shares beneficially owned by the foregoing parties, according to the information filed, (a) 15,018,965
shares are beneficially owned by Fidelity Management & Research Company (“Fidelity”), a wholly owned
subsidiary of FMR Corp., in its capacity as an investment adviser; (b) 1,233,701 shares are beneficially owned by
Fidelity Management Trust Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of FMR Corp., in its capacity as investment
manager; (c) 549,267 shares are beneficially owned by Strategic Advisers, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of
FMR Corp., in its capacity as an investment adviser; (d) 43,269 shares are beneficially owned by Mr. Johnson,
and Mr. Johnson has sole voting and dispositive power over those shares; and (e) 833,040 shares are
beneficially owned by Fidelity International Limited, a majority owned subsidiary of Fidelity, in its capacity as an
investment adviser and manager.
2
PROPOSAL 1: ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
Board of Directors.    The Company’s Bylaws provide for the Board of Directors to serve in three classes having
staggered terms of three years each. Two Class I directors will be elected at the 2006 Annual Meeting to serve for a
three-year term expiring at the Annual Meeting of Stockholders in 2009. Pursuant to Delaware law, in the event of a
vacancy on the Board of Directors, a majority of the remaining directors will be empowered to elect a successor, and
the person so elected will hold office for the remainder of the full term of the director whose death, retirement,
resignation, removal, disqualification or other cause created the vacancy and thereafter until the election of a
successor director.
Recommendation; Proxies.    The Board of Directors recommends a vote FOR each of the nominees named below.
The persons named in the enclosed proxy card will vote all shares over which they have discretionary authority FOR
the election of the nominees named below. Although the Board of Directors of the Company does not anticipate that
any of the nominees will be unable to serve, if such a situation should arise prior to the meeting, the appointed
persons will use their discretionary authority pursuant to the proxy and vote in accordance with their best judgment.
Nominees.    The following table sets forth information for each nominee. Each nominee has consented to be named
in this proxy statement and to serve as a director, if elected.
Name
Principal Occupation
John R. Huff
Michael E. Patrick
Mr. Huff is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
Oceaneering International, Inc., an oilfield services corporation.
He has been President, Chief Executive Officer and a director
of Oceaneering since 1986 and Chairman of the Board since
1990. Mr. Huff is also a director of Suncor Energy Inc.
Mr. Patrick has been the Vice President and Chief Investment
Officer for The Meadows Foundation, Inc., a private foundation,
since December 1, 1995. He served as Managing Director for
M. E. Zukerman Energy Advisors from July 1994 to November
1995. He served as Executive Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer and a director of Lomas Financial Corporation, parent,
and President and Chief Operating Officer of two operating
subsidiaries from 1992 to December 31, 1993. From 1984 to
1991, Mr. Patrick was Executive Vice Chancellor for Asset
Management of the University of Texas System, where he was
responsible for the investment of all endowment funds. Mr.
Patrick is also a director of Cooper Cameron Corporation,
Apptricity Corporation and the RGK Foundation.
Director
Since
1992
Age
59
62
1995
Class
I
I
Other Directors.    The following table sets forth certain information for the Class II and Class III directors, whose
terms will expire at the Annual Meetings of Stockholders in 2007 and 2008, respectively.
Name
Principal Occupation
Don D. Jordan
Name
William H. White
Currently, Mr. Jordan is Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
of Jordan Capital Management, a financial management firm. In
December 1999, Mr. Jordan retired as Chairman of the Board of
Reliant Energy, Inc., a diversified international energy services
company that has operations in
3
Principal Occupation
all segments of the energy chain that bring natural gas and
electricity to customers. Mr. Jordan was employed by various
subsidiaries of Reliant Energy, Inc. from 1956 until his retirement.
He currently serves as a director of AEGIS Insurance Services.
Mr. White has been the Mayor of the City of Houston, Texas since
Director
Age
73
Since
1990
Class
II
Director
Age
Since
Class
51
2003
II
January 2, 2004. From 1997 to 2003, Mr. White was the President
and Chief Executive Officer of WEDGE Group Incorporated, a
private equity company with holdings and operations in real estate,
engineering and construction, and oil and gas services. From 1993
to 1995, Mr. White served as Deputy Secretary of Energy of the
United States. Prior to that, Mr. White was a partner with the
Houston-based law firm of Susman Godfrey.
Currently, Mr. Heiligbrodt is a private investor and managing
partner in a family business. From February 1999 to February
2003, he served as a consultant to Service Corporation
International, a funeral services corporation (“SCI”). President and
Chief Operating Officer of SCI until February 1999, he had served
in various management positions with SCI since February 1990.
Prior to joining SCI, Mr. Heiligbrodt served as President of
Provident Services, Inc. from March 1988 to February 1990. Prior
to that, he served for five years as Vice Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of WEDGE Group Incorporated.
Mr. Payne has served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
Shona Energy Company, LLC, since March 2005. In May 2004, Mr.
Payne retired as Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
of Nuevo Energy Company, which is engaged in the production of
oil and gas. Mr. Payne had served in that capacity since October
2001. Mr. Payne served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
of Santa Fe Energy from 1990 until May 1999, when Santa Fe
merged with Snyder Oil Corporation, which also is engaged in the
production of oil and gas. Following the merger, he was Chief
Executive Officer and then Chief Executive Officer and Chairman
of the merged company, Santa Fe Snyder Corporation. Santa Fe
Snyder merged with Devon Energy Corporation, which also is
engaged in the production of oil and gas, in August 2000, and Mr.
Payne was Vice Chairman and a director of Devon through January
2001. Mr. Payne is also a director of Nabors Industries Ltd. and
Global Industries, Ltd.
Mr. Stewart is the Chairman of the Board, President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Company. He joined Hughes Tool
Company in 1969 as Project Engineer and served as Vice
President—Legal and Secretary of Hughes Tool Company and as
Vice President—Operations for a predecessor of the Company
prior to being named President of the Company in 1986.
4
64
1992
III
68
1999
III
61
1990
III
L. William Heiligbrodt
James L. Payne
J. W. Stewart
PROPOSAL 2: PROPOSED INCREASE IN AUTHORIZED SHARES OF COMMON STOCK
The Board of Directors has unanimously approved the charter amendment increasing the authorized number of shares
of common stock from 380,000,000 shares to 980,000,000 shares and unanimously recommends that you vote FOR
approval of the Authorized Shares Amendment. The affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding shares
of common stock is required to approve this amendment.
What is the proposed charter amendment?
Our certificate of incorporation, as amended, currently authorizes the issuance of a total of 385,000,000 shares of
stock, consisting of 380,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, and 5,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $1.00 per share. The charter amendment would increase the total number of authorized
shares of common stock from 380,000,000 to 980,000,000 shares and is being proposed for approval at the 2006
annual meeting of our stockholders.
The full text of the proposed charter amendment is set forth in Appendix A to this proxy statement. The newly
authorized shares of common stock would constitute additional shares of the existing class of common stock and, if
and when issued, would have the same rights and privileges as the shares of common stock currently authorized. The
number of authorized shares of preferred stock would not be affected.
Why is the amendment necessary?
On December 8, 2005, the Board of Directors voted to recommend to the stockholders that the number of authorized
shares of the common stock of BJ Services be increased from 380,000,000 shares to 980,000,000 shares.
As of December 15, 2005, approximately 323.8 million shares were issued and outstanding and approximately
         million shares were reserved for issuance pursuant to stock option and employee benefit plans, leaving fewer
than                      shares of common stock currently unreserved and available for future use. After a stock split
effected in the form of a stock dividend to stockholders on September 1, 2005, the Company has insufficient shares
of common stock available for future use.
How will the additional authorized shares be used?
The Board believes that increasing our authorized common stock will afford BJ Services continued flexibility to issue
common stock for valid corporate purposes, including acquisitions, financings, incentive compensation and further
stock dividends or stock splits. The proposed charter amendment would permit the Board to issue the additional
shares without further action or authorization by stockholders, except as may be required in certain cases by law or
the rules of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
A stockholder vote against the proposed increase in the number of authorized shares of BJ Services common stock
would have the effect of restricting the use of common stock by the Company. Although at present the Board of
Directors has no plans, other than under existing stock incentive plans and agreements, to issue additional shares of
common stock, the Board desires to have additional shares available to provide flexibility to use its common stock for
business and financial purposes in the future. The Board of Directors believes that the proposed increase in the
authorized shares of common stock is necessary to provide BJ Services with the flexibility to pursue corporate
opportunities without added delay and expense.
Are there disadvantages of having additional authorized shares?
The Company’s stockholders do not have preemptive rights, which means they do not have the right to purchase
shares in any future issuance of common stock in order to maintain their proportionate equity interests
5
in BJ Services. Although the Board of Directors will authorize the further issuance of common stock after the stock
split only when it considers such issuance to be in the best interests of BJ Services, stockholders should recognize
that any such issuance of additional stock would have the effect of diluting the earnings per share and book value per
share of outstanding shares of BJ Services common stock and the equity and voting rights of holders of shares of
common stock.
What are the potential anti-takeover effects of the charter amendment?
The increase in the authorized number of shares of common stock and the subsequent issuance of such shares could
have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of BJ Services without further action by the
stockholders. Shares of authorized and unissued common stock could (within the limits imposed by applicable law) be
issued in one or more transactions that would make a change of control of BJ Services more difficult, and therefore
less likely. The additional authorized shares could be used to discourage persons from attempting to gain control of
BJ Services, by diluting the voting power of shares then outstanding or increasing the voting power of persons who
would support the Board in a potential takeover scenario. We are not currently aware of any pending or threatened
efforts to acquire control of BJ Services.
In addition, the increased shares authorized by the charter amendment could permit the Board of Directors to issue
common stock to persons supportive of management’s position. Such persons might then be in a position to vote to
prevent or delay a proposed business combination that is deemed unacceptable to the Board of Directors, although
perceived to be desirable by some stockholders. Any such issuance could provide management with a means to
block any vote that might be used to effect a business combination in accordance with the certificate of incorporation.
What is the recommendation of the Board of Directors?
The Board of Directors has unanimously approved the proposed charter amendment and has determined that the
increase in authorized common stock is in the best interests of BJ Services and its stockholders. Accordingly, the
Board unanimously recommends that stockholders vote FOR the proposed charter amendment.
Is my vote important?
Your vote counts. Please note that not returning your proxy or abstaining from the vote on the charter amendment has
the same effect as voting against the amendment. Approval of the amendment requires the affirmative vote of an
absolute majority of the common stock outstanding, rather than simply a majority of those who actually vote.
6
BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP OF DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The following table sets forth the beneficial ownership of Common Stock as of December 15, 2005, by each current
director (including each nominee), each executive officer named in the Summary Compensation Table and all current
directors and executive officers as a group.
Name or Group
L. William Heiligbrodt
John R. Huff
Don D. Jordan
Michael E. Patrick
James L. Payne
J. W. Stewart
William H. White
Kenneth A. Williams
David D. Dunlap
T. M. Whichard III
Margaret B. Shannon
All current directors and executive officers as a group (16 persons)(3)
Amount and
Nature of
Beneficial
Ownership(1)
(2)
54,304
48,304
48,304
48,304
40,304
3,355,309
31,304
412,756
915,820
262,498
424,684
5,985,249
(1) The persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power over all shares of Common Stock
beneficially owned by them. As of December 15, 2005, no officer or director owned in excess of 1% of all
outstanding shares of Common Stock, other than Mr. Stewart, who owned approximately 1% of outstanding
shares.
(2)
Includes the following shares subject to options granted pursuant to the Company’s incentive plans and
exercisable within 60 days of December 15, 2005: Mr. Heiligbrodt—34,093 shares; Mr. Huff—38,093 shares;
Mr. Jordan—38,093 shares; Mr. Patrick—38,093 shares; Mr. Payne—14,093 shares; Mr. Stewart—2,392,824
shares; Mr. White—22,093 shares; Mr. Williams—135,018 shares; Mr. Dunlap—740,854 shares; Mr. Whichard—
109,994 shares; and Ms. Shannon—205,160 shares.
(3) All current directors and executive officers as a group owned beneficially an aggregate of approximately 1.9% of
the outstanding Common Stock.
7
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD
Meetings.    During fiscal 2005, the Board of Directors held eight meetings of the full Board and sixteen meetings of
committees. The Nominating and Governance Committee held one meeting, the Executive Compensation Committee
held two meetings and the Audit Committee held thirteen meetings during fiscal 2005. In addition, the Company’s
independent auditors and management met with the Audit Committee Chairman prior to the issuance of earnings
press releases, and the other members of the Audit Committee were invited to attend, and often do attend, these
meetings. Each director attended at least 75% of the aggregate number of meetings of the Board of Directors and
meetings of committees of the Board on which he served. It is the policy of the Board of Directors that directors are
encouraged to attend each meeting of stockholders, and all of the directors attended the last Annual Meeting of
Stockholders.
Compensation.    During the first two months of fiscal 2005, the Company paid non-employee directors a monthly
retainer based on an annual retainer of $50,000, an annual retainer of $10,000 to committee chairman, and an
attendance fee of $1,500 for each Board or committee meeting attended. Members of the Audit Committee receive a
fee of $1,500 for each quarterly pre-earnings release conference call in which they participate. Effective December 1,
2004, the Company increased the annual retainer for non-employee directors to $60,000 and raised the annual retainer
for the Audit Committee Chairman to $25,000. Committee chairmen are also paid an additional attendance or
participation fee equal to 50% of the meeting fee paid to other committee members. The Lead Director also receives
an annual retainer of $10,000. Directors who are employees of the Company are not paid directors’ fees. The
Company reimburses the directors’ out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, under the terms of the 1995 Incentive Plan,
the 1997 Incentive Plan and the 2000 Incentive Plan, non-employee directors are eligible to receive awards of options
to purchase shares of Common Stock. Under the terms of the 2003 Incentive Plan, non-employee directors are
eligible to receive any awards except incentive stock options. Each non-employee director was granted 16,000
options for fiscal 2005 (with an exercise price of $35.38). These awards were made under the 2000 Incentive Plan.
Also, each non-employee director was granted 8,000 shares of phantom stock for fiscal 2005. These awards were
made under the 2003 Incentive Plan. Each share of phantom stock represents the right to receive one share of
Common Stock. These options and shares of phantom stock vest in one-third installments on the first, second and
third anniversaries of the grant date.
Under the Directors’ Benefit Plan, which was adopted in 2000, each non-employee director serving on the Board for
more than three years will earn an annual benefit for each year of service on the Board equal to the annual retainer in
effect for directors at the time of termination of his Board service. Payment of the benefit commences following the
director’s termination of service and continues for the number of years equal to his years of service as a director of
the Company. Directors who have served on the Board for more than ten years will receive an amount based on their
years of service, paid over a ten-year period. In the event of the death of a participant, benefit payments will be made
to the director’s beneficiaries over the remainder of the benefit period. The three-year minimum period is waived in the
case of death. For purposes of the plan, each director completes a “year of service” on the anniversary of the date on
which he was first elected to the Board. The non-employee directors were first elected on the following dates:
Mr. Heiligbrodt—May 7, 1992; Mr. Huff—May 7, 1992; Mr. Jordan—August 20, 1990; Mr. Patrick—April 13, 1995;
Mr. Payne—January 28, 1999; and Mr. White—January 22, 2003.
Non-Management Sessions; Communications.    For fiscal 2005, the non-management directors met in three
regularly scheduled executive sessions without management present. Mr. Payne was selected by the Board to serve
as Lead Director for 2005 and presided at these sessions. Mr. Patrick has been selected by the Board to serve as
Lead Director for 2006. Interested parties may communicate directly with the Board, non-management directors or the
Lead Director by sending a letter to the attention of the Board, non-management directors or the Lead Director, as
applicable, c/o Vice President and General Counsel, BJ Services Company, 5500 Northwest Central Drive, Houston,
Texas 77092.
8
Independence.    The Board has determined that each of the directors except for Mr. Stewart is independent as that
term is defined by rules of the New York Stock Exchange and, in the case of the Audit Committee, the Securities and
Exchange Commission. The Board determined that Mr. Stewart is not an independent director because he is an
officer and employee of the Company. In determining that each of the other directors is independent, the Board
considered that the Company and its subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business buy from and sell products and
services to other companies, including those at which certain directors serve (or recently served) as executive
officers or directors. Mr. Huff currently serves as an executive officer of Oceaneering International, Inc., a subsidiary
of which is a vendor to the Company in amounts that are immaterial, and as a director of Suncor Energy Inc., which is
a customer of the Company. Mr. Payne served as an executive officer of Nuevo Energy Company, a customer of the
Company, prior to his resignation from Nuevo Energy in 2004. In addition, Mr. Payne served as an executive officer of
a charitable organization to which the Company makes contributions from time to time, prior to his resignation from
that organization at the end of 2004. In each case, the transactions and contributions did not automatically disqualify
the directors from being considered independent under the NYSE rules. The Board also determined that these
transactions were not otherwise material to the Company or to the other company involved in the transactions and
that none of our directors had a material interest in the transactions with these companies. Based upon its review, the
Board of Directors has affirmatively determined that each of the directors except for Mr. Stewart is independent and
that none of these independent directors has a material relationship with the Company.
The following table shows the committees on which each director serves:
Director
L. William Heiligbrodt
John R. Huff
Don D. Jordan
Michael E. Patrick
James L. Payne
J. W. Stewart
William H. White
Audit
  
  
X  
X  
X  
  
  
X
Nominating
and Governance
Executive
Compensation
X  
  
  
  
X  
  
X
X
X
X
X
X
Audit Committee.    The responsibilities of the Audit Committee, composed of Messrs. Huff (Chairman), Jordan,
Patrick and White, include:
•  engaging the independent auditors;
•  reviewing interim financial information;
•  reviewing the scope and results of the annual audit of the Company’s consolidated financial statements with
the independent auditors, internal auditors and management;
•  reviewing the independence of the independent auditors;
•  reviewing actions by management on the independent and internal auditors’ recommendations; and
•  meeting with management, the internal auditors and the independent auditors to review the effectiveness of
the Company’s system of internal controls and internal audit procedures.
To promote the independence of the audit, the Audit Committee consults separately and jointly with the independent
auditors, the internal auditors and management. The Board of Directors has determined that all of the Audit
Committee members are audit committee financial experts. The Board of Directors has adopted a charter for the Audit
Committee, a copy of which is available on the Company’s website (www.bjservices.com).
Executive Compensation Committee.    The responsibilities of the Executive Compensation Committee, composed
of Messrs. Jordan (Chairman), Heiligbrodt, Huff, Patrick and Payne, include:
•  reviewing the Company’s executive salary and bonus and overall compensation structure;
9
•  reviewing the Company’s employee stock incentive plans, thrift plan and employee stock purchase plan as
well as incentive alternatives;
•  reviewing the Company’s perquisite program;
•  conducting annual performance evaluations of senior executives;
•  adopting a succession plan for senior management; and
•  recommending directors’ fees.
The Board of Directors has adopted a charter for the Executive Compensation Committee, a copy of which is
available on the Company’s website (www.bjservices.com).
In 2005, the Board of Directors has formalized stock ownership guidelines for executive officers, providing for
executive officers to own three times the officer’s salary in value of common stock. These guideline amounts come
into effect over time as an officer receives performance units. As an officer receives performance units with the
specified value, an officer is expected to hold the specified value of common stock and not sell shares below that
amount. In addition, the Board of Directors has increased its stock ownership guidelines for directors, providing for
each director to own five times the director’s annual retainer in value of common stock. These guideline amounts will
come into effect over a three-year period for new directors.
Nominating and Governance Committee.    The responsibilities of the Nominating and Governance Committee,
composed of Messrs. Heiligbrodt (Chairman), Payne and White include:
•  selecting candidates to fill vacancies on the Board of Directors;
•  reviewing the structure and composition of the Board;
•  reviewing the responsibilities, organization and membership of all Board committees;
•  reviewing director policies on retirement and indemnification issues;
•  considering corporate governance principles and guidelines; and
•  considering qualifications required for Board service and for nominations by the committee and by
stockholders.
The Board of Directors has adopted a charter for the Nominating and Governance Committee, a copy of which is
available on the Company’s website (www.bjservices.com).
The Nominating and Governance Committee has established the following minimum qualifications for non-employee
director candidates that it recommends for nomination:
•  ability to provide insight, wisdom and experience;
•  willingness to demand high expectations of management;
•  availability for attendance at, and willingness to participate in, Board and committee meetings;
•  ability to contribute to the Board’s decision-making process; and
•  ability to identify, and willingness to avoid, conflicts of interest.
The Nominating and Governance Committee has established procedures for identifying and evaluating nominees.
First, the Committee considers the Board’s needs. For instance, the Committee may determine that, due to vacancies
or current developments, the election of a director with a particular specialty (e.g., in a specific industry) would benefit
the Board. The Committee then solicits recommendations from the Chief Executive Officer and other Board members
and considers recommendations, if any, made by stockholders. The Committee then evaluates these
recommendations and identifies prospective nominees to interview. Results from the interview process are reported to
the Committee, and the Committee then recommends nominees to the full Board, which, upon approval by the Board,
recommends the nominees for election by the stockholders.
10
Stockholders may nominate director candidates in accordance with the Company’s Bylaws. To summarize, such
nominations must be made in writing to the Company’s Secretary at the Company’s principal executive offices. The
recommendation must set forth certain information about both the nominee and the nominating stockholder(s). The
foregoing is a summary, and the specific requirements and procedures of the Bylaws control.
It is the policy of the Nominating and Governance Committee to consider nominating any director candidate
nominated by one or more stockholders in accordance with the Company’s Bylaws, provided that the nomination
includes the following additional information:
•  a statement from the stockholder as to whether the stockholder has a good faith intention to continue to hold
his, her or its shares through the date of the meeting of stockholders at which the candidate would stand for
election;
•  a description of all relationships between the candidate and the stockholder and any agreements or
understandings between the candidate and the stockholder regarding the nomination;
•  a description of all relationships between the candidate and any of the Company’s competitors, customers,
suppliers or other persons with special interests regarding the Company;
•  a statement supporting the stockholder’s view that the candidate possesses the minimum qualifications
prescribed by the Committee for nominees, and a brief description of the contributions that the candidate
would be expected to make to the Board of Directors and to the governance of the Company; and
•  a statement by the stockholder whether, in the view of such stockholder, the candidate, if elected, would
represent all stockholders and not serve for the purpose of advancing or favoring any particular stockholder or
other constituency of the Company.
If a nomination is made by two or more stockholders, the foregoing information must be submitted with respect to
each stockholder. The Committee’s acceptance of a proposal for consideration does not imply that the Committee
has any obligation to interview or nominate the candidate. Candidates proposed by stockholders in accordance with
the foregoing requirements are considered by the Committee in the same manner as all other candidates. In
evaluating candidates for director, the Committee may, in its discretion, consider a candidate’s qualifications in
relation to the overall structure and composition of the Board of Directors.
CODE OF ETHICS
The Company has adopted a supplemental code of ethics that applies to its directors and executive officers, including
its Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Controller. The Code of Ethics is available on the Company’s
website (www.bjservices.com).
11
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors consists of four directors who are independent, as defined by the
standards of the New York Stock Exchange and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Under the
charter approved by the Board, the Committee assists the Board in overseeing matters relating to the accounting and
financial reporting practices of the Company, the adequacy of its internal controls and the quality and integrity of its
financial statements and is responsible for selecting and retaining the independent auditors. The Company’s
management is responsible for preparing the financial statements of the Company and the independent auditors are
responsible for auditing those financial statements. The Audit Committee’s role under the charter is to provide
oversight of management’s responsibility. The Committee is not providing any expert or special assurance as to the
Company’s financial statements or any professional certification as to the independent auditors’ work. The Committee
met thirteen times during the year ended September 30, 2005.
The independent auditors provided the Committee a written statement describing all the relationships between the
auditors and the Company that might bear on the auditors’ independence consistent with Independence Standards
Board Standard No. 1, “Independence Discussions with Audit Committees.” The Committee also discussed with the
auditors any relationships that may impact the independence of the auditors.
The Committee discussed and reviewed with the independent auditors all communications required to be discussed
by standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, including those described in Statement of Auditing
Standards No. 61, as amended, “Communication with Audit Committees.”
The Committee reviewed the Company’s audited financial statements as of and for the year ended September 30,
2005, and discussed them with management and the independent auditors. Based on such review and discussions,
the Committee recommended to the Board that the Company’s audited financial statements be included in its Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2005, for filing with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
John R. Huff, Chairman
Don D. Jordan
Michael E. Patrick
William H. White
November 22, 2005
This report of the Audit Committee shall not be deemed “soliciting material,” or to be “filed” with the Securities and
Exchange Commission or subject to Regulation 14A or 14C or to the liabilities of Section 18 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”), except to the extent that the Company specifically requests that the
information be treated as soliciting material or specifically incorporates it by reference into a document filed under the
Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”) or the Exchange Act. Further, this report will not be deemed to be
incorporated by reference into any filing under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act except to the extent that the
Company specifically incorporates this information by reference.
12
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION COMMITTEE REPORT
The Executive Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors consists of five directors who are not employees of
the Company and who are independent, as defined by the standards of the New York Stock Exchange. The
Committee annually reviews the Company’s compensation program and policies for executive officers and directors
and determines the compensation of executive officers and directors.
Compensation of Executive Officers.    The Committee’s overall policy regarding compensation of the Company’s
executive officers, including Mr. Stewart, is to provide competitive salary levels and compensation incentives that
(1) attract and retain individuals of outstanding ability in these key positions, (2) recognize individual performance and
the performance of the Company relative to the performance of other companies of comparable size, complexity and
quality, and (3) support both the short-term and long-term goals of the Company. The Executive Compensation
Committee believes this approach closely links the compensation of the Company’s executives to the
accomplishment of Company goals that coincide with stockholder objectives.
In addition, the Executive Compensation Committee considers the anticipated tax treatment of the Company’s
executive compensation program. Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, generally limits
the corporate tax deduction for compensation paid to executive officers named in the Summary Compensation Table
to $1 million, unless certain conditions are met.
The executive compensation program has in the past included three elements that, taken together, constitute a
flexible and balanced method of establishing total compensation for the Company’s executive officers. These
elements are (1) base salary, (2) annual bonus plan awards, and (3) long-term incentive awards, which in the past
have included stock option grants and performance unit awards.
Providing Competitive Levels of Compensation.    The Executive Compensation Committee generally attempts to
provide the Company’s executives, including Mr. Stewart, with a total compensation package that is competitive and
reflective of the performance achieved by the Company compared to the performance achieved by the Company’s
peers. The compensation is typically weighted toward long-term incentives with base compensation targeted in the
range of the 50th percentile of the compensation comparator group considered by the Committee. The Committee
determines a competitive level of compensation for each executive based on information drawn from a variety of
sources, including proxy statements of other companies and surveys conducted by compensation consultants. An
independent consultant periodically reviews and provides survey data to the Chief Executive Officer and the
Executive Compensation Committee to compare the Company’s executive compensation with compensation levels at
companies in an industry peer group. The Committee obtained an independent survey in the fall of 2005 for the
purpose of determining 2006 compensation for directors and executive officers.
While the targeted value of an executive’s compensation package may be competitive, its actual value may exceed
or fall below competitive levels depending on performance, as discussed below.
Base Salaries.    The Committee periodically reviews and establishes executive base salaries. Generally, base
salaries are determined according to the following factors: the individual’s experience level, scope and complexity of
the position held and annual performance of the individual. In addition, the Committee considers the survey data.
Based on fiscal 2005 performance, all executives received salary increases for fiscal 2006, including Mr. Stewart. The
Company provides perquisites to its senior executives, who choose from the following perquisites: club memberships,
extended life insurance, financial counseling and charitable contributions. The perquisite plan has been approved by
the Committee.
The Annual Bonus Plan.    The purpose of the annual bonus plan is to provide motivation toward, and reward the
accomplishment of, corporate annual objectives and to provide a competitive compensation package that will attract,
reward and retain individuals of the highest quality. As a pay-for-performance plan, cash bonus awards are paid based
upon the achievement of corporate performance objectives established for the fiscal year.
13
Targeted bonus award levels for the Company’s executive officers are established by the Committee each year. The
Company’s annual performance measures are established jointly by the Committee and management. For fiscal 2005,
bonus targets for the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and its other executive officers were based on earnings per
share objectives. These objectives are established at three levels: entry level, expected value (target level) and over-
achievement level. The Committee does not disclose the specific earnings per share objectives because it believes
such disclosure would be detrimental to the Company’s competitive position in the industry. The Company’s fiscal
2005 earnings per share achievement was 90 percentage points above the target (expected value) level. All of the
executive officers, including Mr. Stewart, received a bonus at this level for fiscal 2005.
Long-Term Incentive Program.    The long-term incentive program was introduced in fiscal 1993 to focus
management attention on Company performance over a period of time longer than one year in recognition of the long-
term horizons for return on investments and strategic decisions in the energy services industry. The program is
designed to motivate management to assist the Company in achieving a high level of long-term performance and
serves to link this portion of executive compensation to long-term stockholder value. The Executive Compensation
Committee generally attempts to provide the Company’s executives, including Mr. Stewart, with a total compensation
package that is competitive and reflective of the performance achieved by the Company compared to its peers, and is
typically weighted toward long-term incentives. Aggregate stock or option holdings of the executive have no bearing
on the size of a performance award.
The incentive plans approved by the stockholders of the Company provide flexibility to the Committee in the types of
long-term incentive awards that can be made. For fiscal 2005, the Committee made grants of performance units,
which are payable in stock and have an attached tax gross-up, and stock options. Performance units and stock
options were granted to Mr. Stewart and the other officers named in the summary compensation table on
November 22, 2005. The performance units generally vest at the end of a three-year period, based on Company
performance over such period measured against pre-established objectives. No performance units were scheduled to
vest in fiscal 2005.
CEO Compensation.    A separate, formal process of evaluating Mr. Stewart was conducted, and the results of that
process were considered in determining Mr. Stewart’s compensation. Specifically, the Committee’s considerations
included whether Mr. Stewart achieved his goals for fiscal 2005, the Company’s stock performance, the Company’s
return on assets, and whether the Company’s earnings improved. The Committee also compared the Company’s
financial performance for fiscal 2005 to the Company’s one- and five-year plans. Further, the Committee considered
various qualitative factors, including leadership skills and dedication to strategic planning. The Committee did not
base its considerations on any single factor or specifically assign relative weights to factors.
Key Employee Share Option Plan and Deferred Compensation Plan.    In 1997, the Committee approved the BJ
Services Company Key Employee Share Option Plan, called the “Keysop Plan,” which allows participants to elect to
receive, in lieu of salary and bonus, options to purchase certain designated mutual funds. An executive will not be
taxed on the value of the mutual funds until the Keysop option is exercised, and the Company does not deduct such
amount for tax purposes as compensation until the option is exercised. Beginning January 1, 2005, future elections
were discontinued. In 2000, the Company also implemented a deferred compensation plan for officers and certain key
employees that enables participants to defer taxation on their bonus and a portion of their salary. Amounts deferred
after January 1, 2005, are subject to new Section 409(A) of the Internal Revenue Code (“Section 409”) and the plan
will be modified to conform to this law.
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan.    In 2000, the Committee approved the BJ Services Company
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, which provides supplemental retirement benefits to the Company’s
executive officers. The purpose of this plan is to insure that the Company’s overall compensation program for its
executives is competitive.
Compensation of Directors.    The Committee is also responsible for determining the annual retainer, meeting fees,
stock options and other benefits for members of the Board of Directors. The Committee’s objective
14
with respect to director compensation is to provide compensation incentives that attract and retain individuals of
outstanding ability.
During the first two months of fiscal 2005, the Company paid non-employee directors a monthly retainer based on an
annual retainer of $50,000, an additional annual retainer of $10,000 to committee chairmen, and an attendance fee of
$1,500 for each Board or committee meeting attended. Members of the Audit Committee received a fee of $1,500 for
each quarterly pre-earnings release conference call in which they participated. Effective December 1, 2004, the
Company increased the annual retainer for non-employee directors to $60,000 and raised the annual retainer for the
Audit Committee Chairman to $25,000. Committee chairmen are also paid an additional attendance or participation fee
equal to 50% of the meeting fee paid to other committee members. The Lead Director also receives an annual retainer
of $10,000. Directors who are employees of the Company are not paid directors’ fees. The Company reimburses the
directors’ out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, under the terms of the 1997 Incentive Plan and the 2000 Incentive
Plan, non-employee directors are eligible to receive awards of options to purchase shares of Common Stock. Under
the terms of the 2003 Incentive Plan, non-employee directors are eligible to receive any awards except incentive
stock options.
Under the Directors’ Benefit Plan, which was adopted in 2000, each non-employee director serving on the Board for
more than three years will earn an annual benefit for each year of service on the Board equal to the annual retainer in
effect for directors at the time of termination of his Board service. Payment of the benefit commences following the
director’s termination of service and continues for the number of years equal to his years of service as a director of
the Company. Directors who have served on the Board for more than ten years will receive an amount based on their
years of service, paid over a ten-year period. In the event of the death of a participant, benefit payments will be made
to the director’s beneficiaries over the remainder of the benefit period. The three-year minimum period is waived in the
case of death.
American Jobs Creation Act (“AJCA”).    On October 22, 2004, a new law was enacted which made sweeping
changes to the administration, design and taxation of all deferred compensation arrangements. AJCA is generally
effective for deferrals made on or after January 1, 2005, but may also apply to amounts deferred before that date if
such amounts are not vested as of December 31, 2004 or are made pursuant to a plan that either was not in
existence on or was materially modified after October 3, 2004. Failure to comply with the new law will result in
adverse tax consequences to participants and possible reporting penalties to the Company. The new law impacts, and
changes are required under, the Deferred Compensation Plan, the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, and the
Directors’ Benefit Plan, as well as other benefit arrangements applicable to officers and directors. The Internal
Revenue Service has issued proposed regulations implementing the new law, and final regulations are expected some
time during 2006. The Company’s plans and arrangements are being reviewed to insure that the requirements of AJCA
are timely met.
Don D. Jordan, Chairman
L. William Heiligbrodt
John R. Huff
Michael E. Patrick
James L. Payne
November 22, 2005
This report of the Executive Compensation Committee shall not be deemed “soliciting material,” or to be “filed” with
the Securities and Exchange Commission or subject to Regulation 14A or 14C or to the liabilities of Section 18 of the
Exchange Act, except to the extent that the Company specifically requests that the information be treated as
soliciting material or specifically incorporates it by reference into a document filed under the Securities Act or the
Exchange Act. Further, this report will not be deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the
Securities Act or the Exchange Act except to the extent that the Company specifically incorporates this information
by reference.
15
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Performance Graph—Total Stockholder Return.    The following is a line graph comparing cumulative, five-year
total shareholder return with a general market index (the S&P 500) and a group of peers in the same line of business
or industry selected by the Company. The peer group is comprised of the following companies: Baker Hughes
Incorporated, Halliburton Company, Schlumberger N.V., Smith International, Inc., and Weatherford International Ltd.
The graph assumes investments of $100 on September 30, 2000, and the reinvestment of all dividends.
The graph shall not be deemed incorporated by reference by any general statement incorporating by reference this
Proxy Statement into any filing under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended, except to the extent that the Company specifically incorporates this information by reference, and
shall not otherwise be deemed filed under such Acts.
September 30, 2000 to September 30, 2005
COMPARISON OF 5 YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN*
AMONG BJ SERVICES COMPANY, THE S & P 500 INDEX
AND A PEER GROUP
*
$100 invested on 9/30/00 in stock or index-including reinvestment of dividends. Fiscal year ending September 30.
Copyright © 2002, Standard & Poor’s, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved.
www.researchdatagroup.com/S&P.htm
16
Summary Compensation Table
The following information relates to compensation paid by the Company for fiscal 2003, 2004 and 2005 to the
Company’s Chief Executive Officer and each of the other four most highly compensated executive officers in fiscal
2005:
Name and Principal Position
J. W. Stewart
Chairman of the Board, President and Chief
Executive Officer
Kenneth A. Williams
Vice President and President—
U.S. Operations
David Dunlap
Vice President and President—International
Division
T. M. Whichard III
Vice President—Finance
and Chief Financial Officer
Margaret B. Shannon
Vice President—General Counsel
Annual Compensation(1)
Fiscal
Year
Salary
Bonus(3)
($)
($)
Long-Term
Compensation
Awards(2)
Payouts
Securities
Underlying
Options/
LTIP
All Other
SARs(4)
Payouts(5)
Compensation(6)
(#)
($)
($)
2005
2004
2003
914,843
855,836
808,333
1,341,262
1,127,520
766,511
—  
—  
196,386
—  
—  
2,264,394
2005
2004
2003
428,340
385,841
333,343
441,525
360,836
213,185
—  
—  
98,193
—  
—  
755,296
2005
2004
2003
391,672
361,670
314,165
401,940
338,002
200,643
—  
—  
86,410
—  
—  
755,296
2005
2004
2003  
2005
2004
2003
338,342
320,845
293,342  
332,497
310,840
286,670
346,119
296,895
188,100  
341,040
287,753
181,833
—  
—  
51,060  
—  
—  
43,205
—  
—  
226,642  
—  
—  
480,400
43,064
81,062
76,035
17,936
26,688
23,017
16,882
24,211
21,232
15,600
21,476
17,216
22,593
26,759
21,267
(1) Perquisites and other personal benefits paid or distributed during fiscal 2003, 2004 and 2005 to the individuals
listed in the table above did not exceed, for any individual, the lesser of $50,000 or 10 percent of such
individual’s total salary and bonus. These amounts include premiums for life insurance paid by the Company on
behalf of Messrs. Stewart, Dunlap and Whichard and Ms. Shannon. See note (6) below.
(2) None of the individuals listed above holds any shares of restricted stock of the Company. As of September 30,
2005, the aggregate number of performance units held by such individuals and the dollar value of such units
were: Mr. Stewart—70,423 units ($13,550,589); Mr. Williams—35,211 units ($6,765,667); Mr. Dunlap—30,986
units ($5,948,912); Mr. Whichard—18,310 units ($3,498,194); and Ms. Shannon—15,493 units ($2,977,288). The
dollar values of the performance units are based on the closing price of the Common Stock ($35.99) on
September 30, 2005.
(3)
Includes bonuses earned in the reported fiscal year and paid in the following fiscal year.
(4) Performance units were granted on November 22, 2005 in the following aggregate amounts: Mr. Stewart—64,037
units; Mr. Williams—34,580 units; Mr. Dunlap—30,097 units; Mr. Whichard—16,650 units; and Ms. Shannon—
15,369 units.
(5) Reflects the fair market value (on the date of grant) of shares of Common Stock issued for performance units
granted for the applicable fiscal year under one or more of the Company’s incentive plans.
(6)
Includes contributions to 401(k) plan, deferred compensation plan and premium for life insurance. With respect to
fiscal 2005, the amount shown in this column represents the following amounts contributed by the Company on
the individual’s behalf: Mr. Stewart—$14,906 (401(k) plan), $9,262 (deferred compensation plan) and $18,896
(premium for life insurance); Mr. Williams—$13,074 (401(k) plan) and $4,862 (deferred compensation plan);
Mr. Dunlap—$9,937 (401(k) plan), $4,012 (deferred compensation plan) and $2,933
17
(premium for life insurance); Mr. Whichard—$10,981 (401(k) plan), $3,487 (deferred compensation plan) and
$1,132 (premium for life insurance); and Ms. Shannon—$13,862 (401(k) plan), $3,462 (deferred compensation
plan) and $5,269 (premium for life insurance).
With respect to fiscal 2004, the amount shown in this column represents the following amounts contributed by the
Company on the individual’s behalf: Mr. Stewart—$12,500 (401(k) plan), $51,381 (deferred compensation plan) and
$17,181 (premium for life insurance); Mr. Williams—$12,250 (401(k) plan) and $14,438 (deferred compensation plan);
Mr. Dunlap—$9,188 (401(k) plan), $12,263 (deferred compensation plan) and $2,760 (premium for life insurance);
Mr. Whichard—$10,469 (401(k) plan), $9,875 (deferred compensation plan) and $1,132 (premium for life insurance);
and Ms. Shannon—$11,737 (401(k) plan), $9,875 (deferred compensation plan) and $5,147 (premium for life
insurance).
With respect to fiscal 2003, the amount shown in this column represents the following amounts contributed by the
Company on the individual’s behalf: Mr. Stewart—$12,000 (401(k) plan), $48,375 (deferred compensation plan) and
$15,660 (premium for life insurance); Mr. Williams—$11,667 (401(k) plan) and $11,350 (deferred compensation plan);
Mr. Dunlap—$8,500 (401(k) plan), $10,131 (deferred compensation plan) and $2,601 (premium for life insurance);
Mr. Whichard—$9,000 (401(k) plan), $7,650 (deferred compensation plan) and $566 (premium for life insurance); and
Ms. Shannon—$11,000 (401(k) plan), $8,775 (deferred compensation plan) and $1,492 (premium for life insurance).
The deferred compensation plan provides that the Company contribute the following amounts to the plan on behalf of
each executive officer who participates: (a) for each calendar month, an amount equal to 50% of the participant’s
deferrals of “Excess Compensation” (the participant’s salary over a specified Internal Revenue Code limit ($205,000
for 2004 and $210,000 for 2005)), but not in excess of 6% of the participant’s Excess Compensation for the calendar
month; (b) for each calendar month, an amount equal to 50% of the participant’s deferrals of “Regular Compensation”
(the participant’s base salary up to the Internal Revenue Code limit noted above), but not in excess of 6% of the
participant’s Regular Compensation for the calendar month; and (c) for each calendar month, a percentage (up to 5%)
of the participant’s monthly Excess Compensation. The Company may also make contributions to the plan on behalf
of participants to make up for certain contributions that were forfeited under, or not permitted to be made to, the 401(k)
plan due to Internal Revenue Code limitations applicable to such plan.
Name
J. W. Stewart
Kenneth A. Williams
David Dunlap
T. M. Whichard III
Margaret B. Shannon
Option/SAR Grants in Last Fiscal Year
Potential Realizable Value
at Assumed Annual Rates
of Stock Price Appreciation
for Option Term
Individual Grants
% of Total
Options/
Number of
SARs
Securities
Granted to
Exercise
Underlying
Employees
or Base
Options/SARs
in Fiscal
Price
Expiration
Granted(#)(1)
Year(2)
($/Sh)
Date
5% ($)
10% ($)
240,848  
130,057  
113,198  
62,620  
57,803
14.3% 
7.7% 
6.7% 
3.7% 
3.4%
35.38   11/22/2012   3,468,985   8,084,210
35.38   11/22/2012   1,244,767   2,900,835
35.38   11/22/2012   1,630,415   3,799,560
901,929   2,101,879
35.38   11/22/2012  
35.38   11/22/2012  
832,549   1,940,193
(1) All options reflected in the table were earned in fiscal 2005 and granted on November 22, 2005. Options granted
during fiscal 2005 (i.e., earned in fiscal 2004) were reported in last year’s proxy statement. No stock appreciation
rights (“SARs”) were granted in tandem with the options reflected in this table. These options will become
exercisable ratably over a three-year period, with one-third of each grant vesting on each of the first, second and
third anniversaries of the date of grant.
(2) Reflects the percentage of total options granted in fiscal 2005.
18
Aggregated Option/SAR Exercises in Last Fiscal Year and FY-End Option/SAR Values
The following table sets forth certain information regarding options that persons named in the Summary Compensation
Table above exercised during fiscal 2005 and options that those persons held at September 30, 2005. The values of
unexercised in-the-money stock options at September 30, 2005, shown below are presented pursuant to Securities
and Exchange Commission rules. The actual amount, if any, realized upon exercise of stock options will depend upon
the market price of the Common Stock relative to the exercise price per share of the stock option at the time the
stock option is exercised.
Number of Securities
Underlying Unexercised
Value of Unexercised
Shares
Options/SARs at
In-the-Money
Acquired
Value
FY-End (#)(1)
Options/SARs at FY-End ($)(1)
on Exercise (#)
Realized ($)
Exercisable
Unexercisable
Name
J. W. Stewart
Kenneth A. Williams
David Dunlap
T. M. Whichard III
Margaret B. Shannon
77,844    
330,408   $4,837,722  
232,578   $4,368,151  
316,446   $5,261,194  
0
0
0   2,154,372  
16,048  
636,296  
0  
152,804
Exercisable
Unexercisable
584,428   $53,125,334   $ 9,441,542
291,442   $
374,715   $ 4,710,827
256,066   $16,177,397   $ 4,140,330
198,610    
0   $ 3,378,661
128,264   $ 3,703,253   $ 2,073,140
(1) Does not include options granted after the end of the fiscal year and reflected in the table “Option/SAR Grants in
Last Fiscal Year.”
Long-Term Incentive Plans—Awards in Last Fiscal Year
The following table sets forth certain information regarding performance units granted to the individuals named in the
Summary Compensation Table for performance in fiscal 2005. Performance units represent the right to receive shares
of Common Stock, the number of which is determined by the performance of the Company’s stock as measured
against pre-established objectives. The performance units generally vest at the end of a three-year period, based on
the performance of the Common Stock against such pre-established objectives. Each performance unit includes a tax
gross-up paid in cash.
Name
J. W. Stewart
Kenneth A. Williams
David Dunlap
T. M. Whichard III
Margaret B. Shannon
Number of
End of
Estimated Future Payouts Under
Performance
Performance
Non-Stock Price Based Plans
Units(#)
Period
64,037  
34,580  
30,097  
16,650  
15,369
9/30/2008  
9/30/2008  
9/30/2008  
9/30/2008  
9/30/2008
Threshold(#)
  
21,344  
11,526  
10,031  
5,549  
5,122
Target(#)
  
57,633  
31,122  
27,087  
14,985  
13,832
Maximum(#)
80,046
43,225
37,621
20,813
19,211
19
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan
The Company implemented the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for its senior executives, including
Mr. Stewart, effective October 1, 2000. The following table indicates the hypothetical annual benefit payable under the
plan based on a hypothetical single life annuity computation starting at age 60, using a formula of 2% per year of
service, but not more than 60%, of the participant’s “highest average compensation,” which is the average base salary
and bonus paid for the three highest consecutive years out of the participant’s last ten years of employment. This
benefit would be reduced by Social Security and other benefits listed below.
$200,000
$400,000
$600,000
$800,000
$1,000,000
$1,200,000
$1,400,000
$1,600,000
$1,800,000
$2,000,000
$2,200,000
$2,400,000
Pension Plan Table—Hypothetical Annuity
Highest Average Compensation
5
10
15
20
25
30
Years of Service
20,000   40,000   60,000   80,000   100,000   120,000
   40,000   80,000  120,000  160,000   200,000   240,000
   60,000  120,000  180,000  240,000   300,000   360,000
   80,000  160,000  240,000  320,000   400,000   480,000
  100,000  200,000  300,000  400,000   500,000   600,000
  120,000  240,000  360,000  480,000   600,000   720,000
  140,000  280,000  420,000  560,000   700,000   840,000
  160,000  320,000  480,000  640,000   800,000   960,000
  180,000  360,000  540,000  720,000   900,000   1,080,000
  200,000  400,000  600,000  800,000   1,000,000   1,200,000
  220,000  440,000  660,000  880,000   1,100,000   1,320,000
  240,000  480,000  720,000  960,000   1,200,000   1,440,000
The credited years of service of the named executive officers, at September 30, 2005, are as follows: Mr. Stewart—
36 years; Mr. Williams—32 years; Mr. Dunlap—15 years; Mr. Whichard—16 years; and Ms. Shannon—11 years.
The hypothetical annuity shown above would be reduced by (i) the Social Security benefit payable at age 62,
(ii) certain contributions by the Company for the participant’s account under the Company’s 401(k) plan and 401(k)
restoration plan, and (iii) any annual benefit the participant will receive under a defined benefit pension plan maintained
by the predecessors of the Company. The average annual reduction in benefit currently projected by the Company for
the five named officers is $67,317. In the case of early retirement, death, disability or change in control before the
participant reaches age 60, the benefit is reduced. The compensation covered by the plan for the most recent three
years does not differ by more than 10% from the annual compensation shown in the Summary Compensation Table.
The actual benefit payable is the actuarial equivalent of the hypothetical annuity, after applicable offsets, paid out
over a period elected by the participant of from five to 30 years.
A participant’s benefit is fully vested upon the later of the participant’s 55th birthday or the date the participant
completes five full years of service. Prior to age 55, no part of the benefit is vested, unless the participant dies,
becomes disabled, or a change in control occurs. If one of these events occurs, the participant’s benefit will be fully
vested. In the event of a change in control, the participant will be given three years’ extra credit for years of service
and age in calculating the benefit.
A participant’s interest in the plan is generally distributed upon retirement in accordance with the participant’s
distribution election. The Executive Compensation Committee may, however, direct that the benefits be paid as a
lump sum. A lump sum payment will be paid in the event of death or a change in control, and may be paid by the
Committee at the request of the participant in the case of disability. In the event of a change in control, the participant
will receive a “gross-up” payment sufficient to satisfy any excise tax payments that may be imposed by Section 4999
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), and any additional taxes imposed with respect to
such gross-up payments, in accordance with the provisions of the plan.
The Company has purchased life insurance to finance the benefits under this plan.
20
SEVERANCE AGREEMENTS
The Company has severance agreements with its executive officers, including each of the named executive officers
shown in the Summary Compensation Table. The severance agreements were effective August 27, 1993, except for
Ms. Shannon’s agreement, which was effective February 14, 1994 and Mr. Dunlap’s agreement, which was effective
November 27, 1995. In 1999, the Board of Directors approved amendments to the form of executive severance
agreements. The following describes the terms of the form of severance agreement, as so amended. The term of
each agreement is automatically extended for an additional year at the end of each year, unless the Company has
given one year’s prior notice of termination. The agreements are intended to provide for continuity of management in
the event of a change in control of the Company. The agreements provide that covered executive officers could be
entitled to certain severance benefits following a change in control of the Company. If, following a change in control,
the executive is terminated by the Company for any reason, other than for death, disability or for cause, or if such
executive officer terminates his or her employment for good reason (as this term is defined in the agreements), then
the executive officer is entitled to a severance payment that will be three times the sum of the executive officer’s
base salary and bonus amount, as defined in the agreements, plus an amount equal to three times the value of the
executive’s largest stock option and/or performance unit grant in the prior three years. Option awards that are intended
as two-year awards will be annualized for purposes of this calculation. The severance payment is generally made in
the form of a lump sum. For a period of up to three years, the Company would also provide life, disability, accident
and health insurance coverage substantially similar to the benefits provided before termination. Further, the Company
would provide outplacement services, and the Company would provide retiree medical coverage if the executive were
within five years of eligibility at the time of termination following a change in control.
If a change in control occurs, the severance agreements are effective for a period of two years from the date of such
change in control. Under the severance agreements, a change in control would generally include any of the following
events: (i) any “person” as defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, acquires 25 percent or more
of the Company’s voting securities; (ii) a majority of the Company’s directors are replaced during a two-year period;
(iii) stockholders approve a merger, resulting in (a) 60% or less of the common stock and voting securities of the
surviving corporation being owned by the same persons that owned the Common Stock of the Company immediately
prior to such merger, (b) a person owning 25% or more of the surviving corporation’s common stock or voting
securities, or (c) replacement of a majority of the members of the Board of Directors; or (iv) the Company’s
stockholders approve a liquidation or sale of the Company’s assets. In the event that any payments made in
connection with a change in control would be subject to the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code, the
Company would pay an additional payment (a “gross-up” payment) sufficient to satisfy such excise tax obligations
and any additional taxes imposed with respect to such gross-up payment.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS
SECTION 16(a) BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP REPORTING COMPLIANCE
None.
Based solely upon a review of reports on Forms 3 and 4 and amendments thereto furnished to the Company during
fiscal 2005, reports on Form 5 and amendments thereto furnished to the Company with respect to fiscal 2005, and
written representations from officers and directors that no Form 5 was required to be filed, the Company believes that
all filing requirements applicable to its officers, directors and beneficial owners of more than 10% of the Common
Stock under Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, were complied with during fiscal
2005.
21
SOLICITATION
The Company is soliciting proxies for the 2006 Annual Meeting and will bear the cost of solicitation. In addition to
solicitation by mail, certain of the directors, officers or regular employees of the Company may, without extra
compensation, solicit the return of proxies by telephone or electronic media. Arrangements will be made with
brokerage houses, custodians and other fiduciaries to send proxy material to their principals, and the Company will
reimburse these parties for any out-of-pocket expenses. Georgeson & Company Inc. will assist the Company in the
proxy solicitation and will receive a fee of $8,000, plus reimbursement of certain charges and expenses.
VOTING PROCEDURES
A majority of the outstanding shares of Common Stock present or represented by proxy at the 2006 Annual Meeting
constitutes a quorum for the transaction of business. ADP Investor Communication Services will tabulate all votes
cast, in person or by submission of a properly executed proxy, before the closing of the polls at the meeting. The
Company will appoint an inspector of elections at the meeting. The affirmative vote of holders of a plurality of the
Common Stock present or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote is required for the election of each
nominee. Therefore, abstentions and broker non-votes will not be taken into account in determining the outcome of the
election of directors. For the Authorized Shares Amendment, the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the
outstanding Common Stock is required, and abstentions and broker non-votes will have the effect of negative votes.
For any other matters presented for a vote of stockholders, the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the
Common Stock present or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote is required. Therefore, on any
such matters, abstentions have the effect of a negative vote, and broker non-votes will not be taken into account.
22
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR
Deloitte & Touche LLP, a registered public accounting firm, audited the Company’s consolidated financial statements
for fiscal 2005, and has advised the Company that it will have a representative available at the 2006 Annual Meeting
to respond to appropriate questions. Such representative will be permitted to make a statement if he or she so
desires. It has not been the Company’s practice, and the Company is not required by law, to submit the Audit
Committee’s choice of independent auditor to the stockholders for ratification. The Company has not yet selected
independent public accountants to audit its consolidated financial statements for fiscal 2006. Historically, the
Company has selected independent public accountants for that purpose in May of the fiscal year during which the
audit will take place. Thus, the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors intends to engage the accountants for such
purpose in May 2006.
Deloitte & Touche LLP has billed the Company and its subsidiaries fees as set forth in the table below for (i) the
audits of the Company’s 2004 and 2005 annual financial statements, the audit of the 2005 report on internal control
over financial reporting, reviews of quarterly financial statements, and review of other documented filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, (ii) assurance and other services reasonably related to the audit or review of
the Company’s financial statements, and (iii) services related to tax compliance.
Fiscal 2005 (3)
 
Fiscal 2004 (3)
Audit Fees
$8,645,563  
  
$1,325,462
Audit-
$
Related Fees (1)
  
156,755  
  
268,789
$
Tax Fees (2)
$
4,500
$ 20,916
(1) The services comprising “Audit-Related Fees” included audits of the Company’s employee benefit plans and
internal control consultation.
(2) The services comprising “Tax Fees” included tax compliance, planning and advice.
(3) There were no fees billed in 2004 or 2005 that would constitute “All Other Fees.”
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has adopted policies regarding the pre-approval of auditor services.
Specifically, the Audit Committee pre-approves at its May meeting all services provided by the independent public
accountants. All additional services must be pre-approved on a case-by-case basis. The Audit Committee reviews the
actual and budgeted fees for the independent public accountants at its May and November meetings. All of the
services provided by Deloitte & Touche LLP during fiscal 2004 and 2005 were approved by the Audit Committee.
23
PROPOSALS OF STOCKHOLDERS
Stockholders of record who intend to submit a proposal at the annual meeting of stockholders in 2007 must provide
written notice to the Company in accordance with the Company’s Bylaws. Under the Company’s Bylaws, such notice
must be received at the Company’s principal executive offices, addressed to the Secretary of the Company, no later
than November 2, 2006.
Stockholders who intend to submit a proposal at the annual meeting of stockholders in 2007 and desire that such
proposal be included in the proxy materials for such meeting must follow the procedures prescribed in the Company’s
Bylaws and Rule l4a-8 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. To be eligible for inclusion in the
proxy materials, stockholder proposals must be received by the Secretary of the Company at the Company’s principal
executive offices no later than August 22, 2006.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Annual Report to Stockholders of the Company for the year ended September 30, 2005, including audited
financial statements, is enclosed with this proxy statement but does not constitute a part of the proxy soliciting
material. Additional copies of the Annual Report are available, without charge, upon request.
The Corporate Governance Guidelines, the Corporate Compliance and Business Ethics Manual of the Company and
the charters of the Audit Committee, the Nominating and Governance Committee and the Executive Compensation
Committee are available on the Company’s website (www.bjservices.com), and copies of these documents are
available to stockholders, without charge, upon request.
BJ Services Company will furnish a copy of its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30,
2005, without exhibits, free of charge to each person who forwards a written request to Robert C. Coons,
Director, Corporate Communications, BJ Services Company, 5500 Northwest Central Drive, Houston, Texas
77092-2036.
24
APPENDIX A
PROPOSED TEXT OF ARTICLE FOURTH OF
THE BJ SERVICES COMPANY CHARTER
The text of the proposed amended Article FOURTH of the BJ Services Company Charter is as follows:
“FOURTH: The total number of shares of stock which the Corporation shall have the authority to issue is 985,000,000
shares of capital stock, consisting of 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $1.00 per share (the “Preferred
Stock”), and 980,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share (the “Common Stock”).
The designations, powers and preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights and
qualifications, limitations or restrictions of the Preferred Stock shall be established by resolutions of the Board of
Directors pursuant to Section 151 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware.”
25
[BJ SERVICES COMPANY LOGO]
VOTE BY INTERNET – www.proxyvote.com
BJ SERVICES COMPANY
5500 NORTHWEST CENTRAL DRIVE
HOUSTON, TX 77210-4442
Use the Internet to transmit your voting instructions and for electronic
delivery of information up until 11:59 P.M. Eastern Time the day before
the cut-off date or meeting date. Have your proxy card in hand when
you access the web site and follow the instructions to obtain your
records and to create an electronic voting instruction form.
ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF FUTURE SHAREHOLDER
COMMUNICATIONS
If you would like to reduce the costs incurred by BJ Services Company
in mailing proxy materials, you can consent to receiving all future proxy
statements, proxy cards and annual reports electronically via e-mail or
the Internet. To sign up for electronic delivery, please follow the
instructions above to vote using the Internet and, when prompted,
indicate that you agree to receive or access shareholder
communications electronically in future years.
VOTE BY PHONE – 1-800-690-6903
Use any touch-tone telephone to transmit your voting instructions up
until 11:59 P.M. Eastern Time the day before the cut-off date or
meeting date. Have your proxy card in hand when you call and then
follow the instructions.
VOTE BY MAIL
Mark, sign and date your proxy card and return it in the postage-paid
envelope we have provided or return it to BJ Services Company, c/o
ADP, 51 Mercedes Way, Edgewood, NY 11717.
(Please sign, date and return this proxy in the enclosed
postage prepaid envelope.)
TO VOTE, MARK BLOCKS BELOW IN BLUE OR BLACK INK AS FOLLOWS:
BJSRV1            KEEP THIS PORTION FOR YOUR RECORDS
—  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —   —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —   —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —
—  —  —  —  —  —  —  —
DETACH AND RETURN THIS PORTION ONLY
THIS PROXY CARD IS VALID ONLY WHEN SIGNED AND DATED.
BJ SERVICES COMPANY
            
        Vote on Directors
1
To elect TWO Class I Directors to
serve a three-year term. Nominees
for election as Class III Directors:
01) JOHN R. HUFF
2
02) MICHAEL E. PATRICK
For
All
¨
Withhold
All
¨
For All
Except
¨
To withhold authority to vote for one or more nominees, mark “For All
Except” and write down the number(s) of such nominee(s) on the line
below.
To approve an amendment to BJ Services’ certificate of incorporation, as amended, to
For
Against Abstain
increase the total number
of shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, that BJ Services has the authority
to issue from
380,000,000 shares to 980,000,000 shares (the “authorized shares amendment”).
¨
¨
¨
In the discretion of the proxies, such other business as may properly come before the meeting and at any adjournments or postponements
thereof.
This proxy, when properly executed, will be voted in the manner directed herein. If no direction is made, this proxy will be voted FOR
the election of the nominees for Director and FOR the authorized shares amendment and, in the discretion of the proxies, with respect to
such other business as may properly come before the meeting.
The Board of Directors recommends a vote FOR the election of the nominees for Director and FOR the authorized shares amendment.
For address changes, please check this box                                    ¨
and write them on the back where indicated.
NOTE: Please sign, date and return your instructions promptly in the enclosed envelope. Sign exactly as name(s) appear(s) hereon.
Joint owners should each sign. When signing as attorney, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian or other fiduciary, please give
full title as such.
Signature [PLEASE SIGN WITHIN BOX]
Date
Signature (Joint Owners)
Date
—  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —   —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —   —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —  —
—  —  —  —  —  —
BJ SERVICES COMPANY
PROXY SOLICITED ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS ON JANUARY 31, 2006
The Annual Meeting of the Stockholders of BJ Services Company (the “Company”) will be held on Tuesday, January 31, 2006, at 11:00 a.m.
local time, at the WESTIN GALLERIA HOTEL located at 5060 WEST ALABAMA, HOUSTON, TEXAS.
The undersigned, having received the notice and accompanying Proxy Statement for said meeting, hereby constitutes and appoints J.W.
Stewart, T.M. Whichard III and Margaret B. Shannon, or any of them, his/her true and lawful agents and proxies, with power of substitution
and resubstitution in each, to represent and vote at the Annual Meeting scheduled to be held on January 31, 2006, or at any adjournment
or postponement thereof on all matters coming before said meeting, all shares of Common Stock of BJ Services Company which the
undersigned may be entitled to vote. The above proxies are hereby instructed to vote as shown on the reverse side of this card.
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT
TO ASSURE YOUR REPRESENTATION AT THE MEETING, PLEASE SIGN, DATE AND RETURN YOUR PROXY AS PROMPTLY AS
POSSIBLE. AN ENVELOPE, WHICH REQUIRES NO POSTAGE IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES, IS ENCLOSED FOR THIS
PURPOSE.
(Continued and to be dated and signed on the reverse side.)
ADDRESS CHANGE:
(If you noted any address changes above, please check the corresponding box on the reverse side.)