
Jameson Resources Limited
(ACN 126 398 294)
Annual Report
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Annual Report 2016
CONTENTS
Jameson Resources Limited
Corporate Directory 
 
Chairman’s Letter 
 
Directors’ Report 
 
Auditor’s Independence Declaration  
 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income 
 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position  
 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
 
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
 
Notes to the Financial Statements 
 
Directors’ Declaration 
 
Independent Auditor’s Report  
 
Corporate Governance Statement 
 
Additional Shareholder Information 
 
Schedule of Mineral Tenements
2 
 
3 
 
4
28
29
30
31
32
33
58
59
61
69
71
1
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Jameson Resources Limited is an Australian listed exploration company focused on the development of its 
Canadian based coal projects.  Its holdings are located in British Columbia, being the Crown Mountain and 
Dunlevy projects.  For more details visit www.jamesonresources.com.au.   
 
The Company was established in 2007, and its headquarters are in West Perth, Western Australia.  Current 
relevant information is as follows:
DIRECTORS
Mr T. Arthur Palm
(Acting Chairman and Chief Executive Officer)
Mr Jeff Bennett
(Non-Executive Director)
Mr Steve van Barneveld  
(Non-Executive Director)
COMPANY SECRETARY
Ms Suzie Foreman
REGISTERED OFFICE
Jameson Resources Limited
Suite 5
62 Ord Street
WEST PERTH WA 6008
Telephone: + 61(8) 9200 4473 
Facsimile: + 61(8) 9200 4463
NWP Coal Canada Ltd
Suite 800, 1199 West Hastings St
Vancouver, BCV6E 3TS
Telephone: +1(604) 629 8605
AUDITORS
HLB Mann Judd 
(WA Partnership)
Level 4
130 Stirling Street 
PERTH WA 6000
SHARE REGISTRAR
Security Transfer Registrars
770 Canning Highway
APPLECROSS WA 6153
Telephone: + 61(8) 9315 2333
SECURITIES EXCHANGE LISTING
Australian Securities Exchange
(Home Exchange: Perth, Western Australia)
Code: JAL
2
Annual Report 2016
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
Jameson Resources Limited
Dear Shareholder, 
 
I am honoured to present the Jameson Resources Limited Annual Report for the year ended 30 June 2016. 
 
Jameson  continues  to  progress  our  flagship  Crown  Mountain  coking  coal  project  in  southeast  British 
Columbia,  Canada.    Major  milestones  were  achieved  in  the  pre-application  phase  of  the  Environmental 
Assessment (“EA”) process. 
 
As the coking coal market shows increasing signs of recovery, we continue to position Crown Mountain to 
take advantage when the time is right.  This positioning is balanced against the need to conserve cash, and 
as such, activities at Crown Mountain will continue in a measured manner in fiscal 2017. 
 
In northeast British Columbia, provincial action in creating a Caribou reserve resulted in Jameson losing coal 
exploration  applications  on  our  Peace  Reach,  Graham  River,  and  Carbon  East  properties;  our  Dunlevy 
metallurgical coal project was not affected by this action.  
 
Jameson remains financially strong:  the Company had no debt and $1.9 million in cash and equivalents at 
year-end.   
 
Going forward we shall maintain the strategy adopted last year:  continue to advance Crown Mountain at a 
measured  pace  while  conserving  cash  on  hand.    This  includes  completing  the  Application  Information 
Requirements  (“AIR”)  portion  of  the  EA  process,  to  capture  and  document  all  work  and  consultations 
performed to-date.   
 
As part of our cash conservation efforts, management has taken voluntary reductions in compensation, and 
I would like to thank my fellow Directors Jeff Bennett and Steve van Barneveld not only for their sacrifice in 
that area, but for their valuable and continuing guidance and leadership of the Company during this difficult 
environment 
 
While  Jameson  remains  a  pure  coking  coal  company,  management  will  continue  to  evaluate  other 
opportunities that present themselves from time-to-time, both in and outside of our primary commodity. 
 
The  strength  in  Jameson  lies  in  its  dedicated  shareholders,  broadly  skilled  management,  and  despite  the 
market weakness of the past 2 years, its strategic position in the key long term market for steel-making coal.
Art Palm 
Chairman and CEO 
1 September 2016
3
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT
Jameson Resources Limited
The  directors  of  Jameson  Resources  Limited  (“Jameson”  or  “the  Company”)  submit  herewith  the  financial 
report of the Company and its subsidiaries for the financial year ended 30 June 2016. In order to comply with 
the provisions of the Corporations Act 2001, the directors’ report is as follows: 
 
1.
DIRECTORS
The names and details of the Company’s directors in office during or since the financial year end until 
the  date  of  the  report  are  as follows.  Directors  were  in office for  the  entire  period  unless  otherwise 
stated. 
 
Mr T. Arthur Palm (Chief Executive Officer and Chairman) 
Mr Jeff Bennett 
Mr Steve van Barneveld
INFORMATION ON DIRECTORS
T. Arthur Palm 
Qualifications 
Length of Service 
 
Experience
Jeff Bennett 
Qualifications 
Length of Service 
 
Experience
including
responsibilities
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer   
B.S. Mining Engineering, MBA 
7 years: Director appointment - 12 August 2009 
 
Mr  Palm  is  a  professional  mining  engineer  with  40  years  of  mining  related 
operational  experience, 
in  open-pit  and 
underground  coal  mining  in  North  America.  Mr  Palm  held  management 
positions at several major coal companies during his career and founded and 
operated consulting company Mencon LLC prior to joining Jameson in 2009.  
He  has  extensive  experience  in  exploration,  property  evaluation,  mine  and 
plant design, mine and plant operations, and corporate governance. 
 
 
Non-Executive Director 
BComm CPA 
9 years: Director appointment – 5 July 2007 
 
Mr Bennett has over 20 years’ experience in the resource, transport, IT and 
service  industries.  Mr  Bennett  has  held  senior  financial  positions  at  CSC, 
UXC  Ltd.,  Intermoco  Ltd,  Simoco  Pacific,  BHP,  and  Shell.  His  experience 
extends to corporate finance, capital markets, acquisitions and divestments 
and risk management.
Special Responsibilities  Remuneration and Nomination Committee member
Steve van Barneveld 
Qualifications 
Length of Service 
 
Experience
Non-Executive Director  
B Min-Tech (Hons 1) 
2 years:  Director appointment 21 February 2014 
 
Mr van Barneveld is a process engineer with over 29 years of experience in 
the  mining  services  sector,  a  significant  portion  of  which  was  spent  with 
Sedgman  Limited,  a  leading  international  designer  and  builder  of  coal 
handling  and  processing  plants,  where  he  served  as  COO  and  oversaw  a 
period of significant growth and international expansion. Steve has extensive 
experience  in  asset  development,  design,  construction,  and  operations 
management.  Mr. van Barneveld is based in Brisbane.
Special Responsibilities  Remuneration and Nomination Committee member
4
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
2.
3.
4.
INFORMATION ON DIRECTORS (Continued)
Directorships of other listed companies
Directorships of other listed companies held by directors currently and in the 3 years immediately before the 
end of the financial year are as follows: 
 
Name 
T. Arthur Palm 
Jeff Bennett 
Steve van Barneveld
Period of directorship 
- 
20 May 2008 - current 
-
Company  
- 
KneoMedia Limited 
-
COMPANY SECRETARY
The following person held the position of company secretary during and at the end of the financial 
year:
Ms Suzie Foreman
Ms Foreman is a Chartered Accountant with over 20 years of experience within the UK and Australia. 
Ms  Foreman  has  11  years  combined  experience  with  a  Big  4  and  a  boutique  accounting  firm 
specialising in the areas of audit, advisory and corporate services. Ms Foreman has extensive skills in 
the areas of financial and management reporting, due diligence and ASX corporate  compliance. Ms 
Foreman is a director of Athena Corporate Pty Ltd and has been involved in the listing of numerous 
exploration companies on the ASX, AIM and OTC markets and assisted in corporate matters including 
capital raising, acquisitions, divestments, finance, joint ventures and corporate governance.
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Jameson Resources Limited is a public company listed on the ASX (Code: JAL) and is incorporated 
and domiciled in Western Australia. Jameson Resources Limited and its wholly owned subsidiaries 
NWP Coal Canada Ltd and Dunlevy Energy Inc. are collectively referred to as Jameson, or the Group, 
as the context requires. In 2015 the Company wound up its Australian subsidiary entity NWPC Pty Ltd 
and all overseas entities are now held directly by Jameson Resources Limited, the parent entity.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES
The  principal  activity  of  the  Group  during  the  financial  year  was  advancing  the  Company’s  Crown 
Mountain Coking Coal project. Management has also been evaluating other opportunities that have 
presented themselves from time-to-time, both in coal and other commodities.
There were no significant changes in the nature of the Group’s principal activities during the financial 
year.
OPERATING RESULTS
The loss, after tax, attributable to the Group for the financial year ended 30 June 2016, amounted to 
$2,289,315 (2015: $5,024,488)
5
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
5.
6.
7.
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
DIVIDENDS PAID OR RECOMMENDED
The  directors  do  not  recommend  the  payment  of  a  dividend  in  respect  of  the financial  year  and  no 
amount has been paid or declared by way of a dividend since the start of the financial year to the date 
of this report.
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN STATE OF AFFAIRS
There were no significant changes in the state of affairs of the Company during the financial year.
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Jameson Resources Ltd (“Jameson” or “the Company”) is focused on the exploration of strategic coal 
projects in western Canada.  The Province of British Columbia (location of the Company’s two projects 
– see Figure 1) benefits from world-class railways, deep water ports, and skilled labour and services. 
 
During the financial year ended 30 June 2016, the Company made significant progress advancing its 
flagship  project,  Crown  Mountain,  into  the  pre-application  phase  of  the  Environmental  Assessment 
(“EA”) process.  This is a major first step in ultimately pursuing permitting for an open pit coal mine.  
 
A Prefeasibility Study (PFS) on Crown Mountain was completed by Norwest Corporation of Calgary 
Canada (“Norwest”) in August 2014. That study resulted in an outstanding result for Crown Mountain 
and reinforced the Company’s decision to fast-track Crown Mountain into the EA process.  Full results 
of the PFS were published in Jameson’s 2014 Annual Report, repeated in the 2015 Annual Report, 
and presented in summary form herein.  Several favourable economic factors have emerged since the 
PFS  was  completed.    For  example,  the  lower  exchange  rate  between  the  Canadian  and  US  dollar 
creates  a  significant  reduction  in  forecast  opex  (in  USD).    Too,  labour  and  equipment  costs  have 
declined.  These factors are discussed more in the pages that follow. 
 
No work was performed on the Dunlevy project in northeast British Columbia.  Also in the northeast, 
the Company saw exploration applications cancelled on three projects (Graham River, Peace Reach, 
and  Carbon  East)  due  to  the  province  creating  several  Caribou  reserve  areas.    Jameson  had  not 
planned near or intermediate term work on any of the three cancelled projects.
6
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
Figure 1:  Project Locations
British Columbia  
 
Elk Valley Coal Field - Crown Mountain Coking Coal Project 
 
Location and Tenure 
 
The Crown Mountain project (“Crown Mountain” or “the Project”) is located within the Elk Valley coal 
field in south eastern British Columbia.  Along with the Crowsnest coal field, this region is home to five 
of Canada’s producing coal mines. These five coal mines produce over 22 million tonnes per annum 
of quality coking and thermal coal, representing a significant majority of Canada’s total coal exports. It 
is important to note that all five of these mines continued to operate during the currently depressed 
market for coking coal.  This is contrary to the status of most other export coal mines in Canada, and 
is a testament to the lower cost operating structure, and higher coal quality, in the Elk Valley. 
 
Crown Mountain sits in the heart of this region in close proximity to two significant coking coal mines, 
Line Creek which is 12km to the north, and Elkview which is 8km to the southwest. The Project includes 
five granted coal licenses (418150, 418151, 418152, 418153 and 418154) covering an area of 2,588 
hectares (Table 1), and one application (975 hectares).  All licenses are in good standing and held in 
the name of NWP Coal Canada Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of Jameson.
7
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
Name
North Block 
South Block 
West Crown 
Southern Ext 
Crown East 
Northwest Ext 
TOTAL
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
License 
Number 
418150 
418151 
418153 
418154 
418152 
418430
Status
Area (Ha)
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Granted
Application
334 
1,001 
251 
835 
167 
975 
3,563
Rent
$2,338 
$7,007 
$1,757 
$5,845 
$1,169 
$6,825 
$24,941
Note:  First year rents are pre-paid, annual rents are due starting one year after tenure is granted.
Table 1:  Crown Mountain Coal License Summary Table
Exploration
Jameson successfully completed its inaugural exploration program at Crown Mountain in 2012.  The 
program  was  undertaken  by  independent  contractor  Norwest  and  included  geological  mapping, 
trenching and reverse circulation drilling.  Drilling was performed in three phases across the project 
area  with  the  majority  of  the  drill  holes confined  to  the  North  and  South  Blocks.  The  final  phase  of 
drilling, which focused on the previously untested Southern Extension, was concluded on 19 November 
2012. In total, the program included forty reverse circulation drill holes ranging in depth from 62m to 
231m (average 143m) for an advance of 5,707m.  
 
Consultant Norwest Corporation (Norwest) completed a compliant Resource Report and Preliminary 
Economic  Assessment  (PEA)  in  early  2013  based  on  the  2012,  and  historical,  exploration  results.  
Those reports indicated Crown Mountain to be a project of merit, leading to additional exploration in 
the summer of 2013. 
 
The 2013 exploration program was focused on two objectives:  (a) acquire significant bulk samples to 
determine  coal  quality  at  Crown  Mountain,  and  (b)  perform  additional  drilling  to  verify  the  geologic 
model and explore the extents of the coal deposit.  Both objectives were accomplished.  The 2013 
program was completed ahead of schedule and under budget. 
 
The 2013 program was targeted specifically at the North and South Blocks, which contain measured 
and  indicated  resources.    The  Southern  Extension  area,  containing  only  inferred  resources,  was 
excluded.    However,  it  should  be  noted  that  Jameson  and  its  consultants  believe  the  Southern 
Extension  displays  significant  potential  to  expand  on  the  area  targeted  by  the  2013  program  and 
subsequent PFS. 
 
No drilling activities were conducted at Crown Mountain  during the 2015 or 2016 reporting periods.  
However, Jameson applied for and received an additional exploration permit for Crown Mountain in 
November 2014.  In July 2015 Jameson was granted an extension of the expiration date for all Crown 
Mountain exploration permits to 2018 and drilling activities can be initiated anytime  over the next  2 
years without the need for additional permitting.  Approved exploration permits include the North and 
South  Blocks,  and  the  promising  Southern  Extension  area.    Despite  not  drilling,  the  Company  did 
continue several exploration/environmental related studies during the 2015-2016 period.
8
Annual Report 2016
Resources
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
In March 2014 Norwest provided the resource estimate shown in Table 2, under the guidelines of NI43-
101 and JORC 2012.
RESOURCE AREA
Measured
Indicated
Measured &
Inferred
(Mt)
(Mt)
Indicated
(Mt)
(Mt)
Measured, 
Indicated & 
Inferred (Mt)
North Block
South Block
Southern Extension
8.0
60.9
0
6.0
0
0
14.0
60.9
0
TOTAL
68.9Mt
6.0Mt
74.9Mt
0
0
23.7
23.7Mt
14.0
60.9
23.7
98.6Mt
Table 2:  Crown Mountain Resource 2014 (Effective March 11, 2014)
Note: Data for Table 2 was prepared in accordance with provisions of NI 43-101 and presented above in 
accordance with the JORC Code (2012 Edition), Clause 26. Refer ASX announcement 14 March 2014.
The  Resource  Estimates  were  made  from  a  3D  computer-based  geologic  model  constructed  by 
Norwest using MineSight® software, an internationally recognized application for geologic modelling 
and resource estimation. The Coal Resource estimate in Table 2 was based on the following inputs 
and parameters:
  Forty reverse circulation (“RC”) drill holes (totaling 5,707m) completed by Jameson in 2012 plus
the 7 large drill core (“LDC”) and 6 RC holes completed in 2013
  Eighteen rotary holes drilled in 1969 by Crows Nest Industries and 1979 by Shell Canada 
  Data collected from twelve trenches and thirty nine outcrop points by Jameson in 2012 
  Data collected by Crows Nest Industries and Shell Canada during 1979-1981 via trenching and
bulk sampling
20:1 incremental cut-off strip ratio
  Historical geological mapping 
 
  Minimum minable seam thickness of 0.5m 
  Maximum non-separable parting thickness of 0.5m
Note - The 20:1 incremental cut-off is prescribed by NI43-101 to determine the definable open pit / surface 
mineable  extent  of  the  resource.    It  does  not  reflect  the  average  strip  ratio  which  could  be  economically 
mined.
9
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Reserves 
 
The PFS identified 55.8 million Run of Mine (ROM) tonnes as a coal reserve, of which 49.7 million 
tonnes are classified as Proven and 6.1 million tonnes as Probable.  These reserves are presented in 
the following Table 3.
Area
ASTM 
Group
Run of Mine Coal Reserves
(Ktonnes)
Proven
Probable
COKING
PCI
COKING
PCI
North Pit
East Pit
South Pit
Sub-Total
Bituminous
7,252
3,563
31,784
42,599
756
461
5,914
7,131
4,907
1,192
0
0
0
0
4,907
1,192
Total Proven & Probable
49,730
6,099
Total
55,829
Table 3 – Run of mine surface mineable reserve summary (ktonnes)(as at May 31, 2014)
There has been no additional formal work performed on resources or reserves since the completion of 
the PFS; the above reserves are based on the costs and coal sales prices assumed in the PFS.
Coal Quality
The largest information gap identified in the early 2013 Norwest work was coal quality.  That issue was 
addressed during the summer 2013 exploration program. 
 
Norwest has concluded the Crown Mountain product will compare favourably with the best hard coking 
coals in Canada. 
 
Coal  quality  results  were  published  in  the  2014  Annual  Report;  no  additional  coal  quality  work  has 
been performed since that time.
Preliminary Economic Assessment and Project De-Risking 
 
In April 2013 Norwest completed a Preliminary Economic Assessment (“PEA”) for the Crown Mountain 
project.    The  PEA  identified  certain  risk  areas  (Table  4)  associated  with  the  project.    Mitigation 
measures were identified in the 2014 and 2015 Annual Reports and are updated in the table below for 
activities conducted in 2016:
RISK CATEGORY
PEA RISK DISCUSSION
MITIGATION MEASURES POST PEA
(2013)
(CURRENT)
Market Risk
While the Norwest economics are based 
on pricing forecasts from reputable and 
respected 
is  no 
guarantee  these  forecasts  will  prove 
accurate.
sources,
there
10
for
The  pricing  environment 
the 
Company’s  target  product,  hard  coking 
coal,  has  been  difficult  and  the  risk 
associated with coal markets remains a 
factor. 
is  evaluating 
alternatives  to  the  PFS  that  have  the 
potential  to  lower  operating  and  capital 
costs.    No  formal  revisions  to  the  PFS 
assumptions  have  been  made  at  this 
time.
Jameson
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
RISK CATEGORY
PEA RISK DISCUSSION
MITIGATION MEASURES POST PEA
that
revenues  over
The  2013  exploration  program  and 
subsequent  extensive  coal  analysis 
routines have removed much of the risk 
associated  with  coal  quality  at  Crown 
Mountain.    Evaluation  of  bulk  samples 
has  allowed  third  parties  to  state  with 
confidence 
the  primary  Crown 
Mountain  product is a  hard  coking  coal 
that  will  compare  favourably  with  the 
other  high  quality  Canadian  coals.    In 
2015  and  2016  Jameson  explored  the 
potential for contract mining which would 
allow  multiple  pits 
to  be  mined 
concurrently, with the resulting blended 
product  showing  potential  for  higher 
overall 
life-of-mine 
(versus  the  PFS).    These  discussions 
are ongoing. 
The 
large  amount  of  bulk  sample 
collected in the summer of 2013 allowed 
to  conduct  extensive 
the  Company 
washability 
testing  on  single  seam 
samples  and  coal  blends.    As  a  result, 
plant  yield  is  now  well  understood.  
Specific  yields  have  been  predicted  by 
Norwest,  ranging  from  a  high  of  59 
percent in the North Block to a low of 48 
percent  in  the  South  Block.    The  PFS 
estimated  average  plant  yield  of  52 
percent  compares  to  a  range  of  40-60 
percent  predicted  in  the  PEA.    Work 
performed  in  2015  and  2016  suggests 
potential exists to improve plant yield by 
employing  more 
selective  mining 
practices in the pit:  further evaluation of 
this item is required.
Coal Quality
A definitive understanding of coal quality 
at  Crown  Mountain  is  dependent  upon 
further 
the 
collection and analysis of bulk samples.  
Jameson 
the 
required work in summer 2013.
to  conduct
intends
exploration,
including
Plant Yield
As with coal quality, plant yield has not 
yet  been  defined.    Project  economics 
are highly sensitive to plant yield. While 
the range of yield examined in the PEA, 
40-60%,  is  believed  to  be  reasonable, 
there is no guarantee actual yield will fall 
into  this  range.  The  proposed  summer 
drilling program is designed to evaluate 
what plant yields can be expected.
11
environmental
operation  must
be 
Any  mining 
to  meet 
engineered  and  operated 
existing 
standards, 
including but not limited to air and water 
quality.    While  the  summer  exploration 
program  will  collect  additional  data  on 
critical  environmental  parameters  (ie:  
selenium, ARD, etc), Jameson is not in 
a  position  at  this  time  to  accurately 
determine  the  cost  of  environmental 
compliance 
government’s 
reaction  to  what  environmental  and 
mining  permits  Jameson  may  in  the 
future submit.
or
the
Environmental compliance has become 
a growing concern in the Elk Valley due 
to  approval  of  the  Elk  Valley  Water 
Quality Plan, and rising local interest in 
issues  such  as  wildlife  migration 
corridors.  The Company is sensitive to 
these  issues,  and  their  potential  effect 
on  the  Crown  Mountain  mine  plan. 
Jameson  and  its  consultants  initiated 
several 
exploration/environmental 
programs  over  the  past  three  years.  
These  include  continuation  of  periodic 
surface  water  quality  sampling,  ground 
water  analysis,  wildlife  studies,  aquatic 
studies,  climate  data  collection,  and 
plant  studies.    These  studies  were 
performed concurrent with the Company 
submitting  initial  documents  in  2015 
required  to  enter  the  pre-application 
phase of the Environmental Assessment 
(EA)  permitting  process. 
In  2016 
Jameson  made  significant  progress  in 
this regard.  Work continues in this area, 
and environmental risks remain. 
The  Port  situation  will  not  be  resolved 
until Jameson  reaches a  point  where  a 
contract can be executed.  At this time, 
due to mine closures and project delays, 
there appears to be ample port capacity 
available.    This  is  a  dynamic  process 
and Jameson will remain focused on this 
item.
Annual Report 2016
RISK CATEGORY
Environmental
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
PEA RISK DISCUSSION
MITIGATION MEASURES POST PEA
Port
At  this  time,  it  appears  likely  that  port 
capacity will exist once Crown Mountain 
commences  operation.  However,  there 
are  several  other  coal  projects  under 
evaluation  in  western  Canada  which 
also contemplate export. Jameson does 
not  at  this  time  hold  a  contract  for  port 
capacity (a topic that will be considered 
should a positive PFS occur).
The de-risking of Crown Mountain has been a high priority for Jameson and continues to progress.
Table 4: PEA Risk Areas and Mitigation Measures
Currency and Exchange Rates 
 
The exchange rate assumed in the PFS was 0.92 USD per CAD.  This rate was estimated by Norwest 
based on then current economic conditions and publicly available data from various sources. 
 
At the time this Annual Report was published, the exchange rate is approximately 0.77 USD per CAD.   
 
There is a significant effect associated with this change: at a rate of 0.77 USD per CAD, all else being 
equal, the PFS-projected operating FOB costs drop from US$100.38/tonne life of mine to US$84.01.  
The initial 4 years of project operation would average US$74.19 versus the PFS figure of US$88.64.  
Of note, the current benchmark price for coking coal has risen this year from US$81 to US$92 per 
tonne.
12
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Mining and Processing 
 
The mining method selected for Crown Mountain in the PFS is open pit.  Mining equipment includes 
excavators, front end loaders, and haul trucks, supported by dozers, backhoes, and blasthole drills.  
This type of equipment is typical for Elk Valley mining operations and includes equipment specific to 
selective  mining  in  certain  thinner  seams  present  on  the  property.    The  vast  majority  (90%)  of 
overburden removal is projected to require blasting. 
 
The  mine  plan  has  been  sequenced  to  extract  the  low  strip  ratio  North  block  first,  followed  by  the 
smaller East block (a subset of the South block, but a  distinctly higher quality and discrete mine pit) 
and ultimately the large South block. 
 
Mined ROM coal is hauled from  the pit to a de-rocking  device (rotary breaker or equivalent)  where 
some of the larger size out-of-seam dilution is removed. 
 
Washed coal will be conveyed down the mountain (3 km) and then trucked approximately 9 km to a 
stockpile/loadout area where the product will ultimately be loaded via 16,000 tonne capacity silo onto 
railcars on a new rail loop to be located adjacent to Canadian Pacific’s (“CP”) existing common-user 
railway.  The loadout facility includes silo storage with a batch weigh bulk loading system for accurate 
load control and freight cost management. 
 
The PFS contemplated a company-owned and operated facility.   
 
Due to the ongoing downturn in the coking coal market, contract miners have become more available 
and  more  competitive.    Indeed,  large  amounts  of  contract  mining  equipment  and  labour  are  either 
underutilized or completely idle.  Jameson believes there is substantial potential upside by employing 
contract mining at Crown Mountain:
  Capital costs would be significantly reduced. 
  Operating  costs  may  be  reduced  due  to  employing  an  experienced  skilled  workforce  from
mine startup.
  Multiple  pits  could  be  operated  simultaneously,  allowing  blending  to  occur.    The  PFS 
demonstrated that blending North and South Pit coal results in greater overall coal revenues 
than mining each pit separately.
Infrastructure 
 
The Project is located in an infrastructure-rich area.  Teck operates a total of five coking coal mines in 
the Elk Valley and general vicinity; two of these operations are south of Crown Mountain and three are 
north.  As a result, mainline rail, power, and supporting communities are all nearby. 
 
The towns of Sparwood, Elkford, Fernie, and Crowsnest Pass will be the source of the Crown Mountain 
work force and house numerous mining-related service industries. 
 
Figure 2 displays the proposed (PFS) project footprint and infrastructure.
13
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Figure 2: Crown Mountain Project Infrastructure
Transport 
 
Once loaded onto rail, carrier CP will transport the coal to either Westshore Terminals (“Westshore”) 
near Vancouver or to Ridley Terminals (“Ridley”) near Prince Rupert, where it will be loaded into ships.  
Westshore, at a distance of approximately 1,200 km, is the terminal of choice for Crown Mountain coal 
with a PFS-estimated transportation cost (combined rail and port) of US$32.20/tonne. 
 
It  is  assumed  Westshore  will  have  available  capacity  when  the  first  coal  from  Crown  Mountain  is 
available to be shipped.  Several Westshore customers have reduced volumes shipped through the 
port, and concurrently, Westshore is in the midst of a capacity expansion. 
 
As  an  alternative,  Norwest  also  evaluated  shipping  the  longer  distance  to  Ridley  (at  a  combined 
US$46.92/tonne transportation cost, which translates to US$39.27 at today’s exchange rate).  With 
two  rail  carriers  involved  (CP  and  Canadian  National),  additional  costs  have  been  included  for 
interchange.  There are no significant capacity constraints with either of the railway carriers, and there 
is currently an abundance of capacity available at Ridley. 
 
All clean coal production from Crown Mountain is assumed to be exported.  Coal is sold FOB vessel.
14
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
84% 
16%
Hard Coking coal 
 
PCI coal
Coal Quality and Product Mix 
 
Based on assumptions employed by Norwest in the PFS, the clean coal product mix is estimated as: 
 
   
   
 
Norwest  has  stated  the  North  Block  hard  coking  coal  should  be  equal  to  the  best  hard  coking coal 
exported from Canada and will thus command near benchmark pricing.  The South Block hard coking 
coal product has been discounted to reflect certain parameters that are not as attractive as the North 
Block  counterpart;  there  is  the  potential  for  this  evaluation  to  change  if  additional  coal  quality 
exploration is performed on the South Block. 
 
Blending of North and South Block coals, evaluated during the extensive lab testing performed on core, 
shows potential to increase life-of-mine revenue and will be investigated by Jameson moving forward.  
Blending was not part of the optimization process for the PFS, and thus a potential for upside exists in 
this area.  As discussed previously, contract mining allows the option of blending to be utilized. 
 
 
Coal Pricing 
 
The PFS assumed coal sales prices of US$170/tonne for North Pit (US$151 for South Pit) hard coking 
coal and US$113/tonne for PCI product.  An increase of approximately 12 percent was assumed for 
post 2020 sales. 
 
Adjusted for the current 0.77 exchange rate, the US$170 and US$113 sales prices would be US$142 
and US$95 respectively to achieve the same economic result  (all other PFS factors unchanged) as 
shown in the PFS. 
 
The current hard coking coal benchmark price of US$92/tonne is considerably below the adjusted PFS-
assumed figures, even though the market recovery has seen prices increase approximately 14 percent 
thus far in 2016.  Current market trends point toward a continued recovery which is required to realize 
the economic returns contained in the PFS. 
 
 
Environmental Issues 
 
The PFS and ongoing pre-application Environmental Assessment (EA) effort have significantly added 
to the Company’s understanding of  environmental issues at Crown Mountain.  Importantly, with the 
Project located in an area populated by operating coal mines, the environmental factors are relatively 
well defined. 
 
One of the major environmental issues in the Elk Valley relates to metal leaching and its effect on water 
quality.  In particular selenium (and to a lesser degree cadmium, calcite, and other items) has reached 
elevated levels in the Elk River watershed.  As a result, the province formed a task force headed by 
Teck that resulted in the Elk Valley Water Quality Plan which is now part of the government’s permit 
review process.  Mitigation and control methodologies to address these issues have played a large 
role in the conceptual design of the Crown Mountain spoil piles and the use of wash plant reject to 
systematically  “cap”  spoil  areas  to  reduce  water  infiltration.    The  Company  is  committed  to  utilize 
environmental best practices across the entire operation and will closely monitor actions by other local 
mines and emerging technologies during the course of mine design and construction.  The ability of 
Jameson  to  effectively  demonstrate  maintaining  effective  water  quality  will  be  a  key  in  the 
government’s decision regarding a mine permit application. 
 
Jameson installed multiple ground water monitoring stations in 2013 and collects data on an on-going 
basis.  Norwest has evaluated that information and utilized the results to address issues such as pit 
dewatering and groundwater contamination.  The PFS does not anticipate any material environmental 
challenges associated with groundwater.
15
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
Several  permits  must  be  acquired  by  the  Company  before  mine  construction  can  commence.    To 
continue assessing the viability of Crown Mountain as a project, and ultimately apply for these permits, 
significant study must be performed on areas such as wildlife, water quality, air quality, archaeological 
issues, etc.  Many of these studies were completed in 2015 and 2016, The Company formally entered 
the pre-application phase of the EA process in 2015 and achieved several milestones during 2016, 
including:
  The Valued Components Document (“VCD”) was submitted to the province, followed by a 30-
day public comment period.  A near-final version of the VCD is now under government review, 
with acceptance expected during the September quarter.
  The  Application  Information  Requirements  (“AIR”)  are  also  under  government  review,  with 
acceptance expected during the September quarter, or early in the December quarter.  The 
AIR  is  a  comprehensive  document  describing  how  an  Application  for  an  Environmental 
Assessment  Certificate  will  be  prepared  for  Crown  Mountain,  and  will  be  the  guidance  to 
Jameson moving forward.
  Baseline monthly water sampling has now switched to quarterly, resulting in a 67 percent cost
reduction.
  The weather station has been disassembled and placed in storage, resulting in the elimination
of related monitoring and data uplink charges.
First Nations, Governmental, and Third Party Issues 
 
Crown  Mountain  is  located  in  traditional  First  Nations  territory.    Specifically,  both  the  Ktunaxa  and 
Shuswap bands claim such traditional use.  Jameson has been in contact with these organizations and 
has established a policy of close cooperation and communication moving forward.  First Nations are 
intimately  involved  in  the  mine  permitting  process  through  the  referral  and  commenting  procedures 
established between First Nations and provincial government.  It is incumbent on the province and in 
turn Jameson to understand and address the issues brought forth by First Nations. 
 
In addition to First Nations, there are governmental and private entities that have certain interests with 
respect to land use that can be expected to participate in the permitting process through referral and 
comment.    Such  entities  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  local  governing  authorities  and  special  use 
organizations such as recreational clubs, etc. 
 
Jameson continued to build upon its First Nations and governmental relationships during 2016 through 
multiple meetings with each interested party. 
 
A recent event in the Elk Valley is creation of a Cumulative Effects Management Framework (CEMF) 
task force.  CEMF was formed to develop a model by which to evaluate the effect of existing, expanded, 
and new  mining operations  on the environment.   The  mandated deadline by the province of British 
Columbia  for  completion  of  the  draft  model  is  March  2017.    Jameson  requested,  and  was  granted, 
membership on the task force.  CEMF is an important process that will guide governmental evaluation 
and review of Crown Mountain. 
 
All mining and coal processing activities, including refuse and spoil disposal, will occur on land either 
now controlled or under application by Jameson.  The water supply, access and haulage roads, and 
preferred rail loop/loadout site are on property controlled by one or more third parties.
16
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
It was assumed in the PFS that the necessary access and surface disturbance rights will be acquired 
without major issue.  Since the PFS was issued, Teck acquired a large tract of land from a local timber 
company.  The acquisition was intended by Teck to be an offset to land disturbance associated with 
their expansion of the Line Creek Mine, and Teck refers to this area as “conservation lands”.  Although 
Crown Mountain’s mine and plant lie on Crown land, the proposed haulroad, silo, and rail loop are on 
Teck property along with portions of the power line and natural gas pipeline.  Jameson is in discussions 
with Teck to allow this infrastructure to be located on Teck land.  While it is management’s goal to gain 
Teck’s approval and construct the project as planned, it is possible some components of infrastructure 
may have to be modified or relocated.   
 
Capital and Operating Costs 
 
Start-up capital expenditure to support the mining and processing operation has been estimated in the 
PFS to be US$339.7 million if no leasing or contract mining is employed.  Leasing major equipment 
reduces that figure to US$220.8 million, and US$123.1 million if the plant is also leased. 
 
Since the PFS was issued, significant capacity cutbacks have occurred industry-wide, freeing up large 
amounts of suitable used equipment.  Jameson believes the potential exists for Crown Mountain to be 
built for substantially lower capital cost, with or without employing contract mining. 
 
Capacity cutbacks have also freed up skilled labour:  staffing reductions have occurred not only in coal, 
but oil sands operations as well.  The current labour market is more favourable than assumed in the 
PFS, and Jameson sees potential for cost reductions and productivity improvements as a result. 
 
While  no  formal  third-party  studies  were  performed  in  this  area  during  the  reporting  period,  the 
Company will continue to evaluate capex and opex cost reductions as the project moves forward, with 
a view to incorporate any improvements into a Definitive Feasibility Study at the appropriate time.
Peace River Coal Field - Dunlevy Project
Dunlevy is located in the northwest extension of the Peace River coal field district of northeast British 
Columbia.  Several major mines and mining prospects are located in this area.  Due to its early stage, 
no complaint coal resources have been determined at this time.
Dunlevy is approximately 90 km from Fort St. John, a regional commercial centre. All weather roads 
and good quality secondary  roads link the project to  Fort St. John and Chetwynd, where Canadian 
National Railway service can be accessed.  The rail leads to the Westshore, Neptune and Ridley coal 
terminals  with  Ridley  being  the  most  appropriate  (lowest  transportation  cost)  option.  There  is  also 
potential to reduce transportation costs by utilising the large man-made Williston Lake bordering the 
property to transport coal by barge to rail access. 
 
Jameson currently has 2 approved coal exploration licenses as shown in Table 5 below:
Name
Dunlevy
Dunlevy
TOTAL
License 
Number
Status
Area (Ha)
Rent
418441
Granted
418442
Granted
1,146
1,388
2,534
Table 5:  Dunlevy Coal License Summary Table
$8,022
$9,716
$17,738
Note:  First year rents are pre-paid, then annual rents are due starting one year after tenure is granted.
17
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Cancellation  of  5  pending  exploration  license  applications  by  the  British  Columbian  government  in 
2015 limited the potential scale of the Dunlevy project should it be ultimately developed.  
 
In view of the action by the MEM and the current state of the coal market, Jameson determined that it 
was not in the Company’s best interest to proceed any further at this time, choosing instead to devote 
available funds  to  Crown  Mountain.  As Jameson  did  not  complete  any  work  on  Dunlevy  during  the 
year, please refer to the 2015 Annual Report for information on project details.  
 
Annual rent on the exploration licenses has been paid and the project remains in good standing. 
 
Based  upon  the  current  discontinuation  of  activities  on  Dunlevy,  the  Company  has  elected  to  write 
down the value of the project to nil (including the value of the goodwill on the acquisition of the project). 
The value of the write down will total approximately $1.4 million for the current year. 
 
 
Peace River – Regional Projects (Graham River, Carbon East, Peace Reach) 
 
The Company did not plan to perform any activity on these projects during the reporting period, as they 
were, at the start of the year, still in application status.  In January 2016 Jameson was notified by the 
province that, to protect Caribou habitat, a series of Coal Land Reserves (“CLR”) was being created.  
Mining  activity  in  CLRs  is  prohibited,  thus  the  outstanding  applications  were  cancelled  by  the 
government  and  Jameson’s  prepaid  rent  deposit  of  approximately  C$130,000  was  returned  to  the 
Company.    The  Company  wrote  off  the  carrying  value  of  $676,000  in  respect  of  the  Peace  River 
applications at the half year, and at the year end this is shown now net of the C$130,000 rent refund, 
being $533,359. 
 
Table 6 presents details on the now-cancelled applications.
Name
License 
Number
Status
Area (Ha)
Rent
Graham River
417739
Application
Graham River
417740
Application
Graham River
417741
Application
Carbon East
417727
Application
Peace Reach
417743
Application
3,480
4,350
3,625
2,674
4,568
$24,360
$30,450
$25,375
$18,718
$31,973
TOTAL
18,697
$130,876
Table 6 – Regional Projects - Coal License Summary Table (CAD)
Corporate 
 
On  28  July  2015,  the  Company  issued  100,000  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  upon  conversion  from  a 
holder  of  the  Exchangeable Shares  issued  in  NWP  Coal  Canada  which  were  issued  to  the  original 
Dunlevy vendors.  A total of 500,000 NWP Coal Canada preferred shares remain as exchangeable on 
a one for one basis into Jameson Resources Limited fully paid ordinary shares.  These expire on 13 
December 2016.
18
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
COMPETENT PERSONS STATEMENTS
Mineral Reserves, Prefeasibility Study Results, and Dunlevy Coal Quality Results 
The  information  in  this  Annual  Report  relating  to  the  Mineral  Reserve  Estimate  and  Pre  Feasibility 
Study Results of the Company’s Crown Mountain Coal Project are extracted from the ASX Release 
entitled  “Prefeasibility  study  confirms  Crown  Mountain  coking  coal  project  will  enjoy  outstanding 
economics” announced on 11 August 2014 and is available to view on the ASX website (ASX:JAL) 
and the Company's website.  Dunlevy coal quality results are extracted from the ASX Release entitled 
“First Dunlevy Coal Quality Tests Point to High Yields and Low Ash Content” announced on 17 October 
2014 and available on both the ASX and Company websites.  The Company confirms that it is not 
aware  of  any  new  information  or  data  that  materially  affects  the information  included in  the  original 
market announcements and that all material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the 
reserve estimates and prefeasibility study results in the relevant market announcements continue to 
apply and have not materially changed.  The Company confirms that the form and context in which the 
Competent Person’s findings are presented have not been materially modified from the original market 
announcement. 
 
Mineral Resource 
The  information  in  this Annual  Report  relating  to  the  Mineral  Resource  estimate  on  the  Company’s 
Crown Mountain Coal Project is extracted from the ASX Release entitled “Positive Property-Wide Coal 
Quality, Crown Mountain Coking Coal Project” announced on 14 March 2014 and is available to view 
on the ASX website (ASX:JAL) and the Company's website.  The Company confirms that it is not aware 
of any new information or data that materially affects the information included in the original market 
announcement and that all material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the resource 
estimates in the relevant market announcement continue to apply and have not materially changed.  
The  Company  confirms  that  the  form  and  context  in  which  the  Competent  Person’s  findings  are 
presented have not been materially modified from the original market announcement.
AFTER BALANCE DATE EVENTS
8.
9.
On 26 July 2016, the Company received a full refund ($35,000) plus interest of $777, of its reclamation 
bond on the Dunlevy project. 
 
On 30 August 2016, 1,300,000 Performance Rights C and 1,300,000 Performance Rights D, expired 
unvested. On 31 August 2016, 2,000,000 options exercisable at $0.20 expired, unexercised. 
 
No other matters or circumstances have arisen since the end of the financial year which significantly 
affected or may significantly affect the operations of the Group, the results of those operations, or the 
state of affairs of the Group in future financial years.
10.    MEETINGS OF DIRECTORS
The  number  of  directors’  meetings  held  during  the  financial  year  each  director  held  office,  and  the 
number of meetings attended by each director is as follows:
Director
Directors Meetings
Remuneration and Nomination
Committee
Number held 
and Eligible to
Attend
Meetings 
Attended
Number held 
and Eligible to
Attend
Meetings 
Attended
T. Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
Steve van Barneveld
4
4
4
4
4
4
-
1
1
-
1
1
The Company does not have a formally constituted audit committee as the board considers that the 
Company’s size and type of operation do not warrant such a committee at this point in time.
19
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
11.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
Jameson is focusing its efforts on the development of the Crown Mountain project in Western Canada. 
Work on the Dunlevy project has been suspended and will be reviewed periodically in light of market 
conditions and company priorities. Management will also evaluate other opportunities that may present 
themselves from time-to-time, both in coal and other commodities. 
 
Further details are contained in the Review of Operations Section above.
12.  ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
The  Group’s  operations  are  subject  to  significant  environmental  regulations  in  Western  Canada  in 
respect of its mining exploration activities.
The Company is aware of its environmental obligations with regards to its exploration activities and 
ensures that it complies with all regulations when carrying out any exploration work. The directors of 
the Company are not aware of any breaches of environmental regulations for the year covered by this 
report.
The directors have considered the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007 (the NGER 
Act)  which  introduces  a  single  national  reporting  framework  for  the  reporting  and  dissemination  of 
information  about  the  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  greenhouse  gas  projects,  and  energy  use  and 
production of corporations. At the current stage of development, the directors have determined that 
the NGER Act will have no effect on the Company for the current or subsequent financial year. The 
directors will reassess this position as and when the need arises.
13.    REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
This report outlines the remuneration arrangements in place for the Key Management Personnel of the 
Company for the financial year ended 30 June  2016. The information provided in this remuneration 
report has been audited as required by Section 308(3C) of the Corporations Act. 
 
The remuneration report details the remuneration arrangements for Key Management Personnel who 
are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling 
the major activities of the Company and the Group, directly or indirectly, including any Director (whether 
executive or otherwise) of the parent company, and includes the executives in the Group receiving the 
higher remuneration.
Key Management Personnel 
 
The following are classified as Key Management Personnel:
• 
• 
• 
•
T. Arthur Palm (Chief Executive Officer and Acting Chairman)  
Jeff Bennett (Non-Executive Director) 
Steve van Barneveld (Non-Executive Director) 
Suzie Foreman (Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary)
There are no other Key Management Personnel.
Remuneration Policy
The  remuneration  policy  of  Jameson  Resources  Limited  has  been  designed  to  align  director  and 
executive  objectives  with  shareholder  and  business  objectives  by  providing  a  fixed  remuneration 
component, which is assessed on an annual basis in line with market rates and offering specific long-
term incentives based on key performance areas affecting the Group’s financial results. The long term 
incentive  plan  based  upon  project  milestones  in  respect  of  both  the  Dunlevy  and  Crown  Mountain 
projects expired on 30 August 2016. This has not been replaced by an alternative plan at this stage 
pending an improvement in market conditions which will allow equity based remuneration to be aligned 
with a longer term business strategy.
20
Annual Report 2016
13.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
Remuneration Process - The Role of the Board 
The  board’s  policy for  determining  the  nature  and  amount  of  remuneration  for  board  members  and 
senior  executives  of  the  Group  is  delegated  to  the  Remuneration  Committee,  which  considers  all 
remuneration  matters 
for  executives,  non-executives  and  senior  personnel  and  makes 
recommendations to the Board.  
 
The Remuneration Committee 
The Remuneration Committee reviews executive compensation arrangements annually by reference 
to  the  Group’s  performance,  executive  performance,  the  executive’s  roles  and  responsibilities  and 
benchmarks  this  for  each  executive  against  salary  information  from  peer  group  companies  in 
comparable  industry  sectors  and  other  listed  companies  in  similar  industries.  The  Remuneration 
Committee will assess the appropriateness of the nature and quantum of emoluments of such officers 
by reference to relevant employment market conditions with the overall objective of ensuring maximum 
stakeholder benefit from the retention of a high quality board and executive team.  The remuneration 
committee reports its recommendations to the Board for final determination.   
 
In determining competitive remuneration rates, the Board also seeks independent advice if required 
on local and international trends among comparative companies and industry generally.
Executives and Key Management 
All  executives  receive  a  base  salary  (which  is  based  on  factors  such  as  length  of  service  and 
experience) and statutory superannuation (if eligible).  
 
The Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee must disclose whether or not the relevant 
annual  performance  evaluations  have  been  conducted.  The  Remuneration  Committee  oversaw  a 
performance evaluation of the CEO during the year. This evaluation was based on criteria, including 
the  business  performance  of  the  Company  and  whether  strategic  objectives  in  terms  of  project 
development were being achieved.  
 
Key Performance Indicators 
At  this  stage  of  the  Company’s  development  it  does  not  have  in  place  formal  key  performance 
indicators  (KPIs).  However,  the  Board  held  meetings  at  least  quarterly  during  the  year  where  it 
reviewed  reports  prepared  by  the  CEO  which  outlines  progress  in  key  areas  such  as  project 
development against specified milestones, business development and finance.  
 
Whilst  the  Remuneration  Committee  recommended  executive  2016/7  salaries  be  retained  at  2014 
levels  this  was  considered  in  light  of  continuous  voluntary  reductions  taken  by  the  Chief  Executive 
Officer Mr Art Palm, who has recognised a requirement to reduce administration costs on all levels. Mr 
Palm  has  taken  voluntary  reductions  totalling  $US79,000  for  the  year,  and  these  are  budgeted  to 
continue from 40% to 60% of gross salary and above for the forthcoming year, assuming conditions 
remain unchanged. 
 
The Board previously endorsed the issue of performance rights for directors and senior executives as 
a  means  to  meeting  strategic  performance  targets  associated  with  the  Company’s  projects 
development.  The  current  performance  incentives  expired  on  30  August  2016  and  have  not  been 
replaced by an alternative plan at this stage until market conditions improve and the scheme can be 
aligned with a longer term overall strategy. 
 
The Board encourages directors to hold shares in the Company. The Company has a Share Trading 
Policy which directors and employees are required to comply with. Mr Palm acquired 600,000 fully paid 
ordinary shares during the year via on market purchases.
All remuneration paid to directors and executives is valued at the cost to the Company and expensed. 
Performance Rights are valued upon reference to the share price on the date the right is granted, and 
brought to account over the vesting period, based upon the assessment of the probability of the vesting 
milestone at each reporting period
21
Annual Report 2016
13.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
Non-Executive Directors 
The board policy is to remunerate non-executive directors at market rates for comparable companies 
for  time,  commitment  and  responsibilities.  The  board  determines  payments  to  the  non-executive 
directors and reviews their remuneration annually, based on market practice, duties and accountability. 
Independent external advice is sought when required. Whilst the board recommended non-executive 
fees be retained at 2014 levels, Mr van Barneveld and Mr Bennett both took voluntary pay reductions 
of  $15,000  for  the  financial  year,  and  these  are  set  to  continue  with  increased  reductions  for  the 
forthcoming year, assuming conditions remain unchanged. 
 
The  maximum aggregate amount of fees that can be paid to non-executive directors is currently at 
$250,000  as  approved  by  shareholders  at  an  Annual  General  Meeting.  Fees  for  non-executive 
directors are not linked to the performance of the  Group. However, to align directors’ interests  with 
shareholder interests, the directors are encouraged to hold shares in the Company.  
 
Mr Bennett holds shares in the Company and Mr Van Barneveld acquired 318,755 shares on market 
during the financial year. There is no award plan for non-executive directors.
Performance based remuneration 
 
The  Company  currently  has  no  short  term  performance  based  remuneration  component  built  into 
director and executive remuneration packages. Given current market conditions and cash constraints, 
the Remuneration Committee do not believe this would be appropriate. During the financial year ended 
30 June 2016, no cash based bonuses were paid to Key Management Personnel.
Voting and Comments at the Company’s 2015 Annual General Meeting 
The adoption of the Remuneration Report for the financial year ended 30 June 2015 was put to the 
shareholders  of  the  Company  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting  held  on  12  November  2015.  The 
Company received 84% of the vote, of those shareholders who exercised their right to vote, in favour 
of the remuneration report for the 2015 financial year. The resolution was passed without amendment 
on a show of hands. The Company did not receive any specific feedback at the AGM or throughout 
the year on its remuneration policies.
Employment contracts of key management personnel 
 
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Art Palm is the only member of Key Management Personnel 
employed on a full time basis. His terms are formalised in a service agreement, a summary of which 
is set out below.
Name
Employing 
Company
Contract 
Duration
Termination Notice 
period by Company
Termination
Notice Period by
T. Arthur Palm
Jameson 
Resources 
Limited
2 years
6 months (without
cause).
Executive 
6 months
Non-Executive Directors 
All non-executive directors were appointed by a letter of appointment. Directors can retire in writing 
as set out in the Constitution.
22
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
13.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
(a)  Compensation of Key Management Personnel
Remuneration of Key Management Personnel is set out below.
Jameson Resources Limited
SHORT-TERM BENEFITS
POST EMPLOYMENT
EQUITY-BASED BENEFITS
TOTAL
Salary &
Cash
Non-
Super-
Terminatio
Performance
Fees
Bonus
Monetary
annuation
n Benefits
Rights
$
$
$
$
$
$
%
Performance
Rights of Total
Remuneration
$
Directors 
T. Arthur Palm – Acting Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer #
2016 
2015
270,706 
289,291
- 
-
Jeff Bennett – Non-Executive Director
2016 
2015
30,000 
37,500
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
Steve van Barneveld – Non-Executive Director+
2016 
2015
30,000 
51,813
- 
-
Specified Executive 
Suzie Foreman – Company Secretary †
2016 
2015
52,154 
62,583
Total Remuneration
2016 
2015
382,860 
441,187
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
2,850 
3,681
- 
-
2,850 
3,681
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
-  270,706 
-  289,291
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
30,000 
37,500
32,850 
55,494
52,154 
62,583
-  385,710 
-  444,868
# Mr Palm received US$196,000 in 2016 and US$238,500 in 2015 versus his contracted compensation of US$275,000. The 
reduced remuneration resulted from voluntary pay reductions of US$79,000 (2015: US$36,500)  Mr Palm agreed to take 
during the year. The lower AU/US exchange rate in 2016 has translated into a relatively higher AU conversion shown in the 
remuneration table above.
† Athena Corporate Pty Ltd, a company Ms Foreman has an interest in, receives fees from Jameson Resources Limited for 
corporate,  accounting  and  company  secretarial  services  on  normal  commercial  terms.  These  are  included  in  the 
remuneration above.
+  During  the  year  BC  Resources  Developments  Pty  Ltd,  a  Australian  based  company  of  which  Mr  S  van  Barneveld  is  a 
member received nil (2015: $13,063) as consulting fees for Mr  van Barneveld’s technical services. These services were 
provided outside of director duties performed, and were provided on normal commercial terms. The fees have been included 
as part of director’s remuneration above.
(b) Equity holdings 
 
All  equity  dealings  with  directors  have  been  entered  into  with  terms  and  conditions  no  more 
favourable than those that the Company would have adopted if dealing at arms’ length. The relevant 
interests of each director in share capital at the date of this report are as follows:
Movement in option holdings of key management personnel
2016
Balance at
Granted as
Exercised
Bought &
01.07.15
Remuneration
(Sold/lapsed)
Balance at 
resignation
Balance at
30.06.16
Total
Vested at 
30.06.16
Total
Exercisable 
at 30.06.16
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
Steve van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
13.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
(b) Equity holdings (continued)
Movement in option holdings of key management personnel (continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
2015
Balance at
Granted as
Exercised
Bought &
01.07.14
Remuneration
(Sold/lapsed)
Balance at 
resignation
Balance at
30.06.15
Total
Vested at 
30.06.15
Total
Exercisable 
at 30.06.15
-
83,333
-
-
-
83,333
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(83,333)
-
-
-
(83,333)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Resigned 31 December 2014
Movement in shareholdings of key management personnel
David Fawcett(i)
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
Steve van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
(i)
2016
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
Steve van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
2015
David Fawcett
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
Steve van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
Balance at
01.07.15
Granted as
Remuneration
Conversion of 
Performance
Rights
On Exercise 
of Options
Bought & 
(Sold) (i)
Balance at 
resignation
Balance at
30.06.16
1,350,000
737,500
-
-
2,087,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
600,000
-
318,755
-
918,755
-
-
-
-
-
1,950,000
737,500
318,755
-
3,006,255
Balance at
01.07.14
Granted as
Remuneration
Conversion of 
Performance
Rights
On Exercise 
of Options
Bought 
& (Sold)
Balance at
Balance at
resignation(ii)
30.06.15
100,000
1,350,000
737,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100,000
n/a
-
-
-
-
1,350,000
737,500
-
-
100,000
2,087,500
2,187,500
(i)    
(ii)
2016
75,000 shares are held in the van Barneveld Share Trust, an entity in which Mr Barneveld is a beneficiary. 
Total on date of resignation – Resigned 31 December 2014
Movement in Performance Rights of key management personnel
Balance at
Granted as
Conversion
01.07.15
Remuneration
of
Performance
Rights
Bought & 
(Cancelled 
/expired)
Balance at
30.06.16
Vested &
exercisable at
30.06.16
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
3,000,000
900,000
Steve Van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
-
-
3,900,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
(1,000,000)
(300,000)
2,000,000
600,000
-
-
-
-
(1,300,000)
2,600,000
-
-
-
-
-
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
13.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
(b) Equity holdings (continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
2015
Movement in Performance Rights of key management personnel (continued)
Balance at
Granted as
Conversion
01.07.14
Remuneration
of
Performance
Rights
Bought & 
(Cancelled 
/expired)
Balance at
30.06.15
Vested &
exercisable at
30.06.15
David Fawcett(i)
T Arthur Palm
Jeff Bennett
-
3,000,000
900,000
Steve Van Barneveld 
 
Suzie Foreman
-
-
3,900,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3,000,000
900,000
-
-
3,900,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
(i)       Total on date of resignation – Resigned 31 December 2014
(c) Performance Rights issued as Part of Remuneration
During  the  financial  year  ended  30  June  2016,  no  Performance  Rights  were  issued  as  part  of 
remuneration.  On 31 August 2015, 1,300,000 Class B Performance Rights expired unvested and 
unconverted. 
 
At the Company’s Annual General Meeting held 13 December 2011, the shareholders approved the 
issue of 10,400,000 Performance Rights to the Directors of the Company. Refer to note 13(b) above 
for individual quantities held by each KMP. 
 
The Performance Rights entitle the holder to fully paid ordinary shares in the Company (“Shares”), 
subject to the satisfaction of the vesting condition set out below, each Performance Right vests to 
one Share.
Subsequent to the year end, the remaining 2.6 million performance rights expired unvested.
Terms of Performance Rights
Class of
Total
Performance
Number on
Number 
Vested
Right
Issue
A
B
C
Converted
2,600,000
Expired
1,300,000
D
1,300,000
Performance Condition*
Expiry Date
Delineation of an initial NI 43-101 / JORC compliant 
coal  resource  of  10  million  tonnes  on  the  Crown 
Mountain Project
Delineation of an initial NI 43-101 / JORC compliant 
coal  resource  of  10  million  tonnes  on  the  Dunlevy 
Coal Project 
On the completion of a positive bankable feasibility 
study  that  could  reasonably  serve  as  the  basis  for 
the  Board  to  recommend  a  decision  to  commence 
commercial  production  in  respect  of  either  of  the 
Crown  Mountain  Project  and  the  Dunlevy  Coal 
Project 
On the completion of a positive bankable feasibility 
study  that  could  reasonably  serve  as  the  basis  for 
the  Board  to  recommend  a  decision  to  commence 
commercial  production  in  respect  of  both  of  the 
Crown  Mountain  Project  and  the  Dunlevy  Coal 
Project
30 August 2014
30 August 2015
30 August 2016
30 August 2016
-
-
-
Total
2,600,000
*For vesting conditions to be obtained the holder is required to remain an employee of the Company 
until three (3) months after the completion of the performance Conditions detailed above.
25
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
13.
REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited and Continued)
(c) Performance Rights issued as Part of Remuneration (continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
Performance Rights Movement During the Year
There were no movements in the Performance Rights during the year ended 30 June 2016.
(d) Loans to key management personnel
No loans were made to key management personnel of the Company during the financial year or the 
prior corresponding period.
(e) Other transactions and balances with key management personnel
Other than as stated above, there have been no other transactions with key management personnel 
during the year.
(f) Compensation Options: Granted and vested during and since the financial year ended 30 June
2016 
 
During and since the financial year ended 30 June 2016 (2015: nil), no compensation options were 
granted or vested to directors.
(g)  Performance income as a proportion of total income
No performance based bonuses have been paid to key management personnel during the financial 
year. The CEO took a voluntary pay reduction of  $107,138 (USD $79,000) for the fiscal year. Each 
non-executive took voluntary pay reductions of approximately AUD $15,000 for the fiscal year.
END OF REMUNERATION REPORT
14. DIVERSITY 
 
The Company believes that the promotion of diversity on its Board and within the organisation generally is 
good practice and is committed to managing diversity as a means of enhancing the Company’s performance. 
There  are  currently  no  women  on  the  Company’s  board  or  filling  senior  management  positions  within  the 
Company,  however  the  contract  Company  secretary  is  female.  The  Company  (as  set  out  in  the  Diversity 
Policy, (which is contained on the Company’s website) will focus on participation of women on its Board and 
within  senior  management  and  has  set  measurable  objectives  for  achieving  gender  diversity.  Current  key 
focus for achieving gender diversity is a requirement for each pool of candidates for vacant positions to include 
at  least  one  female  candidate.  This  objective  was  not  met  during  the  year  as  no  vacant  positions  were 
identified. 
 
 
15. SHARES UNDER OPTION OR ISSUED ON EXERCISE OF OPTIONS
At the date of this report unissued ordinary shares of the Company under option are:
Expiry Date
30 September 2016
Exercise Price
$0.16
Number of Shares
14,300,000
No ordinary shares have been issued as a result of the exercise of options during the financial year.
Interests in shares, options, performance rights and exchangeable shares of the Company. 
 
The following relevant interests in shares and options of the Company or a related body corporate 
were held by the directors as at the date of this report.
26
Annual Report 2016
DIRECTORS' REPORT (Continued)
Jameson Resources Limited
15. SHARES UNDER OPTION OR ISSUED ON EXERCISE OF OPTIONS (continued)
Directors
Number of
Shares
Number of 
Options
T. Arthur Palm  
Jeff Bennett (a) 
Steve van Barneveld(b)
1,950,000 
737,500 
393,755
3,081,255
- 
- 
-
-
Number of
Performance
Rights (i)
- 
- 
-
-
Hixon Pty Ltd, an entity controlled by Jeff Bennett holds 737,500 shares in the Company. 
100,000 shares are held by The van Barneveld Share Trust, an entity related to Steve van Barneveld.
(a) 
(b) 
(i)         Expired on 30 August 2016
16.
INDEMNIFYING OFFICERS OR AUDITOR
In accordance with the constitution, except as may be prohibited by the Corporations Act 2001 every 
officer,  auditor  or  agent  of  the  Company  shall  be  indemnified  out  of  the  property  of  the  Company 
against any liability incurred by him in his capacity as Officer, auditor or agent of the Company or any 
related  corporation  in  respect  of  any  act  or  omission  whatsoever  and  howsoever  occurring  or  in 
defending any proceedings, whether civil or criminal. 
 
The Company currently has  a directors’ and officers’ liability insurance in place. A total premium of 
$16,000 has been paid for the cover period from 31 January 2016 to 31 January 2017. Under the terms 
of the policy, the Company is covered for a limit of up to $5 million in aggregate against loss by reason 
of a wrongful act by the directors and officers during the period of insurance. No excess fee is payable 
for loss from such claims. The Company is also insured for the reimbursement of any payment by the 
Company  following  a  successful  defence  of  any  wrongful  act  committed  or  alleged  to  have  been 
committed by a Director or Officer of the Company during the period of Insurance, to the extent that 
the Company has agreed to indemnify them against such a loss.
17.  PROCEEDINGS ON BEHALF OF COMPANY
No person has applied for leave of Court to bring proceedings on behalf of the Company or to intervene 
in any proceedings to which the Company is a party for the purpose of taking responsibility on behalf 
of the Company for all or any part of these proceedings.
The Company was not a party to any such proceedings during the year.
18.  AUDITOR’S INDEPENDENCE DECLARATION
The lead auditor’s independence declaration for the year ended 30 June 2016 has been received and 
can be found on page 28 of the annual report and forms part of this director’s report.
19.  NON-AUDIT SERVICES
No non-audit services were provided by the Company’s auditors during the year. 
 
Signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors.
T Arthur Palm 
Chief Executive Officer 
Dated this 1st day of September 2016
27
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
AUDITOR’S INDEPENDENCE DECLARATION 
 
 
 
As lead auditor for the audit of the consolidated financial report of Jameson Resources Limited for 
the year ended 30 June 2016, I declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief, there have been 
no contraventions of: 
 
a)
the auditor independence requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 in relation to the audit;  
and
any applicable code of professional conduct in relation to the audit.
b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perth, Western Australia 
1 September 2016
M R W Ohm 
Partner
HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership)  ABN 22 193 232 714 
Level 4, 130 Stirling Street Perth WA 6000.  PO Box 8124 Perth BC 6849 Telephone +61 (08) 9227 7500. Fax +61 (08) 9227 7533. 
Email: hlb@hlbwa.com.au.  Website: http://www.hlb.com.au 
Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation
HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership) is a member of
International, a worldwide organisation of accounting firms and business advisers.
28
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Revenue 
 
Employee benefits expense 
Corporate and compliance fees 
Consultancy expense 
Administration expenses 
Depreciation and amortisation 
Interest and finance expenses 
Business development expenses 
Other expenses 
Foreign exchange translation gain 
Impairment of exploration expenditure 
Exploration costs expensed 
 
Loss before income tax  
 
Income tax benefit 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Other comprehensive income 
Items that may be reclassified to profit and loss 
Exchange differences on translation of foreign 
operations and net investment 
 
Other comprehensive income/(loss) for the 
year 
 
Total comprehensive (loss) for the year
Basic loss per share (cents per share)
Note
Consolidated
Year Ended
30 June 2016
2(a)
2(b)
2(b)
2(b)
4
19
$
37,258
(182,992) 
(156,815) 
(15,198) 
(30,541) 
(8,309) 
(13,910) 
(22,370) 
(70,170) 
(24,112) 
(1,898,209) 
(9,586) 
 
(2,394,954) 
 
105,639 
 
(2,289,315) 
 
 
 
 
(188,452) 
 
(188,452)
(2,477,767)
(1.09)
Consolidated
Year Ended
30 June 2015
$
16,834
(213,905) 
(187,364) 
(159,802) 
(127,539) 
(13,501) 
(9,165) 
- 
(150,315) 
64,709 
(4,574,036) 
- 
 
(5,354,084) 
 
329,596 
 
(5,024,488)
840,147 
 
840,147
(4,184,341)
(2.49)
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
29
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
As at 30 June 2016
ASSETS 
CURRENT ASSETS 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Other assets 
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON CURRENT ASSETS 
Other receivables 
Deferred exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Plant and equipment 
Other assets  
TOTAL NON CURRENT ASSETS 
TOTAL ASSETS 
 
LIABILITIES 
CURRENT LIABILITIES 
Trade and other payables 
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES 
TOTAL LIABILITIES 
 
NET ASSETS 
 
EQUITY 
Issued capital  
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
TOTAL EQUITY
Note
5
6(a)
7
6(b)
8 
9 
7
10
11(a,c)
12 
13
Consolidated
2016
$
1,891,057 
141,722 
21,089 
2,053,868 
 
 
 
93,957 
10,453,580 
40,700 
5,160 
10,593,397 
12,647,265 
 
 
 
86,775 
86,775 
86,775 
 
12,560,490 
 
 
26,738,821 
2,002,850 
(16,181,181) 
12,560,490
Consolidated
2015
$
2,432,431 
689,152 
21,472 
3,143,055 
 
 
 
95,097 
11,906,867 
49,601 
7,324 
12,058,889 
15,201,944 
 
 
 
163,687 
163,687 
163,687 
 
15,038,257 
 
 
28,426,321 
2,191,302 
(15,579,366) 
15,038,257
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
30
Jameson Resources Limited
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Annual Report 2016
Cash Flows from Operating Activities 
 
-  Interest received 
-  British Columbia Mining Tax Credit 
-  Payments to suppliers and employees 
 
Net cash provided by/(used in) operating 
activities 
 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities 
 
-  Refund for Peace River project licences 
-  Payments for exploration and evaluation 
 
Net cash used in investing activities 
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities 
 
-  Proceeds from issue of shares 
-  Payments for share issue costs 
 
Net cash provided by financing activities 
 
Net (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 July 
Reclamation bond movement to cash equivalents 
Foreign currency translation on cash held 
 
Cash and cash equivalents at 30 June
Note
20 (ii)
20 (i)
Consolidated 
Year Ended
Consolidated 
Year Ended
30 June 2016
$
5,194 
647,703 
(493,856) 
 
159,041
131,520 
(884,542) 
 
(753,022) 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
 
(593,981) 
 
2,432,431 
- 
52,607 
 
1,891,057
30 June 2015
$
18,957 
543,422 
(898,616) 
 
(336,237)
- 
(2,355,923) 
 
(2,355,923) 
 
 
 
2,002,000 
(126,871) 
 
1,875,129 
 
 
(817,031) 
 
3,086,110 
119,316 
44,036 
 
2,432,431
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
31
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Consolidated
Issued 
Capital
Losses
Accumulated
Equity Based
Balance at 1 July 2014 
 
Loss for the year 
Foreign exchange translation 
Total comprehensive loss 
 
Exchangeable share reduction  
Share capital net of capital 
raising costs 
Balance at 30 June 2015
Payment 
Reserve
$
Foreign 
Currency 
Reserve
$
$
$
27,766,192
(11,769,878)
1,156,911
194,244
- 
- 
-
(5,024,488)
-
(5,024,488)
(1,215,000) 
1,875,129
1,215,000
-
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
-
-
840,147 
840,147
- 
-
Total
$
17,347,469 
 
(5,024,488) 
840,147 
(4,184,341) 
 
- 
1,875,129
28,426,321
(15,579,366)
1,156,911
1,034,391
15,038,257
Consolidated
Issued 
Capital
Losses
Accumulated
Equity Based
Balance at 1 July 2015
Loss for the year 
Foreign exchange translation 
Total comprehensive loss 
 
Cancellation of exchangeable 
shares 
Balance at 30 June 2016
Payment 
Reserve
$
Foreign 
Currency 
Reserve
$
$
$
28,426,321
(15,579,366)
1,156,911
1,034,391
- 
 
- 
 
(1,687,500)
(2,289,315) 
 
(2,289,315) 
 
1,687,500
- 
 
- 
 
-
- 
(188,452) 
(188,452) 
 
-
Total
$
15,038,257
(2,289,315) 
(188,452) 
(2,477,767) 
 
-
26,738,821
(16,181,181)
1,156,911
845,939
12,560,490
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements.
32
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
(a)
Basis of Preparation
b)
The financial report is a general purpose financial report, which has been prepared in accordance with 
the requirements of the Corporations Act 2001, Accounting Standards and Interpretations and complies 
with other requirements of the law.  
The financial report has also been prepared on a historical cost basis unless otherwise stated.
The Company is an ASX listed public company, incorporated in Australia and operating in Australia and 
Canada. The entity’s principal activities are mineral exploration.   
The financial report is presented in Australian dollars. 
 
Adoption of new and revised standards
Changes in accounting policies on initial application of Accounting Standards
In the year ended 30 June 2016, the Directors have reviewed all of the new and revised Standards and 
Interpretations issued by the AASB that are relevant to its operations and effective for the current annual 
reporting period.
It has been determined by the Directors that there is no impact, material or otherwise, of the new and 
revised Standards and Interpretations on its business and, therefore, no change is necessary to Group 
accounting policies.
The Directors have also reviewed all new Standards and Interpretations that have been issued but are 
not  yet  effective  for  the  year  ended  30  June  2016.  As  a  result  of  this  review,  the  Directors  have 
determined  that  there  is  no  impact,  material  or  otherwise,  of  the  new  and  revised  Standards  and 
Interpretations on its business and, therefore, no change necessary to Group accounting policies.
(c)
Statement of Compliance
The financial report was authorised for issue on 1st September 2016.
The financial report complies with Australian Accounting Standards, which include Australian equivalents 
to  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (AIFRS).  Compliance  with  AIFRS  ensures  that  the 
financial  report,  comprising  the  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto,  complies  with  International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
(d)
Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty
The application of accounting policies requires the use of judgements, estimates and assumptions about 
carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The estimates 
and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to 
be relevant. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Exploration and evaluation expenditure:
The Directors have conducted a review of the Group’s capitalised exploration expenditure to determine 
the existence of any indicators of impairment.  Based upon this review, the Directors have determined 
that in respect to the current suspension of activities on the Dunlevy project, the Company has elected 
to write down the value of the project to nil (including the value of the goodwill on the acquisition of the 
project). The value of the write off totals $1,364,850 for the current year. A Coal Land Reserve created 
over the area covering the Peace River license applications resulted in their cancellation, and a total of 
$533,359 has been written off against this project during the year.
Share-based payment transactions:
The Group measures the cost of equity-settled transactions with employees by reference to the fair value 
of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is determined by an external 
valuer using a Black and Scholes model, using assumptions provided by the Company.
The fair value is expensed over the period until vesting with recognition of a corresponding fair value 
liability. The liability is re-measured to fair value at each balance date up to and including the settlement 
date with changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss.
33
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(e)
Revenue recognition
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group 
and the revenue can be reliably measured. The following specific recognition criteria must also be met 
before revenue is recognised:
Interest income
Interest revenue is recognised on a time proportionate basis that takes into account the effective yield 
on the financial asset.
(f)
Cash and cash equivalents
(g)
(h)
Cash comprises cash at bank and in hand. Cash equivalents are short term, highly liquid investments 
that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of 
changes in value.   
 
For the purposes of the Statement of Cash Flows, cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash 
equivalents as defined above, net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Trade and other receivables
Trade receivables are measured on initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently measured at 
amortised cost using the effective interest rate method, less provision for impairment. Trade receivables 
(excluding the BC Mining Tax Credit refund) are generally due for settlement within periods ranging from 
15 days to 30 days.  
 
Impairment of assets
The  Group  assesses  at  each  balance  date  whether  a  financial  asset  or  group  of  financial  assets  is 
impaired. 
 
(i) Financial assets carried at amortised cost
If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss on loans and receivables carried at amortised 
cost has been incurred, the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the asset’s 
carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows (excluding future credit losses 
that have not been incurred) discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate (i.e. the 
effective interest rate computed at initial recognition). The carrying amount of the asset is reduced 
either directly or through use of an allowance account.
The amount of the loss is recognised in profit or loss.
The Group first assesses whether objective evidence of impairment exists individually for financial 
assets that are individually significant, and individually or collectively for financial assets that are not 
individually  significant.  If  it  is  determined  that  no  objective  evidence  of  impairment  exists  for  an 
individually assessed financial asset, whether significant or not, the asset is included in a group of 
financial assets with similar credit risk characteristics and that group of financial assets is collectively 
assessed  for  impairment.  Assets  that  are  individually  assessed  for  impairment  and  for  which  an 
impairment  loss  is  or  continues  to  be  recognised  are  not  included  in  a  collective  assessment  of 
impairment. 
 
If, in a subsequent period, the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be 
related  objectively  to  an  event  occurring  after  the  impairment  was  recognised,  the  previously 
recognised impairment loss is reversed. Any subsequent reversal of an impairment loss is recognised 
in profit or loss, to the extent that the carrying value of the asset does not exceed its amortised cost 
at the reversal date.
(ii) Financial assets carried at cost
If  there  is  objective  evidence  that  an  impairment  loss  has  been  incurred  on  an  unquoted  equity 
instrument that is not carried at fair value (because its fair value cannot be reliably measured), or on 
a  derivative  asset  that  is  linked  to  and  must  be  settled  by  delivery  of  such  an  unquoted  equity 
instrument, the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the asset’s carrying amount 
and the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at the current market rate of return 
for a similar financial asset.
34
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(iii) Available-for-sale investments
If there is objective evidence that an available-for-sale investment is impaired, an amount comprising 
the difference between its cost (net of any principal repayment and amortisation) and its current fair 
value, less any impairment loss previously recognised in profit or loss, is transferred from equity to 
the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income. Reversals of impairment losses for 
equity instruments classified as available-for-sale are not recognised in profit.
(i)
Income tax
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior periods are measured at the amount expected 
to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the 
amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted by the balance date.
Deferred income tax is provided on all temporary differences at the statement of financial position date 
between  the  tax  bases  of  assets  and  liabilities  and  their  carrying  amounts  for  financial  reporting 
purposes.
Deferred  income  tax  assets  are  recognised  for  all  deductible  temporary  differences,  carry-forward  of 
unused  tax  assets  and  unused  tax  losses,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable  that  taxable  profit  will  be 
available against which the deductible temporary differences and the carry-forward of unused tax credits 
and unused tax losses can be utilised, except:


when the deferred income tax asset relating to the deductible temporary difference arises from 
the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, 
at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; or
when  the  deductible  temporary  difference  is  associated  with  investments  in  subsidiaries, 
associates or interests in joint ventures, in which case a deferred tax asset is only recognised to 
the extent that it is probable that the temporary difference will reverse in the foreseeable future 
and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each balance date and reduced to the 
extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the 
deferred income tax asset to be utilised.
Unrecognised deferred income tax assets are reassessed at each balance date and are recognised to 
the extent that it has become probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be 
recovered.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the 
year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been 
enacted or substantively enacted at the balance date.
Income taxes relating to items recognised directly in equity are recognised in equity and not in profit or 
loss.
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right exists to set 
off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to the 
same taxable entity and the same taxation authority.
(j)
Other taxes
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of GST except:


when the GST incurred on a purchase of goods and services is not recoverable from the taxation 
authority, in which case the GST is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of the asset or as 
part of the expense item as applicable; and 
receivables and payables, which are stated with the amount of GST included.
The  net  amount  of  GST  recoverable  from,  or  payable  to,  the  taxation  authority  is  included  as  part  of 
receivables or payables in the statement of financial position.
35
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(j)
Other taxes (continued)
Cash flows are included in the Statement of Cash Flows on a gross basis and the GST component of 
cash flows arising from investing and financing activities, which is recoverable from, or payable to, the 
taxation authority are classified as operating cash flows.
Commitments and contingencies are disclosed net of the amount of GST recoverable from, or payable 
to, the taxation authority.
(k)
Plant and equipment
Plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment 
losses.
Depreciation is calculated over the estimated useful life of the assets as follows:
Plant and equipment – over 5 to 15 years (diminishing value)
Computer equipment – 3 years (diminishing value)
Leasehold improvements – term of the lease (straight line basis)
The  assets'  residual  values,  useful  lives  and  amortisation  methods  are  reviewed,  and  adjusted  if 
appropriate, at each financial year end.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows, recoverable amount is determined 
for the cash-generating unit to which the asset belongs, unless the asset's value in use can be estimated 
to be close to its fair value.
An impairment exists when the carrying value of an asset or cash-generating units exceeds its estimated 
recoverable amount. The asset or cash-generating unit is then written down to its recoverable amount 
with the impairment loss recognised in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
(ii) Derecognition and disposal
An  item  of  plant  and  equipment  is  derecognised  upon  disposal  or  when  no  further  future  economic 
benefits are expected from its use or disposal.
Any  gain  or  loss  arising  on  derecognition  of  the  asset  (calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  net 
disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset) is included in profit or loss in the year the asset 
is derecognised.
(l)
Financial assets
Financial  assets  in  the  scope  of  AASB  139  Financial  Instruments:  Recognition  and  Measurement  are 
classified  as  either  financial  assets  at  fair  value  through  profit  or  loss,  loans  and  receivables,  held-to-
maturity  investments,  or  available-for-sale  investments,  as  appropriate.  When  financial  assets  are 
recognised  initially,  they  are  measured  at  fair  value,  plus,  in  the  case  of  investments  not  at  fair  value 
through profit or loss, directly attributable transaction costs. The Group determines the classification of its 
financial assets after initial recognition and, when allowed and appropriate, re-evaluates this designation 
at each financial year-end. All regular way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the 
trade date, i.e. the date that the Group commits to purchase the asset. Regular way purchases or sales 
are purchases or sales of financial assets under contracts that require delivery of the assets within the 
period established generally by regulation or convention in the marketplace.
(m)
Trade and other payables
Trade payables and other payables are carried at amortised cost and represent liabilities for goods and 
services provided to the Group prior to the end of the financial year that are unpaid and arise when the 
Group becomes obliged to make future payments in respect of the purchase of these goods and services.
36
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(n)
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of 
a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to 
settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
When the Group expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, for example under an insurance 
contract,  the  reimbursement  is  recognised  as  a  separate  asset  but  only  when  the  reimbursement  is 
virtually certain. The expense relating to any provision is presented in the statement of profit or loss and 
other comprehensive income net of any reimbursement. 
 
If the effect of the time value of money is material, provisions are discounted using a current pre-tax 
rate that reflects the risks specific to the liability.
When discounting is used, the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a 
borrowing cost.
(o)
Employee leave benefits
Wages, salaries, annual leave and sick leave
Liabilities for wages and salaries, including non-monetary benefits, annual leave and accumulating sick 
leave expected to be settled within 12 months of the reporting date are recognised in other payables in 
respect of employees’ services up to the reporting date. They are measured at the amounts expected to 
be paid when the liabilities are settled. Liabilities for non-accumulating sick leave are recognised when 
the leave is taken and are measured at the rates paid or payable.
(p)
Share-based payment transactions
Equity settled transactions:
The  Group  provides  benefits  to  employees  (including  senior  executives)  in  the  form  of  share-based 
payments,  whereby  employees  render  services  in  exchange  for  shares  or  rights  over  shares  (equity-
settled transactions).
The cost of these equity-settled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value 
of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is determined by an external 
valuer using a Black-Scholes model, using assumptions provided by the Company.
In  valuing  equity-settled  transactions,  no  account  is  taken  of  any  performance  conditions,  other  than 
conditions linked to the price of the shares of Jameson Resources (market conditions), if applicable.
The cost of equity-settled transactions is recognised, together with a corresponding increase in equity, 
over the period in which the performance and/or service conditions are fulfilled, ending on the date on 
which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award (the vesting period).
The cumulative expense recognised for equity-settled transactions at each reporting date until vesting 
date reflects:
(i)
the extent to which the vesting period has expired and
(ii)         the Group’s best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
No adjustment is made for the likelihood of market performance conditions being met as the effect of 
these  conditions  is  included  in  the  determination  of  fair  value  at  grant  date.  The  statement  of 
comprehensive income charge or credit for a period represents the movement in cumulative expense 
recognised as at the beginning and end of that period.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest, except for awards where vesting is only 
conditional upon a market condition.
37
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(p)
Share-based payment transactions (continued)
If the terms of an equity-settled award are modified, as a minimum an expense is recognised as if the 
terms had not been modified. In addition, an expense is recognised for any modification that increases 
the total fair value of the share-based payment arrangement, or is otherwise beneficial to the employee, 
as measured at the date of modification.
If an equity-settled award is cancelled, it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation, and 
any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately. However, if a new award is 
substituted for the cancelled award and designated as a replacement award on the date that it is granted, 
the cancelled and new award are treated as if they were a modification of the original award, as described 
in the previous paragraph.
The  dilutive  effect,  if  any,  of  outstanding  options  is  reflected  as  additional  share  dilution  in  the 
computation of earnings per share (see Note 19).
(q)
Issued capital
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares 
or options are shown in equity as a deduction, net of tax, from the proceeds.
(r)
Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated as net profit or loss attributable to members of the parent, adjusted 
to exclude any costs of servicing equity (other than dividends) and preference share dividends, divided 
by the weighted average number of ordinary shares, adjusted for any bonus element.
Diluted  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  as  net  profit  or  loss  attributable  to  members  of  the  parent, 
adjusted for:



costs of servicing equity (other than dividends) and preference share dividends;
the after tax effect of dividends and interest associated with dilutive potential ordinary shares that 
have been recognised as expenses; and
other non-discretionary changes in revenues or expenses during the period that would result from 
the  dilution  of  potential  ordinary  shares;  divided  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  ordinary 
shares and dilutive potential ordinary shares, adjusted for any bonus element.
(s)
Exploration and evaluation
Exploration and evaluation expenditures in relation to each separate area of interest are recognised as 
an exploration and evaluation asset in the year in which they are incurred where the following conditions 
are satisfied:
(i) the rights to tenure of the area of interest are current; and
(ii) at least one of the following conditions is also met:
(a)  the exploration and evaluation expenditures are expected to be recouped through successful
development and exploration of the area of interest, or alternatively,
(b)  by its sale; or 
(c)  exploration and evaluation activities in the area of interest have not at the reporting date reached 
a stage which permits a reasonable assessment of the existence or otherwise of economically 
recoverable  reserves,  and  active  and  significant  operations  in,  or  in  relation  to,  the  area  of 
interest are continuing.
Exploration  and  evaluation  assets  are  initially  measured  at  cost  and  include  acquisition  of  rights  to 
explore, studies, exploratory drilling, trenching and sampling and associated activities and an allocation 
of  depreciation  and  amortisation  of  assets  used  in  exploration  and  evaluation  activities.  General  and 
administrative  costs  are  only  included  in  the  measurement  of  exploration  and  evaluation  costs  where 
they are related directly to operational activities in a particular area of interest.
38
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued)
(s)
Exploration and evaluation (continued)
(t)
Exploration and evaluation assets are assessed for impairment when facts and circumstances suggest 
that the carrying amount of an exploration and evaluation asset may exceed its recoverable amount. The 
recoverable amount of the exploration and evaluation asset (for the cash generating unit(s) to which it 
has been allocated being no larger than the relevant area of interest) is estimated to determine the extent 
of the impairment loss (if any). Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses, the carrying amount 
of the asset is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount, but only to the extent that the 
increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had 
no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in previous years.
Where a decision has been made to proceed with development in respect of a particular area of interest, 
the relevant exploration and evaluation asset is tested for impairment and the balance is then reclassified 
to development.
Foreign currency translation
Both the functional and presentation currency of Jameson Resources Limited is Australian dollars.  Each 
entity in the Group determines its own functional currency and items included in the financial statements 
of each entity are measured using that functional currency. 
 
Transactions  in  foreign  currencies  are  initially  recorded  in  the  functional  currency  by  applying  the 
exchange  rates  ruling  at  the  date  of  the  transaction.  Monetary  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in 
foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance date. 
 
All  exchange  differences  in  the  consolidated  financial  statements  are  taken  to  profit  or  loss  with  the 
exception of differences on foreign currency borrowings that provide a hedge against a net investment 
in a foreign entity.  These are taken directly to equity until the disposal of the net investment, at which 
time they are recognised in profit or loss. 
 
Tax charges and credits attributable to exchange differences on those borrowings are also recognised 
in equity.  Non-monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are 
translated using the exchange rate as at the date of the initial transaction. 
 
Non-monetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates 
at the date when the fair value was determined. Translation differences on assets and liabilities carried 
at fair value are reported as part of the fair value gain or loss. 
 
The  functional  currency  of  the  foreign  operations,  NWP  Coal  Canada  and  Dunlevy  Energy  Inc  is 
Canadian dollars, “CAD”. 
 
As at the balance date the assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated into the presentation 
currency of Jameson Resources Limited at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance date and income 
and expense items are translated at the average exchange rate for the period, unless exchange rates 
fluctuated  significantly  during  that  period,  in  which  case  the  exchange  rates  at  the  dates  of  the 
transactions are used. 
 
The exchange differences arising on the translation are taken directly to a separate component of equity, 
being recognised in the foreign currency translation reserve.
39
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 1. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (Continued) 
 
(u)
Basis of Consolidation
The  consolidated  financial  statements  comprise  the  financial  statements  of  Jameson  Resources 
Limited  and  its  subsidiaries  as  at  30  June  each  year  (the  Group).  Control  is  achieved  where  the 
company  has  the  power  to  govern  the  financial  and  operating  policies  of  an  entity  so  as  to  obtain 
benefits from its activities. 
 
The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent 
company, using consistent accounting policies.  Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost 
in the parent entity’s financial statements. 
 
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, all intercompany balances and transactions, income 
and expenses and profit and losses resulting from intra-group transactions have been eliminated in full. 
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and cease 
to be consolidated from the date on which control is transferred out of the Group. Control exists where 
the company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain 
benefits from its activities. 
 
The acquisition of subsidiaries has been accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. The 
purchase method of accounting involves allocating the cost of the business combination to the fair value 
of the assets acquired and the liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition. 
Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements include the results of subsidiaries for the period from 
their acquisition.
NOTE 2. REVENUES AND EXPENSES
Note  Consolidated 
Year Ended
2016
$
The following revenue and expense items are relevant in 
explaining the financial performance for the year: 
 
(a) Revenues
- Interest received 
- Other revenues
(b) Expenses
Employee benefit expense 
- Salaries
Exploration Costs Written off 
  Impairment of Dunlevy Project                                 
  Write off of Peace River Projects                            
                                                                                   8
Depreciation and amortisation 
- Depreciation expense 
- Amortisation 
- Total depreciation and amortisation expense
NOTE 3. AUDITORS’ REMUNERATION
The auditor of Jameson Resources Limited is HLB Mann Judd 
Amounts received or due and receivable to the auditor for: 
- Auditing or reviewing the financial report
40
Consolidated 
Year Ended
2015
$
16,834 
- 
16,834 
 
 
 
213,905
2,763,273 
  1,810,763 
4,574,036 
 
 
10,690 
2,811 
13,501
30,000 
30,000
5,194 
32,064 
37,258 
 
 
 
182,992
1,364,850 
533,359 
1,898,209 
 
 
8,309 
- 
8,309
34,000 
34,000
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Consolidated 
Year Ended
2016
$
NOTE 4. INCOME TAX 
 
a.
(105,639) 
- 
(105,639)
The components of tax expense comprise: 
Current tax (i) 
Deferred tax  
Income tax benefit reported in statement of comprehensive 
income 
(i) Mining Tax Credit (Canada) 
 
The prima facie tax benefit on loss from ordinary 
activities before income tax is reconciled to the income 
tax as follows: 
Prima facie tax benefit on loss from ordinary activities before 
income tax at 30% (2015: 30%)  
 
Add tax effect of:  
-  Revenue losses not recognised 
-  Other non-allowable items 
 
Less tax effect of:  
-  Other deferred tax balances not recognised 
Mining Tax Credit (Canada) 
Income tax benefit reported in statement of comprehensive 
income 
 
Deferred tax recognised: 
 
Deferred tax liabilities: 
Other 
Deferred tax assets: 
Carry forward revenue losses 
Net deferred tax  
 
Unrecognised deferred tax assets: 
Carry forward revenue losses 
Carry forward capital losses 
Capital raising costs 
Property plant and equipment 
Provisions and accruals 
 
 
The tax benefits of the above deferred tax assets will only be obtained if: 
(a)
(718,486)
177,790 
593,976 
53,280 
 
53,280 
105,639 
(105,639)
(215) 
 
215 
- 
 
 
1,952,926 
221,942 
22,222 
359 
6,300 
2,203,749
Consolidated 
Year Ended
2015
$
(329,596) 
- 
(329,596)
(1,606,225)
209,531 
1,453,574 
56,880 
 
56,880 
329,596 
(329,596)
(433) 
 
433 
- 
 
 
1,775,136 
- 
75,808 
1,103 
5,250 
1,857,297
b.
c. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d.
the company derives future assessable income of a nature and of an amount sufficient to enable the  
benefits to be utilised; 
the company continues to comply with the conditions for deductibility imposed by law; and  
no changes in income tax legislation adversely affect the company in utilising the benefits.
(b)  
(c)
41
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Consolidated
30 June
2016
$
1,891,057 
- 
1,891,057
Consolidated
30 June
2015
$
2,163,879 
268,552 
2,432,431
NOTE 5. CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Current 
Cash at bank 
Short term deposits
Cash at bank earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates. 
Short-term  deposits  are  made  for  varying  periods  of  between  one  and  three  months,  depending  on  the 
immediate cash requirements of the Company, and earn interest at the respective short-term deposit rates.
NOTE 6. TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
(a)  Current trade and other receivables 
        GST Receivable 
        British Columbia Mining Tax Credit (Canada) 
        Other debtors (i)
(b)  Non Current other receivables
Reclamation bonds(ii)
8,501 
120,841 
12,380 
141,722
93,957 
93,957
52,163 
627,320 
9,669 
689,152
95,097 
95,097
(i)    Other debtors are non-interest bearing and are normally settled on 60-day terms.  This balance  is
current receivables incurred on a day to day operational basis and considered unimpaired.
(ii)   The Reclamation Bonds are a condition of the Mines Act Permit for the Crown Mountain and Dunlevy 
Projects.   The  Bonds  are  placed  as  security  in  the  form  of  a  certified  cheque  or  held  in  trust  at  a 
nominated  bank  as  a  Safe Keeping  Agreement.    The  Bonds  are  returned  once  the  BC  Ministry  of 
Energy and Mines have inspected the site following completion of exploration and reclamation.
NOTE 7. OTHER ASSETS
Current 
Prepayments 
 
Non Current 
Security deposit
21,089 
 
 
5,160
21,472 
 
 
7,324
42
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
Consolidated
30 June
2016
$
Consolidated
30 June
2015
$
NOTE 8. DEFERRED EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION EXPENDITURE
Costs carried forward in respect of areas of interest in: 
 
Exploration and evaluation phases – at cost 
 
Brought forward 
 
Exploration expenditure capitalised during the period 
Impairment of Dunlevy project 
Write off of Peace River projects 
Foreign currency translation 
At reporting date
10,453,580 
 
11,906,867 
 
747,109 
(1,364,850) 
(533,359) 
(302,187) 
10,453,580
11,906,867 
 
13,428,583 
 
2,413,785 
(2,763,273) 
(1,810,763) 
638,535 
11,906,867
The recoupment of costs carried forward in relation to areas of interest in the exploration and evaluation 
phases are dependent on the successful development and commercial exploitation or sale of the respective 
areas.
79,088 
(39,273) 
39,815 
 
18,124 
(17,239) 
885 
 
23,365 
(23,365) 
- 
40,700
48,047 
(7,640) 
(592) 
39,815
1,554 
- 
(669) 
885
- 
- 
-
75,746 
(27,699) 
48,047 
 
18,124 
(16,570) 
1,554 
 
23,365 
(23,365) 
- 
49,601
55,101 
(9,916) 
2,862 
 48,047
2,327 
- 
(773) 
  1,554
2,812 
(2,812) 
- 
-
NOTE 9. PLANT & EQUIPMENT
Plant and Equipment 
Plant and equipment at cost 
Less: accumulated depreciation 
 
Computer Equipment 
Computer equipment at cost 
Less: accumulated depreciation 
 
Leasehold Improvements  
Leasehold Improvements at cost 
Less: accumulated amortisation 
 
Total Plant and Equipment
Movements in Plant and Equipment 
Movements in Plant and Equipment 
Balance at beginning of the year 
Depreciation expense 
Foreign currency translation  
Balance at end of the year
Movements in Computer Equipment 
Balance at beginning of the year 
Additions (disposal) 
Depreciation and amortisation expense 
Balance at end of the year
Movements in Leasehold Improvements 
Balance at beginning of the year 
Additions (disposal) 
Amortisation expense 
Balance at end of the year
43
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 10. TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES
Current
Trade creditors (i) 
       Other creditors and accruals
Consolidated
Consolidated
30 June
2016
$
60,620 
26,155 
86,775
30 June
2015
$
107,448 
56,239 
163,687
(i) Trade payables are non-interest bearing and are normally settled on 30 day terms.
NOTE 11. ISSUED CAPITAL AND OPTIONS
208,565,619 fully paid ordinary shares (2015: 208,465,619)
(a)
500,000 exchangeable shares (2015: 8,100,000)
(c)
Total
(a)  Movements in fully paid ordinary shares on issue:
30 June
2016
$
26,626,321
112,500
26,738,821
30 June
2015
$
26,603,821
1,822,500
28,426,321
Fully paid ordinary shares
Consolidated
At beginning of the reporting period 
  
Movements in ordinary shares on issue 
Exchangeable shares converted during the year(i) 
Placement – 2 October 2014 at $0.14 per share 
Capital raising costs
At end of reporting period
(i) Refer note 11(c).
As at
As at
30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Number
$
208,565,619
26,626,321
As at
As at
30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Number
208,465,619
$
26,603,821
100,000 
- 
- 
 
208,565,619
22,500 
- 
- 
 
26,626,321
As at
As at
30 June 2015
30 June 2015
Number
$
208,465,619
26,603,821
As at
As at
30 June 2015
30 June 2015
Number
$
189,665,619
23,716,192
4,500,000 
14,300,000 
- 
 
208,465,619
1,012,500 
2,002,000 
(126,871) 
 
26,603,821
44
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 11.  ISSUED CAPITAL AND OPTIONS (Continued)
(b)  Movements in options on issue:
Consolidated
At the beginning of the reporting period 
 
Options issued during the year: 
-  Expiry of options exercisable at $0.15 on 30 September 2014 
-  Options exercisable at $0.16 expiring 30 September 2016
At reporting date
(c)  Movements in exchangeable shares on issue:
As at
30 June 2016
Number
16,300,000
- 
-
16,300,000
As at
30 June 2015
Number
10,976,390
(8,976,390) 
14,300,000
16,300,000
Exchangeable shares
Consolidated
As at
As at
30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Number
$
500,000
112,500
As at
As at
30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Number
$
At beginning of the year 
  
Movements in exchangeable shares on issue 
Conversion of exchangeable shares(i) 
Reduction in exchangeable shares on issue(ii) 
At end of reporting period
8,100,000
1,822,500
(100,000) 
(7,500,000) 
500,000
(22,500) 
(1,687,500) 
112,500
As at
As at
30 June 2015
30 June 2015
Number
$
8,100,000
1,822,500
As at
As at
30 June 2015
30 June 2015
Number
$
18,000,000
4,050,000
(4,500,000) 
(5,400,000) 
8,100,000
(1,012,500) 
(1,215,000) 
1,822,500
(i)  During  the  year,  100,000  (2015:  4,500,000)  exchangeable  shares  in  Jameson’s  subsidiary,  NWP  Coal 
Canada, were exchanged by the election of the holders, on a “one-for-one” basis, into 100,000 Jameson fully 
paid ordinary shares.  The shares were originally issued pursuant to the Dunlevy acquisition.  Further details 
on the terms are contained in note 11(f)a below.
(ii) In March 2016 the Company announced the cancellation of 7,500,000 exchangeable shares via an agreement 
reached  with  the  vendor  of  the  Peace  River  projects  as  consequence  of  the  reduction  in  value  due  to 
environmental constraints.
(d)  Terms of Ordinary Shares
Voting Rights 
Ordinary shares participate in dividends and the proceeds on winding up of the Company in proportion to 
the number of shares held and in proportion to the amount paid up on the shares held. 
 
At shareholders meetings each ordinary share is entitled to one vote in proportion to the paid up amount of 
the share when a poll is called, otherwise each shareholder has one vote on a show of hands.
(e)  Terms of Options
At the end of the reporting period, there were 16,300,000 options over unissued shares as follows:
 

2,000,000 unlisted options exercisable at $0.20 on or before 31 August 2016.   
14,300,000 unlisted options exercisable at $0.16 on or before 30 September 2016
45
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 11.  ISSUED CAPITAL AND OPTIONS (Continued)
(f)  Terms of Exchangeable shares
a)  Dunlevy Energy Inc. acquisition
Pursuant  to  the  Share  Exchange  Agreement  between  Jameson  Resources  Limited,  NWPC  and 
Dunlevy Energy Inc. dated 20 October 2011 for the acquisition of the Dunlevy Project, 12,000,000 non-
voting, convertible, redeemable, preferred shares “Exchangeable Shares” were created in the capital 
stock of NWPC and were issued equally to each of the three Dunlevy shareholders on 23 December 
2011 (“settlement date”).  
 
On 29 May 2015 the Company and the three Dunlevy vendors agreed to reduce the balance owed on 
the Dunlevy acquisition from 6,000,000 to 600,000 exchangeable shares. The Exchangeable Shares 
are exchangeable for fully paid ordinary shares in Jameson (“Jameson Shares”) on a one for one share 
basis and 500,000 remain unexchanged.
Number of
Exchangeable
Performance 
Condition For
Exchange
3,000,000
Settlement Date
Number of
Expiry Date
Exchangeable Shares
Exchanged
3,000,000
13 December 2016
3,000,000
300,000
300,000
18 months from 
Settlement Date 
42 months from 
Settlement Date 
54 months from 
Settlement Date
3,000,000
13 December 2016
100,000
13 December 2016
-
13 December 2016
b)  Nexx Project acquisition
During the year the balance of the 7,000,000 exchangeable shares on issue for the Peace River projects 
were  cancelled  as  a  result  of  the  project  licenses  being  withdrawn  by  the  government  due  to 
environmental protection reasons. Any royalty obligations associated with the project pursuant to the 
Nexx Royalty Agreement are now deemed to be at an end.
46
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 12. RESERVES
Equity Based Payment Reserve (a) 
Foreign Currency Translation Reserve (b)
(a) Equity Based Payments Reserve: 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Balance at the end of the year
(b) Foreign Currency Translation Reserve:
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Foreign exchange differences 
Balance at the end of the year
Consolidated
30 June
2016
$
1,156,911 
845,939 
2,002,850
1,156,911 
1,156,911
1,034,391 
(188,452) 
845,939
Consolidated
30 June
2015
$
1,156,911 
1,034,391 
2,191,302
1,156,911 
1,156,911
194,244 
840,147 
1,034,391
Equity Based Payments Reserve: 
This  reserve  is  used  to  record  the  value  of  equity  benefits  provided  to  employees,  directors  and 
consultants as part of their remuneration. Refer to Notes 15 and 16. 
 
Foreign Currency Translation Reserve 
Foreign  currency  translation  reserve  records  exchange  differences  arising  on  translation  of  the 
subsidiaries’ functional currency (Canadian Dollars) into presentation currency at balance date.
NOTE 13. ACCUMULATED LOSSES
Accumulated losses at the beginning of the year
Reduction in Exchangeable Shares(i) 
  Net loss for the year
Accumulated losses at the end of the year
(i) Refer Note 11(f)(b) for details.
Consolidated
2016
$
(15,579,366)
1,687,500 
(2,289,315) 
(16,181,181)
Consolidated
2015
$
(11,769,878)
1,215,000 
(5,024,488) 
(15,579,366)
47
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 14.  KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL DISCLOSURES
(a) Details of key management personnel
The  following  persons  were  key  management  personnel  of  Jameson  Resources  Limited  during  the 
financial year:
T. Arthur Palm 
Jeff Bennett 
Steve van Barneveld 
Suzie Foreman
Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director – Operations  
Non-Executive Director  
Non-Executive Director  
Company Secretary
The aggregate compensation made to directors and other key management personnel or the Group is set out 
below:
Short-term employee benefits 
Post-employment benefits 
Other long-term benefits 
Termination benefits 
Share based payments
Consolidated
2016 
  $ 
382,860 
2,850 
- 
- 
- 
385,710
Consolidated
2015
$
441,187 
3,681 
- 
- 
- 
444,868
NOTE 15. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
At 30 June 2016, Jameson Resources Limited had 1 (2015: 1) full time employee.
Performance Rights Plan  
 
There is currently no performance rights plan in operation.
NOTE 16. SHARE BASED PAYMENT PLANS
During the year there were  no share based payment plans in existence. Performance rights  were held by 
directors from a performance rights plan implemented in 2011, however these expired unvested on 30 August 
2016.  For further details on the performance rights terms and conditions and vesting conditions refer to the 
remuneration report.
NOTE 17. RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES
BC  Resources  Developments  Pty  Ltd,  an  Australian  based  company  of  which  Mr  S  van  Barneveld  is  a 
member, received no consulting fees this year  (2015: $13,063) for Mr van Barneveld’s technical services. 
These services are provided outside of director duties performed, and are on normal commercial terms. 
 
There have been no other related party transactions other than as stated above.
48
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
NOTE 18.
The main risks arising from the Group’s financial instruments are market risk, currency risk and interest rate 
risk.
This  note  presents  information  about  the  Group’s  exposure  to  each  of  the  above  risks,  their  objectives, 
policies and processes for measuring and managing risk, and the management of capital.
The Board has overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the risk management framework. 
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks and they are summarised below.
The Group’s principal financial instruments comprise cash and short term deposits. The main purpose of the 
financial instruments is to earn the maximum amount of interest at a low risk to the Group. The Group also 
has other financial instruments such as trade debtors and creditors which arise directly from its operations. 
 
(a)  Market Risk
Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates, interest rates and 
equity prices will affect the Group’s income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments. 
 
The Group is exposed to movements in market interest rates on short term deposits. The policy is to 
monitor  the  interest  rate  yield  curve  out  to  120  days  to  ensure  a  balance  is  maintained  between  the 
liquidity of cash assets and the interest rate return.  The Group does not have short or long term debt, 
and therefore this risk is minimal.
(b)  Currency Risk
Foreign exchange risk arises from future commitments, assets and liabilities that are denominated in a 
currency that is not he functional currency of the Group. The Group deposits are denominated in both 
Canadian and Australian dollars. At the year end the majority of deposits were held in Canadian dollars. 
Currently, there are no foreign exchange programs in place. The Group treasury function manages the 
purchase of foreign currency to meet operational and budgetary requirements. The impact of reasonably 
possible changes in foreign exchange rates for the Group is not material. 
 
Interest Rate Risk 
The  table  below  reflects  the  undiscounted  contractual  settlement  terms  for  financial  instruments  of  a 
fixed  period  of  maturity,  as  well  as  management’s  expectations  of  the  settlement  period  for  all  other 
financial instruments. As such, the amounts might not reconcile to the statement of financial position.
(c)
49
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 18.
30 June 2016
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES (Continued)
Weighted 
Average 
Effective 
Interest
Rate
%
FINANCIAL ASSETS
Non-interest bearing
Variable interest rate instruments
Fixed interest rate instruments
0.08%
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
Non-interest bearing
NET FINANCIAL ASSETS
30 June 2015
FINANCIAL ASSETS
Non-interest bearing
Weighted 
Average 
Effective 
Interest
Rate
%
Variable interest rate instruments
Fixed interest rate instruments
0.17%
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES
Non-interest bearing
NET FINANCIAL ASSETS
Less than 1
month
1 to 3
months
3 months 
to 1 year
1 to 5 
years
Total
$
$
1,469,901
-
36,337
1,506,238
86,774
1,419,464
-
-
-
-
-
-
$
-
-
384,819
384,819
-
$
$
-  1,469,901
-
-
-
-
-
421,156
1,891,057
86,774
384,819
-  1,804,283
Less than 1
month
1 to 3
months
3 months 
to 1 year
1 to 5 
years
Total
$
$
1,811,660
636,990
268,552
-
-
-
$
-
-
425,854
2,080,212
636,990
425,854
163,687
-
-
$
$
-  2,448,650
-
-
-
-
268,552
425,854
3,143,056
163,687
1,916,525
636,990
425,854
-  2,979,369
Net fair value of financial assets and liabilities 
 
The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents approximates fair value because of their short-term maturity.
50
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTE 18. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES (Continued)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
(i) Interest Rate Sensitivity Analysis
At 30 June 2016, the effect on loss and equity as a result of changes in the interest rate, with all other 
variable remaining constant would be as follows:
CHANGE IN LOSS
Increase in interest rate by 1% 
Decrease in interest rate by 1%
CHANGE IN EQUITY
Increase in interest rate by 1% 
Decrease in interest rate by 1%
(d)  Credit Risk
2016
$
2015
$
Change
Change
(46,182) 
46,182
(70,383) 
70,383
Change
Change
(46,182) 
46,182
(70,383) 
70,383
Credit  risk  refers  to  the  risk  that  a  counterparty  will  default  on  its  contractual  obligations  resulting  in 
financial  loss  to  the  Group.  The  Group  has  adopted  the  policy  of  only  dealing  with  creditworthy 
counterparties  and  obtaining  sufficient  collateral  or  other  security  where  appropriate,  as  a  means  of 
mitigating the risk of financial loss from defaults. 
 
The Group operates in the mining exploration sector; it therefore does not supply products and  have 
trade receivables and is not exposed to credit risk in relation to trade receivables. The Group does not 
have any significant credit risk exposure to any single counterparty or any  Company of counterparties 
having similar characteristics.
The  Group’s  maximum  exposure  to  credit  risk  at  each  balance  date  in  relation  to  each  class  of 
recognised  financial  assets  is  the  carrying  amount,  net  of  any  allowance  for  doubtful  debts,  of  those 
assets as indicated in the statement of financial position. The maximum credit risk exposure of the Group 
at  30  June  2016  is  $133,220  (2015:  $636,990).  There  are  no  impaired  receivables  at  30  June  2016 
(2015: Nil).
(e)  Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due. 
The  Group’s  approach  to  managing  liquidity  is  to  ensure,  as  far  as  possible,  that  it  will  always  have 
sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, without 
incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Group’s reputation. 
 
The  Group  manages  liquidity  risk  by  monitoring  forecast  cash  flows  on  a  rolling  monthly  basis.  The 
Group does not have any significant liquidity risk as the Group does not have any collateral debts.
(f)  Capital Management
The Group’s objectives when managing capital are to safeguard its ability to continue as a going concern, 
so it may continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders.
Due to the nature of the Group’s activities, being mineral exploration, it does not have ready access to 
credit  facilities  and  therefore  is  not  subject  to  any  externally  imposed  capital  requirements,  with  the 
primary source of Group funding being equity raisings. Accordingly, the objective of the Group’s capital 
risk  management  is  to  balance  the  current  working capital  position  against  the  requirements  to  meet 
exploration programmes and corporate overheads. This is achieved by maintaining appropriate liquidity 
to  meet  anticipated  operating  requirements,  with  a  view  to  initiating  appropriate  capital  raisings  as 
required.
51
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 18. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES (Continued)
The directors consider that the carrying value of the financial assets and financial liabilities recognised 
in the consolidated financial statement approximate their fair value.
NOTE 19. LOSS PER SHARE
(a) Loss used in the calculation of basic loss per share
(b)  Weighted  average  number  of  ordinary  shares 
outstanding  during  the  reporting  period  used  in 
calculation of basic loss per share:
The diluted earnings per share is not disclosed as the Company made a loss for the period.
Consolidated
2016
$
(2,289,315)
Number of
shares
208,557,969
Consolidated
2015
$
(5,024,488)
Number of
shares
201,708,724
Consolidated
Year Ended
30 June 2016
$
1,891,057
(2,289,315)
8,309
9,586
24,112
1,898,209
585,052
(76,912) 
 
159,041
Consolidated
Year Ended
30 June 2015
$
2,432,431
(5,024,488)
13,501
4,574,036
123,435
-
202,148
(224,869) 
 
(336,237)
NOTE 20. CASH FLOW INFORMATION
(i) Reconciliation of cash and cash equivalent: -
Cash at Bank
(ii) Reconciliation of cash flows from operating
activities with loss after income tax
Loss after income tax 
 
Add: Non-cash items:
- Depreciation
- Exploration expensed
- Exchange differences on translation
- Impairment of projects
Changes in assets and liabilities
- Decrease/(Increase) in trade and other receivables
- Increase/(Decrease) in trade and other payables
Net cash inflows/(outflows) from operating
activities
(iii) Non-cash financing and investing activities
2016 and 2015 
There  were  no  non-cash  financing  or  investing  activities  during  the  financial  year  ended  30  June 
2016 or the prior year.
52
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 21. SEGMENT REPORTING
Jameson Resources Limited operates predominantly in one industry being the mining exploration industry 
in Canada, with its corporate function located in Australia.
Segment Information
Identification of reportable segments 
The Company has identified its operating segments based on the internal reports that are reviewed and 
used by the chief operating decision maker (being the Board of Directors) in assessing performance and 
determining the allocation of resources. 
 
The  Company  is  managed  primarily  on  the  basis  of  its  coal  exploration  in  Canada  and  its  corporate 
activities. Operating segments are therefore determined on the same basis.
Reportable segments disclosed are based on aggregating operating segments where the segments are 
considered to have similar economic characteristics.
Types of reportable segments
(i)   Coal exploration
Segment  assets,  including  acquisition  cost  of  exploration  licenses  and  all  expenses  related  to  the 
tenements in Canada are reported on in this segment.
(ii)  Corporate
Corporate, including treasury, corporate and regulatory expenses arising from operating an ASX listed 
entity. Segment assets, including cash and cash equivalents, and investments in financial assets are 
reported in this segment.
Basis of accounting for purposes of reporting by operating segments
Accounting policies adopted
Unless stated otherwise, all amounts reported to the Board of Directors as the chief  operating  decision 
maker with respect to operating segments are determined in accordance with accounting policies that are 
consistent to those adopted in the annual financial statements of the Company.
Segment assets
Where an asset is used across multiple segments, the asset is allocated to the segment that receives the 
majority  of  economic  value  from  the  asset.  In  the  majority  of  instances,  segment  assets  are  clearly 
identifiable on the basis of their nature and physical location.
Segment liabilities
Liabilities are allocated to segments where there is direct nexus between the incurrence of the liability and 
the operations of the segment. Segment liabilities include trade and other payables.
53
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 21. SEGMENT REPORTING (Continued)
30 June 2016
(i) Segment performance
Segment revenue
Segment results
Included within segment result:
•  Depreciation
•
Interest Revenue
Segment assets
Segment liabilities
30 June 2015
(i) Segment performance
Segment revenue
Segment results
Included within segment result:
•  Depreciation
•
Interest Revenue
Segment assets
Segment liabilities
Corporate
Coal
Total
Exploration
$
$
$
1,011
36,247
37,258
(486,002)
(1,803,313)
(2,289,315)
668
1,011
7,641
4,183
8,309
5,194
960,719
11,686,545
12,647,264
(61,220)
(25,554)
(86,774)
Corporate
Coal
Total
Exploration
$
$
$
10,479
6,355
16,834
(578,382)
(4,446,106)
(5,024,488)
(3,585)
10,479
(9,916)
6,355
(13,501)
16,834
1,653,979
13,547,965
15,201,944
(70,476)
(93,211)
(163,687)
(ii) Revenue by geographical region
For the year ending 30 June 2016, the Group had a receivable of A$131,534 in respect to a tax credit 
claim from the British Columbia Mining Exploration Tax Credit. There was no revenue attributable to 
external customers for the year ended 30 June 2016.
(iii) Assets by geographical region
Reportable segment assets are located in Canada and Australia.
54
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTE 22. EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO REPORTING DATE
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
On 26 July 2016, the Company received a full refund ($35,000) plus interest of $777, of its  reclamation 
bond on the Dunlevy project. 
 
On  30  August  2016,  1,300,000  Performance  Rights  C  and  1,300,000  Performance  Rights  D,  expired 
unvested. On 31 August 2016, 2,000,000 options exercisable at $0.20 expired, unexercised. 
 
Other than as detailed above, no matters or circumstances have arisen since the end of the financial year 
which significantly affected or may significantly affect the operations of the Company, the results of those 
operations, or the state of affairs of the Company in future financial years.
NOTE 23. CONTINGENCIES
Subsequent to 30 June 2016, and following an audit of its Canadian Taxation Return, the Company was 
verbally advised by the Canadian Revenue Agency that a portion of its 2014 BC Mineral Taxation Credit 
previously  claimed,  totalling  C$628,085  may  be  disallowed.  The  Company,  in  consultation  with  its 
Canadian taxation advisors, is currently liaising with the taxation department on this matter, however it is 
of the current opinion that the majority of the claim will be approved. 
 
No provision has been made in these financial statements as the Canadian Revenue Agency have yet to 
advise on the quantum of the claim which potentially may be disallowed. In the event that a portion of the 
2014 BC Mineral Taxation Credit claimed is disallowed, the Company would be required to repay the sum 
to the Canadian Revenue Agency or partially offset some of the amount against current refunds due, to 
the extent that they have already been assessed. 
 
Once an amended assessment has been received the Company has the right to appeal any decision and 
will consider this based upon advice received from its in country taxation specialist. 
  
The Company is not aware of any further contingent liabilities or contingent assets other than disclosed 
above.
NOTE 24. COMMITMENTS
(a)  Exploration commitments
The Company’s exploration commitments are as follows:
Not longer than 1 year 
Longer than 1 but not longer than 5 years 
Longer than 5 years 
Total
2016
$
148,129 
592,517 
148,129 
888,775
2015
$
149,927 
599,681 
149,927 
899,535
Exploration commitments consist of Crown Mountain and Dunlevy license rental payments and an annual 
payment of C$100,000 to Mr Bob Morris pursuant to the agreement dated 11 April 2011 between Mr Bob 
Morris and NWP Coal Canada Pty Ltd relating to the Crown Mountain project. Jameson will continue to 
pay the annual rental sum for the use and possession of Mr Bob Morris’s interest in the project until such 
time as the Mining Work is suspended or Jameson elects to acquire the final 10% interest in the project 
for an agreed price of $2,000,000. Mr Bob Morris is not entitled to receive any share in the net profits from 
any mining or other operations on the property from Jameson.
55
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 24. COMMITMENTS (Continued)
(b) Lease expenditure commitments
The Company’s operating lease expenditure commitment, including all outgoings, is as follows:
Not longer than 1 year 
Longer than 1 but not longer than 5 years 
Longer than 5 years 
Total
(c) Remuneration Commitments
2016
$ 
6,541 
13,081 
- 
19,622
2015
$ 
6,620 
13,239 
- 
19,859
There  are  no  commitments  for  the  payment  of  salaries  and  other  remuneration  under  long-term 
employment contracts other than the termination period specified for Mr Palm’s employment contract 
in the remuneration report. 
 
Other than disclosed in (a) – (c) above, the company has no further contractual commitments at 30 
June 2016.
(d) Guarantees 
     As at 30 June 2016 and 2015, the Company had not entered into any guarantees.
The following companies are subsidiaries of Jameson Resources Limited.
Country of
Incorporation
Percentage of equity interest 
held by Consolidated Entity
Investment
NOTE 25. INTEREST IN SUBSIDIARIES
Name
NWP Coal Canada Ltd
Canada
Dunlevy Energy Inc.
Canada
NOTE 26.  PARENT ENTITY DISCLOSURES
(c)  Financial position
Assets 
Current assets 
Non-current assets 
Total assets 
 
 
Liabilities  
Current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
 
Equity 
Issued capital  
Accumulated losses 
Reserves 
Total equity
56
2016
%
100
100
2015
%
100
100
2016
2015
$
1
-
$
1
174,298
30 June
2016
$
959,833 
11,661,877 
12,621,710
61,220 
61,220
26,738,822 
(15,335,243) 
1,156,911 
12,560,490
30 June
2015
$
1,636,269 
13,472,464 
15,108,733
70,476 
70,476
28,426,322 
(14,544,976) 
1,156,911 
15,038,257
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
For the Year Ended 30 June 2016
NOTE 26. PARENT ENTITY DISCLOSURES (Continued)
Financial performance
Loss for the year 
Other comprehensive income 
Total comprehensive loss
Year ended  
30 June 2016
Year ended  
30 June 2015
$
$
(2,477,766)
(4,184,341)
-
-
(2,477,766)
(4,184,341)
a) Contingent liabilities   
    As at 30 June 2016 and 2015, the Company had no contingent liabilities.
b) Contractual Commitments
As at 30 June 2016 and 2015, the Company had no contractual commitments.
c) Guarantees entered into by parent entity
As at 30 June 2016 and 2015, the Company had not entered into any guarantees.
57
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
DIRECTORS' DECLARATION
1.
In the opinion of the directors of Jameson Resources Limited (the ‘Company’):
a.
the  financial  statements,  notes  and  the  additional  disclosures  are  in  accordance  with  the 
Corporations Act 2001 including:
i.
ii.
giving a true and fair view of the Group’s financial position as at 30 June 2016 and of its 
performance for the year then ended; and
complying  with  Australian  Accounting  Standards  (including  the  Australian  Accounting 
Interpretations) and the Corporations Regulations 2001;
b.
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be able to pay its debts as and 
when they become due and payable; and
c.   the financial statements and notes thereto are in accordance with International Financial Reporting
Standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
This declaration has been made after reviewing the declarations required to be made to the directors 
in accordance with Section 295A of the Corporations Act 2001 for the financial year ended 30 June 
2016.
2.
This declaration is signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors.
T Arthur Palm 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
Dated this 1st day of September 2016
58
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT  
To the members of Jameson Resources Limited
Report on the Financial Report
We have audited the accompanying financial report of Jameson Resources Limited (“the company”), which 
comprises the consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2016, the consolidated statement of 
profit  or  loss  and  other  comprehensive  income,  the  consolidated  statement  of  changes  in  equity  and  the 
consolidated statement  of cash  flows  for  the  year  then  ended,  notes  comprising  a  summary  of  significant 
accounting  policies  and  other  explanatory  information,  and  the  directors’  declaration  of  the  consolidated 
entity comprising the company and the entities it controlled at the year’s end or from time to time during the 
financial year.
Directors’ responsibility for the financial report
The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation of the financial report that gives a true and 
fair view in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Act 2001 and for such 
internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of the financial report that 
gives a true and fair view and is free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In Note 1(c), the directors also state, in accordance with Accounting Standard AASB 101: Presentation of 
Financial  Statements,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  comply  with  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards.
Auditor’s responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial report based on our audit. We conducted our audit 
in  accordance  with  Australian  Auditing  Standards.  Those  standards  require  that  we  comply  with  relevant 
ethical  requirements  relating  to  audit  engagements  and  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable 
assurance about whether the financial report is free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the 
financial report. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgement, including the assessment of 
the risks of material misstatement of the financial report, whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk 
assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the consolidated entity’s preparation of the 
financial report that gives a true and fair view in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the 
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s and 
 
its controlled entities’ internal control.
An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting 
policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the directors, as well as evaluating 
the overall presentation of the financial report.
Our  audit  did  not  involve  an  analysis  of  the  prudence  of  business  decisions  made  by  directors  or 
management.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
audit opinion.
HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership)  ABN 22 193 232 714 
Level 4, 130 Stirling Street Perth WA 6000.  PO Box 8124 Perth BC 6849 Telephone +61 (08) 9227 7500. Fax +61 (08) 9227 7533. 
Email: hlb@hlbwa.com.au.  Website: http://www.hlb.com.au 
Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional Standards Legislation
HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership) is a member of
International, a worldwide organisation of accounting firms and business advisers.
59
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
Independence  
In  conducting  our  audit,  we  have  complied  with  the  independence  requirements  of  the  Corporations  Act 
2001.
Auditor’s opinion
In our opinion:
(a)
the financial report of Jameson Resources Limited is in accordance with the  Corporations Act 2001, 
including:  
(i)  giving a true and fair view of the consolidated entity’s financial position as at 30 June 2016 and its
performance for the year ended on that date; and
(b)
(ii)  complying with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001; and  
the financial report also complies with International Financial Reporting Standards as disclosed in Note 
1(c).
Report on the Remuneration Report
We have audited the Remuneration Report included in the directors’ report for the year ended 30 June 2016. 
The  directors  of  the  company  are  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  presentation  of  the  Remuneration 
Report in accordance with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001. Our responsibility is to express an 
opinion on the Remuneration Report, based on our audit conducted in accordance with Australian Auditing 
Standards.
Auditor’s opinion
In our opinion, the Remuneration Report of Jameson Resources Limited for the year ended 30 June 2016 
complies with section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001.
HLB Mann Judd 
Chartered Accountants  
 
 
Perth, Western Australia 
1 September 2016
M R W Ohm 
Partner
60
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT 
This Corporate Governance summary discloses the extent to which the Company will follow the recommendations 
set  by  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council  in  its  publication  Corporate  Governance  Principles  and 
Recommendations  (3rd  Edition)  (Recommendations).  The  Recommendations  are  not  mandatory,  however  the 
Recommendations that will not be followed have been identified and reasons have been provided for not following 
them. 
 
The Company’s Corporate Governance Plan has been posted on the Company’s website at 
www.jamesonresources.com.au.
PRINCIPLES AND RECOMMENDATIONS
COMPLY 
(YES/NO)
EXPLANATION
Principle 1: Lay solid foundations for management and oversight 
Recommendation 1.1  
A listed entity should have and disclose a charter 
which sets out the respective roles and 
responsibilities of the Board, the chair and 
management; and includes a description of those 
matters expressly reserved to the Board and those 
delegated to management.
YES
The Company has adopted a Board Charter. 
 
The  Board  Charter  sets  out 
the  specific 
responsibilities of the Board, requirements as to the 
Boards  composition,  the  roles  and  responsibilities 
of  the  Chairman  and  Company  Secretary,  the 
establishment,  operation  and  management  of 
Board  Committees,  Directors  access  to  company 
records  and  information,  details  of  the  Board’s 
relationship  with  management,  details  of 
the 
Board’s  performance  review  and  details  of  the 
Board’s disclosure policy. 
 
A copy of the Company’s Board Charter is available 
on the Company’s website. 
 
(a)  The Company has detailed guidelines for the 
appointment  and  selection  of  the  Board.  The 
Nomination  Committee  Charter  requires  the 
Committee  to  undertake  appropriate  checks 
before appointing a person, or putting forward 
to security holders a candidate for election, as 
a  director.  These  checks  include  good  frame 
and  character,  experience,  education  and 
financial history and background.
(b)  All material information relevant to a decision 
on whether or not to elect or re-elect a Director 
will be provided to security holders in a Notice 
of Meeting pursuant to which the resolution to 
elect or re-elect a Director will be voted on.
The  Nomination  Committee  Charter  requires  that 
each  director  and  senior  executive  has  a  formal 
written agreement with the Company which sets out 
the  terms  of  that  Director’s  or  senior  executive’s 
appointment.    
 
The  Company  has  entered  into  an  Executive 
Services Agreement with its Chief Executive Officer 
and  Letters  of  Appointment  with  each  Non-
Executive Director. 
 
The Board Charter outlines the roles, responsibility 
and accountability of the Company Secretary. The 
Company  Secretary  is  accountable  directly  to  the 
Board, through the chair, on all matters to do with 
the proper functioning of the Board.
Recommendation 1.2 
A listed entity should:
YES
(a)  undertake appropriate checks before
appointing a person, or putting forward to 
security holders a candidate for election, as 
a director; and
(b)  provide security holders with all material
information relevant to a decision on 
whether or not to elect or re-elect a 
director.
Recommendation 1.3 
A listed entity should have a written agreement with 
each director and senior executive setting out the 
terms of their appointment.
YES
Recommendation 1.4 
The company secretary of a listed entity should be 
accountable directly to the Board, through the chair, 
on all matters to do with the proper functioning of the 
Board.
YES
61
Annual Report 2016
Recommendation 1.5 
A listed entity should:
(a)  have a diversity policy which includes
YES
requirements for the Board: 
(i)
to set measurable objectives for 
achieving gender diversity; and 
to assess annually both the 
objectives and the entity’s 
progress in achieving them;
(ii)
(b)  disclose that policy or a summary or it; and 
(c)  disclose as at the end of each reporting
period: 
(i)
(ii)
the measurable objectives for 
achieving gender diversity set by 
the Board in accordance with the 
entity’s diversity policy and its 
progress towards achieving them; 
and 
either:
(A) the respective proportions of
men and women on the 
Board, in senior executive 
positions and across the 
whole organisation (including 
how the entity has defined 
“senior executive” for these 
purposes); or
(B) the entity’s “Gender Equality 
Indicators”, as defined in the 
Workplace Gender Equality 
Act 2012.
Recommendation 1.6  
A listed entity should:
YES
(a)  have and disclose a process for periodically
evaluating the performance of the Board, 
its committees and individual directors; and
(b)  disclose in relation to each reporting period,
whether a performance evaluation was 
undertaken in the reporting period in 
accordance with that process.
Recommendation 1.7 
A listed entity should:
YES
(a)  have and disclose a process for periodically
evaluating the performance of its senior 
executives; and
(b)  disclose in relation to each reporting period,
whether a performance evaluation was 
undertaken in the reporting period in 
accordance with that process.
Jameson Resources Limited
(a) The Company has adopted a Diversity Policy
(i)  The Diversity Policy provides a framework 
for  the  Company  to  achieve  measurable 
objectives 
gender 
equality.
encompass
that
(ii)  The  Diversity  Policy  provides  for
the 
monitoring and evaluation of the scope and 
currency  of 
the  Diversity  Policy.  The 
company is responsible for implementing, 
monitoring 
the 
measurable objectives.
reporting
and
on
(b) The Diversity Policy is available on the company
website.
(c)
(i)  The  measurable  objectives  set  by  the 
Board  will  be  included  in  the  annual  key 
performance  indicators  for  the  CEO,  MD 
and  senior  executives.  In  addition,  the 
Board  will  review  progress  against  the 
objectives 
in 
its  annual  performance 
assessment.
(ii)
progress
The  Board  will  include  in  the  annual 
the  measurable 
report  each  year, 
objectives, 
the 
objectives,  and  the  proportion  of  male 
and  female  employees  in  the  whole 
organisation, at senior management level 
and at Board Level.
against
responsibilities  of
Information in relation to measurable objectives for 
achieving gender diversity is set out in the Director’s 
Report. 
 
(a)  The  Company  has  a  Nomination  Committee. 
The 
the  Nomination 
Committee  are  detailed  in  the  Nomination 
Committee  Charter. 
The  Nomination 
Committee  may  meet  with  the  aid  of  an 
independent  advisor,  and  its  responsibilities 
involve  evaluating  the  performance  of  the 
Board,  any  committees  and 
individual 
directors on an annual basis. The process for 
this  can  be  found  in  Schedule  11  of  the 
Company’s  Corporate  Governance  Policies.
(b)  The Company has established the Nomination 
Committee Charter, which requires disclosure 
as to whether or not performance evaluations 
were  conducted  during  the  relevant  reporting 
period. Details of the performance evaluations 
conducted  will 
the 
Remuneration  Report  of 
the  Company’s 
Annual Report.
provided
be
in
(a)  The  Company
has 
responsibilities  of
a  Remuneration 
the 
Committee.  The 
Remuneration  Committee  are  detailed  in  the 
Remuneration  Committee  Charter,  which 
includes evaluating the performance of senior 
executives.  The  Remuneration  Committee 
performs an annual performance evaluation of 
the senior executive.
(b)  Details  of
the  performance  evaluations 
the 
the  Company’s
provided
in
conducted  will 
Remuneration  Report  of 
Annual Report.
be
62
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
(a)  During
the
the  year
functions  of
the 
Nomination  committee  were  undertaken  by 
the  full  board  which  was  governed  by  its 
Directors  Selection  Procedures  Policy.  After 
the  year  end 
the  board  established  a 
Nomination Committee. 
 
The  Nomination  Committee  now  comprises 
two  independent  directors  (Jeff  Bennett  and 
Steve van Barneveld). Suzie Foreman is the 
secretary.  
 
Given  the  current  size  and  structure  of  the 
Board,  the  Company  has  not  fully  complied 
with ASX Recommendation 2.1. However, it 
will  seek  to  do  so  as  it  develops  and  the 
Board grows.  
 
The Committee is chaired by an independent 
director (Jeff Bennett).  
 
The  Nomination  Committee’s  Charter 
located on the Company’s website. 
 
The Company will report on the meetings and 
attendance  of  the  Nomination  Committee  in 
future Annual Reports.
is
The Nomination Committee with the assistance of 
an  independent  advisor,  if  required,  reviews  the 
technical skills, capabilities and personal attributes 
of  its  directors  and  will  establish  a  skill  matrix 
setting  out  the  mix  of  skills  and  diversity  that  the 
Board currently has (or is looking to achieve). The 
composition  of  the  Board  is  to  be  reviewed 
regularly  against  the  Company’s  Board  skills 
matrix  to  ensure  the  appropriate mix  of  skills  and 
expertise 
facilitate  successful 
strategic direction.  
 
The Board Charter requires the disclosure of each 
Board members’ qualifications and expertise as set 
out  in  the  Company’s  Board  skills  matrix.  Full 
details  as  to  each director  and  senior  executive’s 
relevant skills and experience are available in the 
Annual Report and the Company’s Website.
is  present
to
Principle 2: Structure the Board to add value 
Recommendation 2.1  
The Board of a listed entity should:
(a)  have a nomination committee which:
(i)
(ii)
has at least three members, a 
majority of whom are independent 
directors; and 
is chaired by an independent 
director,
NO -
partially
and disclose:
(iii) 
(iv)
(v)
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; 
and 
as at the end of each reporting 
period, the number of times the 
committee met throughout the 
period and the individual 
attendances of the members at 
those meetings; or
(b)  if it does not have a nomination committee,
disclose that fact and the processes it 
employs to address Board succession 
issues and to ensure that the Board has the 
appropriate balance of skills, experience, 
independence and knowledge of the entity 
to enable it to discharge its duties and 
responsibilities effectively.
Recommendation 2.2 
A listed entity should have and disclose a Board skill 
matrix setting out the mix of skills and diversity that 
the Board currently has or is looking to achieve in its 
membership.
YES
63
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
Recommendation 2.3 
A listed entity should disclose:
(a)  the names of the directors considered by
YES
the Board to be independent directors;
(b)  if a director has an interest, position, 
association or relationship of the type 
described in Box 2.3 of the ASX Corporate 
Governance Principles and 
Recommendation (3rd Edition), but the 
Board is of the opinion that it does not 
compromise the independence of the 
director, the nature of the interest, position, 
association or relationship in question and 
an explanation of why the Board is of that 
opinion; and 
the length of service of each director
(c)
Recommendation 2.4 
A majority of the Board of a listed entity should be 
independent directors.
YES
Recommendation 2.5 
The chair of the Board of a listed entity should be an 
independent director and, in particular, should not be 
the same person as the CEO of the entity.
NO
Recommendation 2.6 
A listed entity should have a program for inducting 
new directors and providing appropriate professional 
development opportunities for continuing directors to 
develop and maintain the skills and knowledge 
needed to perform their role as a director effectively.
YES
64
(a)  The Board Charter provides for the disclosure 
of  the  names  of  Directors  considered  by  the 
Board  to  be  independent.  Mr  van  Barneveld 
and  Mr  Bennett  are  both 
independent 
directors.  Mr  Palm  is  not  an  independent 
director as he is an executive of the Company.
(b)  Details  of  the  Directors  interests,  positions 
associations and relationships are provided in 
the Annual Report; and
(c)  The  length  of  service  of  each  Director  is
provided in the Annual Report.
the
Governance
Principles
the  Chairman  ceases 
then
The  Board  Charter  requires  that  where  practical 
the majority of the Board will be independent.  
 
Currently  the  Board  has  2  independent  directors 
(Mr Jeff Bennett and Mr Steve van Barneveld) and 
1 non-independent director (Mr Art Palm the CEO, 
Acting Chair). 
 
The  board  have  considered 
relevant 
independence of each director after reviewing the 
definition of what constitutes independence as set 
out  in  the  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council's 
Corporate 
and 
Recommendations as set out in Annexure A to the 
Board Charter. 
 
The  Board  Charter  provides  that  where  practical, 
the Chairman of the Board will be a non-executive 
director. 
If 
to  be 
independent, 
the  Board  will  consider 
appointing a lead independent Director. 
 
Currently Mr Art Palm fulfils the responsibilities of 
both acting Chairman and CEO, and therefore the 
Chair  is  not  independent.  Given  the  size  of  the 
Company  and  the  current  economic  climate  a 
further  appointment 
the  chair  was  not 
considered to be prudent at this time, however this 
will  be  considered on an  ongoing  basis in  light  of 
changing circumstances. 
 
All  new  directors  are  provided  with  an  induction 
including  comprehensive  meetings  with  the  CEO 
and other directors and provision of information on 
the  Company  including  Company  and  board 
policies. All directors are expected to maintain the 
to  effectively  discharge 
skills 
their 
obligations 
the  Company.  Directors  are 
encouraged  to  undertake  continuing  professional 
education  and,  if  this  involves  industry  seminars 
and  approved  education 
courses,  where 
appropriate, this is paid for by the Company. The 
Board  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that  resources 
are  allocated  to  developing  and  maintaining  the 
directors  skills  and knowledge  and  to  ensure  that 
the  directors  have  and  maintain  the  necessary 
skills and knowledge required to fulfil their role on 
the Board and its Committees effectively.
required 
to
to
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
Principle 3: Act ethically and responsibly 
Recommendation 3.1  
A listed entity should:
(a)  have a code of conduct for its directors, 
senior executives and employees; and 
(b)  disclose that code or a summary of it.
YES
Principle 4: Safeguard integrity in financial reporting 
Recommendation 4.1  
 
The Board of a listed entity should:
(a)
NO
(a)  have an audit committee which:
has at least three members, all of 
whom are non-executive directors 
and a majority of whom are 
independent directors; and
is chaired by an independent 
director, who is not the chair of the 
Board,
(i)
(ii)
and disclose:
(iii)
the charter of the committee;
(iv)
(v)
the relevant qualifications and 
experience of the members of the 
committee; and
in relation to each reporting 
period, the number of times the 
committee met throughout the 
period and the individual 
attendances of the members at 
those meetings; or
(i)
(v)
(a)  The Corporate Code of Conduct applies to 
the Company’s directors, senior executives 
and employees.
(b)  The Company’s Corporate Code of Conduct
is available on the Company’s website.
(a)  As  the  Board  only  consists  of  three  (3) 
members,  the  Company  does  not  have  an  Audit 
and  Risk  Committee  because  it  would  not  be  a 
more  efficient  mechanism  than  the  full  Board  for 
focusing  the  Company  on  specific  issues.  The 
responsibilities  of  the  Audit  and  Risk  Committee 
are currently carried out by the Board.
including  risk  management,
(b)  The  Company  has  adopted 
the  Audit 
Committee  Charter  and  the  Risk  and  Internal 
Compliance  Control  Committee  Charter,  whose 
procedures 
the 
processes for the appointment and removal of the 
external  auditor  and  the  rotation  of  the  audit 
engagement  partner.  These  are  currently 
followed by the board and will be followed by the 
Audit and Risk Committee in full once it has been 
established. The Charter provides that:
The  Audit  and  Risk  Committee  Charter  is  made 
available on the Company website;
(b)  if it does not have an audit committee, 
disclose that fact and the processes it 
employs that independently verify and 
safeguard the integrity of its financial 
reporting, including the processes for the 
appointment and removal of the external 
auditor and the rotation of the audit 
engagement partner.
Recommendation 4.2 
The Board of a listed entity should, before it 
approves the entity’s financial statements for a 
financial period, receive from its CEO and CFO a 
declaration that the financial records of the entity 
have been properly maintained and that the financial 
statements comply with the appropriate accounting 
standards and give a true and fair view of the 
financial position and performance of the entity and 
that the opinion has been formed on the basis of a 
sound system of risk management and internal 
control which is operating effectively.
YES
The Audit and Risk Committee Charter states that 
a duty and responsibility of the Committee, and as 
the  Company  does  not  have  a  Committee  the 
Board, is to ensure that before the Board approves 
the  entity’s  financial  statements  for  a  financial 
period,  the  CEO  and  CFO  have  declared  that  in 
their opinion the financial records of the entity have 
been  properly  maintained  and  that  the  financial 
statements comply with the appropriate accounting 
standards  and  give  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the 
financial position and performance of the entity and 
that the opinion has been formed on the basis of a 
sound  system  of  risk  management  and  internal 
control which is operating effectively.
65
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
Recommendation 4.3 
A listed entity that has an AGM should ensure that 
its external auditor attends its AGM and is available 
to answer questions from security holders relevant 
to the audit.
Principle 5: Make timely and balanced disclosure 
Recommendation 5.1  
A listed entity should:
(a)  have a written policy for complying with its
continuous disclosure obligations under the 
Listing Rules; and
(b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it.
YES
YES
Principle 6: Respect the rights of security holders 
Recommendation 6.1  
A listed entity should provide information about itself 
and its governance to investors via its website.
Recommendation 6.2  
A listed entity should design and implement an 
investor relations program to facilitate effective two-
way communication with investors.
Recommendation 6.3  
A listed entity should disclose the policies and 
processes it has in place to facilitate and encourage 
participation at meetings of security holders.
YES
YES
YES
Recommendation 6.4 
A listed entity should give security holders the option 
to receive communications from, and send 
communications to, the entity and its security 
registry electronically.
YES
66
The  Audit  and  Risk  Committee  Charter  provides 
that the Committee, and as the Company does not 
have  a  Committee,  the  Board,  must  ensure  the 
Company’s external auditor attends its AGM and is 
available 
from  security 
holders relevant to the audit.
to  answer  questions
(a)  The  Board  Charter  provides  details  of  the 
Company’s  disclosure  policy.  In  addition, 
Schedule 7 of the Corporate Governance Plan 
is entitled ‘Continuous Disclosure’ and details 
the  Company’s  disclosure  requirements  as 
required  by  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  and  other 
relevant legislation.
(b)  The  Board  Charter  and  Schedule  5 
Continuous Disclosure Policy of the Corporate 
Governance  Policies  are  available  on  the 
Company website.
information
is
communicated
to
is  available
in
Links  are  made  available
to
the  Company  and
its 
Information  about 
governance 
the  Corporate 
Governance  Statement  and  associated  policies 
which can be found on the Company’s website. 
 
The  Company  has  adopted  a  Shareholder 
Communications Policy which aims to promote and 
facilitate  effective  two-way  communication  with 
investors.  The  Policy  outlines  a  range  of  ways  in 
which 
to 
shareholders. 
 
The  Shareholder  Communications  Policy  states 
that as a part of the Company’s developing investor 
relations program, Shareholders can register with 
the  Company  Secretary 
receive  email 
notifications of when an announcement is made by 
the Company to the ASX, including the release of 
the Annual Report, half yearly reports and quarterly 
the 
reports. 
Company’s  website  on  which  all 
information 
provided to the ASX is immediately posted. 
 
Shareholders  are  encouraged  to  participate  at  all 
EGMs  and  AGMs  of  the  Company.  Upon  the 
despatch of any notice of meeting to Shareholders, 
the  Company  Secretary  shall  send  out  material 
with 
that  all 
Shareholders are encouraged to participate at the 
meeting. 
 
The Company permits shareholders to vote online 
(and by other methods) prior to an Annual General 
Meeting if they are unable to attend the meeting. 
 
Security holders can register with the Company to 
receive 
an 
announcement  is  made  by  the  Company  to  the 
ASX. 
Shareholders  queries  should  be  referred  to  the 
Company Secretary at first instance and Company 
communication  details  are  contained  within  the 
Shareholder  Communications  Policy  and  on  the 
Company website.
that  notice  of  meeting  stating
electronic
notifications  when
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
NO
Principle 7:  Recognise and manage risk 
Recommendation 7.1  
The Board of a listed entity should: 
(a)  have a committee or committees to oversee
risk, each of which:
(i)
(ii)
has at least three members, a 
majority of whom are independent 
directors; and 
is chaired by an independent 
director,
and disclose:
(iii) 
(iv)
(v)
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; 
and 
as at the end of each reporting 
period, the number of times the 
committee met throughout the 
period and the individual 
attendances of the members at 
those meetings; or
(b)  if it does not have a risk committee or
committees that satisfy (a) above, disclose that 
fact and the process it employs for overseeing 
the entity’s risk management framework.
Recommendation 7.2 
The Board or a committee of the Board should:
YES
(a)  review the entity’s risk management 
framework with management at least 
annually to satisfy itself that it continues to 
be sound, to determine whether there have 
been any changes in the material business 
risks the entity faces and to ensure that 
they remain within the risk appetite set by 
the Board; and
(b)  disclose in relation to each reporting period,
whether such a review has taken place.
(a)  The Board is charged with the responsibility of 
determining the Company’s risk profile and is 
responsible for overseeing and approving risk 
management strategy and policies.
As the Board only consists of three (3) members, 
the  Company  does  not  have  an  Audit  and  Risk 
Committee because it would not be a more efficient 
mechanism  than  the  full  Board  for  focusing  the 
Company on specific issues. The responsibilities of 
the Audit and Risk Committee are currently carried 
out by the Board.  
 
The  Company  has  adopted  the  Audit  and  Risk 
Committee  Charter,  which  will  be  followed  by  the 
Audit  and  Risk  Committee  once  it  has  been 
established.  
 
(b)  The  board  devotes  time  annually  to  fulfilling 
the  roles  and  responsibilities  associated  with 
overseeing  risk  and  maintaining  the  entities 
risk  management  framework  and  associated 
internal control procedures.
internal
compliance
(a)  The Company process for risk management 
includes  a 
and 
requirement  to  identify  and  measure  risk, 
monitor the environment for emerging factors 
and trends that affect these risks, formulate 
risk management strategies and monitor the 
performance  of  risk  management  systems. 
Internal 
The  Risk  Management  and 
Compliance  Control  Policy  details 
the 
Company’s  disclosure  requirements  with 
respect  to  the  risk  management  review 
procedure  and 
internal  compliance  and 
controls.
(b)  The board will, at least annually, undertake a 
structured  consideration  and  review  of  the 
risk  management 
the 
material risks faced by, and the risk attitude 
of the Company.
framework  and
The Board met during the year to consider its risk 
management framework and material risks faced 
by the Company.
67
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
The Audit and Risk Committee Charter provides for 
the  internal  audit  function  of  the  Company.  The 
Charter  outlines 
the  monitoring,  review  and 
assessment  of  a  range  of  internal  audit  functions 
and procedures.  
 
Given  the  size  of  the  Company,  no  internal  audit 
function is currently considered necessary. 
The  Board  including  the  CEO,  routinely  consider 
risk management matters and continue to develop 
and  refine  their  risk  management  and  internal 
control processes. 
 
The Company is of the view that its operations do 
not  create  a  material  exposure  to  economic, 
environmental and social sustainability risks.
(a)  The  Company
has
a  Remuneration 
the  Board  only 
Committee,  however  as 
consists of three (3) members, its composition 
of 2 non-executive directors does not comply 
with  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council’s 
Best Practice Recommendations.
the
The  Company  has  a  Remuneration  Committee 
which comprises of two independent Directors (Jeff 
Bennett  and  Steve  van  Barneveld),  and  Suzie 
Foreman is the secretary.  
 
The  majority  of  the  committee  are  intendent 
directors  and  the  committee  is  chaired  by  an 
independent director  
 
The  Company  has  adopted  The  Remuneration 
Committee  Charter,  which  is  followed  by  the 
Remuneration  Committee.  The  Remuneration 
Committee  Charter  outlines 
roles  and 
responsibilities  of  the  Remuneration  Committee.  
The  Remuneration  Charter  is  available  on  the 
Company’s website. 
 
The  Company  reports  on  the  meetings  and 
attendance of the Remuneration Committee in the 
Annual Report. 
 
 
The Company provides disclosure of all Directors 
and Executives Remuneration in its Annual 
Report. 
 
Remuneration policies and practices of executives 
and non-executives are also detailed in the 
Remuneration Report. 
 
The  Company  does  not  have  an  equity  based 
remuneration  scheme  which  is  affected  by  this 
recommendation.
YES
Recommendation 7.3 
A listed entity should disclose:
(a)  if it has an internal audit function, how the
function is structured and what role it 
performs; or
(b)  if it does not have an internal audit function,
that fact and the processes it employs for 
evaluating and continually improving the 
effectiveness of its risk management and 
internal control processes.
Recommendation 7.4 
A listed entity should disclose whether, and if so 
how, it has regard to economic, environmental and 
social sustainability risks and, if it does, how it 
manages or intends to manage those risks. 
Principle 8: Remunerate fairly and responsibly 
Recommendation 8.1 
The Board of a listed entity should:
YES
NO
(i)
(a)  have a remuneration committee which: 
has at least three members, a 
majority of whom are independent 
directors; and 
is chaired by an independent 
director,
(ii)
and disclose:
(iii) 
(iv)
(v)
the charter of the committee; 
the members of the committee; 
and 
as at the end of each reporting 
period, the number of times the 
committee met throughout the 
period and the individual 
attendances of the members at 
those meetings; or
(b)  if it does not have a remuneration
committee, disclose that fact and the 
processes it employs for setting the level 
and composition of remuneration for 
directors and senior executives and 
ensuring that such remuneration is 
appropriate and not excessive.
Recommendation 8.2 
A listed entity should separately disclose its policies 
and practices regarding the remuneration of non-
executive directors and the remuneration of 
executive directors and other senior executives and 
ensure that the different roles and responsibilities of 
non-executive directors compared to executive 
directors and other senior executives are reflected in 
the level and composition of their remuneration. 
Recommendation 8.3 
A listed entity which has an equity-based 
remuneration scheme should: 
(a)  have a policy on whether participants are
permitted to enter into transactions (whether 
through the use of derivatives or otherwise) 
which limit the economic risk of participating in 
the scheme; and
(b)  disclose that policy or a summary of it.
YES
YES
68
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
ADDITIONAL SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
A.  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
A statement disclosing the extent to which the Company has followed the best practice recommendations set by 
the ASX Corporate Governance Council during the reporting period is contained within the Financial Report.
B.  SHAREHOLDING
1.  Substantial Shareholders
The names of the substantial shareholders listed on the company’s register as at 16 August 2016:
Shareholder
Number
Percentage of issued
Zero Nom Pty Ltd
Hillboi Nom Pty Ltd
Wholesalers Morley Pty Ltd
2.  Unquoted Securities
Class of Equity Security 
20 cents options expiring 31 August 2016 
16 cents options expiring 30 September 2016 
Exchangeable shares 
Performance rights C expiring 30 August 2016 
Performance rights D expiring 30 August 2016
19,557,088
12,345,006
11,056,667
Number 
2,000,000 
14,300,000 
500,000 
1,300,000 
1,300,000
capital held
9.38%
5.92%
5.30%
Number of Security
Holders
1 
10 
3 
2 
2
Names of persons holding greater than 20% of a class of unquoted equities: 
  
Class of Equity Security
31 August 2016 options - $0.20 
20 September 2016 options - $0.16 
Exchangeable shares 
Performance Rights C expiring 30 August 2016 
Performance Rights C expiring 30 August 2016 
Performance Rights D expiring 30 August 2016 
Performance Rights D expiring 30 August 2016
Number        Holder 
2,000,000 
10,000,000 
500,000 
1,000,000 
300,000 
1,000,000 
300,000
Blackswan Corporate Pty Ltd 
Zero Nominees Pty Ltd 
Dunlevy shareholders 
Art Palm 
Hixon Pty Ltd 
Art Palm 
Hixon Pty Ltd
3.  Number of holders in each class of equity securities and the voting rights attached
There are 705 holders of ordinary shares.  Each shareholder is entitled to one vote per share held. 
 
There are 0 holders of listed options.   
 
On a show of hands every shareholder of ordinary shares present at a meeting in person or by proxy, is entitled 
to one vote, and upon a poll each share is entitled to one vote.
69
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
ADDITIONAL SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION (Continued)
4.  Distribution schedule of the number of holders in each class of equity security as at 16 August 2016.
Number Held as at 16 August 2016 
 
1-1,000 
1,001 - 5,000 
5,001 – 10,000 
10,001 - 100,000 
100,001 and over 
 
Totals
Class of Equity Securities
Fully Paid Ordinary Shares
37 
87 
110 
281 
190
705
5.  Marketable Parcel
Holders of less than a marketable parcel:  fully paid shares
305
6.  Twenty largest holders of each class of quoted equity security
The names of the twenty largest holders of each class of quoted equity security, the number of equity security 
each holds and the percentage of capital each holds (as at 16 August 2016) is as follows:
Name
1  Zero Nom Pty Ltd
2  Hillboi Nominees Pty Ltd
3  Wholesalers Morley Pty Ltd
4  Perth Investment Corp Ltd
5  Lord Robert Simeon
6  Lyons Timothy Guy + H M <Gnowellen Super Fund A/C>
7  Walloon Securities Pty Ltd
8  Rpm Super Pty Ltd <RPM Super Fund A/C>
9  Citicorp Nominees Pty Ltd
10  Lujeta Pty Ltd <Margaret A/C>
11  Burra Pty Ltd <Burra Investment A/C>
12  Hsbc Custody Nom Australia Ltd
13  Jetosea Pty Ltd
14  Argyle Gavin John <Gavin Argyle Family Account>
15  Goldfire Enterprises Pty Ltd
16  Gab Superfund Pty Ltd
17  Deering Nominees Pty Ltd
18  Swanshore Enterprises Pty Ltd
19  Karakoram No2 Pty Ltd <Super Fund A/C>
20  Lyons Nicholas C + K M <Geronimo Super Fund A/C>
Number of
Ordinary Fully
Paid Shares
Held
19,557,088
12,345,006
11,056,667
9,681,051
9,500,000
6,665,866
6,641,495
5,729,867
5,151,500
4,991,698
4,500,000
3,630,832
3,517,750
3,163,354
3,032,765
2,885,416
2,500,000
2,444,587
2,280,000
2,215,211
Held of Issued 
Ordinary Capital
(%)
9.38%
5.92%
5.30%
4.64%
4.55%
3.20%
3.18%
2.75%
2.47%
2.39%
2.16%
1.74%
1.69%
1.52%
1.45%
1.38%
1.20%
1.17%
1.09%
1.06%
TOTALS:
121,490,153
58.24%
7.  Restricted Securities
There are no restricted securities on issue at the current date.
70
Annual Report 2016
Jameson Resources Limited
SCHEDULE OF MINERAL TENEMENTS
Project 
Crown Mountain
Crown Mountain
Crown Mountain
Crown Mountain
Crown Mountain
Crown Mountain
Dunlevy
Dunlevy
Licences / Applications
Status
Interest
418150
418151
418152
418153
418154
418430
418441
418442
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Application
Granted
Granted
90%
90%
90%
90%
90%
100%
100%
100%
71