
20FR12G 1 form20-ffinal.htm
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
[X]REGISTRATION STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OR (g) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
[ ] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
For the fiscal year ended ____________
OR
[ ] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
For the transition period from ____________ to ____________
OR
[ ] SHELL COMPANY PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report _____________
For the transition period from ____________ to ____________
Commission file number
STARCORE INTERNATIONAL MINES LTD.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Not Applicable
(Translation of Registrant’s name into English)
British Columbia, Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
Suite 750 – 580 Hornby Street, Box 113
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C 3B6
(Address of principal executive offices)
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act.
Title of Class Name of each exchange on which registered
Not ApplicableNot Applicable
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act.
Common Shares Without Par Value
(Title of Class)
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act.
Not Applicable
(Title of Class)
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the issuer’s classes of capital or common stock as of the
close of the period covered by the annual report.
Not Applicable
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Securities Act. [ ] YES [X] NO
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports
pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. [ ] YES [ ] NO
Note – Checking the box above will not relieve any registrant required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 from their obligations under those Sections.
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days.
[ ] YES [X] NO
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-
accelerated filer. See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer [ ] Accelerated filer [ ] Non-accelerated filer [X]
Indicate by check mark which financial statement item the registrant has elected to follow.
[ ] ITEM 17 [X] ITEM 18
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Securities Act. [ ] YES [X] NO
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule
12b-2 of the Exchange Act). [ ] YES [ ] NO
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
1
Currency And Measurement
Resource Category (Classification) Definitions
1
Cautionary Notes To United States Investors Concerning Mineral Reserve And Resource Estimates2
3
Forward-Looking Statements
Status As An Emerging Growth Company
4
4
PART I
4
Financial Information And Accounting Principles
Item 1   Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisers
5
5
A.   Directors and Senior Management
B.   Advisers
6
C.   Auditors
Item 2   Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
Item 3   Key Information
A.   Selected Financial Data
B.   Capitalization and Indebtedness
C.   Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
D.   Risk Factors
Item 4   Information on our Company
A.   History and Development of our Company
B.   Our Business Overview
C.   Organizational Structure
D.   Property, Plants and Equipment
Item 5   Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
A.   Operating Results
B.   Liquidity and Capital Resources
C.   Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
D.   Trend Information
E.   Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
F.   Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
G.   Safe harbor.
Item 6   Directors, Senior Management and Employees
A.   Directors and Senior Management
B.   Compensation
C.   Board Practices
D.   Employees
E.   Share Ownership
Item 7   Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions
A.   Major Shareholders
B.   Related Party Transactions
C.   Interests of experts and counsel
Item 8   Financial Information
A.   Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
B.   Significant Changes
Item 9   The Offer and Listing
A.   Offer and Listing Details
B.   Plan of Distribution
C.   Markets
D.   Selling shareholders
E.   Dilution
 
 
F.   Expenses of the issue
Item 10   Additional Information
A.   Share capital.
B.   Memorandum and articles of association.
C.   Material Contracts
D.   Exchange Controls
E.   Taxation
F.   Dividends and Paying Agents
G.   Statement by Experts
H.   Documents on Display
I.   Subsidiary Information
Item 11   Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Item 12   Description of Securities Other than Equity Securities
Item 13   Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
6
6
6
6
8
8
8
18
18
19
21
24
39
39
43
44
44
44
44
44
45
45
48
51
52
53
56
56
57
57
57
57
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
59
59
60
63
64
64
71
71
71
72
72
72
72
Item 14   Material Modifications to the rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds 72
Item 15   Controls and Procedures
72
73
Item 16   [Reserved]
Item 16A   Audit Committee Financial Expert
73
Item 16B   Code of Ethics
73
Item 16C   Principal Accountant Fees and Services
73
Item 16D   Exemptions from Listing Standards for Audit Committees
73
Item 16E   Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers73
Item 16F   Change in Registrant’s Certifying Accountant
73
Item 16G   Corporate Governance
73
Item 16H   Mine Safety Disclosure
73
Item 17   Financial Statements
73
73
Item 18   Financial Statements
Item 19   Exhibits
73
CURRENCY AND MEASUREMENT
All currency amounts in this Registration Statement are stated in Canadian Dollars unless otherwise indicated.
Approximate conversion of metric units into imperial equivalents is as follows:
Metric UnitsMultiply byImperial Units
2.471
hectares
3.281
meters
kilometers 3281
kilometers 0.621
0.032
grams
tonnes
1.102
grams/tonne 0.029
= acres
= feet
= feet
= miles
= ounces (troy)
= tons (short) (2,000 lbs)
= ounces (troy)/ton
RESOURCE CATEGORY (CLASSIFICATION) DEFINITIONS
The discussion of mineral deposit classifications in this Registration Statement adheres to the mineral resource
and mineral reserve definitions and classification criteria developed by the Canadian Institute of Mining ("CIM")
2014. Estimated mineral resources fall into two broad categories dependent on whether the economic viability
of them has been established and these are namely "resources" (potential for economic viability) and "reserves"
(viable economic production is feasible). Resources are sub-divided into categories depending on the
confidence level of the estimate based on level of detail of sampling and geological understanding of the
deposit. The categories, from lowest confidence to highest confidence, are inferred resource, indicated resource
and measured resource. Reserves are similarly sub-divided by order of confidence into probable (lowest) and
proven (highest). These classifications can be more particularly described as follows:
Mineral
Resource
Inferred
Mineral
Resource
A concentration or occurrence of solid material of economic interest in or on the Earth’s crust in such
form, grade or quality and quantity that there are reasonable prospects for eventual economic
extraction.  The location, quantity, grade or quality, continuity and other geological characteristics of a
Mineral Resource are known, estimated or interpreted from specific geological evidence and
knowledge, including sampling.
That part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity and grade or quality are estimated on the basis of
limited geological evidence and sampling.  Geological evidence is sufficient to imply but not verify
geological and grade or quality continuity.  It has a lower level of confidence than that applying to an
Indicated Mineral Resource and must not be converted to a Mineral Reserve.  It is reasonably
expected that the majority of Inferred Mineral Resources could be upgraded to Indicated Mineral
Resources with continued exploration.
1
Indicated
Mineral
Resource
Measured
Mineral
Resource
Mineral
Reserve
Probable
Mineral
Reserve
Proven
Mineral
Reserve
That part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape and physical
characteristics are estimated with sufficient confidence to allow the application of modifying factors -
including, but not limited to,  mining, processing, metallurgical, infrastructure, economic, marketing,
legal, environmental, social and governmental factors (collectively, “Modifying Factors”) in sufficient
detail to support mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit.  Geological
evidence is derived from adequately detailed and reliable exploration, sampling and testing and is
sufficient to assume geological and grade or quality continuity between points of observation.  It has a
lower level of confidence than that applying to a Measured Mineral Resource and may only be
converted to a Probable Mineral Reserve.
That part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or quality, densities, shape, and physical
characteristics are estimated with confidence sufficient to allow the application of Modifying Factors to
support detailed mine planning and final evaluation of the economic viability of the
deposit.  Geological evidence is derived from detailed and reliable exploration, sampling and testing
and is sufficient to confirm geological and grade or quality continuity between points of observation.  It
has a higher level of confidence than that applying to either an Indicated Mineral Resource or an
Inferred Mineral Resource.  It may be converted to a Proven Mineral Reserve or to a Probable Mineral
Reserve.
The economically mineable part of a Measured and/or Indicated Mineral Resource.  It includes
diluting materials and allowances for losses, which may occur when the material is mined or
extracted and is defined by studies at Pre-Feasibility or Feasibility level as appropriate that include
application of Modifying Factors, which are considerations used to convert Mineral Resources to
Mineral Reserves and include, but are not restricted to, mining, processing, metallurgical,
infrastructure, economic, marketing, legal, environmental, social and governmental factors.  Such
studies demonstrate that, at the time of reporting, extraction could reasonably be justified.  The
reference point at which Mineral Reserves are defined, usually the point where the ore is delivered to
the processing plant, must be stated.  It is important that, in all situations where the reference point is
different, such as for a saleable product, a clarifying statement is included to ensure that the reader is
fully informed as to what is being reported.  The public disclosure of a Mineral Reserve must be
demonstrated by a Pre-Feasibility Study or Feasibility Study.
The economically mineable part of an Indicated, and in some circumstances, a Measured Mineral
Resource. The confidence in the Modifying Factors applying to a Probable Mineral Reserve is lower
than that applying to a Proven Mineral Reserve.
The economically mineable part of a Measured Mineral Resource.  A Proven Mineral Reserve implies
a high degree of confidence in the Modifying Factors.
CAUTIONARY NOTES TO UNITED STATES INVESTORS CONCERNING MINERAL RESERVE AND
RESOURCE ESTIMATES
This Registration Statement on Form 20-F uses terms that comply with reporting standards in Canada and
certain estimates are made in accordance with Canadian National Instrument 43-101 Standards of Disclosure
for Mineral Projects ("NI 43-101"). NI 43-101 is a rule developed by the Canadian Securities Administrators that
establishes standards for all public disclosure an issuer makes of scientific and technical information
concerning mineral projects. Unless otherwise indicated, all resource estimates contained in this Registration
Statement have been prepared in accordance with NI 43-101. These standards differ significantly from the
2
requirements of the SEC, and resource information contained herein may not be comparable to similar
information disclosed by companies in the United States.
This Registration Statement on Form 20-F uses the terms “probable mineral reserve” and “proven mineral
reserve”, as permitted under NI 43-101. For United States reporting purposes, SEC Industry Guide 7 (under the
United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”)), as interpreted by Staff of the SEC,
applies different standards in order to classify mineralization as a reserve. As a result, the definitions of proven
and probable reserves used in NI 43-101 differ from the definitions in SEC Industry Guide 7. Under SEC
standards, mineralization may not be classified as a “reserve” unless the determination has been made that the
mineralization could be economically and legally produced or extracted at the time the reserve determination is
made. Among other things, all necessary permits would be required to be in hand or issuance imminent in order
to classify mineralized material as reserves under the SEC standards. Accordingly, mineral reserve estimates
calculated in accordance with Canadian standards may not qualify as “reserves” under SEC standards.
In addition, this Registration Statement on Form 20-F uses the terms “measured mineral resources”, “indicated
mineral resources” and “inferred mineral resources” to comply with the reporting standards in Canada. We
advise United States investors that while those terms are recognized and required by Canadian regulations, the
SEC does not recognize them. United States investors are cautioned not to assume that any part or all of the
mineral deposits in these categories will ever be converted into mineral reserves. These terms have a great
amount of uncertainty as to their existence, and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility.
Further, “inferred resources” have a great amount of uncertainty as to their existence and as to whether they can
be mined legally or economically. Therefore, United States investors are also cautioned not to assume that all
or any part of the inferred resources exist. In accordance with Canadian rules, estimates of “inferred mineral
resources” cannot form the basis of feasibility or other economic studies, except in limited circumstances where
permitted under NI 43-101.
It cannot be assumed that all or any part of “measured mineral resources”, “indicated mineral resources”, or
“inferred mineral resources” will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Investors are cautioned not to assume
that any part of the reported “measured mineral resources”, “indicated mineral resources”, or “inferred mineral
resources” in this Registration Statement is economically or legally mineable.
In addition, disclosure of “contained ounces” is permitted disclosure under Canadian regulations; however, the
SEC only permits issuers to report mineralization as in place tonnage and grade without reference to unit
measures.
Forward-Looking Statements
Except for the statements of historical fact contained herein, some information presented in this Registration
Statement constitutes forward-looking statements. When used in this Registration Statement, the words
“estimate”, “project”, “believe”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “expect”, “predict”, “may”, “should”, the negative thereof or
other variations thereon or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such
forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause
the actual results, performance or achievements of our Company to be materially different from any future
results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors
include, among others, lack of commercially exploitable mineral reserves, future prices of precious metals and
minerals, as well as those factors discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 8, below.
Although our Company has attempted to identify important factors that could cause actual results to differ
materially, there may be other factors that cause actual results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended.
There can be no assurance that such statements will prove to be accurate as actual results and future events
could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. Accordingly, prospective investors should not
place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this Registration
Statement speak only as to the date hereof. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws
of the United States, we do not undertake any obligation to
3
release publicly any revisions to these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the
date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
As used in this Registration Statement, the terms “we”, “us” and “our” mean Starcore International Mines Ltd.
and all of our wholly owned subsidiaries, unless otherwise indicated.
STATUS AS AN EMERGING GROWTH COMPANY
Our Company is an "emerging growth company" as defined in section 3(a) of the Exchange Act, and we will
continue to qualify as an "emerging growth company" until the earliest to occur of: (a) the last day of the fiscal
year during which our Company has total annual gross revenues of US$1,000,000,000 (as such amount is
indexed for inflation every 5 years by the SEC) or more; (b) the last day of our Company's fiscal year following
the fifth anniversary of the date of the first sale of common equity securities pursuant to an effective Registration
Statement under the Securities Act; (c) the date on which our Company has, during the previous 3-year period,
issued more than US$1,000,000,000 in non-convertible debt; or (d) the date on which our Company is deemed
to be a "large accelerated filer", as defined in Exchange Act Rule 12b–2. Therefore, we expect to continue to be
an emerging growth company for the foreseeable future.
Generally, a company that registers any class of its securities under section 12 of the Exchange Act is required
to include in the second and all subsequent annual reports filed by it under the Exchange Act, a management
report on internal control over financial reporting and, subject to an exemption available to companies that meet
the definition of a “smaller reporting company” in Exchange Act Rule 12b-2, an auditor attestation report on
management’s assessment of internal controls over financial reporting. However, for so long as we continue to
qualify as an emerging growth company, we will be exempt from the requirement to include an auditor
attestation report in our annual reports filed under the Exchange Act, even if we do not qualify as a “smaller
reporting company”. In addition, auditors of an emerging growth company are exempt from the rules of the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the
auditor's report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about the audit and the
financial statements of the registrant company (auditor discussion and analysis).
As a reporting issuer under the securities legislation of the Canadian provinces of Ontario, British Columbia,
and Alberta, we are required to comply with all new or revised accounting standards that apply to Canadian
public companies. Pursuant to Section 107(b) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (commonly referred to
as the “JOBS Act”), an emerging growth company may elect to utilize an extended transition period for
complying with new or revised accounting standards for public companies until such standards apply to private
companies. We have elected to utilize this extended transition period. However, while we have elected to utilize
this extended transition period, our audited consolidated financial statements as of April 30, 2016 reflect the
adoption of all required accounting standards for Canadian public companies.
On December 14, 2015, the Company consolidated its share capital on the basis of every four shares being
consolidated to one share.  Unless otherwise noted, where the Company reports on share capital and securities
issued or issuable, the information herein should be read on the basis of pre-consolidated numbers if the
information is prior to December 14, 2015, or post-consolidated numbers if after December 14, 2015.
PART I
Financial Information And Accounting Principles
The financial statements and summaries of financial information contained in this document are reported in
Canadian dollars (“$”) unless otherwise stated. All such financial statements have been prepared in accordance
with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”), as issued by the International Accounting Standards
Board (the “IASB”).
4
In May 2016, our Board of Directors resolved to change our financial year end from July 31 to April 30, with the
result that our transition financial year ended on April 30, 2016 covered a period of nine months. Our financial
statements for the year ended April 30, 2016 have been reported on by Davidson & Company LLP, Chartered
Accountants, of 1200-609 Granville Street, P.O. Box 10372, Pacific Centre Vancouver, BC, Canada V7Y 1G6, a
registered public accounting firm.
Item 1
A.
Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisers
Directors and Senior Management
The Directors and the senior management of our Company as of April 30, 2016 are as follows:
Function
As our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Eadie is responsible for strategic planning and
operations, as well as managing our relations with our lawyers, regulatory authorities and
investor community; as a director, Mr. Eadie participates in management oversight and
helps to ensure compliance with our corporate governance policies and standards.    As
President of the Company, Mr. Eadie negotiated and completed the acquisition of
Starcore’s principal property, the San Martin Mine in Queretaro, Mexico.
As our Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Arca is responsible for the management and
supervision of all of the financial aspects of our business and corporate governance and
standards; as a director, Mr. Arca participates in management oversight and helps to
ensure compliance with our corporate governance policies and standards.
Name
Robert
Eadie
Gary Arca
David
Gunning
Cory Kent
Jordan
Estra
Business
Address
Suite 750,
580
Hornby
Street
Vancouver,
British
Columbia 
V6C 3B6
Canada
Suite 750,
580
Hornby
Street
Vancouver,
British
Columbia
V6C 3B6
Canada
Suite 750,
580
Hornby
Street
Vancouver,
British
Columbia 
V6C 3B6
Canada
1055 W.
Georgia
Street,
Suite 1500
PO Box
11117
Vancouver,
BC V6E
4N7
Canada
5888 North
Ocean
Blvd.
Ocean
Ridge,
Florida,
U.S.A.
33435
Suite 750,
580
As our Chief Operating Officer, Mr. Gunning is responsible for our exploration,
development and mining operations and for management of our Mexican operations; as a
director, Mr. Gunning participates in management oversight and helps to ensure
compliance with our corporate governance policies and standards.
As Corporate Secretary, Mr. Kent is responsible for ensuring that the board of directors
has the proper advice and resources to fulfill their duties to shareholders.  Mr. Kent’s
duties include ensuring the integrity of the governance framework and compliance with
statutory and regulatory requirements.
As an independent director, Mr. Estra provides oversight for management to help ensure
alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate governance
policies and standards..
Ken
Sumanik
As an independent director, Mr. Sumanik provides oversight for management to help
ensure alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate
governance policies and standards.
Hornby
Street
Vancouver,
British
Columbia 
V6C 3B6
Canada
Panzacola
15
Barrio
Santa
Catarina
Coyoacan
04000
Mexico
Federico
Villaseñor
As an independent director, Mr. Villaseñor provides oversight for management to help
ensure alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate
governance policies and standards.
5
Michael
Gunning
Suite 2300 –
1177 West
Hastings Street
Vancouver,
British Columbia
V6E 2K3
Canada
As an independent director, Mr. Gunning provides oversight for management to help
ensure alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate
governance policies and standards.
B.
Advisers
Our legal advisers are McMillan LLP, Barristers & Solicitors, with a business address at Suite 1500, 1055 West
Georgia Street, P.O. Box 1117, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6E 2N7.
C.
Auditors
Our auditors are Davidson & Company LLP, Chartered Accountants, of 1200-609 Granville Street, P.O. Box
10372, Pacific Centre Vancouver, BC, Canada V7Y 1G6. Davidson & Co. LLP is a member of the Chartered
Professional Accountants of British Columbia and is registered with both the Canadian Public Accountability
Board (CPAB) and the U.S. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB).
Item 2                                    Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
Not Applicable.
Item 3                                    Key Information
A.
Selected Financial Data
The following tables summarize selected financial data for our Company for the year ended April 30, 2016 and
the past four years before that. The information in the tables was extracted from the detailed financial statements
and related notes included in this Registration Statement and should be read in conjunction with those financial
statements and the other information appearing under the heading “Item 5 – Operating and Financial Review
and Prospects” beginning at page 39, below.
Selected Financial Data
(Stated in thousands of Canadian Dollars)
At
At
At
At
At
IFRS as issued by the IASB
July 31,
2012
July 31,
2013
July 31,
2014
July 31,
2015
Net Sales or Operating Revenue
Net Gain (Loss)
Net Gain (Loss) from Operations
Basic and Diluted Earnings (Loss) per Share0.11/0.10
57,039
14,335
21,690
IFRS as issued by the IASB
At
July 31,
2012
30,246
4,702
8,298
0.03
At
July 31,
2013
33,136
2,965
8,588
0.02
At
July 31,
2014
28,405
210
645
0.00
At
July 31,
2015
65,094
16,299
44,023
April 30,
2016
20,326
195
1,519
0.00
At
April 30,
2016
78,907
14,279
50,605
Assets
Current Assets
Share Capital
Common Stock
6
56,191
11,114
43,053
139,796,651143,390,465143,515,465151,946,84749,146,851
69,197
12,020
45,354
59,537
13,733
43,752
Cash Dividends per Common ShareNILNILNIL0.02NIL
Disclosure of Exchange Rate History
On July 1, 2016, the noon rate of exchange as set forth in the H.10 statistical release of the Federal Reserve
Board, for the conversion of United States dollars into Canadian dollars was US$1.00 = $1.2897.
The following table sets forth the high and low rates of exchange for the Canadian dollar, expressed as
Canadian dollars per U.S. dollar, for each month during the previous six months:
Month Ended
Exchange Rate U.S. Dollars into
Canadian Dollars*
High
1.3089
June 30, 2016
1.3155
May 31, 2016
1.3175
April 30, 2016
1.3466
March 31, 2016
February 29, 20161.4039
January 31, 2016 1.4592
Low
1.2694
1.2544
1.2544
1.2962
1.3522
1.3970
* The exchange rates presented represent the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers payable in
foreign currencies as certified for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The following table sets forth the average rates of exchange for the Canadian dollar, expressed as Canadian
dollars per U.S. dollar, during the transition year ended April 30, 2016 and during each of the preceding four
financial years ended July 31, calculated by using the average of the exchange rates on the last day of each
month during the period:
Year Ended Average Exchange Rate U.S. Dollars into Canadian Dollars†
April 30, 2016*1.3331
July 31, 2015 1.2030
July 31, 2014 1.0761
July 31, 2013 1.0103
July 31, 2012 1.0068
* Nine-month transition year.
† The exchange rates presented represent the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers payable in
foreign currencies as certified for customs purposes by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
7
Capitalization and Indebtedness Our authorized capital consists of unlimited number of shares of common stock
without par value. As of April 30, 2016, we had 49,146,851 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding.
On Monday, December 14, 2015, the Company’s shares were consolidated on a one-for-four basis
resulting in 45,153,648 common shares issued and outstanding, subject to adjustment for fractional
shares. All share amounts in this document are stated at the actual amount of shares transacted at the
stated date without adjustment for pre or post consolidated values. The share amounts and/or price per
share amounts for transactions prior to December 14, 2015 should be adjusted by dividing the share
amount by four (4) and multiplying the price per share amounts by four (4).
The table below sets forth our total indebtedness in Canadian dollars and shows the capitalization of our
Company as of June 30, 2016. You should read this table in conjunction with our audited and unaudited
financial statements, together with the accompanying notes and the other information appearing under the
heading “Item 5 – Operating and Financial Review and Prospects” beginning at page 39, below.
Liabilities
Current, unsecured
$1,660,000  
Rehabilitation and Closure Cost Provision   1,483,000  
Loans Payable
$3,143,000
Shareholders’ Equity
$50,605,000 
 Share capital
  11,173,000 
Contributed Surplus
  (8,684,000) 
Deficit
Accumulated other Comprehensive Income  7,066,000  
$60,160,000
Dividends
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Board of Directors did not declare an annual dividend. In the year
ended July 31, 2015 the Company declared the first dividend in the Company’s history. A dividend of $0.02 per
share (total of $2,922,000) was paid on the Common Shares of the Company on September 30, 2014 to
shareholders of record on August 29, 2014.
B. Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
Not applicable.
C. Risk Factors
An investment in our common stock involves a number of very significant risks. You should carefully
consider the following risks and uncertainties in addition to other information in this Registration
Statement in evaluating our Company and our business before purchasing shares of our Company’s
common stock. Our business, operating results and financial condition could be seriously harmed due
to any of the following risks. The risks described below are not the only ones facing our Company.
Additional risks not presently known to us may also impair our business operations. You could lose all
or part of your investment due to any of these risks.
8
Risks Associated with our Mining Operations
Our operations are subject to risk. Our Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows to continue
operations is dependent on many factors and cannot be assured.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the cash flow generated from operating activities was higher than cash
used in investing and financing activities, resulting in a net cash inflow of $1,650,000 bringing the Company’s
cash balance to $4,248,000 with a working capital of $6,569,000 and an accumulated deficit of $9,291,000. The
ability of the Company to generate sufficient cash flows to continue operations is dependent upon many factors
including, but not limited to, sufficient ore grade, ore production at the San Martin mine, control of mine
production costs, administrative costs and tax costs and upon the market price of metals. Cash flows may also
be affected by the ability of the Company to reduce capital expenditures, including mine development.
Exploration, development and mining involve a high degree of risk.
Our operations will be subject to all the hazards and risks normally encountered in the exploration, development
and production of gold and other base or precious metals, including, without limitation, unusual and unexpected
geologic formations, seismic activity, rock bursts, pit-wall failures, cave-ins, flooding and other conditions
involved in the drilling and removal of material, any of which could result in damage to, or destruction of, mines
and other producing facilities, damage to life or property, environmental damage and legal liability. Milling
operations are subject to various hazards, including, without limitation, equipment failure and failure of retaining
dams around tailings disposal areas, which may result in environmental pollution and legal liability.
Mining risks.
The business of mining involves many risks and hazards, including environmental hazards, industrial
accidents, labour force disruptions, the unavailability of materials and equipment, unusual or unexpected rock
formations, pit slope failures, changes in the regulatory environment, weather conditions, cave-ins, rock bursts,
water conditions and gold bullion losses. Such occurrences could result in damage to, or destruction of, mineral
properties or production facilities, personal injury or death, environmental damage, delays in mining, monetary
losses and possible legal liability. As a result, we may incur significant costs that could have a material adverse
effect upon our financial performance, liquidity and results of operations.
Mine development is subject to a number of risks.
Our ability to sustain or increase our present levels of gold production is dependent upon the successful
development of new producing mines and/or identification of additional reserves at existing mining operations. If
we are unable to develop new ore bodies, we will not be able to sustain present production levels. Reduced
production could have a material and adverse impact on future cash flows, results of operations and financial
condition. Many factors are involved in the determination of the economic viability of a deposit, including the
achievement of satisfactory mineral reserve estimates, the level of estimated metallurgical recoveries, capital
and operating cost estimates and the estimate of future gold prices. Capital and operating cost estimates are
based upon many factors, including anticipated tonnage and grades of ore to be mined and processed, the
configuration of the ore body, ground and mining conditions, expected recovery rates of the gold from the ore,
and anticipated environmental and regulatory compliance costs. Each of these factors involves uncertainties
and as a result, we cannot give any assurance that our exploration and development activities will result in
economically viable deposits. If a deposit is developed, actual operating results may differ from those
anticipated.
We may be adversely affected by fluctuations in gold prices.
The value and price of our securities, our financial results, and our exploration, development and mining
activities may be significantly adversely affected by declines in the price of gold and other precious metals. Gold
prices fluctuate widely and are affected by numerous factors beyond our control such as interest rates,
9
exchange rates, inflation or deflation, fluctuation in the value of the United States dollar and foreign currencies,
global and regional supply and demand, and the political and economic conditions of gold producing countries
throughout the world. The price for gold fluctuates in response to many factors beyond anyone’s ability to
predict. The prices used in making the resource estimates are disclosed and differ from daily prices quoted in
the news media. The percentage change in the price of a metal cannot be directly related to the estimated
resource quantities, which are affected by a number of additional factors. For example, a 10 percent change in
price may have little impact on the estimated resource quantities and affect only the resultant positive cash flow,
or it may result in a significant change in the amount of resources. Because mining occurs over a number of
years, it may be prudent to continue mining for some periods during which cash flows are temporarily negative
for a variety of reasons including a belief that the low price is temporary and/or the greater expense incurred is
in closing a property permanently.
Mineralized material calculations and life-of-mine plans using significantly lower gold and precious metal prices
could result in material write-downs of our investments in mining properties and increased amortization,
reclamation and closure charges.
In addition to adversely affecting our mineralized material estimates and our financial condition, declining metal
prices can impact operations by requiring a reassessment of the commercial feasibility of a particular project.
Even if the project is ultimately determined to be economically viable, the need to conduct such a reassessment
may cause substantial delays in development or may interrupt operations, if any, until the reassessment can be
completed.
Further, if revenue from gold sales declines, we may experience liquidity difficulties. This may reduce our ability
to invest in exploration and development and making necessary capital expenditures, which would materially
and adversely affect future production, earnings and our financial position.
Our estimates of future production may not be achieved.
We prepare internal estimates of future gold production for our operations. We cannot give any assurance that
we will achieve our production estimates. Our failure to achieve our production estimates could have a material
and adverse effect on any or all of our future cash flows, results of operations and financial condition. These
production estimates are dependent on, among other things, the accuracy of mineral reserve estimates, the
accuracy of assumptions regarding ore grades and recovery rates, ground conditions and physical
characteristics of ores, such as hardness and the presence or absence of particular metallurgical
characteristics, and the accuracy of estimated rates and costs of mining and processing.
Our actual production may vary from our estimates for a variety of reasons, including: actual ore mined varying
from estimates of grade, tonnage, dilution and metallurgical and other characteristics; short-term operating
factors such as the need for sequential development of ore bodies and the processing of new or different ore
grades from those planned; mine failures, slope failures or equipment failures; reduced metallurgical recovery
rates, industrial accidents; natural phenomena such as inclement weather conditions, floods, droughts, rock
slides and earthquakes; encountering unusual or unexpected geological conditions; changes in power costs
and potential power shortages; shortages of principal supplies needed for operation, including explosives,
fuels, chemical reagents, water, equipment parts and lubricants; labour shortages or strikes; civil disobedience
and protests; and restrictions or regulations imposed by government agencies or other changes in the
regulatory environments. Such occurrences could result in damage to mineral properties, interruptions in
production, injury or death to persons, damage to our property or others, monetary losses and legal liabilities.
These factors may cause a mineral deposit that has been mined profitably in the past to become unprofitable,
forcing us to cease production. Each of these factors also applies to our sites not yet in production and to
operations that are to be expanded. In these cases, we do not have the benefit of actual experience in verifying
its estimates, and there is a greater likelihood that actual production results will vary from the estimates.
Mineral reserves and resources estimates are subject to inherent uncertainty.
The figures presented for both mineral reserves and mineral resources herein are only estimates. The
estimating of mineral reserves and mineral resources is a subjective process and the accuracy of reserve and
10
resource estimates is a function of the quantity and quality of available data and the assumptions used and
judgements made in interpreting engineering and geological information. There is significant uncertainty in any
reserve or resource estimate, and the actual deposits encountered and the economic viability of mining a
deposit may differ materially from our estimates. Estimated mineral reserves or mineral resources may have to
be recalculated based on changes in gold prices, further exploration or development activity, actual production
experience, other changes in the assumptions made in the estimation process, or changes in the estimation
methodology. This could materially and adversely affect estimates of the volume or grade of mineralization,
estimated recovery rates or other important factors that influence reserve or resource estimates. Market price
fluctuations for gold, increased production costs or reduced recovery rates, or other factors may render our
present proven and probable mineral reserves uneconomical or unprofitable to develop at a particular site or
sites. A reduction in estimated reserves could require material write-downs in our investment in the affected
mining properties and increased amortization, reclamation and closure charges.
We compete with other companies for mining claims and mining assets.
We compete with other mining companies and individuals for mining claims and leases on exploration
properties and the acquisition of gold mining assets. Some of the companies with which we compete have
significantly greater financial, management and technical resources than we do, and may use these resources
to their advantage when competing with us for such opportunities. We cannot give any assurance that we will
continue to be able to compete successfully with our competitors in acquiring attractive mineral properties and
assets.
We cannot guarantee the success of our exploration efforts.
Our continued operations are dependent on our ability to discover new mineral resources and reserves at our
San Martin Mine. Mineral exploration is highly speculative in nature. Our exploration efforts involve many risks
and success in exploration is dependent upon a number of factors including, but not limited to, quality of
management, quality and availability of geological expertise and availability of exploration capital. We cannot
give any assurance that our future exploration efforts will result in the discovery of mineral reserves or
resources, or that our current and future exploration programs will result in the expansion or replacement of
current production with new proven and probable mineral reserves. We cannot give assurance that our
exploration programs will be able to extend the life of our existing properties or result in the discovery of new
producing mines.
We may have future capital requirements.
As of April 30, 2016, we had cash of approximately $4,248,000, highly liquid short-term investments of
$5,742,000 and working capital of approximately $6,569,000. We intend to use our future cash flows to fund
exploration and development work and for general corporate purposes. Capital expenditures and funds for
exploration in financial year 2017 are expected to total approximately $4 $3.2million. The primary expenditures
are planned to be mine development and equipment purchases and replacement which are anticipated to be
funded out of the mine’s cash flow. We may have further capital requirements to the extent we decide to develop
other properties or to take advantage of opportunities for acquisitions, joint ventures or other business
opportunities that may be presented to us. In addition, we may incur major unanticipated liabilities or expenses.
Failure to make required capital expenditures may impact our financial results.
We may be required to obtain additional financing in the future to fund future exploration and development
activities or acquisitions of additional properties or other interests that may be appropriate to enhance our
financial or operating interests. We have historically raised capital through equity financing and in the future
may raise capital through equity or additional debt financing, joint ventures, production sharing arrangements or
other means. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain necessary financing in a timely manner
or on acceptable terms, if at all.
We cannot guarantee that the operations of the Altiplano processing plant will be successful.
Our Altiplano Plant, which is in the pre-operational stage, is strategically located within a historic mining district
and although home to numerous mining operations, it is still unknown if the Company will be able to
11
source a consistent supply of concentrates for the plant. Although the Altiplano Plant has been designed to
operate as a cleaner and more economical facility, the Altiplano Plant has not yet commenced commercial
operations. There is no guarantee that the Altiplano Plant will operate as designed, or that it will be able to
operate at its designed capacity. There is no guarantee, even if the Altiplano Plant commences commercial
operations, that it will operate as expected or that it will be profitable. In addition, there are often delays with the
start-up of new operations. There is no guarantee that commercial operations at Altiplano will commence when
currently expected, or at all.
We need to service our current indebtedness.
We have debt of $5,988,000 as of April 30, 2016 and may arrange additional loans in the future which may
require scheduled payments. Our mining operations may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service our
indebtedness and we may be forced to take other actions to satisfy our obligations, which actions may not be
successful.
Our ability to meet the repayment obligations on our indebtedness depends on our financial condition and
operating performance, which is subject to, among other factors, prevailing economic and competitive
conditions and to certain financial, business, legislative, regulatory and other factors beyond our control. We
may not be able to maintain a level of cash flow from our operating activities sufficient to permit us to pay the
principal and the interest on our indebtedness.
Our current indebtedness is secured by a first charge on all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets, which are
primarily the San Martin Mine and the Altiplano Plant. If we are unable to meet our scheduled debt service
obligations, our lenders could foreclose and take over ownership of these assets to satisfy our debt obligations.
Government regulation may adversely affect our business and planned operations.
We believe we currently comply with existing environmental and mining laws and regulations and that our
proposed exploration programs will also meet those standards. Our mineral exploration and development
activities, if any, are subject to various laws governing prospecting, mining, development, production, taxes,
labor standards and occupational health, mine safety, toxic substances, land use, water use, land claims of
local people and other matters. We can provide no assurance that new rules and regulations will not be enacted
or that existing rules and regulations will not be applied in a manner which could limit or curtail our exploration,
production or development activities. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and
activities of exploration, development mining and milling or more stringent implementation thereof could have a
material adverse impact on our business and financial condition and cause increases in operating and
exploration expenses, capital expenditures or production costs or reduction in levels of production or require
abandonment or delays in development of new mining properties.
Government approvals and permits are currently, and may in the future be, required in connection with our
operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain these permits in a timely manner.
Our Operations in Mexico are subject to Mexican Foreign Investment and Income Tax Laws
Under the Foreign Investment Law of Mexico, there is no limitation on foreign capital participation in mining
operations; however, the applicable laws may change in a way which may adversely impact the Company and
its ability to repatriate profits. Under Mexican Income Tax Law, dividends are subject to a withholding tax.
The VAT (IVA) is an indirect tax levied on the value added to goods and services, and it is imposed on
corporations that carry out activities within Mexican territory.
During 2013, the Mexican Congress passed tax reform legislation, effective January 1, 2014. The tax reform
includes an increase in the corporate tax rate to 30% from 28%, the introduction of a special mining royalty of
7.5% on the profits derived from the sale of minerals, and, the introduction of an extraordinary mining royalty of
0.5% on the gross income derived from the sale of gold, silver and platinum. These changes may
12
have a material impact on the Company’s future earnings and cash flows, and possibly on future capital
investment decisions.
Our operations are subject to environmental risks.
All phases of our operations, if any, will be subject to federal, state and local environmental regulation. These
regulations mandate, among other things, the maintenance of air and water quality standards and land
reclamation. They also set forth limitations on the generation, transportation, storage and disposal of solid and
hazardous waste. Environmental legislation is evolving in a manner which will require stricter standards and
enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent environmental assessments of
proposed projects and a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and their officers, directors and
employees. We cannot be certain that future changes in environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely
affect our operations, if any. Environmental hazards may exist on properties we hold that are unknown to us and
that have been caused by previous or existing owners or operators of the properties.
Failure to comply with applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements may result in enforcement
actions thereunder, including orders issued by regulatory or judicial authorities causing operations to cease or
be curtailed, and may include corrective measures requiring capital expenditures, installation of additional
equipment, or remedial actions. Parties engaged in mining operations or in the exploration or development of
mineral properties may be required to compensate those suffering loss or damage by reason of the mining
activities and may have civil or criminal fines or penalties imposed for violations of applicable laws or
regulations.
We do not insure against all risks.
Our insurance will not cover all the potential risks associated with a mining company’s operations. We may also
be unable to maintain insurance to cover these risks at economically feasible premiums. Insurance coverage
may not continue to be available or may not be adequate to cover any resulting liability. Moreover, we expect
that insurance against risks such as environmental pollution or other hazards as a result of exploration and
production may be prohibitively expensive to obtain for a company of our size and financial means. We might
also become subject to liability for pollution or other hazards which we may not be insured against or which we
may elect not to insure against because of premium costs or other reasons. Losses from these events may
cause us to incur significant costs that could have a material adverse effect upon our financial condition and
results of operations.
Our directors and officers may have conflicts of interest.
Certain of our directors and officers had conflicts of interest in the acquisition of companies of which they served
as directors and/or officers. Those acquisitions required the approval of the companies’ shareholders. Certain of
our directors and officers have served and continue to serve as officers and directors for other companies
engaged in natural resource exploration and development and related industries. Consequently, there is a
possibility that our directors and/or officers may be in a position of conflict now or in the future.
Title to our properties may be subject to challenge.
Acquisition of title to mineral properties in all jurisdictions is a very detailed and time-consuming process. We
have acquired substantially all of our mineral properties through acquisitions. Although we have investigated
title to all of our mineral properties, we cannot give any assurance that title to such properties will not be
challenged or impugned. The properties may have been acquired in error from parties who did not possess
transferable title, may be subject to prior unregistered agreements or transfers, and title may be affected by
undetected defects or aboriginal, indigenous peoples or native land claims.
In Mexico, the site of the San Martin Mine, all mineral resources are owned by the state. Title to minerals can be
held separately from title to the surface. Mining rights take precedence over surface rights. Rights to explore for
and to extract minerals are granted by the state through issuance of mining concessions.
13
Mining operations are subject to reclamation costs, estimates of which may be uncertain.
In accordance with existing accounting standards, we have recognized a liability for future site closure and mine
reclamation costs based on our estimate of the costs necessary to comply with existing reclamation standards.
Site closure and mine reclamation costs for operating properties are reviewed annually. There can be no
assurance that our reclamation and closure liabilities will be sufficient to cover all reclamation and closure
costs. The costs of performing the decommissioning and reclamation must be funded by the Company’s
operations. These costs can be significant and are subject to change. We cannot predict what level of
decommissioning and reclamation may be required in the future by regulators. If we are required to comply with
significant additional regulations or if the actual cost of future decommissioning and reclamation is significantly
higher than current estimates, this could have an adverse impact on our future cash flows, earnings, results of
operations and financial condition.
We may be subject to unforeseen litigation.
All industries, including the mining industry, are subject to legal claims, with and without merit. Although we are
not currently involved in any legal proceedings, and are not aware of any threatened or pending legal
proceedings, there is no guarantee that we will not become subject to such proceedings in the future. There can
be no guarantee of the outcome of any such claim. In addition, defense and settlement costs for any legal
proceeding can be substantial, even with respect to claims that have no merit. Due to the inherent uncertainty of
the litigation process, there can be no assurance that the resolution of any particular legal proceeding will not
have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions employed in the preparation of financial statements.
The preparation of our Company’s consolidated financial statements requires us to use estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as revenues and expenses. Our
accounting policies and our critical accounting estimates and judgements are described in notes 3 and 4
respectively to our April 30, 2016 audited annual financial statements.
Our accounting policies relating to mineral property and deferred exploration costs, asset retirement obligations,
stock-based compensation and future amortization and depletion of mining interest, plant and equipment are
critical accounting policies that are subject to estimates and assumptions. If these estimates or assumptions
prove to be inaccurate, we could be required to change the recorded value of our assets and liabilities, which
may reduce our earnings and working capital.
We record mineral property acquisition costs and mine development costs at cost. In accordance with IFRS, we
capitalize preproduction expenditures net of revenues received, until the commencement of commercial
production. A significant portion of our mining interest, plant and equipment will be depreciated and amortized
on a unit-of-production basis. Under the unit-of-production method, the calculation of depreciation, depletion
and amortization of mining interest, plant and equipment is based on the amount of proven and probable
reserves and a portion of resources expected to be converted to reserves. If these estimates of reserves prove to
be inaccurate, or if we revise our mining plan for a location, due to reductions in the price of gold or otherwise, to
reduce the amount of reserves expected to be recovered, we could be required to write-down the recorded
value of its mining interest, plant and equipment, or to increase the amount of future depreciation, depletion and
amortization expense, both of which would reduce our earnings and net assets.
In addition, IFRS requires us to consider at the end of each accounting period whether or not there has been an
impairment of the capitalized mining interest, plant and equipment. For producing properties, this assessment is
based on expected future cash flows to be generated from the location. For non-producing properties, this
assessment is based on whether factors that may indicate the need for a write-down are present. If we
determine there has been an impairment because our prior estimates of future cash flows have proven to be
inaccurate, due to reductions in the price of gold, increases in the costs of production, reductions in the amount
of reserves expected to be recovered or otherwise, or because we have determined that the deferred costs of
non-producing properties may not be recovered based on current economics or permitting
14
considerations, we would be required to write-down the recorded value of our mining interest, plant and
equipment, which would reduce our earnings and net assets.
We have an obligation to reclaim our properties after the minerals have been mined from the site, and have
estimated the costs necessary to comply with existing reclamation standards. Rehabilitation provisions have
been created based on the Company’s internal estimates. Assumptions, based on the current economic
environment, have been made which management believes are a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the
future liability. These estimates take into account any material changes to the assumptions that occur when
reviewed regularly by management. Estimates are reviewed annually and are based on current regulatory
requirements. Significant changes in estimates of contamination, restoration standards and techniques will
result in changes to provisions from period to period. Actual rehabilitation costs will ultimately depend on future
market prices for the rehabilitation costs, which will reflect the market condition at the time of the rehabilitation
costs are actually incurred. The final cost of the currently recognized rehabilitation provision may be higher or
lower than currently provided for.
The inflation rate applied to estimated future rehabilitation and closure costs is 3.5% and the discount rate
currently applied in the calculation of the net present value of the provision is 8.0%.
Our operations are subject to risks associated with currency fluctuations.
Currency fluctuations may affect the costs that we incur at our operations. Gold is sold throughout the world
based principally on a U.S. dollar price, but the majority of our operating expenses are incurred in non-U.S.
dollar currencies. The appreciation of non-U.S. dollar currencies in those countries where we have mining
operations against the U.S. dollar would increase the costs of gold production at such mining operations which
could materially and adversely affect our earnings and financial condition.
Our foreign investments and operations may be subject to political and other risks.
We conduct mining, development or exploration activities primarily in Mexico and exploration activities in the
United States. Our foreign mining investments are subject to the risks normally associated with the conduct of
business in foreign countries. The occurrence of one or more of these risks could have a material and adverse
effect on our earnings or the viability of its affected foreign operations, which could have a material and adverse
effect on our future cash flows, results of operations and financial condition.
Such risks may include, among others, labour disputes, invalidation of governmental orders and permits,
corruption, uncertain political and economic environments, war, civil disturbances and terrorist actions, criminal
and gang related activity, illegal mining and protests, arbitrary changes in laws or policies of particular
countries, foreign taxation, delays in obtaining or the inability to obtain necessary governmental permits,
opposition to mining from environmental or other non-governmental organizations, limitations on foreign
ownership, limitations on the repatriation of earnings, limitations on gold exports and increased financing costs.
These risks may limit or disrupt our projects, restrict the movement of funds or result in the deprivation of
contract rights or the taking of property by nationalization or expropriation without fair compensation.
Certain of our projects are located in Mexico and are subject to country risks that may affect our ability
to complete development work on or to operate our projects.
The Company’s primary mineral activities are conducted in Mexico and will be exposed to various levels of
political, economic and other risks and uncertainties. These risks include but are not limited to, hostage taking,
illegal mining, fluctuations in currency exchange rates, high rates of inflation, excessive import duties and taxes
on the importation of equipment, expropriation and nationalization, possible future restrictions on foreign
exchange and repatriation, changes in taxation, labour and mining regulations and policies, and changing
political conditions, currency controls, and government regulations that favour or require the awarding of
contracts to local contractors or require foreign contractors to employ local citizens.
Changes, if any, in mining or investment policies, or shifts in political attitude in Mexico, may adversely affect
the Company’s operations or profitability. Current activities and future operations may be affected in
15
varying degrees by government regulations with respect to, but not limited to, restrictions on production, price
controls, export controls, currency remittance, income taxes, expropriation of property, foreign investment,
maintenance of claims, environmental legislation, land use, land claims of local people, water use and mine
safety.
Failure to comply strictly with applicable laws, regulations and local practices relating to mineral right
applications, and tenure, could result in loss, reduction or expropriation of entitlements, or the imposition of
additional local or foreign parties as joint venture partners with carried or other interests.
Mexico continues to undergo violent internal struggles between the government and organized crime with drug-
cartel relations and other unlawful activities. The number of kidnappings throughout Mexico is of particular
concern and appears to be on the rise. The violence has increased since 2011 but for the most part has been
centralized in specific regions of Mexico: Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango and Tamaulipas, as well as parts or
most of Nuevo Leon, Sinaloa, Sonora, Zacatecas, Aguascalientes, Guerrero, Jalisco, Michoacan and Nayarit.
Queretaro for the most part remains largely unaffected; however small incidents have become more prevalent.
The Company is taking additional measures to increase security and protect both personnel and property;
however, there is no absolute guarantee that such measures will provide an adequate level of protection for the
Company. The occurrence of these various factors and uncertainties cannot be accurately predicted, and could
have an adverse effect on the Company’s operations or future profitability.
There are risks associated with our acquisition strategy.
As part of our business strategy, the Company has made acquisitions in the past and continues to seek new
acquisition opportunities. The opportunities sought by the Company are operating mines, as well as exploration
and development opportunities with a primary focus on gold. The Company has also sought out companies in
related industries, such as processing plants and refineries. As a result, the Company may from time to time
acquire additional mineral properties or securities of issuers which hold mineral properties or are involved in
related industries.
In pursuit of such opportunities, the Company may fail to select appropriate acquisition candidates or negotiate
acceptable arrangements, including arrangements to finance acquisitions or integrate the acquired businesses
and their personnel into the Company, and may fail to assess the value, strengths, weaknesses, contingent and
other liabilities and potential profitability of acquisition candidates, or to achieve identified and anticipated
operating and financial synergies, and may incur unanticipated costs, diversion of management attention from
existing businesses, the potential loss of the Company’s key employees or of those of the acquired business.
The Company cannot assure that it can complete any acquisition or business arrangement that it pursues, or is
pursuing, on favourable terms, or that any acquisitions or business arrangements completed will ultimately
benefit the Company. Acquisitions may involve a number of special risks, circumstances or legal liabilities.
These and other risks related to acquiring and operating acquired properties and companies could have a
material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition.
Further, to acquire properties and companies, the Company may be required to use available cash, incur debt,
issue additional securities or a combination of any one or more of these. This could affect the Company’s future
flexibility and ability to raise capital, to operate, explore and develop its properties and could dilute existing
shareholders and decrease the price of the common shares of the Company.
In addition, there may be no right for the Company’s shareholders to evaluate the merits or risks of any future
acquisition undertaken by the Company, except as required by applicable laws and regulations.
We are reliant on our current management team.
The success of our operations and activities is dependent to a significant extent on the efforts and abilities of
our management including Robert Eadie, Chief Executive Officer & President, David Gunning, Chief Operating
Officer, and Gary Arca, Chief Financial Officer. Investors must be willing to rely to a significant extent on
management’s discretion and judgment. We do not have in place formal programs for succession of
16
management and training of management. We do not maintain key employee insurance on any of our
employees. The loss of one or more of these key employees, if not replaced, could adversely affect our
operations.
We compete for access to qualified employees and contractors.
At April 30, 2016, we employed or contracted the services of approximately 324 persons, including staff at the
minesite. We compete with other mining companies in connection with the recruitment and retention of qualified
employees. At the present time a sufficient supply of qualified workers is available for our operations. The
continuation of such supply depends upon a number of factors, including, principally, the demand occasioned
by other projects. There can be no assurance that we will continue to be able to retain or attract qualified
employees. There is a risk that increased labour costs could have a material adverse effect on our operating
costs.
Dilution of Shareholders’ Interests as a Result of Issuances of Additional Shares
Depending on the outcome of the Company’s exploration programs and mining operations, the Company may
issue additional shares to finance additional programs and mining operations or to acquire additional
properties. In the event that the Company is required to issue additional shares or decides to enter into joint
ventures with other parties in order to raise financing through the sale of equity securities, investors’ interests in
the Company will be diluted and investors may suffer dilution in their net book value per share depending on
the price at which such securities are sold.
Risks Related To Our Company
Our Articles of Incorporation indemnify our officers and directors against all costs, charges and
expenses incurred by them.
Our Articles of Incorporation contain provisions limiting the liability of our officers and directors for their acts,
receipts, negligence or defaults and for any other loss, damage or expense incurred by them which occurs
during the execution of their duties as officers or directors of our Company, unless they failed to act honestly
and in good faith with a view to the best interests of our Company. Such limitations on liability may reduce the
likelihood of derivative litigation against our officers and directors and may discourage or deter our shareholders
from suing our officers and directors based upon breaches of their duties to our Company, though such an
action, if successful, might otherwise have been of benefit to our Company and our shareholders.
Risks Relating to our Securities
Trading in our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange is limited and sporadic, making it
difficult for our shareholders to sell their shares or liquidate their investments.
Our common shares are currently listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange under the symbol “SAM”. The trading
price of our common shares has been and may continue to be subject to wide fluctuations. Trading prices of our
common shares may fluctuate in response to a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control. In
addition, the stock market in general, and the market for base metal companies has experienced extreme price
and volume fluctuations that have often been unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of such
companies. These broad market and industry factors may adversely affect the market price of our shares,
regardless of our operating performance. If you invest in our common shares, you could lose some or all of your
investment.
In the past, following periods of volatility in the market price of a company’s securities, securities class-action
litigation has often been instituted. Such litigation, if instituted, could result in substantial costs and a diversion
of management’s attention and resources.
17
We do not expect to declare or pay any dividends in the immediate future.
Although we declared dividends in 2014, we do not anticipate paying any such dividends for the foreseeable
future.
U.S. investors may not be able to enforce their civil liabilities against us or our directors, controlling
persons and officers.
It may be difficult to bring and enforce suits against us. Some of our directors and officers are residents of
countries other than the United States. Consequently, it may be difficult for United States investors to effect
service of process in the United States upon those directors or officers who are not residents of the United
States, or to realize in the United States upon judgments of any court of the United States.
Trading of our stock may be restricted by the SEC’s “Penny Stock” regulations which may limit a
stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted regulations which generally define “penny stock”
to be any equity security that has a market price (as defined) of less than US$5.00 per share or an exercise
price of less than US$5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the penny
stock rules, which impose additional sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell to persons other
than established customers and “accredited investors.” The term “accredited investor” refers generally to
institutions with assets in excess of US$5,000,000 or individuals with a net worth in excess of US$1,000,000
(exclusive of the value of a principal residence) or annual income exceeding US$200,000 or US$300,000
jointly with their spouse.
The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from
the rules, to deliver a standardized risk disclosure document in a form prepared by the SEC which provides
information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market. The broker-dealer
also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny stock, the compensation of
the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements showing the market
value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account. The bid and offer quotations, and the broker-dealer
and salesperson compensation information, must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting
the transaction and must be given to the customer in writing before or with the customer’s confirmation.
In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from
these rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable
investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction.
These disclosure requirements may have the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary
market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock rules. Consequently, these penny stock rules may affect
the ability of broker-dealers to trade our securities. We believe that the penny stock rules discourage investor
interest in, and limit the marketability of, our common stock.
Item 4
Information on our Company
A. History and Development of our Company
Our governing corporate legislation is the British Columbia Business Corporations Act (the “Act”). We
incorporated under the former Company Act (British Columbia) on October 17, 1980, under the name Omnibus
Resources Inc.  On September 10, 1981 Omnibus Resources Inc. changed its name to Berle Oil Corporation. 
On May 31, 1983 Berle Oil Corporation changed its name to Berle Resources Ltd.  On August 6, 1987 Berle
Resources Ltd. changed its name to Eagle Pass Resources Ltd. On September 17, 1992 Eagle Pass
Resources Ltd. changed its name to Starcore Resources Ltd. On February 2, 2004 Starcore Resources Ltd.
changed its name to Starcore International Ventures Ltd. On February 1, 2008 Starcore International Ventures
Ltd. changed its name to Starcore International Mines Ltd.
18
Our principal place of business is located at Suite 750 – 580 Hornby Street, Box 113, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada V6C 3B6. Our telephone number at this address is: (604) 602-4935.
Our common shares are listed on the on the Toronto Stock Exchange under the symbol “SAM” and on the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange under symbol “V4JA”.
B.
Our Business Overview
We are in the mineral resource business. The mineral resource business generally consists of three stages:
exploration, development and production. We are a mineral resource company with projects in various stages.
Mineral resource companies that are engaged in the extraction of a known mineral resource are in the
production stage. We fall in this category with our principal property, the San Martin Mine in Queretaro, Mexico,
where we are engaged in extracting and processing gold and silver. The San Martin Mine is our sole source of
operating cash flows.
We are also engaged in acquiring exploration assets in North America directly and through corporate
acquisitions. Some of our projects are in the exploration stage because our exploration activities on the project
lands have not yet identified mineral resources in commercially exploitable quantities. There is no assurance
that a commercially viable mineral deposit exists on any of our other exploration properties and further
exploration is required before we can evaluate whether any exist and, if so, whether it would be economically
and legally feasible to develop or exploit those resources. Even if we complete our current exploration program
and we are successful in identifying a mineral deposit, we would be required to spend substantial funds on
further drilling and engineering studies before we could know whether that mineral deposit will constitute a
reserve (a reserve is a commercially viable mineral deposit). Please refer to the section entitled “Risk Factors”,
beginning on page 8 of this Registration Statement, for additional information about the risks of mineral
exploration.
Acquisition of American Consolidated
On October 1, 2014 the Company entered into an arrangement agreement (the “American Consolidated
Arrangement Agreement”) with American Consolidated Minerals Corp., a company then listed on the TSX
Venture Exchange (TSX-V: AJC), to acquire all of the outstanding securities of American Consolidated
pursuant to a court approved plan of arrangement (the “American Consolidated Arrangement”) under the Act.
American Consolidated is a Vancouver-based mineral exploration company with three exploration projects: the
Toiyabe Property located in Nevada, USA, the Sierra Rosario Property located in Sinaloa, Mexico and the Lone
Ranch Property located in Washington State, USA. See “Mineral Properties”.
Under the terms of the American Consolidated Arrangement Agreement, each American Consolidated
shareholder received one Starcore common share for every three American Consolidated common shares held.
The American Consolidated Arrangement closed on December 2, 2014 after receiving the final order from the
Supreme Court of British Columbia and the required approval by at least 66 2/3% of the votes cast by the
shareholders of American Consolidated at a special meeting of American Consolidated shareholders held on
November 20, 2014. Starcore did not require a shareholder vote to complete the transaction.
Acquisition of Creston Moly
On February 19, 2015, Starcore completed the acquisition of all of the shares of Creston from Deloitte
Restructuring Inc., in its capacity as trustee in bankruptcy of Mercator Minerals Ltd., at a purchase price of
CDN$2 million. Creston was formerly a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mercator Minerals Ltd., who acquired
Creston in 2011 in a cash-and-shares deal valuing Creston at approximately CDN$194 million. Creston is a
British Columbia company that owns, through its subsidiaries, a 100% interest in the following three
molybdenum-copper mineral projects: (i) the El Creston Project located in Sonora, Mexico; (ii) the Ajax Project
located in British Columbia, Canada; and (iii) the Molybrook Project located in Newfoundland, Canada. See
“Mineral Properties”.
19
Acquisition of Cortez Gold
On June 12, 2015, the Company entered into an arrangement agreement (the “Cortez Arrangement
Agreement”) with Cortez Gold Corp., a company then listed on the TSX Venture Exchange (TSX-V: CUT), to
acquire all of the outstanding securities of Cortez Gold pursuant to a court approved plan of arrangement (the
“Cortez Arrangement”) under the Act. Cortez Gold owns the Altiplano Plant located in Matehuala, Mexico. See
“Mineral Properties – Other Properties – Altiplano Processing Plant”.
Under the terms of the Cortez Arrangement Agreement, each Cortez Gold shareholder received three Starcore
common shares for every one common share of Cortez Gold held. In addition, incentive stock options
outstanding in Cortez Gold were cancelled and each option holder received cash consideration equal to the
amount by which $0.42 exceeded the exercise price of such options.
The Cortez Arrangement closed on August 5, 2015 after receiving the final order from the Supreme Court of
British Columbia and the required approval by at least 66 2/3% of the votes cast by the shareholders of Cortez
Gold at a special meeting of Cortez Gold shareholders held on July 9, 2015. Starcore did not require a
shareholder vote to complete the transaction.
Revenues: See Item 5(A) “Operating Results”
Principal Market
Gold and silver doré in the form of bullion that is produced from our San Martin Mine is shipped primarily to a
refinery in Europe. We also have a contract and the ability to ship to a refinery in Brampton, Ontario to mitigate
the potential impact of unrelated problems that could arise using a lone refinery such as strikes or other issues.
The terms of the refinery contracts provide for payment of 99.5% to 99.9% of the gold (depending on the gold
content of the doré, and 99.25% to 99.5% of the silver content with treatment charges of $0.25/troy oz of doré)
and refining charges of US$1.00/troy oz of gold. Payment is due 5 - 20 days following receipt of the bullion at
the refinery and based on the spot price when settled.
The San Martin doré is a clean product with few impurities. There are numerous refineries around the world
available to refine the doré.
We have not yet identified any commercially viable mineral deposit on any of our exploration properties, and
metal prices are currently not economically attractive for the El Creston project nearing the development stage.
We expect that the principal markets for any of these other properties - should they be successful and be put
into production - would consist of metals refineries and base metal traders and dealers.
Seasonality of our Business
The San Martin Mine operates year-round. In general the mine does not operate on Sundays although at times
overtime is required in the mine to meet production targets.  The mine and plant operate with 3 shifts a day.
Administration personnel at the mine work Monday to Friday.
Exploration activities at all of our properties can be conducted year-round.
Patents and Licenses; Industrial, Commercial and Financial Contracts; and New Manufacturing
Processes
We are not dependent on any patented or licensed processes or technology, or on any industrial, commercial or
financial contract, or on any new manufacturing processes.
Competitive Conditions
We compete with other mining companies for the acquisition of mineral interests and for the recruitment and
retention of qualified employees. Some of our competitors have greater financial resources and technical
20
facilities than our Company. While we compete with these other exploration companies in the effort to locate
and acquire mineral resource properties, we will not compete with them for the removal or sales of mineral
products from our properties if we should eventually discover the presence of them in quantities sufficient to
make production economically feasible. Readily available markets exist worldwide for the sale of mineral
products. Therefore, we will likely be able to sell any mineral products that we identify and produce.
Governmental Regulations
Various levels of governmental controls and regulations address, among other things, the environmental impact
of mineral exploration and mineral processing operations, and establish requirements for decommissioning of
mineral exploration properties after operations have ceased. With respect to the regulation of mineral
exploration and processing, legislation and regulations in various jurisdictions establish performance
standards, air and water quality emission standards, and other design or operational requirements for various
aspects of the operations, including health and safety standards. Legislation and regulations also establish
requirements for decommissioning, reclamation and rehabilitation of mineral exploration properties following
the cessation of operations and may require that some former mineral properties be managed for long periods of
time.
In North America, our production, processing and exploration activities are subject to various levels of federal
and state laws and regulations in the countries where we have a presence. These laws and regulations relate
to protection of the environment, including requirements for closure and reclamation of mineral exploration
properties. In North America, these laws and regulations include the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act, the Endangered Species Act, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act, the
National Environmental Policy Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and the equivalents of these
federal laws that have been adopted by the state of Nevada.
In addition, we are subject to Mexican mining laws and their laws protecting ecological balance and the
environment.
C.
Organizational Structure
The following table sets forth all of our material subsidiaries, their jurisdictions of incorporation and the
percentage of voting securities beneficially owned or controlled by the Company.
21
Jurisdiction of IncorporationPercentage Ownership
Name of Subsidiary
Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal, S.A. de C.V.1Mexico
Creston Moly Corp.
American Consolidated Minerals Corp.
Cortez Gold Corp.
0993684 BC Ltd.
Golden Oasis Exploration
Altiplano Goldsilver S.A. de C.V.
Tenajon Resources Corp.
Creston Mining Corporation
Exploraciones Global S.A. de C.V.
Arco Exploraciones S .A. de C.V.
British Columbia
British Columbia
British Columbia
British Columbia
Nevada
Mexico
British Columbia
Ontario
Mexico
Mexico
100%2
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%3
100%4
100%4
100%5
100%6
1.Bernal, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Starcore, holds the title to the San Martin Mine in Queretaro, Mexico.
2.
3.
6.
To comply with Mexican corporate legislation, one share of Bernal is held of record by Mr. Robert Eadie, the
CEO of Starcore, for the benefit of Starcore. All economic benefits of this share ownership accrue to Starcore.
Altiplano Goldsilver S.A. de C.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cortez Gold, holds title to the Altiplano gold
and silver processing plant in Matehuala, Mexico. To comply with Mexican corporate legislation, one share of
Altiplano is held of record by Mr. Robert Eadie, the CEO of Starcore, for the benefit of Starcore. All economic
benefits of this share ownership accrue to Starcore.
Tenajon Resources Corp. and Creston Mining Corporation are wholly-owned by Creston Moly Corp., which is
a wholly-owned subsidiary of Starcore.
Exploraciones Global S.A. de C.V. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Creston Mining Corp. (Ontario). It holds
the 100% interest in the El Creston molybdenum property located in the State of Sonora, Mexico. To comply
with Mexican corporate legislation, four shares of Exploraciones are held of record by Mr. Robert Eadie, the
CEO of Starcore, for the benefit of Starcore. All economic benefits of this share ownership accrue to Starcore.
Arco Exploraciones S.A. de C.V. is a wholly owned subsidiary of 0993684 BC Ltd. and is our leasing
company in Mexico. To comply with Mexican corporate legislation, one share of Arco is held of record by Mr.
Robert Eadie, the CEO of Starcore, for the benefit of Starcore. All economic benefits of this share ownership
accrue to Starcore.
4.
5.
22
23
D.
Property, Plants and Equipment
San Martin Mine, Queretaro, Mexico: Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal, S.A. de C.V., a wholly owned
Starcore subsidiary, holds the mining concessions covering 6,236 ha at the San Martin Project in the State of
Querétaro. In addition there are 6755.6 ha held in concession Lote San Martin 4 which is north and
contiguous to the mining concessions, bringing total land holdings to 12,991.7 ha.  The mining concessions
include seven underground mining units and four units under exploration, as well as an additional property,
1.
San Pedrito, located 50 km west of San Martin. Luismin (now “Goldcorp Mexico”) operated the mine from
1993 to January, 2007 when it was purchased by our Company. We have been mining at San Martin at a rate
of approximately 300,000 tonnes per year. We expect to continue to operate the mine as we convert resources
to reserves. Historically, the mine has typically maintained at least two years of reserves for operations.
Altiplano Plant, Matehuala, Mexico: The Altiplano plant is the principal asset of Cortez Gold Corp., a wholly-
owned Starcore subsidiary that holds title to the land, equipment and permits for the operation of a processing
plant situated on 20 hectares of land in Matehuala, Mexico. The land and the plant and equipment are owned
by Altiplano Goldsilver, S.A. de C.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cortez Gold. The facility is located within a
historic mining district, in an area that is home to numerous medium-sized mining operations. The Altiplano
Plant is designed to employ the dissolution treatment production process to recover precious metals from
flotation concentrates. When compared to the alternative pyrometallurgical foundries, it is a cleaner process
and more economical, enabling the facility to offer lower processing rates than those currently available to
concentrate producers in the area. As at February15, 2016, the Altiplano Plant poured its first doré bar,
weighing in at 21.131 kg. The Plant is currently in a pre-commissioning phase. Once the Plan is
commissioned, we intend to offer toll milling opportunities to local miners. In order to attract concentrates, in
addition to offering lower processing costs, regional producers will receive flexible payment options, while
having access to a facility that is able to receive small concentrate lots. We expect that this will ensure
reasonable access to advanced processing for all local producers regardless of the size or scale of their
operations.
Our executive office is located at Suite 750 – 580 Hornby Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C
3B6. We lease a 2,264 square foot office, with total rent for this space being $249,000 over a five-year period
until the lease expires on April 30, 2020. This office space accommodates all of our executive and
administrative personnel and we believe that it is adequate for our current needs. Should we require
additional space, we believe that such space can be secured on commercially reasonable terms. We also
have an office in Toronto, Ontario, leasing 1,531 square feet for total rent payable of approximately $82,400
over the life of the lease, which expires on September 30, 2017. See Item 5(F) for combined office lease
obligations.
2.
3.
Mineral Properties
San Martin Mine, Queretaro, Mexico
Except as indicated below, the following description of the San Martin Mine has been extracted from the
technical report entitled “Reserves and Resources in the San Martin Mine, Mexico as of July 31, 2014” issued
on October 6, 2014, (the “Technical Report”). The Technical Report was prepared for Starcore in accordance
with National Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”) by David R. Gunning, P. Eng., who is our Company’s Chief
Operating Officer and therefore is not independent, and Joseph W. Campbell, P. Geo., who is independent. The
Technical Report is effective as at July 31, 2014.
The following table is a summary of mine production statistics for the San Martin mine for the year ended July
31, 2015 and April 30, 2016. It is included to show the results of operations at San Martin since the writing of the
technical report in 2014. The mine continues to operate at 850 tons per day and the continued strength of the
US dollar has resulted in profitable operational results even with the recently declining mill head grade.
Production from the date of the report until the end of calendar year 2016 totalled 541,466 tonnes at an average
head grade of 2.07 g/t gold and 20 g/t silver.
24
Actual
results for
Actual
results for
Mine production of gold in dore
Mine production of silver in dore
Unit of measure
thousand ounces
thousand ounces
Total mine production – equivalent ounces
thousand ounces
Silver to gold equivalency ratio
Mine gold grade
Mine silver grade
Mine gold recovery
Mine silver recovery
Milled
grams/tonne
grams/tonne
percent
percent
thousands of tonnes
Mine development, preparation and exploration
Meters
Mine operating cash cost per tonne milled
US dollars/tonne
Mine operating cash cost per equivalent ounce
US dollars/ounces
Number of employees and contractors at minesite
12 months
ended
July 31,
2015
period
ended 
April 30,
2016
18,278
97,134
19,634
71.63
2.14
18.2
85.1%
53.1%
311,897
6,055
57
903
315**
12,294
70,215
13,215
76.22
1.96
18.4
84.93%
51.69%
229,569
4,079
49
846
299
* devaluation of the peso occurred rapidly in early 2015 resulting in improved cost
per ounce and cost per tonne milled
** employee reduction occurred December of 2014 from 330 to 299 employees.
Location
The San Martin Mine, an ISO 9001 certified facility located approximately 50km east of the City of Queretaro,
State of Queretaro, Mexico, consists of mining concessions covering 12,992 hectares and includes seven
underground mining units and four units under exploration, as well as an additional property, San Pedrito,
located 50 km west of San Martin.
25
26
The following table summarizes the mining concessions comprising the San Martin Mine property.
San Martin Mine Property
Property Name
City
State
Concession Number
Area
(ha)
Issue DatePresent Expiry Date
San Pedrito
QueretaroQueretaro177081
San Martin 2
Queretaro191134
Colón
San Martin
Colón
Queretaro191423
Ampl. San Pedrito
QueretaroQueretaro198405
Ampl. SW San PedritoQueretaroQueretaro198734
2a. Ampl. San Pedrito QueretaroQueretaro199528
Colón
La Trinidad
Queretaro204824
Queretaro215262
San Martin Fracc. A. Colón
Queretaro215263
San Martin Fracc. B. Colón
Queretaro215264
San Martin Fracc. C Colón
San Martin 3
Colón
Queretaro215301
San Martín Cuatro
Queretaro221844
Colón
27
Technical Report Summary
225.0000 28/02/198627/02/2036
190.7972 29/04/199128/04/2041
132.0818 19/12/199118/12/2041
1,000.000026/11/199325/11/2043
525.0000 17/12/199316/12/2043
575.0000 29/04/199428/04/2044
2,610.722413/05/199712/05/2047
14/02/200213/02/2052
37.1099
22.8901
14/02/200213/02/2052
3,182.564614/02/200213/02/2052
60.0000
14/02/200213/02/2052
6,755.614502/04/200401/04/2054
Cautionary Note to Investors Concerning Estimates of Mineral Resources
This section uses the terms “proven mineral reserve” and “probable mineral reserve”, as permitted under
Canadian reporting standards. For United States reporting purposes, SEC Industry Guide 7 applies different
standards in order to classify mineralization as a reserve. As a result, the definitions of proven and probable
reserves applicable under Canadian reporting standards differ from the definitions in the SEC Industry Guide 7.
Accordingly, mineral reserve estimates calculated in accordance with Canadian standards may not
qualify as “reserves” under SEC standards.
In addition, this section also uses the term "inferred mineral resources". While this term is recognized and
required by Canadian regulations, the SEC does not recognize it. "Inferred mineral resources" have a great
amount of uncertainty as to their existence, and great uncertainty as to their economic and legal feasibility. It
cannot be assumed that all or any part of a mineral resource will ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under
Canadian rules, estimates of inferred mineral resources may not form the basis of economic studies, except in
rare cases. Investors are cautioned not to assume that all or any part of an inferred resource exists, or is
economically or legally mineable.
The following has been reproduced from the Technical Report.
Starcore International Mines Ltd. (“Starcore”) estimates the reserves and resources for the San Martin mine
effective as of July 31 of each year to match its fiscal year. Mine personnel have prepared this report under the
direction of David R. Gunning P. Eng, and the results of this work was modified and verified by Joseph W.
Campbell P. Geo. in compliance with National Instrument 43-101 (“NI 43-101”) on the San Martin Project in the
State of Querétaro, Mexico. Mr. Gunning is the Chief Operating Officer and a Director of Starcore and is a
Qualified Person (“QP”) as defined by NI 43-101. Mr. Campbell is an independent QP as defined by NI 43-101.
While relying on mine staff and other experts for information contained in this report, Mr. Gunning and Mr.
Campbell take full responsibility for all aspects of this report. This report follows previous reports by Mr. Gunning
in 2013 and earlier reports co-written with Mr. Joe Campbell P. Geo. for the reserves as of July 31st, 2011 and
by Mr. Campbell as of July 31st, 2012.
Starcore acquired the San Martin Mine (“San Martin”) from Goldcorp Inc. (“Goldcorp”) in February 2007.
Goldcorp is a Canadian mining company listed on both Canadian and United States Stock Exchanges.
Goldcorp acquired the San Martin Project in February 2005 with the take-over of Wheaton River Minerals Ltd.,
who had acquired San Martin in the take-over in 2002 of the Mexican mining company Minas Luismin S.A. de
C.V. (“Luismin”). San Martin is owned and operated by Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal, S.A. de C.V., a
wholly-owned subsidiary of Starcore.
The project is located northwest of Mexico City, some 50 km east of the City of Querétaro, in the State of
Querétaro . The mine is near the towns of Tequisquiapan and Ezequiel Montes, and is immediately to the north
of the town of San Martin, which has a population of approximately 2,000. Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal
S.A. de C.V., a wholly-owned Starcore subsidiary, holds the mining concessions covering 12,992 ha at San
Martin . The lease and land status information on San Martin and the information as reported herein was subject
to a legal title report by RB Abogados of Mexico City (July 19, 2012) and found to be in good standing until at
least the year 2041, subject to payment of applicable taxes and royalties. Previous authors accepted this report
as evidence of property ownership by Starcore International Mines Ltd. and property tax payments have been
made as of the date of this report.
The San Martin Project presently consists of two underground mines, San José and San Martin. The San Martin
deposit/mine is approximately 700 m NNE of the San José deposit/mine and lies predominantly below claims 1,
2, 4, and 5. One 63 hectare parcel of surface rights is a part of the property, known as “Terrenos” that cover the
offices and mine entrance. The rest of the property is overlain by surface rights rented from individuals and an
ejido (common land) based in the town of San Martin.
28
The deposit was discovered in the eighteenth century and high grade mineralization reportedly was exploited
by the Spaniards for approximately 40 years, however no production records exist. The first records show the
Ajuchitlan Mining and Milling Company produced an estimated 250 thousand tonnes at a grade of 15 g Au/t and
100 g Ag/t during 1900 to 1924.
In 1982, Mexico declared a 6,300 ha National Reserve over the area surrounding the Peña de Bernal but by
1986 Luismin had reached an agreement to work in the National Reserve and initiated an exploration program
in 1988.
Mining began in 1993 at 300 tpd, and in early 1994, production began from open pit operations on the San José
deposit. The table below illustrates production for the period 1994 to July 2014.
SAN MARTIN MINE, HISTORIC PRODUCTION (1994 to July 31st 2014)
TonnesGrade
Au (g/t)Ag (g/t)
-
Production oz. Eq. Au 
-
134,1183.19
146,7743.54
187,6913.40
219,8273.27
224,2793.45
242,2953.46
284,4903.60
287,5203.74
268,4514.26
276,4814.29
272,7344.47
282,3923.89
278,9143.20
252,4003.34
266,6002.50
272,8562.44
275,2902.03
296,8452.14
YearHistoric Annual
 
19931,707
199414,298
199517,068
199621,620
199724,570
199827,539
199929,624
200035,571
200138,068
200241,124
200342,692
200444,377
200538,543
200626,529
200729,606
200821,367
200921,696
201018,156
201123,736
29
-
35
39
44
43
50
46
55
66
71
82
83
65
60
49
32
33
31
38
2012
19,213309,7962.0925
2013
24,425306,9412.6624
2014*
21,755311,2102.3522
19,319309,5652.0920
2015*
 
2016*
(Jan – Apr)
4,791
TOTAL
100,3711.6913
(* These production figures for 2014, 2015 and 2016 were not in the Technical Report but have since become
available.)
The San Jose open pit operated for several years until the operation made the transition to the mining of the
relatively higher grade “manto” style orebodies found near the contact with the dacite flows and the underlying
rocks. In the year 2000 the operation began mining some of the steeply dipping vein structures known as tronco
deposits. Over the last 14 years that mining has at times been predominantly from tronco deposits.
Over the period August 1, 2013 to July 31, 2014 the mine operated at an average 846 tpd using mechanized
mining equipment such as single boom jumbos, 2.0 - 3.5 yard scooptrams and 10 to 20 tonne haulage trucks.
Conventional jackleg drills are still used in some of the mine headings.
The mineralization at San Martin occurs in a tabular breccia zone striking northeast and dipping 50° to 90°SE.
It occurs within Upper Cretaceous black limestones and calcareous shales of the Soyatal Mexcala Formation
and varies in width from 1 to 17 m but averages about 4 m . The breccia zone appears in a structural window on
the western hillside which is composed primarily of a Tertiary Rhyolite/Dacite.
The San Martin zone appears to predate the late stage Tertiary dacitic flows which cover the local hillsides but
may be related to andesitic intrusive which form the Peña de Bernal and have been seen in the deepest San
Jose workings. The most developed area of the mine, the San Martin area, has developed 400 meters down dip
along a breccia structure formed at the location where older limestones have been thrust upon younger shales.
To the north other predominantly manto deposits have been found along a more northerly direction over several
kilometres. The San Jose I, San Martin, and 28 orebodies seem to share the northeasterly strike whereas the
San Jose II, 29, 30 and 31 orebodies have a more northerly strike. Post-mineral faulting has resulted in vertical
offsets up to 100 m and horizontal offsets to 500 m along several major faults which form the boundaries for the
named orebodies or areas.
The deposit has been described as an epithermal, probably a low sulphidation precious metal (Ag-Au) type,
related to a Tertiary dacitic/andesite dome. Recent work has failed to locate a postulated dome and
mineralization in the troncos may be more mesothermal or fault related.
Mineralization occurs as native gold, electrum, naumannite (Ag2Se) and argentojarosite (AgFe3(SO4)2(OH)6)
associated principally with quartz and lesser calcite. The silver contained in argentojarosite is not recoverable
with cyanidation.
30
It appears that the northeast trending San Martin breccias tronco is related to a thrust fault of limestone upon the
younger shales (Rankin 2008). The structure varies in dip from 45 degrees in the lower levels to 70 degrees in
the upper levels. Above Level 1 the tronco flattens to the manto deposits which tend to occur along the
limestone/shale contact overlain by dacite and rhyolite flows above. This is similar to the structure present in the
San Jose deposit except that in the latter case the mantos appear to have been eroded as there are no dacitic
rocks capping the limestones. ... In 2012, a flat lying wide zone of stockwork and vein structures was discovered
in the footwall of the San Martin vein, and this added substantially to reserves in this area. This area is now
referred to as the San Martin footwall area.
Troncos with a more northerly alignment are present in orebodies San Jose II, and 29 and so far the different
direction has not been explained structurally. The mantos in area 29 as well as those found in areas 30 and 31
seem to be aligned in this northerly direction as well.
In addition to the manto, tronco and vein style mineralization there is at least one instance where ore grade
mineralization has been dragged along, or deposited along one of the principal faults dividing area 28 from area
29. There are also a few locations where stockwork zones occur in the troncos and economic mineralization
extends over widths of more than 20 meters which is currently being exploited in the hanging wall of some past
producing tronco stopes. Exploration in 2010 discovered the SAM vein which is a northerly trending vein that is
steeper (near vertical) at shallower depths and to the west, but has rotated into a wider sub-horizontal zone as it
trends to the north and dips down to the east.
Again in area 29 an extension to the Pilotos mantos stopes was found to the west which greatly aided the
production grade in 2011. Although this ore zone is exhausted the workings rehabilitated in the area are being
utilized to recover pillars with above average grades.
Assayed samples used in generating these reserves and resources are collected under the direction of the
Geological Department and delivered to the mine lab tagged and bagged. In general individual samples do not
exceed 1.5m in length and are generally not less than 0.2 m. All samples are prepared and assayed in the on-
site assay lab. ... Inspectorate laboratories in Vancouver has inspected the mine lab facilities and has provided
procedures, flux recipes and feedback on all laboratory equipment. The assay results are recorded by
geological staff and in the case of diamond drill core samples any pulps returning more than 1 g/t gold are sent
to Chemex for check assays. The mine has been awarded the Mexican Quality Award which is similar to
International Standards ISO 9001 for quality control in the overall mining operations.
Mr. Gunning visits the San Martin Mine regularly every month and has done so since 2009. Mr. Gunning is a
Qualified Person as defined by National Instrument 43-101. Mr. Campbell visited the San Martin Mine from
August 18th to 22nd 2014, and has previously visited the mine on multiple occasions between 2010 and 2012.
Mr. Campbell is an independent Qualified Person as defined by National Instrument 43-101. This Mineral
Resource/Reserve estimate is effective as of July 31, 2014, and follows the previous independent
Resource/reserve estimate made July 31, 2013....
The terminology used by the mine to designate Measured and Indicated Mineral Resources and Proven and
Probable Mineral Reserves is in general agreement with the Canadian Institute of Mining Metallurgy and
Petroleum (the “CIM Standards”) as adopted in NI 43-101 as is the Inferred Resources category.
In the years prior to mining by Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal reserve and resource estimates were based
on the assumptions and subject to rules defined by Luismin many years ago. In recent years, with the
involvement of various professionals, it was recognized that mining methodology was changing due to factors
such as:
·a greater percentage of production coming from narrow steeply dipping vein structures
·Sub-horizontal Mantos mineralized structures that were somewhat narrower than historical Mantos
Reopening and scavenging of the hangingwall mineralization in old stopes where lower grade mineralization
·
was not mined during times of lower gold prices.
31
Based on the above mining changes, and incorporating mining experience over the last 6 years some of the
original Luismin assumptions have been modified to improve tonnage and grade estimation for reserves. The
assumptions used in this estimate are:
· A gold price of $1,250 per ounce.
· A silver price of $19.23 per ounce.
· First half 2014 operating costs of $74 per metric dry tonne.
·Average metallurgical recoveries of 86% for gold and 52% for silver.
Using the above price and cost assumptions the resultant calculated cutoff grade is approximately 2.2 g/t Au
·
equivalent.
·Specific gravity of 2.6 has been applied to all calculated mineralized volumes.
Mining dilution is applied to in situ mineralized zones, and recovery factors are applied to these diluted blocks
·
using the following factors:
Mining dilution of 10% of zero grade in horizontal mineralized zones (Mantos) mined by room and
pillar.
Mining dilution of 10% of zero grade in steeply dipping mineralized zones mined by cut and fill. This
dilution factor is modified by first applying a minimum 2 meter mining width to narrow zones. This
has resulted in up to 30% dilution for narrower cut and fill vein style (Tronco) mineralized zones.
Remnant pillars left in room and pillar stopes are typically 20% of the total tonnage, i.e. 80%
extraction. This recovery factor has been applied to sub-horizontal mineralized zones.
In addition to these factors reserve grades are lowered to reflect mined grades in ore blocks that have sufficient
historical production to establish that mined grades are lower than estimated from exploration data. The
reserves and resources estimated in this report are based on data available up until July 31, 2014.
Total Proven and Probable Mineral Reserves at the San Martin mine as of July 31, 2014 estimated by mine staff
and reviewed by David R. Gunning, P. Eng., and Joseph W. Campbell, P.Geo, are 486,586 tonnes at a grade
of 2.31 g Au/t and 18.5 g Ag/t (Table 5). This total includes Proven reserves of 179,589 tonnes grading 2.33 g/t
Au and 17 g/t Ag along with Probable reserves of 306,997 tonnes grading 2.30 g/t Au and 19 g/t Ag. In addition
to this reserve is 181,546 tonnes at a grade of 2.98 g/t Au and 32 g/t Ag which is hosted in carbonaceous
limestone and needs some capital investment in the mill to enable normal recovery. Until the costs and
recoveries are better understood this material is uncategorized at the moment. There exists sufficient non-
carbonaceous ore to operate for one and a half years, which should be enough time to enable the installation of
the required metallurgical changes in the plant.
Total Inferred Mineral Resources at the San Martin mine (excluding San Pedrito) are estimated to be 898,049
tonnes at a grade of 2.15 g/t Au and 24 g/t Ag. Inferred Mineral Resources are not known to the same degree of
certainty as Mineral Reserves and do not have demonstrated economic viability.
No reserves or resources have been defined north of Area 31.
The authors believe that the Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource estimates fairly represent the Mineral
Reserve/Mineral Resource potential of the property. The previous NI43-101 compliant estimation prepared was
as of July 31, 2013 by David Gunning P. Eng. who reported total reserves of 705,998 tonnes at a grade of
2.53 g Au/t and 23.6 g Ag/t. This total included Proven reserves of 334,271 tonnes grading 2.40 g/t Au and 25
g/t Ag along with Probable reserves of 371,727 tonnes grading 2.61 g/t Au and 22 g/t Ag. In addition to this
reserve 174,683 tonnes at a grade of 2.67 g/t Au and 27 g/t Ag was reported but not
32
categorized as reserve as it is hosted in carbonaceous limestone and needs capital investment in the mill to
enable normal metal recovery. This capital has not yet been committed.
Close monitoring and mentoring of the mine staff in recent months has made progress in mine planning but
continued improvement is possible in the mine planning, budgeting, and grade control systems at the mine. The
budget for future exploration programs on the property will depend on the success of grade control and the
ability to maintain profitability.
Accessibility & Infrastructure
Access to the San Martin project, from Mexico City is some 160 km NW, on the Querétaro to Mexico main
highway to the city of San Juan del Rio, then 35 km NE to the town of Ezequiel Montes then roughly 10 km from
Ezequiel Montes to the town of San Martin. Paved highway #4 which connects Queretaro with the tourist town
of Bernal is within 2 km of the mine entrance.
Access to the project, via Querétaro City, is also readily available from the Querétaro international airport which
is 30 km from the minesite and has daily flights from Dallas as well as from Houston, Texas.
The infrastructure at San Martin is typical of a small mining operation and the site includes mine offices, repair
shops, laboratory, warehouse and eating facilities for mine personnel. The mine and mill are connected to the
electric grid and the mine produces more than enough water for milling operations. Electrical power is supplied
by the Federal Power Commission however the mine has a secondary electricity generating system with about
500kW capacity to supply power to the mill during a power failure and during the peak supply times when prices
are higher.
Exploration, Development and Production
This section has been prepared by David Gunning, P. Eng., and a director and Chief Operating Officer of the
Company.
For the nine months ended April 30, 2016, the San Martin plant achieved 84.9% recovery of gold and 51.7% for
silver from the 229,569 tonnes milled during the fiscal year (nine months). Head grades averaged 1.96 g/t gold
and 18.4 g/t silver resulting in 13,215 equivalent gold ounces of production during the fiscal year. Equivalent
gold ounce calculation is based on the actual daily average gold:silver ratio of 76.22 during the fiscal year (nine
months). No surface exploration program was contracted during the nine-month period ended April 30, 2016; all
exploration efforts were focussed within the mine.
Between August 1, 2015 and April 30, 2016 a total of 8,106.5 meters were drilled using the three company
owned diamond drills.
Highlights of exploration during the year included the development of the 6-101 stope in area 30 which
produced roughly 20,000 tonnes of ore grading 6 grams per tonne gold. In addition the 6-112 stope was found
in area 31 which appears to be an extension of stopes previously mined in 2008. Most recently another small
block of very high grade mineralization in hole 31-79 was drifted on and provided mill feed for the months
subsequent to the fiscal period. Drilling has also succeeded in tracing mineralization down dip in the San Martin
structure to level 12.
In late 2015, the Company contracted the engineering and purchase of equipment for a changeover to CIL
processing that will enable the exploitation of carbonaceous mineralization that has been identified in the mine.
Work is progressing to accurately define the roughly 100,000 tonnes of carbonaceous ore that contains above
average grade. The development of the ore blocks will result in a surface stockpile of this ore that will be used
to commission the revised process plant. The break in period is anticipated in September of this year.
The Company continues to explore with development headings that convert resources to reserves. A new NI43-
101 compliant reserve estimate was not prepared during the fiscal period.
33
Other Mineral Properties
In addition to our principal property, the San Martin Mine, we have several other mineral interests in exploration
properties, as summarized below, which we do not consider to be material to our operations at this time. These
include three molybdenum-copper exploration projects that we acquired through our acquisition of Creston Moly
Corp. (“Creston Moly”) from Deloitte Restructuring Inc., in its capacity as trustee in bankruptcy of Mercator
Minerals Ltd., in February 2015 for a purchase price of Cdn$2 million – namely, the El Creston Project in
Mexico, the Ajax Project in British Columbia and the Molybrook Project in Newfoundland.
Creston Moly, a British Columbia company, was formerly a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mercator Minerals, who
acquired Creston Moly in 2011 in a cash-and-shares deal valuing Creston Moly at approximately
Cdn$194 million.
· El Creston Project, Sonora, Mexico
The El Creston molybdenum property is located in the State of Sonora, Mexico, 175 kilometres south of the US
Border and 145 kilometers northeast of the city of Hermosillo. Creston Moly’s indirect wholly-owned subsidiary,
Exploraciones Global S.A. de C.V. (“Exploraciones Global”), is the registered holder of the El Creston property.
Exploraciones Global purchased the claims comprising the El Creston property from the previous owners. The
property is known to host several zones of porphyry-style molybdenum copper mineralization.
El Creston Project, Sonora, Mexico
Tenure
Number
Claim
Name
Owner/
Interest
Underlying
Royalty
Tenure
Type/
Tenure Sub
Type
Area
(ha)
Issue Date/
Present
Expiry
Date
Required
Holding
Expenses
219813 Meztli
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
Exploration
89
16/04/2003
4/15/2053
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
Property
Surface
Rights
4,529
hectares
100%
Owned
acquired
through
purchase
from local
landowners
and
Ownership
Eijdo and
local
landowners
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
hijdo.  573
hectares
leased for 30
years with
exclusive
option to
purchase
Part of aboveAs above
220332 Meztli 1
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
8
Exploration
16/07/2003
6/15/2053
34
222321Lorenia
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
Exploration
138
25/06/2004
6/24/2054
222700Alma
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
Exploration
359
13/08/2004
8/12/2054
223111Letty
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
Exploration
391.509
15/10/2004
10/14/2054
225638Meztli 2
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
Exploration
1455.98
30/09/2005
9/29/2055
229984Meztli 6
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
0.0032
04/07/2007
7/3/2057
230018Meztli 4
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
8465.04
10/07/2007
7/9/2057
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
by May 30th
Part of aboveAs above
Part of aboveAs above
Part of aboveAs above
Part of aboveAs above
Part of aboveAs above
Part of aboveAs above
35
231151Meztli 3
Exploraciones
Global/
100%
3% NSR
Concession/
Mining
457.056
18/01/2008
1/17/2058
Taxes to be paid
semi-
annually.   Notice
of Work form filed
Part of aboveAs above
· Sierra Rosario: Sinaloa, Mexico
by May 30th
Located within the historically productive Sierra Madre Occident geological province in the northern Mexican
state of Sinaloa, the Sierra Rosario property consists of two large mineral exploration concessions totalling
978.57 hectares. The Company has a 100% interest in this property.
In 2012, we rehabilitated approximately 10 kilometres of access road and established 20 line kilometres of cut
and flagged grid line, consisting of 10 lines spaced 200 meters apart over the northern two-thirds of the
Property. Utilizing this grid, the Property was geologically mapped and soil sampled at 25-meter intervals. An
induced polarization (“IP”) survey (50 meter dipole spacing and n=6 separations) and a ground magnetic
geophysical survey were also carried out over the grid. The work centred upon the San Raphael gossan zone
where initial trenching and rock sampling returned an average value of 181 g/t silver and 0.32 g/t gold from 23
chip channel samples averaging five metres in length.
Results of the IP survey identified an open ended northwest-southeast trending chargeability anomaly
measuring 1,400 metres in length, extending from line 4+00S (where it is 100 meters wide) to line 18+00S
(where it is over 1,300 meters wide). The anomaly remains open to the south and southeast.  Coincident with
the eastern margin of the chargeability anomaly and a northwest-southeast trending ridge, a silver-gold-arsenic-
lead soil anomaly was outlined, also measuring 1,400 metres in length, extending from line 4+00S to line
18+00S, where the anomaly remains open to the south and southeast.  Individual soil sample values range up
to 326.0 g/t silver; 0.712 g/t gold; 1320 ppm arsenic and 3470 ppm lead. The highest silver values occur on line
18+00S, the most southern grid line.
Geology at Sierra Rosario
The Sierra Rosario Property is located approximately 25 kilometres of the town of Choix in Sinaloa State. It is
underlain by Jurassic andesite and greywacke which in turn are overlain by gently north dipping ridge forming
Cretaceous limestones and interbedded calcareous siltstones all intruded by Tertiary granodiorite and diorite.
Overlying the northernmost portions of the property are Tertiary andesites capped by rhyolite.
Since January of 2012, work has concentrated on the San Raphael Zone where quartz veins and stockwork
carrying significant values of silver and gold were initially noted in a small exposure of granodiorite intruding
Cretaceous limestone and calcareous siltstones. The subsequent recent program has defined coincident
anomalies that extend from this granodiorite plug at least 1400 meters to the southeast in an area mapped as
Cretaceous limestone with calcareous siltstone. The geochemical anomalies extend in a northerly direction to
the contact with the overlying Tertiary andesite suggesting these younger rocks post-date the silver
mineralization.
As at the date of this Registration Statement, no further work is planned for this property in the foreseeable
future.
36
· Ajax Project, British Columbia.
The Ajax molybdenum property is comprised of 11,718 hectares and is located 13 km north of Alice Arm, British
Columbia. The Ajax property, one of North America's largest undeveloped molybdenum deposits occupying a
surface area of approximately 600 by 650 metres, is in the advanced stage of exploration.
Creston Moly’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Tenajon Resources Corp. (“Tenajon Resources”), is the registered
holder of the Ajax property. Tenajon Resources acquired all but one of the claims comprising the Ajax property
through on line staking; the final claim, identified by tenure number 511540, was acquired by way of a claim
conversion (that is, a procedure for converting manually-staked claims to computerized-staked claims).
Ajax Molybdenum Property, British Columbia, Canada
Tenure
Number
Claim
Name
Owner/
Interest
Underlying
Royalty
Tenure Type/
Tenure Sub Type
Area
(ha)
Issue Date/
Present
Expiry
Date
Required
Holding
Expenses
Property
Surface
Rights
Ownership
501393 mq2
504775 mq3
504776 mq3
504782 mq-5
505618 mq5
511540
Tenajon
Resources
Corp./
100%
Tenajon
Resources
Corp/
100%
Tenajon
Resources
Corp/
100%
Tenajon
Resources
Corp/
100%
Tenajon
Resources
Corp/
100%
Tenajon
Resources
Corp/
100%
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
402.28
12/01/2005
14/07/2021
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
255.99
25/01/2005
27/07/2021
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
292.7
25/01/2005
27/07/2021
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
146.22
25/01/2005
27/07/2021
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
256.00
02/02/2015
04/08/2021
NONE
Claim/
Mineral Exploration
365.67
22/04/2005
09/06/2021
Total
37
 
· Molybrook Project, Newfoundland.
1718.86
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
No work
required
until
2021.  No
gov't fees
None Govern-ment
None Govern-ment
None Govern-ment
None Govern-ment
None Govern-ment
None Govern-ment
Creston Moly’s Molybrook molybdenum property, located on the south coast of Newfoundland, is centred 2.5
km from the outport of Grey River less than 4 kilometres from a deep water, ice free navigable fjord. The
property hosts a 3 km long trend in which at least three zones of at surface molybdenum mineralization occur:
Molybrook, Wolf and Chimney Pond. To date, almost all exploration has been completed on the Molybrook
zone where a large porphyry molybdenum deposit has been outlined.
Creston Moly’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Tenajon Resources, is the registered holder of the Molybrook
property. Tenajon Resources acquired its interest from the party that originally staked the underlying claim.
Molybrook Molybdenum Property, Newfoundland, Canada
Tenure
Number
Owner/
Interest
Underlying
Royalty
Tenure
Type/ Sub
Type
Area
(ha)
Issue Date/
Present
Expiry
Date
Required Holding Expenses
23630
Tenajon
Resources
Corp./
100%
2% NSR
Claim/
Mineral
Exploration
1100
18/12/2000
18/12/2018
No work required until 2018.   in
order to keep Claim; after 2018
must spend $52,400 prior to
expiry.  No gov't fees.
· Toiyabe Property, Nevada, USA
Property
Surface
Rights
Ownership
None Govern-ment
We have the right to acquire a 100% undivided interest, subject to a 3% net smelter royalty, in 165 mining
claims located in Lander County, Nevada, more commonly known as the Toiyabe Property. The Toiyabe
Property has demonstrated similar structural characteristics to the Cortez, Cortez Hills and Pipeline deposits, all
located within 10 miles of the Toiyabe Property.
Consideration to be paid to acquire the interest in the Toiyabe Property is US$900,000 and the commitment for
the Company to incur total exploration expenditures of US$1,025,000 on the property (which expenses have
been incurred), by the earlier of October 15, 2018 or the date the Company enters into a joint venture agreement
over Toiyabe or the date that the Company completes a bankable feasibility study on the property.
We also have the right to purchase up to one-half of the net smelter royalty (or 1.5%) on the basis of US$2
million per each 1% of the royalty. There are no payments required on this property until 2018.
· Lone Ranch: Washington State, USA
We acquired the right to a 100% undivided interest, subject to a 3% net smelter royalty, in 73 mining claims
located in Ferry County, Washington State, United States of America (“Lone Ranch”) from MinQuest Inc.
(“MinQuest”). Consideration to be paid for the interest is US$360,000, and the commitment to incur total
exploration expenditures of US$1,225,000 (of which $175,000 has been incurred) on the property, by the third
anniversary of the “New Effective Date” as agreed by MinQuest.
The New Effective Date shall be the earlier of October 15, 2018 or the date the Company enters into a joint
venture agreement over the property or the date that the Company completes a bankable feasibility study on the
property.
The optionor has also granted the Company the right to purchase up to one-half of the net smelter royalty (or
1.5%) on the basis of US$1.5 million per each 1% of the royalty. If the Company does not incur the exploration
expenditures as specified, the unpaid portions may be paid to the optionor to maintain the option.
38
The property is readily accessible and located within 20 miles of the Kettle River Processing facility operated by
Kinross. There are no property payments required on this property until 2018.
There is no assurance that a commercially viable mineral deposit exists on any of our exploration properties, or
that we will be able to identify any mineral resource on any of these properties that can be developed profitably.
Even if we do discover commercially exploitable levels of mineral resources on any of our properties, which is
unlikely, there can be no assurance that we will be able to enter into commercial production of our mineral
properties.
Processing Plant
The Altiplano gold and silver processing plant (the “Altiplano Plant”) is constructed on land with an area of 75
hectares located in Matehuala, Mexico. Both the land and the Altiplano Plant are owned by Altiplano Goldsilver
S.A. de C.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cortez Gold Corp., which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Company.
The Plant offers processing for precious metals and is designed to process 25 tons per day. The facility has the
capacity to expand to 50 tons per day if extra leaching tanks are installed; at this time there is no intention to
expand the processing capacity of the plant.
For environmental matters, the Altiplano Plant is required to abide by the governing laws of Mexico, as well as
the provincial and local regulations.
As at February 15, 2016, the Altiplano Plant poured its first doré bar, weighing in at 21.131 kg. Since then, the
Plant has been receiving concentrate deliveries to test the full facilities of the plant and procedures. As at June
13, 2016, the Plant has processed over 90 tonnes of concentrate purchased from 3 different suppliers to
produce 40.16 kg of metal doré bars, which included 2.01kg of gold and 38.15kg of silver. It has tested
concentrates deliveries from 14 different suppliers and the Company is currently negotiating concentrate
purchase agreements for the best quality concentrate that will bring a consistent supply. As the Plant is currently
in a pre-operational phase, any incidental revenue or expenses generated during this process has been
capitalized under IAS 16 guidelines. The Company shall cease to record costs as part of the carrying amount of
the Plant when the assets are in the condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended
by management.
Item 5
Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal period
ended April 30, 2016 should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included in
this Registration Statement. Our financial statements included in this Registration Statement were prepared in
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting
Standards Board.
A.
Operating Results
Our results of operations have been, and may continue to be, affected by many factors of a global nature,
including economic and market conditions, the availability of capital, the level and volatility of prices and
interest rates, currency values, commodities prices and other market indices, technological changes, the
availability of credit, inflation and legislative and regulatory developments. Factors of a local nature, including
political, social, financial and economic stability, the availability of capital, technology, workers, engineers and
management, geology and weather conditions, may also affect our results of operations. As a result of the
economic and competitive factors discussed above, our results of operations may vary significantly from period
to period. Except where otherwise noted, financial results are rounded to the nearest $1,000 and are expressed
in Canadian currency.
39
Period Ended April 30, 2016 Compared to Years Ended July 31, 2015 and 2014.
(in thousands of Canadian dollars)
For the year ended,
REVENUES
 MINED ORE
PURCHASED CONCENTRATE
 
TOTAL REVENUE
COST OF SALES
MINED ORE
PURCHASED CONCENTRATE
DEPRECIATION AND DEPLETION
 
TOTAL COST OF SALES
EARNINGS FROM MINING OPERATIONS
332
2014
2015
2016
 
$20,326$28,073$33,136
-
 
20,326 28,405 33,136
 
(14,093)(20,768)(18,577)
-
(4,714) (6,686) (5,971)
 
(18,807)(27,760)(24,548)
1,519
8,588
-
-
(306)
645
3
1,742
(387)
(286)
FINANCING INCOME(COSTS)
(159)
494
FOREIGN EXCHANGE GAIN
(1,031) (1,115) (402)
PROFESSIONAL AND CONSULTING FEES
(918)
(1,210) (1,538)
MANAGEMENT FEES AND SALARIES
(1,114) (1,446) (1,323)
OFFICE AND ADMINISTRATION
-
OTHER EXPENSES
(110)
SHAREHOLDER RELATIONS
REGULATORY AND TRANSFER AGENT FEES(244)
WRITE-DOWN FOR OBSOLETE EQUIPMENT -
EARNINGS (LOSS) BEFORE TAXES
INCOME TAX RECOVERY (PROVISION)
EARNINGS FOR THE YEAR
(91)
-
(128)
(233)
(110)
(144)
-
(125)
(1,710) 5,031
1,920
$210
(2444)
2,639
195
(2,066)
$2,965
40
Comparison April 30, 2016 to April 30, 2015
Overall, revenue from milled ore decreased by $1.7 million compared to the prior period due mainly to lower
metal production and lower gold and silver recovery in the current period compared to prior year. Cost of sales
decreased in the current period due to lower tonnage processed and lower overall mine development costs and
costs of labour and supplies, including chemicals and electricity. As a percentage of mined ore revenue,
earnings from mining operations increased to 7% of mined ore revenue compared to 5% in the comparative
period.
Sales of metals for the period ended April 30, 2016 approximated 12,666 ounces of gold and 72,105 ounces of
silver sold at average prices in the period of US$1,142 and US$14.87 per ounce, respectively. This is a
decrease in sale ounces from the comparative period ended April 30, 2015 where sales of metal approximated
14,709 ounces of gold and 73,642 ounces of silver, sold at higher average prices of US$1,224 and US$17.30
per ounce, respectively.
The total cost of sales above includes non-cash expenses for depreciation and depletion of $4,714, compared
to $5,141 in the comparable period last period, which is calculated based on the units of production from the
mine over the expected mine production as a denominator. This calculation is based solely on the San Martin
mine proven and probable reserves and a percentage of inferred resources in accordance with the Company’s
policy of recognizing the value of expected Resources which will be converted to Proven and Probable
Reserves, as assessed by management.
For the period ending April 30, 2016, the Company produced $1,519 in earnings from mine operations
compared to $1,038 for the period ended April 30, 2015. The increase resulted partially due to the strengthening
USD which converted into Canadian Dollar (“CDN”) at $1.255 in the current period compared to $1.210 at April
30, 2015, which increased revenues and concurrently lowered costs. The combination of slightly higher
recoveries for gold and silver, despite a lower metal price per ounce, resulted in higher revenue as compared to
the prior period.
Costs per ounce for the period ended April 30, 2016 were much lower at an average operating cash cost of
US$846/EqOz. compared to an average operating cash cost of US$920/EqOz. during the period ended April
30, 2015, resulting in reported mined ore costs which were $2,194 lower at $18,807. Also included in mined ore
costs in the current period is depletion of $4,714 compared to $5,141 for the period ended April 30, 2015.
Other Items
Changes in other items for the period ended April 30, 2016, resulted in the following significant changes from
the period ended April 30, 2015:
•
•
Financing costs during the period increased by $319 due to the debt that was raised by the Company to
finance the Altiplano project;
Office and administration increased by $133 due higher corporate costs relating to acquisition of Cortez Gold
Corp., general regulatory administration and office related costs.
Foreign exchange decreased by $1,358 for the period ended April 30, 2016. The decrease relates primarily
due to the weakening of the Mexican peso and Canadian dollar in relation to the US dollar, the functional
currency of the mining operations in the prior comparable period.
Professional and consulting fees increased by $107 to $1,031 due to higher fees charged in relations to legal,
tax and audit fees in the prior comparative period.
•Transfer Agent Fees increased by $145 due to costs relating to registration on the United States markets.
Deferred Income Tax Recovery increased by $1,842 due to the Company recognizing its ability to use its non-
capital loss carry forwards in the current and future years.
41
•
•
•
Comparison July 31, 2015 to July 31, 2014
Overall, revenue from mill production decreased to $28.4 million from $33.1 million in the prior year due mainly
to lower metal prices per ounce and the lower metal production in the current year compared to the prior
comparative year. During the current year, the Company also generated $332 in revenue from purchased
concentrates processed at the San Martin mine. Cost of sales increased in the current year due to higher
tonnage processed and partly to higher overall mine development costs and costs of labour and supplies,
including chemicals and electricity. As a percentage of mined ore revenue, earnings from mining operations
decreased to 2% of mined ore revenue compared to 26% in the comparative year, due to higher overall mine
costs and lower revenue per ounce as a result of lower gold and silver prices.
Sales of metals for the year ended July 31, 2015 approximated 18,762 ounces of gold and 101,830 ounces of
silver sold at average prices in the year of US$1,210 and US$16.87 per ounce, respectively. This is a decrease
in sale ounces from the comparative year ended July 31, 2014 where sales of metal approximated 22,018
ounces of gold and 126,519 ounces of silver, sold at higher average prices of US$1,294 and US$21 per ounce,
respectively. The overall revenue was lower compared to the prior year due to decrease in the price of gold and
silver for the current year and due to the reduced production of metals in the current year.
The total cost of sales above includes non-cash expenses for depreciation and depletion of $6,686, compared
to $5,971 in the comparable period last year, which is calculated based on the units of production from the mine
over the expected mine production as a denominator. This calculation is based solely on the San Martin mine
proven and probable reserves and a percentage of inferred resources in accordance with the Company’s policy
of recognizing the value of expected Resources which will be converted to Proven and Probable Reserves, as
assessed by management.
For the year of operations to July 31, 2015, the Company produced earnings from mine operations of $645
compared to $8,588 for the year ended July 31, 2014. As discussed above, average gold ore grades of 2.14 g/t
and silver ore grades of 18.2 g/t for the year ended July 31, 2015 were lower as compared to the July 31, 2014
year where grades averaged 2.55 g/t and 24.2 g/t, respectively. This, in combination with lower recoveries of
85.1% for gold and 53.1% for silver in the current year compared to 87.1% for gold and 52.7% for silver in the
prior comparable year ending July 31, 2014, resulted in substantially lower production and revenue.
Costs for the year ended July 31, 2015 were much higher at an average operating cash cost of US$903/EqOz.
compared to an average operating cash cost of US$750/EqOz. during the year ended July 31, 2014, resulting in
reported mined ore costs which were $3,212 higher at $27,760. Also included in mined ore costs in the current
year is non-cash stock based compensation expense of $18 and depletion of $6,686 compared to $48 and
$5,971, respectively, for the year ended July 31, 2014. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation
model to calculate the fair value of share purchase options at the date of grant.
Other Items
Changes in other items for the year ended July 31, 2015, resulted in the following significant changes from the
year ended July 31, 2014:
Financing costs during the year decreased by $289 due to the full repayment of the Loan Facility in
·
August, 2013. The Company has not incurred any additional financing costs during the year;
Office and administration increased by $89 to $1,556 due higher corporate costs relating to loan repayment
·
activity, general regulatory administration and office related costs.
Shareholder’s communication decreased by $105 to $128 due to decreased participation in conventions and
·
events.
Foreign exchange gain increased by $1,248 to a gain of $1,742 for the year ended July 31, 2015 due to the
·
weakening of the Mexican peso and Canadian dollar in relation to the US dollar, the functional currency of the
mining operations. Cash balances are mainly held in US dollars.
42
Professional fees increased in the current year by $713 to $1,115 due to increase in tax and audit fees as well
as services related to improving mine efficiency and to re-class of certain contractors. The Company also
·
incurred additional legal costs to acquire Creston and American Consolidated Minerals Corp. during the year
ended July 31, 2015.
Management fees and salaries decreased by $328 to $1,210 due to lower bonuses paid to management in the
current year compared to the prior year. Included in management fees and salaries is a non-cash, stock based
·
compensation expense to management and to the members to the Company’s technical advisory committee of
$120 in the current year, compared to $365 in the prior year.
The Company recorded an impairment of an investment in a Mexican subsidiary purchased in the current
·
quarter of $175. While the subsidiary has significant tax assets available, management believes a write off of
subsidiary costs is warranted based on an impairment analysis of existing assets of the subsidiary.
Other Items
B.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
1.  Liquidity risk arises from the excess of financial obligations over available financial assets due at any
point in time. The Company’s objective in managing liquidity risk is to maintain sufficient readily available
reserves in order to meet its liquidity requirements. The Company accomplishes this by achieving
profitable operations and maintaining sufficient cash reserves. As at April 30, 2016, the Company was
holding cash of $4,248,000 (2015 - $3,370,000) and short-term investments of $5,742,000 (2015 -
$2,615,000).
Obligations due within twelve months of the year ended,2016 2017 201820192020 and beyond
(in thousands of Canadian dollars)
Trade and other payables
Current portion of loan payable
$ 3,091$ -
4,619 -
$ -
-
$ -
-
$ -
-
Non-current portion of loan payable
-
1,369-
-
-
Reclamation and closure obligations
-
-
-
-
1,401
The Company’s trade and other payables are due in the short term. Long-term obligations include the
Company’s reclamation and closure cost obligations, other long-term liabilities and deferred income taxes.
Management believes that profits generated from the mine will be sufficient to meet its financial obligations and
therefore has sufficient working capital.
The Company has several sources of cash flow which includes raising cash through debt, issuance of shares
and from operating a profitable mine.
1.  During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company secured a USD $1,000,000 (CDN $1,305,000) loan
with a lender. The funds were used to advance the Altiplano Project. The loan is secured against certain
assets of the Company and bears interest at 11% per annum, compounded monthly with interest payment
payable monthly on the last business day of each month. The full principal plus accrued interest on the
loan shall be repayable to the lender on August 31, 2017.
1.  The Company has no commitments for capital expenditures and has disclosed all material commitments
under Section F (“Tabular disclosure of contractual obligations”).
43
 
C. Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
We do not currently, and did not previously, have research and development policies in place.
D.
Trend Information
There have been no significant recent trends in production, sales and inventory, the state of the order book and
costs and selling prices in our business since the end of the latest financial year, nor are there any known
trends, uncertainties, demands, commitments or events that are reasonably likely to have a current or future
effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or
capital resources that is material to investors. Although there are significant uncertainties in respect of market
prices for minerals and, accordingly, the availability of equity financing for the purposes of mineral exploration
and development, we do not believe that the fluctuations in market price are predictable. The price of minerals
has fluctuated widely in recent years and wide fluctuations are expected to continue.
E.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or
future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resource that is material to investors. We have optioned its
mineral properties from a private company controlled by an officer and director of our Company.
F. Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
Total Less than 1 year1-3 years3-5 yearsMore than 5 years
Obligations due within twelve months 
of  the year ended,
(in thousands of Canadian dollars)
Trade and other payables
Loan payable
Rehabilitation and closure cost provision1,401 -
Management contract obligation
Land lease obligation
2,520 840
264
132
$ 3,091$ 3,091
5,988 4,619
$ -
1,369
-
840
132
$ -
-
-
840
-
$ -
-
1,401
-
-
Office lease obligation
432
144
144
144
-
G.
Safe harbor.
Statements in Item 5.E and Item 5.F of this Registration Statement on Form 20-F that are not statements of
historical fact, constitute “forward-looking statements.” See “Forward-Looking Statements” on page 3 of this
Registration Statement. Our Company is relying on the safe harbor provided in Section 27A of the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, in making
such forward-looking statements.
Item 6
44
Directors, Senior Management and Employees
A.
Directors and Senior Management
The following table sets forth the names, age, business experience and functions and areas of experience in
our Company of each of our directors and officers:
Name
Office
Held
Age
Robert
Eadie
Chief
Executive
Officer
and
Director 
Age:  51
David
Gunning
Chief
Operating
Officer
and
Director
Age:  56
Gary Arca
Chief
Financial
Officer
and
Director
Age:  55
Cory Kent
Director
Age:  46
Jordan
Estra
Area of Experience and Functions in Our Company
As our Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Eadie is responsible for strategic planning and operations, as well
as managing our relations with our lawyers, regulatory authorities and investor community; as a
director, Mr. Eadie participates in management oversight and helps to ensure compliance with our
corporate governance policies and standards.  Mr. Eadie was one of the founders of our Company.
As our Chief Operation Officer, Mr. Gunning is responsible for our exploration, development and
mining operations and for management of our San Martin Mine.
As Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Arca is responsible for the management and supervision of all of the
financial aspects of our business; as a director, Mr. Arca participates in management oversight and as
Chairman of the Corporate Governance committee, helps to design our corporate governance
policies and standards and ensures compliance therewith.
As Corporate Secretary, Mr. Kent is responsible for ensuring that the board of directors has the proper
advice and resources to fulfill their duties to shareholders.  Mr. Kent’s duties include ensuring the
integrity of the governance framework and compliance with statutory and regulatory
requirements.  Mr. Kent is a member of the Compensation Committee.
As an independent director, Mr. Estra provides oversight to management to help ensure alignment
with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate governance policies and standards.  Mr.
Estra is a member of the Audit Committee and the Corporate Governance Committee.
As an independent director, Mr. Sumanik  provides oversight to management to help  ensure
alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate governance policies and
standards. Mr. Sumanik is a member of the Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee and the
Corporate Governance Committee.
As an independent director, Mr. Villaseñor provides oversight to management to help ensure
alignment with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate governance policies and
standards. Mr. Villaseñor is a member of the Audit Committee and the Compensation Committee.
Director
Age: 51
Ken
Sumanik
Director
Age: 79
Federico
Villaseñor
Director
Age: 65
Michael)
Gunning
Director:
Age: 54
As an independent director, Mr. Gunning provides oversight to management to help ensure alignment
with corporate strategies and compliance with our corporate governance policies and
standards.  With his technical expertise and credentials, he provides the Board with more than 25
years of diverse and valuable experience in mineral exploration and geological research.
Robert Eadie – Chief Executive Officer and Director
Mr. Eadie has been our President & Chief Executive Officer, and a director of our Company since October 2003.
Mr. Eadie is also President and a director of Parlane Resource Corp. (TSXV: PPP) and Red Hut Metals Inc.
(TSXV: ROB), junior mineral exploration and development companies listed on the TSX Venture Exchange and
headquartered in Vancouver, British Columbia.
45
Mr. Eadie is a self-employed business owner and has many years of experience in working with and helping
build start-up companies. He began his career as a corporate investor and public relations consultant and went
on to establish his own investor relations consulting business. He has since become an executive, officer or
director of a number of junior public companies, primarily in the natural resource sector. In the past 20 years, Mr.
Eadie has been actively involved in public resource companies raising over $100 million dollars for various
exploration and development projects around the world.
David Gunning – Chief Operating Officer and Director
Mr. Gunning has been Chief Operating Officer and a director of our Company since April 2009. He is a graduate
of the University of British Columbia with a B.A.Sc. degree in Mining and Mineral Process Engineering. He is a
member of the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of British Columbia since 1989. He has
over 30 years of experience in all aspects of the mining industry, including mineral exploration in addition to
mine operations, management and development.
Mr. Gunning is currently a director of Parlane Resource Corp. (TSXV: PPP), junior mineral exploration and
development company listed on the TSX Venture Exchange and headquartered in Vancouver, British
Columbia.
Gary Arca – Chief Financial Officer and Director
Mr. Arca has been our Chief Financial Officer and a director of our Company since January 2006. Mr. Arca is
currently Chief Financial Officer and a director of Parlane Resource Corp. (TSXV: PPP) and Red Hut Metals
Inc. (TSXV: ROB), junior mineral exploration and development companies listed on the TSX Venture Exchange
and headquartered in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Mr. Arca has over 30 years of financial management experience. He is a Chartered Professional Accountant
(CPA) and has been a member of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Professional Accountants and British
Columbia Institute of Chartered Professional Accountants since 1980. He was a partner with public accounting
firms, Amisano Hanson from 2002 to 2005 and Driver Anderson from 1996 to 2001.
Mr. Arca has provided auditing, consulting, taxation, accounting and litigation support services to various
clients. His client base included mining, oil & gas, financial, bio-tech, high tech, and retail and wholesale
businesses. Mr. Arca has extensive experience dealing with public companies and start-ups both from the
perspective of management and as a consultant, and has served as a director of various publicly traded
resource companies.
Mr. Arca is Chair of the Corporate Governance Committee.
Cory Kent LLB – Corporate Secretary & Director
Mr. Kent has been a director of our Company since November 2004. Mr. Kent is a Partner at McMillan LLP, and
was on the executive of the Securities Law Section of the Canadian Bar Association from 2002 – 2004. With a
practice focused on corporate securities law and related technology, natural resources and commercial matters,
Mr. Kent possesses a strong and varied legal background suited to the junior mining sector.
Mr. Kent is also a director of Nevada Sunrise Gold Corporation , listed on the TSXV.
Mr. Kent is a member of the Compensation Committee.
Mr. Jordan Estra – Director
Mr. Estra has been a director of our Company since March 2010. Mr. Estra is Managing Director of Private
Equity at Sutter Securities Incorporated, a full-service investment banking firm headquartered in San Francisco,
California. Mr. Estra is also currently President and Chief Executive Officer of Ophir Brasil Mineracao, Ltda., a
privately owned gold mining company in Brazil, and President and Chief Executive Officer of Ophir Consulting
Group, Inc., a privately owned mining consulting company. His background includes his experience as a
leading research analyst for a number of international investment banks.
46
Mr. Estra graduated with High Distinction from Babson College (International Economics) and with Honors from
the Columbia University Graduate School of Business (Finance). He served in the United States Army (Medical
Corps) and has been a member of the American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers, the
Foreign Policy Associate, the New York Society of Security Analysts and the Stock & Bond Club of South
Florida. He holds Series 6, 7, 24, 57 and 58 securities licenses.
Jordan Estra is also a director of Searchlight Minerals Corp. (TSX-V) and Meadow Bay Gold Corporation (TSX),
a publicly-traded company in the mining and metals industry.
Mr. Estra is a member of the Audit Committee and the Corporate Governance Committee.
Mr. Federico Villaseñor – Director
Mr. Villasenor has been a director of our Company since February, 2007. He is currently a consultant to various
mining companies. From 2007 to 2014, he served as the Business Development Director for Goldcorp Mexico,
a subsidiary of Goldcorp Inc., a leading global gold producer engaged in the acquisition, exploration,
development and operation of gold properties in Canada, the United States and Latin America. He obtained a
B.Sc. in Mining Engineering from the University of Guanajuato in 1972, a Master of Science from Columbia
University of New York City in 1976 and a Finance Degree from the Instituto Tecnologico de Mexico in 1985.
Mr. Villaseñor has been a member of the Mexican Mining Chamber Board.
Federico Villaseñor is also a director of Santacruz Silver Mining Ltd, which is listed on the TSX-V. Mr.
Villaseñor is Chair of the Audit Committee and a member of the Compensation Committee.
Mr. Ken Sumanik – Director
Mr. Sumanik has been a director of our Company since November, 1993. He is an environment and land
specialist with over 40 years of experience in logging and mining impact assessment and evaluation. From
1989 to 1999, he held the position of Vice-President of Environment and Land Use for the Mining Association of
British Columbia. Mr. Sumanik then served as Assistant to the Minister for Mining in British Columbia before
becoming involved with publicly listed junior mining companies on the TSX Venture Exchange and the Toronto
Stock Exchange.
Mr. Sumanik is currently a retired resource consultant.
Mr. Sumanik sits on the Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee and the Corporate Governance
Committee.
Dr. Michael Gunning – Director
Dr. Gunning has been a director of our Company since September, 2012. Dr. Gunning has more than 25 years
of diverse experience in mineral exploration and geological research, and is widely recognized for his expertise
in the uranium sector. He is currently Chairman at ALX Uranium Corporation, a junior mineral exploration
company. Prior to ALX, he was CEO of Hathor Exploration, a Vancouver-based junior uranium explorer
successfully sold to Rio Tinto PLC, followed by CEO of alpha Minerals, a junior uranium explorer successfully
sold to Fission Energy Corp. Prior to joining Hathor, Dr. Gunning served as President and CEO of Triex
Minerals, a junior mineral exploration company focused on uranium opportunities.
Dr. Gunning was the principal Mineral Deposits Research Geologist at the Saskatchewan Geological Survey,
before which, he was a Senior Project Geologist in Exploration at Tech Comino ltd., responsible for all aspects
of various exploration programs and initiatives in the Canadian high Arctic, Brazil and Mexico. He has a Ph.D.
in mineral deposits and volcanology from the University of Western Ontario, and is a past President of the
Saskatchewan Geological Society and the Society of Economic Geologists Student Chapter.
Dr. Gunning is also a director of ALX Uranium Corp. and Galena International Resources Ltd., which are listed
on the TSX-V, and he is President of Renntiger Resources Ltd., a private mineral exploration company.
47
 
B.
Compensation
Executive Compensation
The following table contains information about the compensation paid for services in all capacities to us,
including compensation paid to or earned by (a) our Chief Executive Officer (or an individual who acted in a
similar capacity); (b) our Chief Financial Officer (or an individual who acted in a similar capacity); (c) each of the
three most highly compensated executive officers, other than the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial
Officer, who were serving as executive officers as at April 30, 2016 and whose total salary and bonus exceeds
$150,000 during the period ended April 30, 2016; and (d) any additional individuals for whom disclosure would
have been provided under (c) except that the individual was not serving as an officer of our Company as of April
30, 2016.
Summary Compensation Table
Annual Compensation
Name and Principal
Position
Fiscal
Period
Ended
Fees
($)
Bonus
($)
2016(2)
270,000
240,000
NIL
120,000
Robert Eadie
CEO
2015
2014
240,000
120,000
Other
Annual
Compen-
sation
($)
–
–
–
Long Term Compensation
Awards
Securities Under
Options/
SARs
Granted (1)
(#)
–
Restricted
Shares or Share
Units
($)
44,580
43,977
–
–
–
Payouts
LTIP
Payouts
($)
All
Other
Compen-
sation
($)
–
–
–
–
–
–
David Gunning
COO
Gary Arca
CFO
2016(2)
180,000
180,000
NIL
45,000
2015
2014
180,000
90,000
2016(2)
180,000
NIL
180,000
180,000
75,000
90,000
2015
2014
–
31,206
30,784
–
31,206
30,784
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(1)The sum of the number of securities under option granted during each fiscal year, on a non-cumulative basis.
(2)The compensation figures provided for the fiscal period ended 2016 cover only the nine months from August
2015 to April 2016.
Long Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) Awards
We do not have any long term incentive plans and, except as disclosed above.
An LTIP is “any plan providing compensation intended to motivate performance over a period longer than one
fiscal year but does not include option or stock appreciation rights plans or plans for compensation through
shares or units that are subject to restrictions on resale”.
48
Option and Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs)
The Company has 2,808,750 options granted under previously approved stock option plans. The Company
does not currently have an active plan as shareholders rejected the Company’s share option plan dated for
reference January 17, 2011 (the “Plan”) at its annual general meeting in January 2014. No further options may
be granted under the Plan. However, the Plan continues to govern outstanding options that were granted under
it or otherwise made subject to it.
The Plan had been established to provide incentive to qualified parties to increase their proprietary interest in
the Company and thereby encourage their continuing association with the Company. The Plan is administered
by the Board. The Plan provided that options will be issued pursuant to option agreements to directors, officers,
employees or consultants of the Company or a subsidiary of the Company. All options expire on a date not later
than 10 years after the issuance of such option. Subject to the requirements of the policies of the TSX and the
prior receipt of any necessary regulatory approval, the Board may, in its absolute discretion, amend or modify
the Plan or any outstanding option granted under the Plan, as to the provisions set out in the Plan.
The process by which the Board has historically granted option-based awards to executive officers is: The
Board, after reviewing recommendations from the Compensation Committee and management, approves stock
option grants to executive officers and employees annually. Additional options may be granted as options are
replenished within the Plan. Options are granted at other times of the year to individuals commencing
employment with the Company. The exercise price for the options is set in accordance with the policies of the
TSX.
Please see “Share Ownership” for details relating to our previous stock option plan.
Option/SAR Grants During the Most Recently Completed Financial Year
During the most recently completed financial year ended April 30, 2016 and subsequent thereto, no stock
options were granted. See “Options and Stock Appreciation Rights.”
Aggregated Option/SAR Exercises During the Most Recently Completed Financial Year and Financial
Year-End Option/SAR Values
The following table sets forth the value of outstanding options held by the executive officers as of April 30, 2016.
The value of the unexercised in-the-money options at fiscal year end is the difference between the fair market
value of the common shares on April 30, 2016, which was $0.60, and the exercise price of the options.
Name
Securities Acquired
on Exercise
Aggregate Value
Realized 
($)
Robert
Eadie
Gary
Arca
David
Gunning
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Unexercised
Options at FY-End
(#)
Exercisable/
Unexercisable
  125,000(2)(3)
250,000(2)(4)
  100,000(2)(3) 
  175,000(2)(4)
100,000(3)
175,000(4)
Value of Unexercised in-the-Money
Options at FY-End
($)
Exercisable/ Unexercisable
Nil/Nil
Nil/Nil
Nil/Nil
(1)
The market price of the Company’s common shares as reported on the TSX on April 30, 2016 was $0.60 per
share.
(2)
Options are fully vested.
(3) Exercise price is $1.00
(4) Exercise price is $0.88.
49
Option and SAR Repricings
There were no repricings of stock options under the stock option plan or otherwise during our completed
financial year ended April 30, 2016. No amendments can be made to any outstanding options.
Defined Benefit or Actuarial Plan
We do not have a defined benefit or actuarial plan.
Compensation of Directors
The compensation provided to the directors, excluding the three officers named in the foregoing, for the
Company’s most recently completed financial year of April 30, 2016, is as follows:
Name(1)
Fees
earned(1)
($)
Share-
based
Awards
Option-based
awards
($)
Non-equity incentive plan
compensation
($)
Pension
value
($)
All other
compen-
sation(2)
Total
($)
Nil
15,000
Cory Kent 10,500
Ken
Sumanik
Jordan
Estra
Federico
Villaseñor
Serge
Depatie(3)
Michael
Gunning
14,246
9,750
Nil
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
($)
256,471
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
256,971
15,000
Nil
14,246
9,750
Nil
(1)
(2)
Includes all fees awarded, earned, paid or payable in cash for services as a director, including annual
retainer fees, committee, chair and meeting fees.
Includes all compensation paid, payable, awarded, granted, given or otherwise provided, directly or
indirectly, wherein the director received compensation for services rendered. The Company paid in legal fees
to a law firm of which Cory Kent is a partner.
(3)Mr. Depatie did not stand for re-election at the Company’s Annual General Meeting held o January 15, 2016.
Outstanding Share-based Awards and Option-based Awards
The following table sets out all share-based awards and option-based awards outstanding as at April 30, 2016,
for each director, excluding a director who is already set out in disclosure for a Named Executive Officer for the
Company:
Name
Option-based Awards
Number of
securities
underlying
unexercised
options
(#)
($)
Option
exercise
price
Share-based Awards
Option
expiration
date
Value of
unexercised
in-the-money
options(1)
($)
Number of shares
or units of shares
that have not
vested
(#)
Market or payout
value of share-based
awards that have not
vested
($)
Cory Kent12,500
12,500
12,500
Ken
Sumanik
Jordan
Estra
 
Michael
Gunning
Federico
VillaseñorNil
200,000
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$1.48
January
27, 2017
January
27, 2017
January
27, 2017
 
April 13,
2017
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
n/a
n/a
n/a
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
n/a
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
n/a
(1)     The market price of the Company’s common shares as reported on the TSX on April 16, 2016 was $0.60
per share.
50
Incentive Plan Awards – Value Vested or Earned During the Year
The following table sets out all incentive plans (value vested or earned) during the year ended April 30, 2016,
for each director who was not a Named Executive Officer:
Name
Option-based awards –
Value vested during the
year
($)
Cory Kent Nil
Ken
Sumanik
Jordan
Estra
 
Michael
Gunning
Federico
Villaseñor
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Share-based awards –
Value vested during the
year
($)
Nil
Non-equity incentive plan
compensation – Value earned during
the year
($)
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
(1)
The market price of the Company’s common shares on the date of grant was equal to the exercise price of
the options granted.
C.
Board Practices
Each director of our Company is elected annually and holds office until the next annual general meeting of the
shareholders unless that person ceases to be a director before then. Our last annual general meeting of the
shareholders was held on January 15, 2016.
Name and Position with the Company
Robert Eadie
Executive Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and Director
David Gunning
Chief Operating Officer and Director
Director/Officer Since
October 24, 2003
April 6,  2009
January 25,  2006
January 25, 2006
November 19, 1993
February 1, 2007
March 26, 2010
September 24, 2012
Gary Arca
Chief Financial Officer and Director
Cory Kent,
Corporate Secretary and Director
Ken Sumanik
Director
Federico Villaseñor
Director
Jordan Estra
Director
Michael Gunning
Director
51
2. Management Contracts
Pursuant to a management agreement effective as of August 2015, Robert Eadie is paid a fee of $360,000 per
annum, for acting as Chief Executive Officer of the Company. The agreement is for a term of five years to July
31, 2020 and may be terminated upon notice in writing and payment of $720,000. In addition, the agreement
provides that, for a period of 30 days after a “change of control”, Mr. Eadie may, by notice in writing to the
Company, deem the agreement to be terminated, in which case Mr. Eadie will receive a lump sum payment of
$720,000. A change of control (a “Change of Control”) is deemed to occur when (i) there is a sale of all or
substantially all of the assets of the Company, (ii) there is a merger of the Company whereby shareholders of
the Company hold less than 50% of the shares in the surviving entity, (iii) there is a change in ownership of
voting securities of the Company sufficient to permit any person to elect or appoint a majority of the Board of
Directors, (iv) any person or persons acting jointly or in concert acquire greater than 50% of the outstanding
voting securities of the Company, or (v) there is a change in the composition of the Board of Directors of the
Company as a result of a proposal by a shareholder group not supported by management resulting in current
members of the Board of Directors representing less than 51% of the members of the Board of Directors. In
addition to his management fees, Mr. Eadie received fees for his services as a director in the amount of $10,500
for the year ended April 30, 2016.
Pursuant to a management agreement effective as of August 2015, Gary Arca is paid a fee of $240,000 per
annum, for acting as Chief Financial Officer of the Company. The agreement is for a term of five years to July
31, 2020 and may be terminated upon notice in writing and payment of $480,000. In addition, the agreement
provides that, for a period of 30 days after a Change of Control, Mr. Arca may, by notice in writing to the
Company, deem the agreement to be terminated, in which case Mr. Arca will receive a lump sum payment of
$480,000. In addition to his management fees, Mr. Arca received fees for his services as a director in the
amount of $10,500 for the year ended April 30, 2016.
Pursuant to a management agreement effective as of August 2015, David Gunning is paid a fee of $240,000 per
annum, for acting as Chief Operating Officer of the Company. The agreement is for a term of five years to July
31, 2020 and may be terminated upon notice in writing and payment of $480,000. In addition, the agreement
provides that, for a period of 30 days after a Change of Control, Mr. Gunning may, by notice in writing to the
Company, deem the agreement to be terminated, in which case Mr. Gunning will receive a lump sum payment
of $480,000. In addition to his management fees, Mr. Gunning received fees for his services as a director in the
amount of $10,500 for the year ended April 30, 2016.
3. Committees
The members of our Company’s audit committee include Federico Villaseñor (Chairman), Ken Sumanik and
Jordan Estra. The audit committee is directly responsible for overseeing the work of the external auditors in
preparing or issuing the auditor’s report, including the resolution of disagreements between management and
the external auditors regarding financial reporting and audit scope or procedures. The audit committee also
considers whether adequate controls are in place over annual and interim financial reporting as well as controls
over assets, transactions and the creation of obligations, commitments and liabilities of our Company. The audit
committee also reviews the financial statements and financial information prior to its release to the public.
The members of our Company’s compensation committee are Cory Kent, Ken Sumanik and Federico
Villaseñor. The function of the Compensation Committee is to review periodically the compensation paid to the
Company’s executive officers and to the Directors, and to make recommendations on compensation to the
Board. In addition, the Committee reviews the compensation plans for the Company’s senior executive staff and
administers the Company’s stock option plan.
The members of our Company’s corporate governance committee are Ken Sumanik, Jordan Estra and Gary
Arca (Chairman). The Corporate Governance & Nominating Committee is charged with the responsibility of
developing corporate governance policies and seeking out individuals for appointment to the board of directors
as required.
Employees
D.
52
The San Martin mine operates with a combination of contractors and employees. Most of the hourly workers are
contracted through the union or syndicate. The mine has a good relationship with the union and has seen
significantly fewer labour issues than most other mines in Mexico.
As at April 30, 2016, we had the following employees and contractors:
Location
Full-Time SalariedHourly (Union)Contractors
Altiplano
12
San Martin Mine 61
Vancouver Office8
Total
81
0
163
0
163
0
75
5
80
Total
 
12
299
13
324
In comparison, we had the following employees and contractors as at July 31, 2015:
Location
Full-Time SalariedHourly (Union)Contractors
San Martin Mine 31
Vancouver Office6
Total
37
166
0
166
104
6
110
Total
 
301
12
313
In comparison, we had the following employees and contractors as at July 31, 2014:
Location
Full-Time SalariedHourly (Union)Contractors
San Martin Mine 33
Vancouver Office8
Total
41
E.
Share Ownership
169
0
169
128
3
131
Total
 
330
11
341
There were 49,146,851 common shares issued and outstanding as of April 30th, 2016. Of the shares issued and
outstanding, warrants held and stock options granted, our directors and officers owned the following common
shares as of April 30, 2016:
Name
Number of Common Shares
Beneficially Owned
Percentage
Robert Eadie 1,370,617
Gary Arca
569,499
David Gunning25,000
Cory Kent
77,625
2.79%
1.16%
0.5%
0.16%
The voting rights attached to the common shares owned by our officers and directors do not differ from those
voting rights attached to shares owned by people who are not officers or directors of our Company.
53
For information concerning options held by our officers and directors, please see “Compensation”.
Stock Option Plan
The Company does not currently have any equity compensation arrangements in place under which directors,
officers or employees can be granted an equity interest in the Company. The Company previously had an
incentive stock option plan in place (the “Plan”) pursuant to which the Board had the ability to grant options to
purchase common shares (“Options”) to directors, officers, employees and consultants to the Company. The
Plan was subject to shareholder approval, which was not received at the Company’s January 28, 2014 annual
general meeting. Options granted under the Plan prior to January 28, 2014 remain outstanding and are
exercisable; however no new Options may be granted under the Plan. As at the date of this Registration
Statement, Options to purchase 2,808,750 common shares remain outstanding under the Plan.
The following is a summary of the material terms of the Plan that apply to the outstanding Options:
(a)
All Options granted under the Plan are non-assignable, non-transferable, will be exercisable for such period
as is determined by the board of directors on the date of grant, such period not to exceed 10 years, and will
vest at the discretion of the board of directors;
for Options granted to employees or service providers (inclusive of management company employees), the
Company must ensure that the proposed Optionee is a bona fide employee or service provider (inclusive of a
management company employee), as the case may be, of the Company or of any of its subsidiaries;
(b)
(c)
if an Optionee ceases to be employed by the Company, other than as a result of termination with cause in
which case the option terminates immediately or ceases to act as a director or officer of the Company or a
subsidiary of the Company, any vested option held by such Optionee may be exercised within 30 days after
the date such Optionee ceases to be employed or act as an officer or director;
(d)
in the case of the death of an Optionee, any vested Option held by the Optionee at the date of death will
become exercisable by the Optionee’s lawful personal representatives, heirs or executors until the earlier of
one year after the date of death of such Optionee and the date of expiration of the term otherwise applicable
to such Option; and
(e)
subject to the policies of the Toronto Stock Exchange, the Plan and Options granted under it may be
amended without shareholder approval to:
·may make amendments which are of a typographical, grammatical, clerical or housekeeping nature only;
· No other amendments are allowed.
For information regarding outstanding stock options, please see “Compensation” above.
In May, 2016, the Board of Directors approved the adoption of a Restricted Share Unit and Deferred Share Unit
Plan (the “RSU/DSU Plan”) as part of the Company’s compensation arrangements for directors, officers,
employees or consultants of the Company or a related entity of the Company. The purpose of the RSU/DSU
Plan is to provide directors, officers, employees or consultants (the “Eligible Persons”) with the opportunity to
acquire restricted share units (RSU’s) and deferred share units (“DSUs”) of the Company, enabling them to
participate in the long-term success of the Company, and to promote a greater alignment of their interests with
the interests of the shareholders of the Company.
Although the RSU/DSU Plan is share-based, all vested RSUs and DSUs will be settled in cash. No common
shares will be issued.
Both RSUs and DSUs, and all other rights, benefits or interests in the RSU/DSU Plan are non- transferrable
(other than to a grantee’s beneficiary or estate, as the case may be, upon the death of the grantee). The RSUs
and DSUs to be granted to Eligible Persons under the RSU/DSU Plan will entitle the holder to receive the fair
market value of
54
common shares, subject to vesting and performance criteria (the “Performance Conditions”) established by the
Board. Accordingly, the RSUs and DSUs will track the value of the underlying common shares, but the grantees
will not receive the fair market value thereof until the applicable RSU or DSU vests, and upon vesting, will be
further subject to meeting the Performance Conditions.
For the purposes of the RSU/DSU Plan, the fair market value of the Common Shares is determined, as at a
particular date, by the volume weighted average (“VWAP”) of the trading price per common share on the
Toronto Stock Exchange (“TSX”) for the last ten (10) trading days ending on that date.
The RSU/DSU Plan is administered by the Board. The Board has the authority to delegate all of its powers and
authority under the RSU/DSU Plan to the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. The maximum
number of common shares to be made subject to the RSU/DSU Plan is set at 5% of the Company’s issued and
outstanding share capital which, together with options outstanding under the Company’s existing Stock Option
Plan, will not exceed 10% of the outstanding common shares of the Company. The Board will be guided by this
ceiling and the Performance Conditions described hereunder. The Board has also determined that it will not be
seeking shareholder approval for the Stock Option Plan to be renewed, once the outstanding stock options
have been exercised or expire, with the last outstanding options expiring on January 15, 2019.
Restricted Share Units
The purpose of the RSUs is to reward directors, officers, employees or consultants for their individual
performance and to provide an alternative incentive mechanism to the Company’s Stock Option Plan which
expires on January 15, 2019. The goal of such grants is to more closely align awards to individual performance
and established performance criteria.
The RSU/DSU Plan permits the Board to grant awards of RSUs to Eligible Persons. The Board of Directors has
the discretion to stipulate the length of time for vesting and to determine various performance conditions to be
met prior to payout of any RSUs. The Board has determined the following criteria to govern RSUs:
1. RSUs will vest over a period of three years from the date of grant, vesting as to one-third at the end of each
calendar year.
2. Performance Conditions will accompany vested RSUs as to the following percentages:
· 50% of vested RSUs will automatically be paid out;
25% of vested RSUs will be based on the market price having increased by a minimum of 10% per annum from
the initial year, or 30% over a 3-year term. If this criteria is not met in the first year, so long as the criteria is met
·
in either year 2 or year 3, the affected portion of vested RSUs will be paid out. If the criteria is not met, unpaid
RSUs will expire.
25% of vested RSUs will be based on meeting an earnings-per-share of $0.05 per annum. This portion of
·
vested RSUs will not carry over to the succeeding years. If this criteria is not met, this portion of vested RSUs
will expire in the year that they vest.
The Performance Conditions to be met are established by the Board at the time of grant of the RSU. RSUs that
are permitted to be carried over to the succeeding years shall expire no later than April 30th of the third calendar
year after the year in which the RSUs have been granted, and will be terminated to the extent the performance
objectives or other vesting criteria have not been met. Upon vesting, and upon applying the Performance
Conditions, the RSUs will be settled through a cash payment equal to the fair market value of the common
shares underlying the RSUs as of the date of vesting.
Treatment of Dividends
If the Company pays a cash dividend on its shares, the RSUs held by an RSU Grantee will be increased by (i)
multiplying the amount of the dividend per share by the aggregate number of Restricted Share Units that were
credited to the Eligible Person’s account as of the record date for such dividend, and (ii) dividing that amount by
the fair market value on the date on which the dividend is paid.
55
Termination and Change of Control
RSUs will remain outstanding and vest in accordance with their terms, unless the RSU Grantee is terminated by
the Company with cause, in which case all RSUs held by the RSU Grantee, whether vested or unvested will be
forfeited and cancelled without payment. In the event of a change of control of the Company and the subsequent
termination of the RSU Grantee, or a decrease or diminishment of the RSU Grantee’s duties, the RSUs will
immediately vest and be paid out. Upon resignation of a participant, all unvested RSUs will be automatically
cancelled and all rights in respect thereof will be forfeited for no consideration.
Deferred Share Units
Under the RSU/DSU Plan, the Board may, before a relevant date in respect of which compensation is otherwise
payable, grant DSUs to Eligible Persons (a “DSU Award”). In addition, Eligible Persons are permitted (subject
to the approval of the Board), at any time before compensation is earned, to elect to receive any portion of their
cash compensation in DSUs. Deferred Share Units issued pursuant to this Plan will be credited to a notional
account maintained for each Eligible Person for the purpose of facilitating the determination of amounts that
may become payable.
DSU Awards will vest for current DSU participants as to 25% of DSUs on the date of grant; and 25% on each
anniversary date of the grant over a period of 3 years. Vested DSUs will be calculated as to their cash value
equal to the fair market value of the common shares underlying the DSUs as of the date of vesting. Prior to the
vesting dates, DSU Participants will have the option to settle up to 50% of vested DSUs in the form of DSUs
being deposited into a notional account, the cash value of which will be deferred until the date that the Eligible
Person ceases to be an Eligible Person under the RSU/DSU Plan (the “Separation Date”). No cash settlements
will be given to the Eligible Person until he/she ceases to be an Eligible Person, whether such status changes
as a result of the termination of service of the Eligible Person by the Company, retirement or resignation of the
Eligible Person, removal from the Board of Directors, or otherwise, but in any event no later than April 30th of the
year following the year in which the Separation Date occurs, or in the case of the death of the of the holder of
the DSU Award, within two months of the death of the holder. All vested DSUs will be settled through a cash
payment equal to the fair market value of the common shares underlying the DSUs as of the date of vesting.
Treatment of dividends for DSUs will be the same as the treatment of dividends for RSUs.
Item 7
A.
Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions
Major Shareholders
The following table sets forth, as of April 30, 2016, the persons known to us to be the beneficial owner of more
than five percent (5%) of our common shares:
Name of Shareholder
No. of Common
Shares  Beneficially Owned
Percentage
of 
Outstanding
Common
Shares
Percentage
of 
Fully Diluted
Common
Shares(1)
2176423 Ontario Ltd. (a private company
controlled by Eric S. Sprott)
Toronto, Ontario
5,413,125(2)
11%
10.38%
Based on 49,146,851 common shares issued and outstanding as at April 30, 2016, and 2,985,534 being the
number of shares issuable upon the exercise of issued and outstanding stock options and warrants which
are exercisable, for a total of 52,094,885 fully diluted common shares.
The information is as at April 30, 2016, as derived from SEDI, the electronic filing system for Insider
Reporting. The number of common shares (5,413,125) is based on a post-consolidated basis.
(1)
(2)
56
The voting rights of our major shareholders do not differ from the voting rights of holders of our common shares
who are not major shareholders.
As at July 22, 2016, the registrar and transfer agent for our Company reported that there were 49,146,851
common shares of our Company issued and outstanding. Of these, 43,979,735 were registered to Canadian
residents 246 shareholders), 2,533,008 were registered to residents of the United States (104 shareholders)
and 3,864,209 were registered to residents of other foreign countries (11 shareholders).
To the best of our knowledge, our Company is not directly or indirectly owned or controlled by another
corporation, by any foreign government or by any other natural or legal person.
There are no arrangements known to us, the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in
the control of our Company.
B.
Related Party Transactions
Other than as disclosed below, to the best of our knowledge, there have been no material transactions since
formation of our Company to which we were or are a party and in which any of our directors or officers, any
relative or spouse of any director or officer, or any individual owning, directly or indirectly, an interest in our
voting power that gives it significant influence over us, has or will have a direct or indirect material interest nor
were any of our directors or officers, any relatives or spouses of such directors or officers, or any individuals
owning, directly or indirectly, an interest in our voting power that gives them significant influence over us,
indebted to us during this period.
We paid our directors and companies controlled by our directors consulting and management fees for the year
ended April 30, 2016.  Specifically, we paid Robert Eadie, our Chief Executive Officer and director, for his
management and consulting services and directors’ fees.  We paid Gary Arca, our Chief Financial Officer for his
management and consulting services and directors’ fees.  Finally, we paid in consulting fees to David Gunning,
our Chief Operating Officer and director during the year ended April 30, 2016 for his management and
consulting services and directors’. (See “Management Contracts.”)
At the time that Starcore and Cortez Gold agreed to their business combination transaction described in Item 4B
- Our Business Overview, three directors of Cortez Gold were also directors of Starcore, namely, Robert Eadie,
Gary Arca and Federico Villaseñor.
C.
Interests of experts and counsel
David Gunning, a director and the Company’s Chief Operating Officer, is co-author of the Technical Report on
the San Martin Mine.
Cory Kent, a director and the Company’s Corporate Secretary, is a partner at McMillan LLP, counsel to the
Company. As a partner, he participates in fees paid by the Company to McMillan LLP.
Item 8                                    Financial Information
A. Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
Item 18 of this Registration Statement contains our financial statements as at and for the years ended April 30,
2016 and July 31, 2015. Our financial statements are stated in Canadian dollars and have been prepared in
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, as issued by the International Accounting
Standards Board.
Export Sales
(All dollar figures are in ‘000s)
Export sales constituted 100 percent of our Company’s total sales volume during the fiscal years disclosed in
the following table:
57
YearSales Export Sales (%)
2016$20,326100%
2015$28,405100%
2014$33,136100%
2013$30,246100%
2012$57,039100%
Legal Proceedings
There are no legal proceedings to which our Company is a party and, to our knowledge, no such proceedings
are pending.
On December 22, 2015, the SEC initiated proceedings under Section 12(j) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 for our Company’s failure to comply with Exchange Act Section 13(a) and Rules 13a-1 and 13a-13
thereunder because it had not filed any periodic reports with the Commission since the period ended April 30,
2004. On January 25, 2016, the Company executed an Offer of Settlement presented by the SEC to settle the
proceedings. The SEC issued its Final Order on February 1, 2016.
Dividend Policy
Our Company does not have a formal dividend policy.
Our Company paid our shareholders dividends in September 2014. Any future payment of dividends or
distributions will be determined by the board of directors of our Company on the basis of our Company's
earnings, financial requirements and other relevant factors. Successful operation of our business is subject to a
number of risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors” appearing on
page8, above.
B.
Significant Changes
Not Applicable
Item 9                                    The Offer and Listing
A.
Offer and Listing Details
Not Applicable
B.
Plan of Distribution
Not Applicable
C.
Markets
Our common shares trade on the TSX Exchange (Toronto Stock Exchange) with symbol “SAM” and our CUSIP
number is 85525T202. Our common shares also trade on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange with symbol V4JA.
D.
Selling shareholders
Not Applicable
E.
Dilution
Not Applicable
F.
Expenses of the issue
Not Applicable
58
Item 10
A.
Additional Information
Share capital.
1. Issued Capital
The following table sets forth certain particulars regarding the Company’s common shares that are issued and
outstanding as at April 30, 2016. All common shares issued and outstanding are fully paid.
(Dollar Amounts are in thousands of Canadian dollars)
Number of
common
shares
Number of common
shares Issued and
Number of
Outstanding
Value of
common
Book value of
common
Number of
Outstanding
Book value of
common
Authorized Outstanding as April
30, 2016
Unlimited 49,146,851(1)(2)
shares common shares as
at July 31, 2015(3)
37,986,760
No par
value
shares as at
July 31, 2015
$45,354
common shares as
at July 31, 2014(3)
35,878,915
shares as at
July 31, 2014
$44,023
(1)The Company consolidated its common shares on a 1 for 4 basis effective on December 14, 2015.
(2)
On January 19, 2016, after receiving shareholder approval, 3,993,203 outstanding subscription receipts were
converted into common shares.
(3) The number of outstanding common shares is on a consolidated basis.
The Company has the following common stock purchase warrants and common stock options issued and
outstanding as at April30, 2016:
Common Stock Purchase Warrants
NILNLNILNIL
Common Stock Options
Grant DateExpiry DateOutstandingExercise Price
16-Jan-12 16-Jan-17 100,000
27-Jan-12 27-Jan-17 485,000
13-Apr-12 13-Apr-17 812,500
22-Aug-13 22-Aug-18 200,000
22-Aug-13 22-Aug-18 68,750
06-Sep-13 06-Sep-18 50,000
12-Sep-13 12-Sep-18 50,000
59
$0.80
$1.00
$1.48
$0.25
$0.80
$0.92
$1.00
15-Jan-1415-Jan-191,042,500$0.88
 Total
2,808,750
Issuance of Common Shares
Year Ended April 30, 2016
Further to the closing of the Company’s acquisition of Cortez Gold Corp. (“Cortez Gold”) on September 3, 2015
pursuant to a plan of arrangement, the Company issued 15,972,810 Subscription Receipts (the “Receipts”), in
full and complete settlement of outstanding debt as at July 31, 2015 in the aggregate amount of USD
$1,725,000 (Cdn$2,241,000) owed to certain creditors. The Receipts were issued at a deemed price of
Cdn$0.14 per Receipt.
The debt relates to outstanding loans that were incurred in 2014 to complete construction of the Altiplano gold
and silver processing plant in Matehuala, Mexico, by Cortez Gold. The Receipts were subject to a four-month
hold period under applicable Canadian securities laws.
The Subscription Receipts were convertible, with no further action required by the creditors, into one common
share of the Company upon receipt of shareholder approval at the Company’s annual general meeting
scheduled for January 2016. If shareholder approval was not received, no shares would be issued and the
Receipt holders would receive a cash settlement.
On January 15, 2016, at the Company’s Annual General Meeting, shareholders approved the conversion of the
subscription receipts. On January 19, 2016, the Company issued 3,993,203 common shares to settle the debt.
Year Ended July 31, 2015
During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company issued:
·2,575,000 shares pursuant to the exercise of options at $0.15 per share for gross proceeds of $386,250; and
5,856,382 shares pursuant to the plan of arrangement at a deemed issue price of $0.13 per share whereby the
·
Company acquired all of the outstanding common shares of American Consolidated Minerals Corp.
Year Ended July 31, 2014
During the year ended July 31, 2014, the Company issued:
125,000 shares pursuant to the exercise of stock options at $0.15 per share for gross proceeds of $18,750.
B. Memorandum and articles of association.
1.
Articles of Incorporation and By-laws
The Company was incorporated on October 17, 1980 is registered at the BC Registry Services (British
Columbia, Canada) with incorporation number BC0218266 at Vancouver, BC. The Company has undergone
several name changes (see Item 4). The Company’s articles of Incorporation contain no restrictions about
objects and purposes.
2. Provisions regarding Directors
a) Part 17 of the articles of incorporation regulates the way a Director must act, vote and disclose when there is
interest in an agreement, proposal or contract. If a breach in these provisions occurs, the Director will be liable
to account to the Company for any profit that accrues to the Director as a result of the contract or transaction to
the extent provided in the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (Part 17.1). With regard to voting, if
present at the meeting, the Director who has an interest in a contract or transaction, can be counted in the
quorum but is not
60
entitled to vote (Part 17.2 and 17.3). The interested Director has the obligation to disclose his interest according
to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (Part 17.4).
b) Part 13.5 of the Articles of Incorporation provides that directors are entitled to remuneration, if any, as
Directors from time to time determine and if they do so the remuneration may be determined by the
shareholders. That remuneration may be in addition to any salary or other remuneration paid to any officer or
employee of the Company as such, who is also a director. Part 13.7 provides that if any director performs any
professional or other services for the Company, that in the opinion of the directors are outside the ordinary
duties of a director, or if any director is otherwise specially occupied in or about the Company’s business, he or
she may be paid remuneration fixed by the directors, or at the option of that director, fixed by ordinary resolution,
and such remuneration may be either in addition to, or in substitution for, any other remuneration that he or she
may be entitled to receive.
c) Part 8.1 of the Articles of Incorporation provides that the Company may, if authorized by the directors:
(1)
borrow money in the manner and amount, on the security, from the sources and on the terms and conditions
that they consider appropriate;
(2)
issue bonds, debentures and other debt obligations either outright or as security for any liability or obligation
of our Company or any other person and at such discounts or premiums and on such other terms as they
consider appropriate;
(3)
guarantee the repayment of money by any other person or the performance of any obligation of any other
person; and
(4)
mortgage or charge, whether by way of specific or floating charge, grant a security interest in, or give other
security on, the whole or any part of the present and future assets and undertaking of our Company.
d) There is no provision in the Company’s Articles of Incorporation imposing a requirement for retirement or
non-retirement of directors under an age limit requirement.
e) Part 13.4 of the articles of Incorporation states that a Director is not required to hold a share in the capital of
the Company as qualification for his or her office but must be qualified as required by the Business
Corporations Act (British Columbia) to become, act or continue to act as a director.
3. Rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to each class of the shares
The authorized capital consists of an unlimited number of common shares without par value.
Each common share entitles the holder thereof to notice and to attend and to cast one vote for each matter to be
decided at a general meeting of our Company. The Company’s common shares do not have special rights or
restrictions attached.
4. Changing Share Rights
The Company’s articles of incorporation do not describe the rights, preferences and restrictions attaching to
each class of the shares, but subject to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), by special resolution
of the shareholders (a special resolution of our shareholders must be approved by at least 2/3 of our
shareholders that are present at a meeting):
(a)
create special rights or restrictions for, and attach those special rights or restrictions to, the shares of any
class or series of shares, whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued; or
(b)
vary or delete any special rights or restrictions attached to the shares of any class or series of shares,
whether or not any or all of those shares have been issued.
5. Shareholders’ meetings
61
Part 10 of the Company’s Articles of Incorporation regulates the meetings of shareholders.
Part 10.1 of our Articles of Incorporation provides that, unless an annual general meeting is deferred or waived
in accordance with Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), an annual general meeting must be held at
least once in each calendar year and not more than 15 months after the last annual reference date at such time
and place as may be determined by directors.
The notice for meetings of Shareholders is contemplated in Part 10.4 of the Company’s Articles of Incorporation
and provides that the Company must send notice of the date, time and location of any meeting of shareholders,
in the manner provided in the Articles of Incorporation or in such other manner, if any, as may be prescribed by
ordinary resolution, to each shareholder entitled to attend the meeting, to each director and to the auditor of our
Company, unless the Articles otherwise provide, at least 21 days before the meeting. Part 10.5 provides that the
directors may set a date as the record date for the purpose of determining shareholders entitled to notice of any
meeting of shareholders and entitled to vote at any meeting of shareholders, the record date must not precede
the date on which the meeting is to be held by more than two months and at least 21 days before.
Generally, notice of a meeting of the shareholders called for any purpose other than consideration of the
financial statements and any reports of the directors or auditor, the setting and changing of the number of
directors, the election or appointment of directors and appointment of auditor, the setting of the remuneration of
the auditor, shall state the general nature of the special business and if the special business includes
considering, approving, ratifying, adopting or authorizing any document or the signing of or giving effect to any
document, have attached to it a copy of the document or state that a copy of the document will be available for
inspection by shareholders at our records office or such other reasonably accessible location in British
Columbia.
The accidental omission to send notice of any meeting to, or the non-receipt of any notice by, a shareholder will
not invalidate any proceedings at that meeting. A shareholder may in any manner waive notice of or otherwise
consent to a meeting of shareholders.
6. Limitations on Ownership of Securities
There are no limitations imposed by the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), our Notice of Articles or
our Articles of Incorporation, on the right of non-resident or foreign shareholders to own or vote securities of the
Company. However, the Investment Canada Act (Canada) will prohibit implementation, or if necessary, require
divestiture of an investment deemed “reviewable” under the Investment Canada Act by an investor that is not a
“Canadian” as defined in the Investment Canada Act, unless after review the Minister responsible for the
Investment Canada Act is satisfied that the “reviewable” investment is likely to be of net benefit to Canada.
The following discussion summarizes the principal features of the Investment Canada Act for a non-Canadian
who proposes to acquire common shares of our Company. The discussion is general only; it is not a substitute
for independent legal advice from an investor's own adviser; and, except where expressly noted, it does not
anticipate statutory or regulatory amendments.
The Investment Canada Act is a federal statute of broad application regulating the establishment and
acquisition of Canadian businesses by non-Canadians, including individuals, governments or agencies thereof,
corporations, partnerships, trusts or joint ventures, Investments by non-Canadians to acquire control over
existing Canadian businesses or to establish new ones are either reviewable or notifiable under the Investment
Canada Act. If an investment by a non-Canadian to acquire control over an existing Canadian business is
reviewable under the Investment Canada Act, the Investment Canada Act generally prohibits implementation of
the investment unless, after review, the Minister of Industry is satisfied that the investment is likely to be of net
benefit to Canada.
An investment in our common shares by a non-Canadian, who is not a resident of a World Trade Organization
(“WTO”) member, would be reviewable under the Investment Canada Act if it was an investment to acquire
control of our Company and the value of the assets of our Company was CAN$5 million or more. An investment
in our common shares by residents of WTO members would be reviewable only if it was an investment to
acquire control of our Company and the value of the assets of our Company was equal to or greater than a
specified amount, which is published by the Minister after its determination for any particular year. This amount
is currently CAN $600 million for the year 2016; it will increase to CAN $800 million starting April 24, 2017.
62
A non-Canadian would be deemed to acquire control of our Company for the purposes of the Investment
Canada Act if the non-Canadian acquired a majority of our outstanding common shares (or less than a majority
but controlled our Company in fact through the ownership of one-third or more of our outstanding common
shares) unless it could be established that, on the acquisition, we were not controlled in fact by the acquirer
through the ownership of such common shares. Certain transactions in relation to our common shares would be
exempt from review under the Investment Canada Act, including, among others, the following:
(a)
the acquisition of voting shares or other voting interests by any person in the ordinary course of that person’s
business as a trader or dealer in securities;
(b)
the acquisition of control of our Company in connection with the realization of security granted for a loan or
other financial assistance and not for any purpose related to the provisions of this Act, if the acquisition is
subject to approval under the Bank Act (Canada), the Cooperative Credit Associations Act (Canada),
the Insurance Companies Act (Canada) or the Trust and Loan Companies Act (Canada); and
(c)
the acquisition of control of our Company by reason of an amalgamation, merger, consolidation or corporate
reorganization following which the ultimate direct or indirect control of our Company, through the ownership
of voting interests, remains unchanged.
7. Change in Control
There are no provisions in our articles of incorporation, nor in any by-law that would have the effect of delaying,
deferring or preventing a change in control of our Company, and that would operate only with respect to a
merger, acquisition or corporate restructuring involving our Company.
The Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) does not contain any provisions that would have the effect of
delaying, deferring or preventing a change of control of our Company. Generally, there are no significant
differences between Canadian and United States law in this regard, as many state corporation statutes also do
not contain such provisions and only empower our board of directors to adopt such provisions.
8. Ownership Threshold
There are no provisions in our articles or in the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) governing the
threshold above which shareholder ownership must be disclosed. The Securities Act (British Columbia)
requires us to disclose, in our annual general meeting proxy statement, holders who beneficially own more than
10% of our issued and outstanding shares. Most state corporation statutes do not contain provisions governing
the threshold above which shareholder ownership must be disclosed. United States federal securities laws
require us to disclose, in our Registration Statement on Form 20-F, holders who own more than 5% of our
issued and outstanding shares.
9. Changes in the Capital of the Company
There are no conditions imposed by our articles or our bylaws which are more stringent than those required by
the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
C.
Material Contracts
With the exception of the contracts listed below, we have not entered into any material contracts during the last
twenty-four months that were outside those entered into in the ordinary course of business.
1.
Arrangement Agreement dated October 1, 2014 between the Company and American Consolidated covering
the acquisition by the Company of all of the shares of American Consolidated pursuant to a plan of
arrangement in accordance with the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
63
2.
Arrangement Agreement dated May 29, 2015 between the Company and Cortez Gold covering the acquisition
by the Company of all of the shares of Cortez Gold pursuant to a plan of arrangement in accordance with the
Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).
D.
Exchange Controls
There are no government laws, decrees or regulations in Canada which restrict the export or import of capital or
which affect the remittance of dividends, interest or other payments to non-resident holders of our common
shares. Any remittances of dividends to United States residents and to other non-residents are, however,
subject to withholding tax. See “Taxation” below.
Except as provided in the Investment Canada Act (Canada), which has rules regarding certain acquisitions of
shares by non-residents, there is no limitation imposed by Canadian law or by our charter or other constituent
documents on the right of a non-resident to hold or vote our common shares. The Investment Canada Act is a
Canadian federal statute of broad application regulating the establishment and acquisition of Canadian
businesses by non-Canadians, including individuals, governments or agencies thereof, corporations,
partnerships, trusts or joint ventures. Investments by non-Canadians to acquire control over existing Canadian
businesses or to establish new ones are either reviewable or notifiable under the Investment Canada Act. If an
investment by a non-Canadian to acquire control over an existing Canadian business is reviewable under the
Investment Canada Act, the Investment Canada Act generally prohibits implementation of the investment
unless, after review, the Minister of Industry is satisfied that the investment is likely to be of net benefit to
Canada.
E.
Taxation
Canadian Federal Income Taxation
We consider that the following summary fairly describes the principal Canadian federal income tax
consequences applicable to a holder of our common shares who at all material times deals at arm's length with
our Company, who holds all common shares as capital property, who is resident in the United States, who is not
a resident of Canada and who does not use or hold, and is not deemed to use or hold, his common shares of
our Company in connection with carrying on a business in Canada (a “non-resident holder”). It is assumed that
the common shares will at all material times be listed on a stock exchange that is prescribed for purposes of the
Income Tax Act (Canada) (the “ITA”) and regulations thereunder. Investors should be aware that the Canadian
federal income tax consequences applicable to holders of our common shares will change if, for any reason, we
cease to be listed on a prescribed stock exchange. Accordingly, holders and prospective holders of our
common shares should consult with their own tax advisors with respect to the income tax consequences of
them purchasing, owing and disposing of our common shares should we cease to be listed on a prescribed
stock exchange.
This summary is based upon the current provisions of the ITA, the regulations thereunder, the Canada-United
States Tax Convention as amended by the Protocols thereto (the “Treaty”) as at the date of the Registration
Statement and the currently publicly announced administrative and assessing policies of the Canada Revenue
Agency (the “CRA”). This summary does not take into account Canadian provincial income tax consequences.
This description is not exhaustive of all possible Canadian federal income tax consequences and does not take
into account or anticipate any changes in law, whether by legislative, governmental or judicial action. This
summary does, however, take into account all specific proposals to amend the ITA and regulations thereunder,
publicly announced by the Government of Canada to the date hereof.
This summary does not address potential tax effects relevant to our Company or those tax
considerations that depend upon circumstances specific to each investor. Accordingly, holders and
prospective holders of our common shares should consult with their own tax advisors with respect to
the income tax consequences to them of purchasing, owning and disposing of common shares in our
Company.
Dividends
The ITA provides that dividends and other distributions deemed to be dividends paid or deemed to be paid by a
Canadian resident corporation (such as our Company) to a non-resident of Canada shall be subject to a non-
resident withholding tax equal to 25% of the gross amount of the dividend of deemed dividend. Provisions in the
ITA
64
relating to dividend and deemed dividend payments to and gains realized by non-residents of Canada, who are
residents of the United States, are subject to the Treaty. The Treaty may reduce the withholding tax rate on
dividends as discussed below.
Article X of the Treaty as amended by the US-Canada Protocol ratified on November 9, 1995 provides a 5%
withholding tax on gross dividends or deemed dividends paid to a United States corporation which beneficially
owns at least 10% of the voting stock of the company paying the dividend. In cases where dividends or deemed
dividends are paid to a United States resident (other than a corporation) or a United States corporation which
beneficially owns less than 10% of the voting stock of a company, a withholding tax of 15% is imposed on the
gross amount of the dividend or deemed dividend paid. We would be required to withhold any such tax from the
dividend and remit the tax directly to the CRA for the account of the investor.
The reduction in withholding tax from 25%, pursuant to the Treaty, will not be available:
(a)
if the shares in respect of which the dividends are paid formed part of the business property or were
otherwise effectively connected with a permanent establishment or fixed base that the holder has or had in
Canada within the 12 months preceding the disposition, or
(b) the holder is a U.S. LLC which is not subject to tax in the U.S.
The Treaty generally exempts from Canadian income tax dividends paid to a religious, scientific, literary,
educational or charitable organization or to an organization exclusively administering a pension, retirement or
employee benefit fund or plan, if the organization is resident in the U.S. and is exempt from income tax under
the laws of the U.S.
Capital Gains
A non-resident holder is not subject to tax under the ITA in respect of a capital gain realized upon the
disposition of one of our shares unless the share represents “taxable Canadian property” to the holder thereof.
Our common shares will be considered taxable Canadian property to a non-resident holder only if-.
(a) the non-resident holder;
(b) persons with whom the non-resident holder did not deal at arm's length- or
(c) the non-resident holder and persons with whom he did not deal at arm's length,
owned not less than 25% of the issued shares of any class or series of our Company at any time during the five
year period preceding the disposition. In the case of a non-resident holder to whom shares of our Company
represent taxable Canadian property and who is resident in the United States, no Canadian taxes will generally
be payable on a capital gain realized on such shares by reason of the Treaty unless:
(a)
(b)
the value of such shares is derived principally from real property (including resource property) situated in
Canada,
the holder was resident in Canada for 120 months during any period of 20 consecutive years preceding, and
at any time during the 10 years immediately preceding, the disposition and the shares were owned by him
when he ceased to be a resident of Canada,
they formed part of the business property or were otherwise effectively connected with a permanent
establishment or fixed base that the holder has or bad in Canada within the 12 months preceding the
disposition, or
(c)
(d)
the holder is a U.S. LLC which is not subject to tax in the U.S.
If subject to Canadian tax on such a disposition, the taxpayer's capital gain (or capital loss) from a disposition is
the amount by which the taxpayer’s proceeds of disposition exceed (or are exceeded by) the aggregate of the
taxpayer's
65
adjusted cost base of the shares and reasonable expenses of disposition. For Canadian income tax purposes,
the “taxable capital gain” is equal to one-half of the capital gain.
United States Federal Income Taxation
The following is a discussion of the material United States Federal income tax consequences, under current
law, applicable to a U.S. Holder (as defined below) of our common shares who holds such shares as capital
assets. This discussion does not address all potentially relevant Federal income tax matters and it does not
address consequences peculiar to persons subject to special provisions of Federal income tax law, such as
those described below as excluded from the definition of a U.S. Holder. In addition, this discussion does not
cover any state, local, or foreign tax consequences. (See “Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences”
above.)
The following discussion is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), Treasury
Regulations, published Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) rulings, published administrative positions of the IRS
and court decisions that are currently applicable, any or all of which could be materially and adversely changed,
possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time. In addition, this discussion does not consider the potential effects,
both adverse and beneficial, of any recently proposed legislation which, if enacted, could be applied, possibly
on a retroactive basis, at any time.
The discussion below does not address potential tax effects relevant to our Company or those tax
considerations that depend upon circumstances specific to each investor. In addition, this discussion
does not address the tax consequences that may be relevant to particular investors subject to special
treatment under certain U.S. Federal income tax laws, such as dealers in securities, tax-exempt entities,
banks, insurance companies and non-U.S. Holders. Purchasers of shares of our common stock should
therefore satisfy themselves as to the overall tax consequences of their ownership of our common
stock, including the State, local and foreign tax consequences thereof (which are not reviewed herein),
and should consult their own tax advisors with respect to their particular circumstances.
U.S. Holders
As used herein, a “U.S. Holder” includes a beneficial holder of common shares of our Company who is a citizen
or resident of the United States, a corporation or partnership created or organized in or under the laws of the
United States or of any political subdivision thereof, any trust if a US court is able to exercise primary
supervision over the administration of the trust and one or more US persons have the authority to control all
substantial decisions of the trust, any entity created or organized in the United States which is taxable as a
corporation for U.S. tax purposes and any other person or entity whose ownership of common shares of our
Company is effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States. A U.S. Holder
does not include persons subject to special provisions of Federal income tax law, such as tax-exempt
organizations, qualified retirement plans, financial institutions, insurance companies, real estate investment
trusts, regulated investment companies, broker-dealers, non-resident alien individuals or foreign corporations
whose ownership of our common shares is not effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in
the United States and shareholders who acquired their shares through the exercise of employee stock options
or otherwise as compensation.
Dividend Distribution on Shares of our Company
U.S. Holders receiving dividend distributions (including constructive dividends) with respect to the common
shares of our Company are required to include in gross income for United States Federal income tax purposes
the gross amount of such distributions to the extent that we have current or accumulated earnings and profits,
without reduction for any Canadian income tax withheld from such distributions. Such Canadian tax withheld
may be deducted or may be credited against actual tax payable, subject to certain limitations and other complex
rules, against the U.S. Holder's United States Federal taxable income. See “Foreign Tax Credit” below. To the
extent that distributions exceed our current or accumulated earnings and profits, they will be treated first as a
return of capital to the extent of the shareholder's basis in the common shares of our Company and thereafter as
gain from the sale or exchange of the common shares of our Company. Preferential tax rates for net long term
capital gains may be applicable to a U.S. Holder which is an individual, estate or trust.
66
In general, dividends paid on our common shares will not be eligible for the dividends received deduction
provided to corporations receiving dividends from certain United States corporations.
Foreign Tax Credit
A U.S. Holder who pays (or who has had withheld from distributions) Canadian income tax with respect to the
ownership of our common shares may be entitled, at the election of the U.S. Holder, to either a deduction or a
tax credit for such foreign tax paid or withheld. This election is made on a year-by-year basis and generally
applies to all foreign income taxes paid by (or withheld from) the U.S. Holder during that year. There are
significant and complex limitations which apply to the credit, among which is the general limitation that the
credit cannot exceed the proportionate share of the U.S. Holder's United States income tax liability that the U.S.
Holder's foreign source income bears to his or its world-wide taxable income. In determining the application of
this limitation, the various items of income and deduction must be classified into foreign and domestic sources.
Complex rules govern income such as “passive income”, “high withholding tax interest”, “financial services
income”, “shipping income” and certain other classifications of income. A U.S. Holder who is treated as a
domestic U.S. corporation owning 10% or more of our voting stock is also entitled to a deemed paid foreign tax
credit in certain circumstances for the underlying foreign tax of our Company related to dividends received or
Subpart F income received from us. (See the discussion below of Controlled Foreign Corporations). The
availability of the foreign tax credit and the application of the limitations on the foreign tax credit are fact specific
and holders and prospective holders of our common shares should consult their own tax advisors regarding
their individual circumstances.
Disposition of Common Shares
If a U.S. Holder is holding shares as a capital asset, a gain or loss realized on a sale of our common shares will
generally be a capital gain or loss, and will be long-term if the shareholder has a holding period of more than
one year. However, gains realized upon sale of our common shares may, under certain circumstances, be
treated as ordinary income, if we were determined to be a “collapsible corporation” within the meaning of Code
Section 341 based on the facts in existence on the date of the sale (See below for definition of “collapsible
corporation”). The amount of gain or loss recognized by a selling U.S. Holder will be measured by the difference
between (i) the amount realized on the sale and (ii) his tax basis in our common shares. Capital losses are
deductible only to the extent of capital gains. However, in the case of taxpayers other than corporations (U.S.)
$3,000 ($1,500 for married individuals filing separately) of capital losses are deductible against ordinary income
annually. In the case of individuals and other non-corporate taxpayers, capital losses that are not currently
deductible may be carried forward to other years. In the case of corporations, capital losses that are not currently
deductible are carried back to each of the three years preceding the loss year and forward to each of the five
years succeeding the loss year.
A “collapsible corporation” is a corporation that is formed or availed principally to manufacture, construct,
produce, or purchase prescribed types or property that the corporation holds for less than three years and that
generally would produce ordinary income on its disposition, with a view to the stockholders selling or
exchanging their stock and thus realizing gain before the corporation realizes two thirds of the taxable income to
be derived from prescribed property. Prescribed property includes: stock in trade and inventory; property held
primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course of business; unrealized receivables or fees, consisting of
rights to payment for non-capital assets delivered or to be delivered, or services rendered or to be rendered to
the extent not previously included in income, but excluding receivables from selling property that is not
prescribed; and property gain on the sale of which is subject to the cap-ital gain/ordinary loss rule. Generally, a
shareholder who owns directly or indirectly 5 percent or less of the outstanding stock of the corporation may
treat gain on the sale of his shares as capital gain.
Other Considerations for U.S. Holders
In the following circumstances, the above sections of this discussion may not describe the United States
Federal income tax consequences resulting from the holding and disposition of common shares of the
Registrant.
Foreign Personal Holding Company
If at any time during a taxable year more than 50% of the total combined voting power or the total value of our
outstanding shares is owned, actually or constructively, by five or fewer individuals who are citizens or residents
of the United States and 60% or more of our gross income for such year was derived from certain passive
sources (e.g.,
67
from dividends received from its subsidiaries), we would be treated as a “foreign personal holding company.” In
that event, U.S. Holders that hold common shares in our capital would be required to include in income for such
year their allocable portion of our passive income which would have been treated as a dividend had that
passive income actually been distributed.
Foreign Investment Company
If 50% or more of the combined voting power or total value of our outstanding shares are held, actually or
constructively, by citizens or residents of the United States, United States domestic partnerships or
corporations, or estates or trusts other than foreign estates or trusts (as defined by the Code Section 7701(a)
(31)), and we are found to be engaged primarily in the business of investing, reinvesting, or trading in securities,
commodities, or any interest therein, it is possible that we might be treated as a “foreign investment company”
as defined in Section 1246 of the Code, causing all or part of any gain realized by a U.S. Holder selling or
exchanging our common shares to be treated as ordinary income rather than capital gains.
Passive Foreign Investment Company
A U.S. Holder who holds stock in a foreign corporation during any year in which such corporation qualifies as a
passive foreign investment company (“PFIC”) is subject to U.S. federal income taxation of that foreign
corporation under one of two alternative tax methods at the election of each such U.S. Holder.
Section 1297 of the Code defines a PFIC as a corporation that is not formed in the United States and, for any
taxable year, either (i) 75% or more of its gross income is “passive income,” which includes interest, dividends
and certain rents and royalties or (ii) the average percentage, by value (or, if the company is a controlled foreign
corporation or makes an election, adjusted tax basis), of its assets that produce or are held for the production of
“passive income” is 50% or more. For taxable years of U.S. persons beginning after December 31, 1997, and for
tax years of foreign corporations ending with or within such tax years, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 provides
that publicly traded corporations must apply this test on a fair market value basis only.
As a PFIC, each U.S. Holder must determine under which of the alternative tax methods it wishes to be taxed.
Under one method, a U.S. Holder who elects in a timely manner to treat the Registrant as a Qualified Electing
Fund (“QEF”), as defined in the Code, (an “Electing U.S. Holder”) will be subject, under Section 1293 of the
Code, to current federal income tax for any taxable year in which we qualify as a PFIC on his pro-rata share of
our (i) “net capital gain” (the excess of net long-term capital gain over net short-term capital loss), which will be
taxed as long-term capital gain to the Electing U.S. Holder and (ii) “ordinary earnings” (the excess of earnings
and profits over net capital gain), which will be taxed as ordinary income to the Electing U.S. Holder, in each
case, for the U.S. Holder's taxable year in which (or with which) our taxable year ends, regardless of whether
such amounts are actually distributed. Such an election, once made shall apply to all subsequent years unless
revoked with the consent of the IRS.
A QEF election also allows the Electing U.S. Holder to (i) generally treat any gain realized on the disposition of
his common shares (or deemed to be realized on the pledge of his common shares) as capital gain; (ii) treat his
share of our net capital gain, if any, as long-term capital gain instead of ordinary income, and (iii) either avoid
interest charges resulting from PFIC status altogether (see discussion of interest charge below), or make an
annual election, subject to certain limitations, to defer payment of current taxes on his share of our annual
realized net capital gain and ordinary earnings subject, however, to an interest charge. If the Electing U.S.
Holder is an individual, such an interest charge would be not deductible.
The procedure a U.S. Holder must comply with in making a timely QEF election will depend on whether the
year of the election is the first year in the U.S. Holder's holding period in which we are a PFIC. If the U.S. Holder
makes a QEF election in such first year, (sometimes referred to as a “Pedigreed QEF Election”), then the U.S.
Holder may make the QEF election by simply filing the appropriate documents at the time the U.S. Holder files
its tax return for such first year. If, however, we qualified as a PFIC in a prior year, then the U.S. Holder may
make an “Unpedigreed QEF Election” by recognizing as an “excess distribution” (i) under the rules of Section
1291 (discussed below), any gain that he would otherwise recognize if the U.S. Holder sold his stock on the
qualification date (Deemed Sale Election) or (ii) if we are a controlled foreign corporation (“CFC”), the Holder's
pro rata share of the corporation's earnings and profits (Deemed Dividend Election) (But see “Elimination of
Overlap Between Subpart F Rules and
68
PFIC Provisions”). The effect of either the deemed sale election or the deemed dividend election is to pay all
prior deferred tax, to pay interest on the tax deferral and to be treated thereafter as a Pedigreed QEF as
discussed in the prior paragraph. With respect to a situation in which a Pedigreed QEF election is made, if we
no longer qualify as a PFIC in a subsequent year, normal Code rules and not the PFIC rules will apply.
If a U.S. Holder has not made a QEF Election at any time (a “Non-electing U.S. Holder”), then special taxation
rules under Section 1291 of the Code will apply to (i) gains realized on the disposition (or deemed to be
realized by reason of a pledge) of his common shares and (ii) certain “excess distributions”, as specially
defined, by our Company. An “excess distribution” is any current-year distribution in respect of PFIC stock that
represents a rateable portion of the total distributions in respect of the stock during the year that exceed 125
percent of the average amount of distributions in respect of the stock during the three preceding years.
A Non-electing U.S. Holder generally would be required to pro-rate all gains realized on the disposition of his
common shares and all excess distributions over the entire holding period for the common shares. All gains or
excess distributions allocated to prior years of the U.S. Holder (other than years prior to our first taxable year
during such U.S. Holder's holding period and beginning after January, 1987 for which it was a PFIC) would be
taxed at the highest tax rate for each such prior year applicable to ordinary income. The Non-electing U.S.
Holder also would be liable for interest on the deferred tax liability for each such prior year calculated as if such
liability had been due with respect to each such prior year. A Non-electing U.S. Holder that is an individual is
not allowed a deduction for interest on the deferred tax liability. The portions of gains and distributions that are
not characterized as “excess distributions” are subject to tax in the current year under the normal tax rules of the
Internal Revenue Code.
If we are a PFIC for any taxable year during which a Non-electing U.S. Holder holds common shares, then we
will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to such common Shares, even if our Company is no longer by
definition a PFIC. A Non-electing U.S. Holder may terminate this deemed PFIC status by electing to recognize
gain (which will be taxed under the rules discussed above for Non-Electing U.S. Holders) as if such common
shares had been sold on the last day of the last taxable year for which we were a PFIC.
Under Section 1291(f) of the Code, the Department of the Treasury has issued proposed regulations that would
treat as taxable certain transfers of PFIC stock by Non-electing U.S. Holders that are generally not otherwise
taxed, such as gifts, exchanges pursuant to corporate reorganizations, and transfers at death. If a U.S. Holder
makes a QEF Election that is not a Pedigreed Election (i.e., it is made after the first year during which we are a
PFIC and the U.S. Holder holds our shares) (a “Unpedigreed Election”), the QEF rules apply prospectively but
do not apply to years prior to the year in which the QEF first becomes effective. U.S. Holders should consult
their tax advisors regarding the specific consequences of making a Non-Pedigreed QEF Election.
Certain special, generally adverse, rules will apply with respect to the common shares while we are a PFIC
whether or not it is treated as a QEF. For example under Section 1297(b)(6) of the Code (as in effect prior to the
Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997), a U.S. Holder who uses PFIC stock as security for a loan (including a margin
loan) will, except as may be provided in regulations, be treated as having made a taxable disposition of such
stock.
The foregoing discussion is based on currently effective provisions of the Code, existing and proposed
regulations thereunder, and current administrative rulings and court decisions, all of which are subject to
change. Any such change could affect the validity of this discussion. In addition, the implementation of certain
aspects of the PFIC rules requires the issuance of regulations which in many instances have not been
promulgated and which may have retroactive effect. There can be no assurance that any of these proposals will
be enacted or promulgated, and if so, the form they will take or the effect that they may have on this discussion.
Accordingly, and due to the complexity of the PFIC rules, U.S. Holders of our common shares are strongly
urged to consult their own tax advisors concerning the impact of these rules on their investment in our
Company. For a discussion of the impact of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 on a U.S. Holder of a PFIC, see
“Mark-to-Market Election For PFIC Stock Under the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997” and “Elimination of Overlap
Between Subpart F Rules and PFIC Provisions” below.
Mark-to-Market Election for PFIC Stock Under the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997
The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 provides that a U.S. Holder of a PFIC may make a mark-to-market election
with respect to the stock of the PFIC if such stock is marketable as defined below. This provision is designed to
provide a current inclusion provision for persons that are Non-Electing Holders. Under the election, any excess
of the fair
69
market value of the PFIC stock at the close of the tax year over the Holder's adjusted basis in the stock is
included in the Holder's income. The Holder may deduct any excess of the adjusted basis of the PFIC stock
over its fair market value at the close of the tax year. However, deductions are limited to the net mark-to-market
gains on the stock that the Holder included in income in prior tax years, or so called “unreversed inclusions.” For
purposes of the election, PFIC stock is marketable if it is regularly traded on (1) a national securities exchange
that is registered with the SEC, (2) the national market system established under Section II A of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, or (3) an exchange or market that the IRS determines has rules sufficient to ensure that
the market price represents legitimate and sound fair market value.
A Holder's adjusted basis of PFIC stock is increased by the income recognized under the mark-to-market
election and decreased by the deductions allowed under the election. If a U.S. Holder owns PFIC stock
indirectly through a foreign entity, the basis adjustments apply to the basis of the PFIC stock in the hands of the
foreign entity for the purpose of applying the PFIC rules to the tax treatment of the U.S. owner. Similar basis
adjustments are made to the basis of the property through which the U.S. persons hold the PFIC stock.
Income recognized under the mark-to-market election and gain on the sale of PFIC stock with respect to which
an election is made is treated as ordinary income. Deductions allowed under the election and loss on the sale
of PFIC with respect to which an election is made, to the extent that the amount of loss does not exceed the net
mark-to-market gains previously included, are treated as ordinary losses. The U.S. or foreign source of any
income or losses is determined as if the amount were a gain or loss from the sale of stock in the PFIC.
If PFIC stock is owned by a CFC (discussed below), the CFC is treated as a U.S. person that may make the
mark-to-market election. Amounts includible in the CFC's income under the election are treated as foreign
personal holding company income, and deductions are allocable to foreign personal holding company income.
The above provisions apply to tax years of U.S. persons beginning after December 31, 1997, and to tax years of
foreign corporations ending with or within such tax years of U.S. persons.
The rules of Code Section 1291 applicable to nonqualified funds as discussed above generally do not apply to
a U.S. Holder for tax years for which a mark-to-market election is in effect. If Code Section 1291 is applied and a
mark-to-market election was in effect for any prior tax year, the U.S. Holder's holding period for the PFIC stock is
treated as beginning immediately after the last tax year of the election. However, if a taxpayer makes a mark-to-
market election for PFIC stock that is a nonqualified fund after the beginning of a taxpayer's holding period for
such stock, a co-ordination rule applies to ensure that the taxpayer does not avoid the interest charge with
respect to amounts attributable to periods before the election.
Controlled Foreign Corporation Status
If more than 50% of the voting power of all classes of stock or the total value of the stock of our Company is
owned, directly or indirectly, by U.S. Holders, each of whom own after applying rules of attribution 10% or more
of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of our Company, we would be treated as a “controlled
foreign corporation” or “CFC” under Subpart F of the Code. This classification would bring into effect many
complex results including the required inclusion by such 10% U.S. Holders in income of their pro rata shares of
“Subpart F income” (as defined by the Code) of our Company and our earnings invested in “U.S. property” (as
defined by Section 956 of the Code). In addition, under Section 1248 of the Code if we are considered a CFC at
any time during the five year period ending with the sale or exchange of its stock, gain from the sale or
exchange of common shares of our Company by such a 10% U.S. Holder of our common stock at any time
during the five year period ending with the sale or exchange is treated as ordinary dividend income to the extent
of our earnings and profits attributable to the stock sold or exchanged. Because of the complexity of Subpart F,
and because we may never be a CFC, a more detailed review of these rules is beyond of the scope of this
discussion.
Elimination of Overlap Between Subpart F Rules and PFIC Provisions
Under the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, a PFIC that is also a CFC will not be treated as a PFIC with respect to
certain 10% U.S. Holders. For the exception to apply, (i) the corporation must be a CFC within the meaning of
section 957(a) of the Code and (ii) the U.S. Holder must be subject to the current inclusion rules of Subpart F
with respect to such corporation (i.e., the U.S. Holder is a “United States Shareholder,” see “Controlled Foreign
70
Corporation,” above). The exception only applies to that portion of a U.S. Holder's holding period beginning
after December 31, 1997. For that portion of a United States Holder before January 1, 1998, the ordinary PFIC
and QEF rules continue to apply.
As a result of this new provision, if we were ever to become a CFC, U.S. Holders who are currently taxed on
their pro rata shares of Subpart F income of a PFIC which is also a CFC will not be subject to the PFIC
provisions with respect to the same stock if they have previously made a Pedigreed QEF Election. The PFIC
provisions will however continue to apply to U.S Holders for any periods in which Subpart F does not apply (for
example he is no longer a 10% Holder or we are no longer a CFC) and to U.S. Holders that did not make a
Pedigreed QEF Election unless the U.S. Holder elects to recognize gain on the PFIC shares held in our
Company as if those shares had been sold.
ALL PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS ARE ADVISED TO CONSULT THEIR OWN TAX ADVISORS WITH
RESPECT TO THE SPECIFIC TAX CONSEQUENCES OF PURCHASING THE COMMON SHARES OF
OUR COMPANY.
F.
Dividends and Paying Agents
There is no dividend restriction; during the year ended April 30, 2016, no dividends were declared, and we do
not anticipate that we will declare any dividends in the foreseeable future. We currently intend to retain future
earnings, if any, to finance the development of our business. Any future payment of dividends or distributions
will be determined by our Board on the basis of our earnings, financial requirements and other relevant factors.
There is no special procedure for non-resident holders to claim dividends. Any remittances of dividends to
United States residents and to other non-residents are, however, subject to withholding tax. See “Taxation”
above.
Statement by Experts
G.
The financial statements of our Company as of April 30, 2016 included in this Registration Statement have been
audited by Davidson & Company LLP, Chartered Professional Accountants of 1200-609 Granville Street, P.O.
Box 10372, Pacific Centre Vancouver, BC, Canada V7Y 1G6., as stated in their reports appearing in this
Registration Statement and have been so included in reliance upon the reports of such firm given upon their
authority as experts in accounting and auditing.
David Gunning, P. Eng., a Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101, is co-author of the Technical Report. Mr.
Gunning is a director and the Chief Operating Officer of our Company and is responsible for ensuring that the
technical information contained in this Registration Statement is an accurate summary of the original reports
and data provided to or developed by the Company.
Joseph W. Campbell, P. Geo., a Qualified Person as defined by NI 43-101, is co-author of the Technical Report.
Mr. Campbell is an independent consultant contracted by the Company.
H.
Documents on Display
Upon the effectiveness of this filing, we will be subject to the informational requirements of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and we will thereafter file reports and other information with the SEC. You
may read and copy any of our reports and other information at, and obtain copies upon payment of prescribed
fees from, the Public Reference Room maintained by the SEC at 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Room 1024,
Washington, DC 20549. In addition, the SEC maintains a web site that contains reports and other information
regarding registrants that file electronically with the SEC at HTTP://www.sec.gov. The public may obtain
information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330.
The documents concerning our Company referred to in this Registration Statement may be viewed at our
principal executive offices, Suite 750 – 580 Hornby Street, Box 113, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6C
3B6 (Telephone: (604) 602-4935), during normal business hours.
71
 
I.
Subsidiary Information
See Item 4(C) for the Company’s active subsidiaries as at the date of this Registration Statement.
Item 11
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
As a Canadian company, our cash balances are kept in U.S. and Canadian funds. Therefore, we may become
exposed to some exchange, interest rate and other risks as listed below. We consider the amount of risk to be
manageable and do not currently, nor will we likely in the foreseeable future, conduct hedging to reduce our
market risks.
i.)
Currency Risk - Currency risk is the risk to the Company's earnings that arises from fluctuations of foreign
exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates. The Company does not use derivative instruments
to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
ii.)
Interest rate risk - The Company’s cash earns interest at variable interest rates. While fluctuations in market
rates do not have a material impact on the fair value of the Company’s cash flows, future cash flows may be
affected by interest rate fluctuations. The Company is not significantly exposed to interest rate fluctuations.
iii.)
Credit risk - Credit risk is the risk that one party to a financial instrument will fail to discharge an obligation
and cause the other party to incur a financial loss. The Company is exposed to credit risk with respect to its
cash and short-term investments.
iv.)
Liquidity risk - Liquidity risk arises from the excess of financial obligations over available financial assets due
at any point in time. The Company’s objective in managing liquidity risk is to maintain sufficient readily
available reserves in order to meet its liquidity requirements. The Company accomplishes this by achieving
profitable operations and maintaining sufficient cash reserves.
v.)
Commodity Risk - Mineral prices and marketability fluctuate and any decline in mineral prices may have a
negative effect on the Company. Mineral prices, particularly gold and silver prices, have fluctuated widely in
recent years. The marketability and price of minerals which may be produced and sold by the Company will
be affected by numerous factors beyond the control of the Company. These other factors include delivery
uncertainties related to the proximity of its resources to processing facilities and extensive government
regulations related to price, taxes, royalties, allowable production land tenure, the import and export of
minerals and many other aspects of the mining business.
Item 12
Description of Securities Other than Equity Securities
Not applicable
Item 13
Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
None
Item 14 Material Modifications to the rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds
Controls and Procedures
Not Applicable
Item 15
Not Applicable
Item 16
72
[Reserved]
Item 16A Audit Committee Financial Expert
Not applicable
Item 16B Code of Ethics
Not applicable
Item 16C Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Not applicable
Item 16D Exemptions from Listing Standards for Audit Committees
Not applicable
Item 16E Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Not applicable
Item 16F Change in Registrant’s Certifying Accountant
Not applicable
Item 16G Corporate Governance
Not applicable
Item 16H Mine Safety Disclosure
Not applicable
PART III
Item 17
Not Applicable
Item 18
Financial Statements
Financial Statements
The following financial statements and notes thereto are filed with and incorporated herein as part of this
Registration Statement:
(a)
[audited financial statements of the Company for the nine months ended April 30, 2016, and the years ended
July 31, 2015 and 2014, including consolidated statements of financial position, consolidated statements of
operations and comprehensive income, consolidated statements of changes in equity, consolidated
statements of cash flows, and notes to the consolidated financial statements; and
The Company’s Financial Statements are stated in Canadian Dollars and are prepared in accordance with
International Financial Reporting Standards, as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
Item 19
Exhibits
Exhibits Required by Form 20-F
73
Description
Exhibit
Number
1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
4.
4.1
 
4.2
8.
Articles of Incorporation
Notice of Articles of Starcore International Mines Ltd. dated October 2, 2012.
Articles of Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Notice of Change of Directors dated January 28, 2016.
Material Contracts
Arrangement Agreement dated October 1, 2014 between the Company and American Consolidated
 
Arrangement Agreement dated May 29, 2015 between the Company and Cortez Gold
List of Subsidiaries
Subsidiaries of the Company
Additional Exhibits
Consent of Davidson & Company LLP
 
 
Consent of David Gunning, P. Eng.
Consent of Joseph W. Campbell, P. Geo.
8.1
15.
15.1
 
 
15.2
15.3
74
Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the period ended April 30, 2016, the year ended July 31, 2015 and 2014
(Audited)
Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(in thousands of Canadian dollars)
2014
2015
4,324
3,409
2,464
648
2,615
3,435
2,037
563
April 30,July 31, July 31,
2016
 
 
 
 
$ 4,248 $ 3,370 $ 5,454
5,742
2,221
1,877
191
 
14,279 12,020 16,299
As at
 
Assets
 
Current
Cash
Short-term Investments (note 6)
Amounts Receivable (notes 5 & 7)
Inventory (note 8)
Prepaid Expenses and Advances
 
Total Current Assets
 
Non-Current
Mining Interest, Plant and Equipment (notes 5 & 9) 56,618 50,632 44,731
Exploration and Evaluation Assets (note 10)
Reclamation Deposits
Deferred Tax Assets
 
Total Non-Current Assets
 
Total Assets
 
Liabilities
 
Current
Trade and Other Payables
Current Portion of Loan Payable (note 11)
-
-
4,064
3,411
165
2,969
3,864
165
3,981
 
64,628 57,177 48,795
 
$ 78,907$ 69,197$ 65,094
 
 
 
 
$ 3,091 $ 1,950 $ 3,252
4,619
-
-
Total Current Liabilities
7,710
 
Non-Current
 
1,369
Loan Payable (note 11)
Rehabilitation and Closure Cost Provision (note 12)1,091
Deferred Tax Liabilities
 
Total Non-Current Liabilities
 
Total Liabilities
3,252
 
 
-
1,128
10,864 12,674 13,167
 
13,324 15,141 14,295
 
$ 21,034$ 17,091$ 17,547
1,950
 
 
1,305
1,162
$ 50,605$ 45,354$ 44,023
11,173 11,173 11,213
5,386
(9,291)
 
57,873 52,106 47,547
 
$ 78,907$ 69,197$ 65,094
5,065
(9,486)
(915)
(6,774)
Equity
 
Share Capital (note 13)
Equity Reserve
Foreign Currency Translation Reserve
Accumulated Deficit
 
Total Equity
 
Total Liabilities and Equity
Subsequent Events (notes 9 & 13)
Commitments (notes 10 and 15)
Approved by the Directors:
“Robert Eadie” Director “Gary Arca” Director
3
Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income
(in thousands of Canadian dollars except per share amounts)
For the
 
Revenues
Mined ore
Purchased concentrate
 
Total Revenues
Nine months ended
Year ended
Year ended
April 30,
2016
 
 
$ 20,326
-
 
20,326
July 31,
2015
 
 
$ 28,073
332
 
28,405
July 31,
2014
 
 
$ 33,136  
 
-
 
 
 
33,136
Cost of Sales
14,093
Mined ore
-
Purchased concentrate
4,714
Depreciation and depletion
 
 
18,807
Total Cost of Sales
 
 
1,519
Earnings from mining operations
 
 
(387)
Financing income (costs) (note 11)
(159)
Foreign exchange gain (loss)
(1,031)
Professional and consulting fees
(918)
Management fees and salaries (notes 13 & 15)
(1,114)
Office and administration
-
Other expenses
(110)
Shareholder relations
-
Write-down for obsolete equipment
(244)
Regulatory and transfer agent fees
 
 
(2,444)
(Loss) earnings before taxes
 
 
 
Income tax recovery (note 19)
57
Current
2,582
Deferred
 
 
195
Earnings for the year
 
 
Other comprehensive income
 
Item that may subsequently be reclassified to income 
Foreign currency translation differences
 
Comprehensive income for the year
 
Basic earnings per share (note 18)
 
Diluted earnings per share (note 18)
4
321
 
$ 516
 
$ 0.00
 
$ 0.00
Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(in thousands of Canadian dollars)
For the
 
Cash provided by
Operating activities
Earnings for the period
Items not involving cash:
20,768
306
6,686
 
27,760
 
645
 
3
1,742
(1,115)
(1,210)
(1,446)
(91)
(128)
-
(110)
 
(1,710)
 
 
299
1,621
 
210
 
 
 
5,980
 
$ 6,190
 
$ 0.00
 
$ 0.00
18,577
-
5,971
 
24,548
 
8,588
 
(286)
494
(402)
(1,538)
(1,380)
-
(233)
(125)
(87)
 
5,031
 
 
(601)
(1,465)
 
2,965
 
 
 
1,627
 
4,592
 
0.08
 
0.08
Nine months
ended
Year
ended
Year
ended
April 30,
2016
 
 
 
$ 195
July 31,
2015
 
 
 
$ 210
July 31
2014
 
 
 
$ 2,965
Depreciation and depletion
Employee profit sharing provision
Other expenses
Income tax (recovery) (note 19)
Interest on long-term debt (note 11)
Interest revenue
Rehabilitation and closure cost accretion (note 12)
Share-based payments (note 13)
Unwinding of discount on long-term debt (note 11)
Write-down for obsolete equipment
 
Cash generated by operating activities before working capital
changes
 
Change in non-cash working capital items
Amounts receivable
Income tax paid
Inventory
Prepaid expenses and advances
Trade and other payables
 
Cash provided by operating activities
 
Financing activities
Advance (repayment) of loan payable (note 11)
Dividends paid (note 13)
Interest paid
Financing fees
Share issuances
 
Cash provided by (outflows) for financing activities
 
Investing activities
Cash acquired on acquisition of subsidiaries
Interest received
Investment in exploration and evaluation assets (note 10)
Investment in subsidiaries
Purchase of mining interest, plant and equipment (note 9)
Reclamation deposits
Sale (purchase) of short-term investments (note 6)
 
Cash outflows for investing activities
 
Total (decrease) increase in cash
 
Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash
 
Cash, beginning of period
 
Cash, end of period
 
 
5
4,784
-
-
(2,639)
283
(12)
65
-
42
3
2,721
1,214
-
152
482
790
 
5,359
 
 
3,850
-
(97)
(90)
-
 
3,663
 
 
-
7
(517)
-
(3,700)
-
(3,162)
 
(7,372)
 
1,650
 
(772)
 
3,370
 
$ 4,248
6,688
-
175
(1,920)
-
(20)
79
144
-
-
6,004
(424)
-
2,066
33
(4)
84
466
104
125
5,356
11,419
-
16
519
(557)
(2,105)
 
3,229
 
 
1,289
(2,922)
-
-
386
 
(1,247)
 
 
4
7
(303)
(2,188)
(3,299)
(122)
2,002
 
(3,899)
 
(1,917)
 
(167)
 
5,454
 
$ 3,370
(1,307)  
 
192
 
(671)
1,918
 
 
437
 
 
11,988  
 
 
 
 
(3,583)  
-
 
 
(33)
 
-
19
 
 
 
(3,597)  
 
 
 
 
 
-
 
4
-
 
-
 
(6,210)  
-
 
(1,620)  
 
 
(7,826)  
 
 
565
 
 
 
 
(749)
 
 
5,638
 
 
 
$ 5,454
Starcore International Mines Ltd.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity
For the period ended April 30, 2016, year ended July 31, 2015 and 2014
(in thousands of Canadian dollars, except for number of shares)
Balance, July 31, 2013
35,847,665
Issued for cash pursuant to:
- Exercise of options - at $0.60
Deferred tax effect of share issue costs
Share-based payments
Foreign currency translation differences
Earnings for the year
Balance, July 31, 2014
Issued for cash pursuant to:
- Exercise of options - at $0.60
- Acquisition of American Consolidated
Minerals - at $0.52
Dividends issued
Share-based compensation
Foreign currency translation
Earnings for the year
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
 
Issued for cash pursuant to:
- Acquisition of Cortez Gold Corp. - at $0.42
- Share subscriptions conversion - at $0.56
Foreign currency translation
Earnings for the period
Balance, April 30, 2016
6 
 
1.
Corporate Information
Share Equity TranslationAccumulated
Number of
Shares
OutstandingCapitalReserveReserve
Foreign
 
Currency
Deficit
$
43,752
 
 
26
245
-
-
-
 
$
44,023
 
 
570
31,250
-
-
-
-
35,878,915
643,750
$ 10,754$ (2,542)
$ (9,739)
(7)
-
466
-
-
-
-
-
1,627
-
-
-
-
-
2,965
$ 11,213$ (915)
$ (6,774)
-
-
(184)
1,464,095
761
-
-
-
-
-
-
144
-
-
-
-
5,980
-
-
-
-
-
 
37,986,760 45,354 11,173 5,065
 
 
7,166,888
3,010 -
3,993,203
2,241 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
 
 
 
49,146,851 $
-
-
321
-
$ 11,173$ 5,386
50,605
-
-
(2,922)
-
-
210
 
(9,486)
-
-
-
195
$ (9,291)
Total
 
$
42,225
 
 
19
245
466
1,627
2,965
 
$
47,547
 
 
386
761
(2,922)
144
5,980
210
 
52,106
 
 
3,010
2,241
321
195
 
$
57,873
Starcore International Mines Ltd. is the parent company of its consolidated group (the “Company” or “Starcore”)
and was incorporated in Canada with its head office located at Suite 750 – 580 Hornby Street, Vancouver,
British Columbia, V6C 3B6.
Starcore is engaged in extracting and processing gold and silver in Mexico through the San Martin mine in
Queretaro, Mexico owned by Compañia Minera Peña de Bernal, S.A. de C.V. (“Bernal”), which was purchased
by the Company in 2007. The San Martin mine, which has been in operation since 1993 producing gold and
silver, is a self-sustaining mining operation in Mexico and is the Company’s sole source of operating cash
flows. The Company is also engaged in acquiring mining related operating assets and exploration assets in
North America directly and through corporate acquisitions (see notes 5 & 10).
2.
Basis of Preparation
a) Statement of Compliance
These consolidated financial statements for the Company have been prepared in accordance with International
Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IASB”).
On May 13, 2016, the Company changed its fiscal year end from July 31 to April 30. With this year-end change,
the Company will report a one-time transitional period for the nine months ended April 30, 2016.
Effective December 14, 2015, the Company completed a 4:1 share consolidation (note 13). All common share
and per share amounts have been retroactively restated.
The financial statements were authorized for issue by the Board of Directors on August 9, 2016.
b) Basis of Measurement
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis, except certain financial
instruments, which are measured at fair value, as explained in the Company’s accounting policies discussed in
note 3.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Canadian dollars, which is also the parent company’s
functional currency, and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand dollars, unless otherwise indicated.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in compliance with IFRS requires management to make
certain critical accounting estimates. It also requires management to exercise judgment in applying the
Company’s accounting policies. The areas involving a higher degree of judgment of complexity, or areas where
assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed in note 4.
7
2.
Basis of Preparation
c) Basis of Consolidation
These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and all of its subsidiaries, which
are entities controlled by the Company. Control exists when the Company has the power to govern the financial
and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from the entity’s activities. Subsidiaries are included
in the consolidated financial results of the Company from the effective date of acquisition up to the effective date
of disposal or loss of control. The Company’s wholly-owned subsidiaries, Bernal and Altiplano, along with
various other subsidiaries, carry out their operations in Mexico, U.S.A. and in Canada.
All intra-group transactions, balances, income and expenses are eliminated, in full, on consolidation.
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The accounting policies set out below were applied consistently to all periods presented in these consolidated
financial statements, unless otherwise indicated.
a)
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currency of Starcore, the parent, is the Canadian dollar (“CAD”) and the functional currency of its
subsidiaries is the United States dollar (“USD”) (collectively “Functional Currency”). Foreign currency accounts
are translated into the Functional Currency as follows:
At the transaction date, each asset, liability, revenue and expense denominated in a foreign currency is
translated into the Functional Currency by the use of the exchange rate in effect at that date. At the period end
·
date, unsettled monetary assets and liabilities are translated into the Functional Currency by using the
exchange rate in effect at the period end.
Foreign exchange gains and losses are recognized in net earnings and presented in the Consolidated
Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income in accordance with the nature of the transactions to which
the foreign currency gains and losses relate, except for foreign exchange gains and losses from translating
available-for-sale investments in marketable securities which are recognized in other comprehensive income as
part of the total change in fair values of the securities. Unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses on cash
and cash equivalent balances denominated in foreign currencies are disclosed separately in the Consolidated
Statements of Cash Flows.
b)
Foreign Operations
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations with Functional Currencies differing from the presentation
currency, including fair value adjustments arising on acquisition, are translated to CAD at exchange rates in
effect at the reporting date. The income and expenses of foreign operations with Functional Currencies differing
from the presentation currency are translated into CAD at the year-to-date average exchange rates.
The Company’s foreign currency differences are recognised and presented in other comprehensive income as
a foreign currency translation reserve (“Foreign Currency Translation Reserve”), a component of equity. When a
foreign operation is disposed of such that control, significant influence or joint control is lost, the cumulative
amount in the translation reserve related to that foreign operation is reclassified to profit or loss as part of the
gain or loss on disposal.
8 
 
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
c)
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents includes cash on hand, deposits held at call with financial institutions and other
short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less that are readily convertible
to known amounts of cash and subject to an insignificant risk of change in value. At April 30, 2016, July 31,
2015 and July 31, 2014, the Company has no cash equivalents.
d)
Short Term Investments
Short term investments, which consist of fixed term deposits held at a bank with a maturity with a maturity of
more than three months at the time of issuance, are recorded at fair value.
e)
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the sale of metals is recognized when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have
passed to the buyer, it is probable that economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the
Company, the sale price can be measured reliably, the Company has no significant continuing involvement and
the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably.
Revenues from metal concentrate sales are subject to adjustment upon final settlement of metal prices, weights,
and assays as of a date that may be up to two weeks after the shipment date. The Company records
adjustments to revenues monthly based on quoted forward prices for the expected settlement period.
Adjustments for weights and assays are recorded when results are determinable or on final settlement.
Accounts receivable for metal concentrate sales are therefore measured at fair value.
f)
Inventory
Finished goods and work-in-process are measured at the lower of average cost and net realizable value. Net
realizable value is calculated as the estimated price at the time of sale based on prevailing and long-term metal
prices less estimated future costs to convert the inventories into saleable form and estimated costs to sell.
Ore extracted from the mines is processed into finished goods (gold and by-products in doré). Costs are
included in work-in-process inventory based on current costs incurred up to the point prior to the refining
process, including applicable depreciation and depletion of mining interests, and removed at the average cost
per recoverable ounce of gold. The average costs of finished goods represent the average costs of work-in-
process inventories incurred prior to the refining process, plus applicable refining costs.
Supplies are measured at average cost. In the event that the net realizable value of the finished product, the
production of which the supplies are held for use in, is lower than the expected cost of the finished product, the
supplies are written down to net realizable value. Replacement costs of supplies are generally used as the best
estimate of net realizable value. The costs of inventories sold during the year are presented in the Company’s
profit and loss.
9
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
g) Mining Interest, Plant and Equipment
Mining interests represent capitalized expenditures related to the development of mining properties and related
plant and equipment.
Recognition and Measurement
On initial recognition, equipment is valued at cost, being the purchase price and directly attributable cost of
acquisition or construction required to bring the asset to the location and condition necessary to be capable of
operating in the manner intended by the Company, including appropriate borrowing costs and the estimated
present value of any future unavoidable costs of dismantling and removing items. The corresponding liability is
recognized within provisions.
Mining expenditures incurred either to develop new ore bodies or to develop mine areas in advance of current
production are capitalized. Mine development costs incurred to maintain current production are included in the
consolidated statement of operations. Exploration costs relating to the current mine in production are expensed
to net income as incurred due to the immediate exploitation of these areas or an immediate determination that
they are not exploitable.
Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition and preparation for use, are capitalized.
Capitalization of borrowing costs, begins when expenditures are incurred and activities are undertaken to
prepare the asset for its intended use. The amount of borrowing costs capitalized cannot exceed the actual
amount of borrowing costs incurred during the period. All other borrowing costs are expensed as incurred.
The capitalization of borrowing costs is discontinued when substantially all of the activities necessary to
prepare the qualifying asset for its intended use or sale are complete. Capitalized borrowing costs are
amortized over the useful life of the related asset.
Major Maintenance and Repairs
Subsequent costs are included in the asset’s carrying amount or recognized as a separate asset, as
appropriate, only when it is probable that the future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the
Company and the cost of the item can be measured reliably. All other repairs and maintenance are charged to
the Company’s profit or loss during the financial year in which they are incurred.
Subsequent Costs
The cost of replacing part of an item of equipment is recognized in the carrying amount of the item if it is
probable that the future economic benefits embodied within the part will flow to the Company and its costs can
be measured reliably. The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognized. The costs of the day-to-day
servicing of equipment are recognized in the Company’s profit or loss as incurred.
10
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
g)          Mining Interest, Plant and Equipment – (cont’d)
Leased Equipment
Leased assets in which the Company receives substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership of the
asset are capitalized as finance leases at the lower of the fair value of the asset or the estimated present value
of the minimum lease payments. The corresponding lease obligation is recorded within debt on the statement of
financial position.
Assets under operating leases are not capitalized and rental payments are included in earnings based on the
terms of the lease.
Derecognition
Upon sale or abandonment, the cost of the property, plant, and equipment and related accumulated
depreciation or depletion, are removed from the accounts and any gains or losses thereon are included in
operations.
Depreciation and Impairment
Mining interest, plant and equipment are subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation, less
any accumulated impairment losses, with the exception of land which is not depreciated. Depletion of mine
properties is charged on a unit-of-production basis over proven and probable reserves and resources expected
to be converted to reserves. Currently the depletion base is approximately 6 years of expected production.
Depreciation of plant and equipment and corporate office equipment, vehicles, software and leaseholds is
calculated using the straight-line method, based on the lesser of economic life of the asset and the expected life
of mine of approximately 6 years. Where components of an asset have different useful lives, depreciation is
calculated on each separate part. Depreciation commences when an asset is available for use. At the end of the
each calendar year estimates of proven and probable gold reserves and a portion of resources expected to be
converted to reserves are updated and the calculations of amortization of mining interest, plant and equipment
is prospectively revised.
The Company reviews and evaluates its mining interests, plant and equipment for impairment at least annually
or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
Impairment is considered to exist if the recoverable value of a cash generating unit is less than the carrying
amount of the assets. An impairment loss is measured and recorded based on the greater of the cash
generating unit’s fair value less cost to sell or its value in use versus its carrying value. Future cash flows are
estimated based on expected future production, commodity prices, operating costs and capital costs.
Mining interests, plant and equipment that have been impaired in prior periods are tested for possible reversal
of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the impairment has reversed. If the
impairment has reversed, the carrying amount of the asset is increased to its recoverable amount but not
beyond the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognized for the
asset in the prior periods. A reversal of an impairment loss is recognized in the consolidated statement of
operations.
11
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
h)          Rehabilitation and Closure Cost Provision
The Company records a provision for the estimated future costs of rehabilitation and closure of operating and
inactive mines and development projects, which are discounted to net present value using the risk free interest
rates applicable to the future cash outflows. Estimates of future costs represent management’s best estimates
which incorporate assumptions on the effects of inflation, movements in foreign exchange rates and the effects
of country and other specific risks associated with the related liabilities. The provision for the Company’s
rehabilitation and closure cost obligations is accreted over time to reflect the unwinding of the discount with the
accretion expense included in finance costs in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive
Income. The provision for rehabilitation and closure cost obligations is re-measured at the end of each reporting
period for changes in estimates and circumstances. Changes in estimates and circumstances include changes
in legal or regulatory requirements, increased obligations arising from additional mining and exploration
activities, changes to cost estimates and changes to risk free interest rates.
Rehabilitation and closure cost obligations relating to operating mines and development projects are initially
recorded with a corresponding increase to the carrying amounts of related mining properties. Changes to the
obligations are also accounted for as changes in the carrying amounts of related mining properties, except
where a reduction in the obligation is greater than the capitalized rehabilitation and closure costs, in which
case, the capitalized rehabilitation and closure costs is reduced to nil and the remaining adjustment is included
in production costs in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income. Rehabilitation
and closure cost obligations related to inactive mines are included in production costs in the Consolidated
Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income on initial recognition and subsequently when re-
measured.
i) Exploration and Evaluation Expenditures
Once the legal right to explore a property has been acquired, costs directly related to exploration and evaluation
(“E&E”) expenditures are recognized and capitalized, in addition to the acquisition costs. These direct
expenditures include such costs as materials used, surveying and sampling costs, drilling costs, payments
made to contractors, geologists, consultants, and depreciation on plant and equipment during the exploration
phase. Costs not directly attributable to E&E activities, including general and administrative overhead costs, are
expensed in the period in which they occur.
When a project is determined to no longer have commercially viable prospects to the Company, E&E
expenditures in respect of that project are deemed to be impaired. As a result, those E&E expenditures, in
excess of estimated recoveries, are written off to the Company’s profit or loss.
The Company assesses E&E assets for impairment when facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying
amount of an asset may exceed its recoverable amount.
Once the technical feasibility and commercial viability of extracting the mineral resource has been determined,
the property is considered to be a mine under development and is classified as “mines under construction”. E&E
assets are tested for impairment before the assets are transferred to development properties.
Any incidental revenues earned in connection with exploration activities are applied as a reduction to
capitalized exploration costs.
12
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
j)
Financial Instruments
Financial instruments are classified as one of the categories below based upon the purpose for which the asset
was acquired. All transactions related to financial instruments are recorded on a trade date basis. The
Company’s accounting policy for each category is as follows:
Loans and Receivables
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets resulting from the delivery of cash or other assets by
a lender to a borrower in return for a promise to repay on a specified date or dates, or on demand. They are
initially recognized at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue,
and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method, less any impairment losses.
Amortised cost is calculated taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and includes fees that
are an integral part of the effective interest rate and transaction costs. Gains and losses are recognized in the
profit or loss when the loans and receivables are derecognized or impaired, as well as through the amortization
process.
The Company’s cash accounted for at fair value and amounts receivable are all accounted for as loans and
receivables.
Available-for-Sale
Non-derivative financial assets not included in the above category are classified as available-for-sale.
Available-for-sale investments are carried at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in accumulated
other comprehensive loss/ income. Where there is a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of an
available-for-sale financial asset, which constitutes objective evidence of impairment, the full amount of the
impairment, including any amount previously recognized in other comprehensive loss/income is recognized in
the Company’s profit or loss. If there is no quoted market price in an active market and fair value cannot be
readily determined, available-for-sale investments are carried at cost.
Purchases and sales of available-for-sale financial assets are recognized on a trade date basis. On sale or
impairment, the cumulative amount recognized in other comprehensive loss/income is reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive loss/income to the Company’s profit or loss.
Impairment of Financial Assets
At each reporting date, the Company assesses whether there is any objective evidence that a financial asset or
a group of financial assets is impaired. A financial asset or group of financial assets is deemed to be impaired if,
there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that has occurred subsequent to the
initial recognition of the asset and that event has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial
asset or the group of financial assets.
13
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
j)
Financial Instruments – (cont’d)
Financial Liabilities
Financial liabilities are classified as other financial liabilities, based on the purpose for which the liability was
incurred, and comprised of trade and other payables, and loan payable. These liabilities are recognized at fair
value, net of any transaction costs directly attributable to the issuance of the instrument and subsequently
carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method. This ensures that, any interest expense over
the period to repayment is at a constant rate on the balance of the liability carried in the statement of financial
position. Interest expense in this context includes initial transaction costs and premiums payable on redemption,
as well as any interest or coupon payable while the liability is outstanding.
Trade and other payables represent goods and services provided to the Company prior to the end of the period
which are unpaid. Trade payable amounts are unsecured and are usually paid within 30 days of recognition.
Fair value hierarchy
Financial instruments recognized at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets must be classified into one of
the three following fair value hierarchy levels:
Level 1 – measurement based on quoted prices (unadjusted observed in active markets) for identical assets or
liabilities;
Level 2 – measurement based on inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, that are observable for
the asset or liability;
Level 3 – measurement based on inputs that are not observable (supported by little or no market activity) for the
asset or liability.
The Company’s financial instruments recognized at fair value consist of short term investments having a fair
value of $5,742 (2015 – $2,615, 2014 – $4,324) measured in accordance with Level 1.
k)          Income Taxes
Current tax and deferred taxes are recognized in the Company’s profit or loss, except to the extent that it relates
to a business combination or items recognized directly in equity or in other comprehensive loss/income.
Current income taxes are recognized for the estimated taxes payable or receivable on taxable income or loss
for the current year and any adjustment to income taxes payable in respect of previous years. Current income
taxes are determined using tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the
period end date.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized where the carrying amount of an asset or liability differs from
its tax base, except for taxable temporary differences arising on the initial recognition of goodwill and temporary
differences arising on the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which is not a business
combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
14 
 
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
k)
Income Taxes – (cont’d)
Recognition of deferred tax assets for unused tax losses, tax credits and deductible temporary differences is
restricted to those instances where it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the
deferred tax asset can be utilised. At the end of each reporting period, the Company reassesses unrecognized
deferred tax assets. The Company recognizes a previously unrecognized deferred tax asset to the extent that it
has become probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
l)            Share Capital
Financial instruments issued by the Company are classified as equity, only to the extent that they do not meet
the definition of a financial liability or asset. The Company’s common shares, share warrants and share options
are classified as equity instruments.
Incremental costs, directly attributable to the issue of new shares, warrants or options, are shown in equity as a
deduction, net of tax, from proceeds.
m)        Profit or Loss per Share
Basic profit or loss per share is computed by dividing the Company’s profit or loss applicable to common shares
by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the relevant period.
Diluted profit or loss per share is computed by dividing the Company’s profit or loss applicable to common
shares, by the sum of the weighted average number of common shares outstanding and all additional common
shares that would have been outstanding if potentially dilutive instruments were converted at the beginning of
the period.
n)          Share-based Payments
Where equity-settled share options are awarded to employees or non-employees, the fair value of the options at
the date of grant is charged to the Company’s profit or loss over the vesting period. The number of equity
instruments expected to vest at each reporting date, are taken into account so that the cumulative amount
recognized over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest. Non-vesting
conditions and market vesting conditions are factored into the fair value of the options granted. As long as all
other vesting conditions are satisfied, a charge is made irrespective of whether these vesting conditions are
satisfied. The cumulative expense is not adjusted for failure to achieve a market vesting condition or where a
non-vesting condition is not satisfied.
Where the terms and conditions of options are modified before they vest, the increase in the fair value of the
options, measured immediately before and after the modifications, is charged to the Company’s profit or loss
over the remaining vesting period.
Where equity instruments are granted to employees, they are recorded at the fair value of the equity instrument
granted at the grant date. The grant date fair value is recognized in the Company’s profit or loss over the vesting
period, described as the period during which all the vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
15
3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies – (cont’d)
n)          Share-based Payments – (cont’d)
Where equity instruments are granted to non-employees, they are recorded at the fair value of the goods or
services received in the Company’s profit or loss, unless they are related to the issuance of shares. Amounts
related to the issuance of shares are recorded as a reduction of share capital.
When the value of goods or services received in exchange for the share-based payment cannot be reliably
estimated, the fair value is measured by use of a valuation model. The expected life used in the model is
adjusted, based on management’s best estimate, for effects of non-transferability, exercise restrictions and
behavioural considerations.
All equity-settled share based payments are reflected in equity reserve, until exercised. Upon exercise, shares
are issued from treasury and the amount reflected in equity reserve is credited to share capital, adjusted for any
consideration paid.
Where a grant of options is cancelled or settled during the vesting period, excluding forfeitures when vesting
conditions are not satisfied, the Company immediately accounts for the cancellation as an acceleration of
vesting and immediately recognizes the amount that otherwise would have been recognized for services
received over the remainder of the vesting period.
Any payment made to the employee on the cancellation is accounted for as the repurchase of an equity interest
except to the extent that the payment exceeds the fair value of the equity instrument granted, measured at the
repurchase date. Any such excess is recognized as an expense.
Where vesting conditions are not satisfied and options are forfeited, the Company reverses the fair value
amount of the unvested options which had been recognized over the vesting period.
o) New and Revised Accounting Standards
The following accounting standards have been issued or amended but are not yet effective. The Company has
not early adopted these new and amended standards. The Company continues to evaluate the new standards
but currently no material impact is expected as a result of the adoptions of these new and amended standards:
IFRS 9 “Financial Instruments”
·
· IFRS 14 “Regulatory Deferral Accounts”
· IFRS 15 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”
·
·
· IAS 16 “Property Plant and Equipment”
· Annual Improvements to IFRSs 2012–2014 Cycle
IFRS 16 “Leases”
IAS 12 “Income Taxes”
16
4. Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments
The Company makes estimates and assumptions about the future that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities. Estimates and judgments are continually evaluated based on historical experience and other factors,
including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. In the
future, actual experience may differ from these estimates and assumptions.
The effect of a change in accounting estimate is recognized prospectively by including it in the Company’s profit
or loss in the period of the change, if it affects that period only, or in the period of the change and future periods,
if the change affects both.
Information about critical judgments in applying accounting policies that have the most significant risk of
causing material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities recognized in the consolidated
financial statements within the next financial year are discussed below:
a) Economic Recoverability and Profitability of Future Economic Benefits of Mining Interests
Management has determined that mining interests, evaluation, development and related costs incurred which
have been capitalized are economically recoverable. Management uses several criteria in its assessments of
economic recoverability and probability of future economic benefit including geologic and metallurgic
information, history of conversion of mineral deposits to proven and probable reserves, scoping and feasibility
studies, accessible facilities, existing permits and life of mine plans.
b)
Impairments
The Company assesses its mining interest, plant and equipment assets annually to determine whether any
indication of impairment exists. Where an indicator of impairment exists, a formal estimate of the recoverable
amount is made, which is considered to be the higher of the fair value less costs to sell and value in use. These
assessments require the use of estimates and assumptions such as long-term commodity prices, discount rates,
future capital requirements, exploration potential and operating performance.
c)
Rehabilitation Provisions
Rehabilitation provisions have been created based on the Company’s internal estimates. Assumptions, based
on the current economic environment, have been made which management believes are a reasonable basis
upon which to estimate the future liability. These estimates take into account any material changes to the
assumptions that occur when reviewed regularly by management. Estimates are reviewed annually and are
based on current regulatory requirements. Significant changes in estimates of contamination, restoration
standards and techniques will result in changes to provisions from period to period. Actual rehabilitation costs
will ultimately depend on future market prices for the rehabilitation costs, which will reflect the market condition
at the time that the rehabilitation costs are actually incurred. The final cost of the currently recognized
rehabilitation provision may be higher or lower than currently provided.
The inflation rate applied to estimated future rehabilitation and closure costs is 3.5% (2015 – 3.5%, 2014 –
3.5%) and the discount rate currently applied in the calculation of the net present value of the provision is 8%
(2015 – 8%, 2014 – 8%).
17 
 
4. Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments – (cont’d)
d)
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes. There are many transactions and
calculations undertaken during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is
uncertain. The Company recognizes liabilities and contingencies for anticipated tax audit issues based on the
Company’s current understanding of tax law. For matters where it is probable that an adjustment will be made,
the Company records its best estimate of the tax liability including the related interest and penalties in the
current tax provision. Management believes they have adequately provided for the probable outcome of these
matters; however, the final outcome may result in a materially different outcome than the amount included in the
tax liabilities.
In addition, the Company recognizes deferred tax assets relating to tax losses carried forward to the extent there
are sufficient taxable temporary differences (deferred tax liabilities) relating to the same taxation authority and
the same taxable entity against which the unused tax losses can be utilized. However, utilization of the tax
losses also depends on the ability of the taxable entity to satisfy certain tests at the time the losses are
recuperated.
e)
Share-based Payment
The Company measures the cost of equity-settled transactions with employees, and some with non-employees,
by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. Estimating fair
value for share-based payment transactions requires determining the most appropriate valuation model, which
is dependent on the terms and conditions of the grant.
This estimate also requires determining the most appropriate inputs to the valuation model including the
expected life of the share option, expected forfeiture rate, volatility and dividend yield and making assumptions
about them. The assumptions and models used for estimating fair value for share-based payment transactions
are disclosed in note 13.
f) Mineral Reserves and Mineral Resource Estimates
Mineral reserves are estimates of the amount of ore that can be economically and legally extracted from the
Company’s mining properties. The Company estimates its mineral reserve and mineral resources based on
information compiled by Qualified Persons as defined by Canadian Securities Administrators National
Instrument 43-101 Standards for Disclosure of Mineral Projects. Such information includes geological data on
the size, depth and shape of the mineral deposit, and requires complex geological judgments to interpret the
data. The estimation of recoverable reserves is based upon factors such as estimates of commodity prices,
future capital requirements, and production costs along with geological assumptions and judgments made in
estimating the size and grade that comprise the mineral reserves. Changes in the mining reserve or mineral
resource estimates may impact the carrying value of mineral properties and deferred development costs,
property, plant and equipment, provision for site reclamation and closure, recognition of deferred income tax
assets and depreciation and amortization charges.
18
4. Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments – (cont’d)
g)
Units of production depletion
Estimated recoverable reserves are used in determining the depreciation of mine specific assets. This results in
depreciation charges proportional to the depletion of the anticipated remaining life of mine production. Each
item’s life, which is assessed annually, has regard to both its physical life limitations and to present
assessments of economically recoverable reserves of the mine property at which the asset is located. These
calculations require the use of estimates and assumption, including the amount of recoverable reserves and
estimate of future capital expenditure. Changes are accounted for prospectively.
5.
Acquisition of Subsidiaries
Acquisition of Cortez Gold Corp.
During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company signed of a letter of intent with Cortez Gold Corp. (“Cortez or
“CUT”) (TSXV: CUT) to acquire all of the outstanding securities of CUT in an all-share transaction to be
completed pursuant to a court approved Plan of Arrangement under the Business Corporations Act (British
Columbia) (the “Arrangement”). Under the terms of the planned acquisition, each CUT shareholder would
receive three Starcore common shares for every one CUT common share held by CUT shareholders (the
“Exchange Ratio”). Cortez is a Vancouver-based junior resource company that owns the Altiplano gold and
silver processing plant in Matehuala, Mexico and has a director and officer in common with the Company.
Shareholders of Cortez approved the Arrangement which was finalised on approval by the British Columbia
Supreme Court on August 5, 2015. Pursuant to the Arrangement, the former Cortez shareholders hold
7,166,888 common shares of Starcore, representing 15.87%, of the 45,153,599 outstanding common shares of
Starcore after issue of shares pursuant to the Arrangement. In addition, each holder of the outstanding common
share purchase warrants of CUT may receive such number of replacement warrants of Starcore based upon the
Exchange Ratio and at the exercise price adjusted based upon the Exchange Ratio.
The Company valued the 7,166,888 shares at the fair market value on date of issue of $0.42 per share, for total
consideration of $3,010, which was accounted for as acquisition of assets allocated based on their relative fair
values on the closing date. The following purchase price allocation is based on management’s best estimates
and assumptions after taking into account all relevant information available. The purchase price has been
allocated as follows:
Assets
Amounts receivable
Prepaid expenses and advances  
Plant, machinery and equipment
 
Total assets
$ 350
5
6,094
 
$ 6,449
$ 3,010
Liabilities
Less: Trade and other payables
Loan payable
 
Total liabilities
$ 503
2,936
 
$ 3,439
 
Net assets acquired  - consideration paid (7,166,888 shares issued at $0.42 per share)
19 
 
5.
Acquisition of Subsidiaries – (cont’d)
Acquisition of Cortez Gold Corp. – (cont’d)
The Altiplano processing plant was in the final stages of completion and testing as at April 30, 2016 and,
therefore, is in the pre-operational phase of production. As a result, all of the costs and any test production
revenue are capitalized to Plant costs until such time as the facility is of sufficient operational status with the
ability to function as management intended.
Acquisition of Creston Moly Corp.
On February 19, 2015, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire all of the shares of Creston Moly
Corp. (“Creston Moly”) from Deloitte Restructuring Inc, in its capacity as trustee in bankruptcy of Mercator
Minerals Ltd. (the “Trustee”), at a purchase price of $2,013 (the “Creston Transaction”).
The Supreme Court of Canada discharged Creston Moly from bankruptcy which was formerly a wholly-owned
subsidiary of the Trustee. Creston Moly is a British Columbia company that owns, through its wholly-owned
subsidiaries, a 100% interest in three molybdenum-copper projects (see note 10):
• The El Creston Project in Sonora, Mexico;
• The Ajax Project in British Columbia, Canada; and
• The Molybrook Project in Newfoundland, Canada.
The Creston Transaction was accounted for as an acquisition of assets. The purchase price of $2,013 has been
allocated to the assets acquired based on their relative fair value on the closing date. The purchase price
allocation is a result of management’s best estimates and assumptions after taking into account all relevant
information available.
The purchase price has been allocated entirely to the mineral properties acquired as the Company assumed no
liabilities or other assets in the Creston Transaction.
Acquisition of American Consolidated Minerals Corp.
On November 20, 2014, the Company acquired American Consolidated Minerals Corp. (“AJC”) pursuant to a
plan of arrangement (the “AJC Transaction”). Before the AJC Transaction, AJC and Starcore had directors in
common.
AJC shareholders received one common share of the Company for three (3) common shares of AJC held by
such AJC shareholder (the “Exchange Ratio”). In addition, each holder of the outstanding stock options and
common share purchase warrants of AJC received replacement options or warrants of the Company (the
“Starcore Options”) based upon the Exchange Ratio, and the exercise price of the replacement Starcore
Options was adjusted based upon the Exchange Ratio. In total, the Company issued 1,464,095 shares at a fair
value of $0.52 per share for total consideration of $761. The Company also issued 139,284 common share
purchase warrants at a fair value of $Nil (note 13).
20
5.
Acquisition of Subsidiaries – (cont’d)
Acquisition of American Consolidated Minerals Corp. – (cont’d)
The AJC Transaction was accounted for as acquisition of assets. The purchase price of $761 has been
allocated to the assets acquired based on their relative fair values on the closing date. The purchase price
allocation is a result of management’s best estimates and assumptions after taking into account all relevant
information available. The purchase price has been allocated as follows:
Assets
Cash
Amounts receivable
Reclamation deposits
Mineral properties (note 10)
 
Total assets
 
Less: Trade and other payables
 
Net assets acquired
Net assets Consideration:
Shares (1,464,095shares issued at $0.52 per share)$ 761
$ 4
25
43
1,029
 
1,101
 
340
 
761
6.
Short-term Investments
At April 30, 2016, the Company held a Guaranteed Investment Certificate (“GIC”) denominated in CAD, USD
and Mexican Pesos (“MP”). The GIC denominated in CAD and USD has a market value of $3,766 (July 31,
2015 - $2,615, July 31, 2014 - $3,924), earning interest income at 0.2% per annum and maturing on November
5, 2016. The Company also holds a GIC denominated in MP with a market value of $1,976 (July 31, 2015 - $Nil,
July 31, 2014 - $400) earning interest at 3.25% per annum on a month to month basis.
These GICs are cashable at the Company’s option and are considered to be highly liquid. The Company’s
short-term investments are held at two financial institutions and as such the Company is exposed to the risks of
those financial institutions.
7.
Amounts Receivable
April 30,     2016
Taxes receivable $ 1,955
Trades receivables-
Other
 
21 
 
8.
266
$ 2,221
Inventory
July 31,
July 31,
2014
2015
 
$ 3,202 $ 2,856
351
202
-
233
$ 3,435 $ 3,409
2016
 
 
Carrying value of inventory: 
Doré
2015
$ 1,097 $ 1,051$ 1,141
April 30,
July 31,
July 31,
2014
Goods in transit
Work-in-process
Stockpile
Supplies
-
190
238
895
-
112
118
756
53
35
13
679
$ 1,877 $ 2,037$ 2,464
9. Mining Interest, Plant and Equipment
The Company entered into a Binding Agreement (“Agreement”) to sell the San Pedrito Property located in
Queretaro, Mexico. The sale is expected to net the Company approximately USD $7 Million. The Agreement
requires the buyer to deposit 50 million Mexican Pesos (“MP”) (approximately USD $2.8 million), which has
been received in trust and may only be released pending various confirmations, including compliance with state
and municipal regulations and evidence that the property is in good standing.
The agreement is subject to a 50 million MP penalty clause in case of non-performance that will be effective if
either the purchaser does not pay the owed amount when all the conditions have been met or if the Company
does not wish to continue with the sale. Upon receipt of the required confirmations, the agreement provides for
the subject conditions to be removed and the balance of funds to be paid immediately to the Company. The
Company has not recorded the sale or deposit in these Financial Statements due to the pending conditions
precedent.
The San Pedrito property was part of Starcore’s original acquisition in 2007, when the Company acquired the
San Martin Mine from Goldcorp for USD $26 million. The Company has allocated a cost base of approximately
$3,750 to the property.
22
9. Mining Interest, Plant and Equipment – (cont’d)
Mining InterestPlant and EquipmentCorporate Office EquipmentTotal
 
 
$ 49,358
3,707
-
$ 61,368
6,210
(253)
3,995
 
71,320
3,842
14,216
 
89,378
3,700
6,094
(4)
(1,910)
Cost
Balance, July 31, 2013
Additions
Write-down of equipment
Effect of foreign exchange 3,037
 
 
56,102
Balance, July 31, 2014
Additions
2,581
Effect of foreign exchange 11,162
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
Additions
Acquisition of Cortez assets-
Write-down of equipment
-
Effect of foreign exchange (1,160)
69,845
1,333
$ 11,685
2,503
(253)
958
 
14,893
1,109
3,054
 
19,056
2,289
6,040
-
(750)
$ 325
-
-
-
 
325
152
-
 
477
78
54
(4)
-
$ 70,018
 
 
$ 14,634
5,012
-
-
Balance, April 30, 2016
 
Depreciation
Balance, July 31, 2013
Depreciation for the year
Write-down of equipment
Effect of foreign exchange 933
 
 
20,579
Balance, July 31, 2014
Depreciation for the year
5,482
Effect of foreign exchange 4,219
 
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
30,280
Depreciation for the period 3,707
Write-down of equipment
Effect of foreign exchange (2,206)
 
Balance, April 30, 2016
 
Carrying amounts
Balance, July 31, 2014
Balance, July 31, 2015
Balance, April 30, 2016
$ 31,781
 
 
$ 35,523
$ 39,565
$ 38,237
$ 26,635
 
 
$ 4,417
1,041
(129)
409
 
5,738
1,204
1,250
 
8,192
1,007
-
(683)
 
$ 8,516
 
 
$ 9,155
$ 10,864
$ 18,119
$ 605
 
 
$ 239
33
-
-
 
272
2
-
 
274
70
(1)
-
 
$ 343
 
 
$ 53
$ 203
$ 262
$ 97,258
 
 
$ 19,200
6,086
(129)
1,342
 
26,589
6,688
5,469
 
38,746
4,784
(1)
(2,889)
 
$ 40,640
 
 
$ 44,731
$ 50,632
$ 56,618
23
10.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
a) American Consolidated Minerals (“AJC”) properties
Pursuant to the Acquisition of AJC (note 5), the Company has acquired the rights to three exploration properties
as follows:
i) Lone Ranch, U.S.A
The Company has acquired the right to a 100% undivided interest, subject to a 3% net smelter royalty (“NSR”),
in 73 mining claims located in Ferry County, Washington State, United States of America (“Lone Ranch”) from
MinQuest Inc. (“MinQuest”). Consideration to be paid for the interest is USD$360, and the Company must incur
total exploration expenditures of USD$1,225 (USD$175 incurred) on the property, by the third anniversary of the
“New Effective Date” as agreed by MinQuest.
The New Effective Date shall be the earlier of October 15, 2018 or the date the Company enters into a joint
venture agreement over the property or the date that the Company completes a bankable feasibility study on the
property.
The optionor has also granted the Company the right to purchase up to one-half of the NSR (or 1.5%) on the
basis of USD$1,500 per each 1% of the royalty. If the Company does not incur the exploration expenditures as
specified, the unpaid portions may be paid to the optionor to maintain the option.
ii) Toiyabe, U.S.A
The Company has the right to acquire a 100% undivided interest, subject to a 3% NSR, in 165 mining claims
located in Lander County, Nevada, United States of America (“Toiyabe”) from MinQuest. Consideration to be
paid for the interest is USD$900 and the Company must incur total exploration expenditures of USD$1,025
(USD$1,025 incurred) on the property, by the fifth anniversary of the “New Effective Date” as agreed by
MinQuest.
The New Effective Date shall be the earlier of October 15, 2018 or the date the Company enters into a joint
venture agreement over Toiyabe or the date that the Company completes a bankable feasibility study on the
property.
The optionor has also granted the Company the right to purchase up to one-half of the NSR (or 1.5%) on the
basis of USD $2,000 per each 1% of the royalty.
iii) Sierra Rosario, Mexico
The Company acquired a 50% interest in the 978-hectare Sierra Rosario Property, over 2 claims that are
located in the state of Sinaloa, Mexico (“Sierra Rosario”). During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company
acquired the remaining 50% interest from the optionor for $25 and a 1% NSR over the entire property.
24
10.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets – (cont’d)
b) Creston Moly (“Creston”) properties
i) El Creston Project, Mexico
The Company acquired a 100% interest in the nine mineral claims known as the El Creston molybdenum
property located northeast of Hermosillo, State of Sonora, Mexico, which has completed a Preliminary
Economic Assessment on the property based on zones of porphyry-style molybdenum (“Mo”)/copper (“Cu”)
mineralization. The mineral concessions are subject to a 3% net profits interest.
ii) Ajax Project, Canada
The Company acquired a 100% interest in six mineral claims known as the Ajax molybdenum property located
in B.C.
iii) Molybrook Project, Canada
The Company owns 100% of the 44 mineral claims of the Moly Brook molybdenum property, located on the
southern coast of Newfoundland. The Moly Brook property is subject to a 2% NSR, of which 1.5% can be
purchased by the Company for $1,500.
During the year, the Company reduced its claims to focus of the core project and to reduce its holding costs.
25
10.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets – (cont’d)
Acquisition costs:
Balance, August 1, 2014
Acquisition Payments
Effect of foreign exchange
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
Effect of foreign exchange
 
Balance, April 30, 2016
Exploration costs:
Balance, August 1, 2014
Geological
Land taxes
Maintenance
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
Geological
Legal fees
Maintenance
Effect of foreign exchange
 
Balance, April 30, 2016
AJC
Properties
 
$ -
1,079
80
 
$ 1,159
(76)
 
$ 1,083
 
$ -
2
10
13
 
$ 25
-
-
59
37
 
$ 121
Creston PropertiesTotal
$ -
2,001
-
 
$ 2,001
-
 
$ 2,001
 
$ -
1
-
225
 
$ 226
115
228
90
-
 
$ 659
$ -
3,080
80
 
$ 3,160
(76)
 
$ 3,084
 
$ -
3
10
238
 
$ 251
115
228
149
37
 
$ 780
Total exploration and evaluation assets 
Balance, July 31, 2014
Balance, July 31, 2015
Balance, April 30, 2016
$ -
$ 1,184
$ 1,204
$ -
$ 2,227
$ 2,660
$ -
$ 3,411
$ 3,864
11.
Loan payable
During the year ended July 31, 2012, the Company secured an $11 million credit facility (the “Facility”) with
Sprott Resource Lending. The facility was used to settle the hedge liability originally entered into with Investec
Bank PLC (“Investec”) pursuant to a Loan Facility entered into on purchase of the mine in 2007. The Facility
bore interest at 11% per annum, payable monthly, with monthly principal payments of $917 to be made
commencing May 31, 2012 and amended to $Nil on December 19, 2012, with the final payment amended to a
balloon payment on October 31, 2013. The Facility was guaranteed by the Company's wholly owned
subsidiary, Bernal, and was secured by a fixed and floating charge and specific registration over all of the
assets of the Company and Bernal, including the San Martin gold and silver mine in Queretaro, Mexico, and a
pledge of all of the shares of Bernal held by the Company.
On August 30, 2013, the Company paid the remaining $3,583 of the Facility, settling its obligation in full and
without penalty.
During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company secured a $1,305 (USD $1,000) loan with a lender. The
loan is secured against certain assets of the Company and bears interest at 11% per annum, compounded
monthly. The full principal plus accrued interest on the loan shall be repayable to the lender on
August 31, 2017.
26 
 
11.
Loan payable – (cont’d)
The Company amalgamated with Cortez (note 5) on August 5, 2015 and acquired the outstanding debt of
$2,936. During the period ended April 30, 2016, the Company settled this debt by paying $650 (USD$500) and
interest of $96 (USD $75) to its lenders. The Company also issued 3,993,203 Subscription Receipts (the
“Receipts”) to complete settlement of outstanding debt in the aggregate amount of $1,959 (US$1,500) and $282
(US$225) in interest to certain creditors. The Receipts were issued at a fair value of $0.56 per Receipt. The
Receipts were subsequently converted into 3,993,203 common shares (note 13) during the period ended April
30, 2016.
On November 17, 2015, the Company completed a private placement of secured bonds in the aggregate
principal amount of $4,500 (“the Bonds”) less structuring and finder’s fees, totaling $90 (the “Discount”). The
Bonds bear interest of 8% per annum, payable on November 12, 2016. The Bonds are secured against all of the
Company’s asset that ranks pari passu with the existing debt obligations of the Company. The Discount is
being charged to the Company’s statement of operations and comprehensive income and added to the liability
over the life of the Bonds.
PrincipalInterestDiscountTotal
(104)
 
-
104
 
-
 
-
-
 
-
 
(51)
Balance, July 31, 2013
 
Payments made during the year(3,583)
Unwinding of discount
 
Balance, July 31, 2014
 
Financing, July 30, 2015
Foreign exchange adjustment 16
 
Balance, July 31, 2015
 
Acquisition of Cortez Debt
Repayment on debt
Financing, November 17, 2015 4,500
Interest accrual
Unwinding of discount
Foreign exchange adjustment
 
Balance, April 30, 2016
$ 3,583 -
 
 
-
-
 
-
 
-
-
 
-
 
378
(378) 51
-
282
-
-
-
-
(51)
 
$ 5,754 $ 282 $ (48)
(90)
-
42
-
-
 
-
 
1,289
1,305
 
2,609
(2,609)
3,479
 
(3,583)
104
 
-
 
1,289
16
 
1,305
 
2,936
(2,936)
4,410
282
42
(51)
 
$ 5,988
April 30, 2016July 31, 2015July 31, 2014
$ 4,619
Current
Non-Current1,369
$ 5,988
$ -
1,305
 
$ 1,305
$ -
-
 
$ -
27
11.
Loan payable – (cont’d)
The Company’s financing (income) costs for the period ended April 30, 2016 and the comparative periods
ending on July 31, 2015 and 2014 as reported on its Consolidated Statement of Operations and
Comprehensive Income can be summarized as follows:
For the
Unwinding of discount on rehabilitation and closure accretion (note 12)$ 65
Discount unwinding on debt repaid
Discount unwinding on existing debt
Legal fees related to settlement of debt
Interest expense on debt
Gain on forgiveness of debt
51
42
-
282
-
Nine month
ending April
30, 2016
Year ended
July 31,
2015
 
$ 79
-
-
-
-
(9)
Year ended
July 31,
2014
 
$ 84
104
33
69
-
-
Interest revenue
12.
Rehabilitation and Closure Cost Provision
(53)
 
$ 387
(73)
 
$ (3)
(4)
 
$ 286
The Company’s asset retirement obligations consist of reclamation and closure costs for the mine. At April 30,
2016, the present value of obligations is estimated at $1,091 (July 31, 2015 - $1,162; July 31, 2014 - $1,128)
based on expected undiscounted cash-flows at the end of the mine life of 19,195,000 MP or $1,401 (July 31,
2015 - $1,615; July 31, 2014 - $1,693), which is calculated annually over 5 to 10 years. Such liability was
determined using a discount rate of 8% (July 31, 2015 – 8%; July 31, 2014 – 8%) and an inflation rate of 3.5%
(July 31, 2015 – 3.5%; July 31, 2014 – 3.5%).
Significant reclamation and closure activities include land rehabilitation, demolition of buildings and mine
facilities, closing portals to underground mining areas and other costs.
Changes to the reclamation and closure cost balance during the period is as follows:
Balance, beginning of year $ 1,162
Accretion expense
Foreign exchange fluctuation(136)
$ 1,091
65
April 30, 2016July 31, 2015July 31, 2014
$ 1,128
79
(45)
 
$ 1,162
$ 1,053
84
(9)
 
1,128
28
13.
a)
Share Capital
Common Shares
The Company is authorized to issue an unlimited number of common shares, issuable in series.
The holders of common shares are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company and to receive
dividends, which may be declared from time-to-time. All shares are ranked equally with regard to the
Company’s residual assets.
In December 2015, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a resolution consolidating the Company’s
share capital on the basis of one new share for up to every four outstanding shares of the Company. The
Company received acceptance from regulatory authorities and commenced trading on a consolidated basis
effective December 14, 2015. The 4:1 share consolidation has been presented throughout the consolidated
financial statements retroactively.
During the period ended April 30, 2016, the Company issued:
3,993,203 Subscription Receipts (the “Receipts”), to settle the outstanding debt pursuant to the acquisition of
Cortez (note 5) as at July 31, 2015 in the aggregate amount of $2,241 owed to certain creditors. The Receipts
-
were issued at a fair value of $0.56 per Receipt. The Receipts were convertible into one share of the Company
upon receipt of shareholder approval. On January 19, 2016, the shareholders approved the conversion of the
Receipts into shares and as a result the Company issued 3,993,203 shares to the Receipt holders.
7,166,888 shares were issued pursuant to the plan of arrangement at $0.42 whereby the Company acquire all
-
of the outstanding shares of Cortez Gold Corp.
During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company issued:
643,750 shares pursuant to the exercise of options at $0.60 per share for proceeds of $386. The fair value of
-
the options as determined on the date of issuance, being $184, was transferred to the Company’s share capital
from equity reserve on exercise.
1,464,095 shares pursuant to the plan of arrangement at $0.52 whereby the Company acquire all of the
-
outstanding shares of AJC (note 5).
During the year ended July 31, 2014, the Company issued:
31,250 shares pursuant to the exercise of stock options at $0.60 per share for proceeds of $19. The fair value of
-
the options as determined on the date of issuance, being $7, was transferred to the Company’s share capital
from equity reserve on exercise.
During the year ended July 31, 2014, the Company adjusted the deferred tax effect on share issuance
costs which resulted in an adjustment of $244.
29
Share Capital – (cont’d)
Warrants
13.
b)
No warrants were issued during the period ended April 30, 2016.
During the year ended July 31, 2015, the Company issued 139,284 warrants pursuant to the AJC acquisition
(note 5). The fair value of these warrants was minimal and as such, no amount was recorded for the issued
warrants. Each warrant entitles the holder to acquire one share of the Company, at $1.20 until June 16, 2016.
These warrants expired unexercised subsequent to April 30, 2016.
A summary of the Company’s outstanding share purchase warrants at April 30, 2016, July 31, 2015 and July 31,
2014, and the changes during the periods then ended is presented below:
Number of warrants
Outstanding at July 31, 2013
Warrants expired
 
Outstanding at July 31, 2014
Warrants issued
 
Outstanding at July 31, 2015 & April 30, 2016139,284
1,126,250
(1,126,250)
 
-
139,284
Weighted average
exercise price
 
$ 1.40
1.40
 
-
1.20
 
$ 1.20
A summary of the Company’s outstanding warrants at April 30, 2016 is as follows:
Number OutstandingWeighted Average PriceWeighted Average Life
139,284
$1.20
0.13
c)
Dividend Paid and Declared
During the previous year ended July 31, 2015, a dividend of $0.08 per share (total of $2,922) (July 31, 2014 -
$Nil) was paid on the shares of the Company on September 30, 2014 to shareholders of record.
d)
Share-based Payments
The Company, in accordance with the policies of the TSX, was previously authorized to grant options to
directors, officers, and employees to acquire up to 20% of the amount of stock outstanding. In January 2014, the
Company’s shareholders voted to cancel the Company’s option plan and, as a result, the Company’s Board of
Directors may not grant further options. The Company’s management and directors are reviewing alternative
compensation arrangements for the Company’s employees and directors.
30
13.
d)
Share Capital – (cont’d)
Share-based Payments – (cont’d)
The following is a summary of changes in options for the periods ending April 30, 2016, July 31, 2015 and July
31, 2014:
Balance at July 31, 2013
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited/expired
 
Balance at July 31, 2014
Exercised
Forfeited/expired
Outstanding and Exercisable at
July 31, 2015 & April 30, 2016
Number of OptionsWeighted Average Exercise Price
 
3,295,000
1,411,250
(31,250)
(25,000)
 
4,650,000
(643,750)
(1,160,000)
$0.92
0.88
0.60
0.60
 
0.92
0.60
0.64
2,846,250
$1.07
Subsequent to the period ended April 30, 2016, 37,500 options expired unexercised.
The following is a summary of the Company’s outstanding and exercisable options at April 30, 2016:
Number OutstandingWeighted Average Exercise PriceWeighted Average Life
37,500
100,000
485,000
812,500
200,000
68,750
50,000
50,000
1,042,500
$0.60
$0.80
$1.00
$1.48
$1.00
$0.80
$0.92
$1.00
$0.88
0.02
0.71
0.74
0.95
2.31
2.31
2.35
2.37
2.71
2,846,250
$1.07
1.72
During the period ended April 30, 2016, the Company had share-based compensation expense of $Nil (July 31,
2015 - $144, July 31, 2014 - $466). These amounts have been expensed as follows:
For the
April 30, 2016
 
$ -
Cost of Sales – Mined ore
Management fees and salaries-
-
Office and administration
$ -
 
 
 
31
Nine months ending
Year ended
Year ended
July 31, 2015
 
$ 18
120
6
$ 144
July 31, 2014
 
 
$ 48
 
365
53
 
$ 466
13.
d)
Share Capital – (cont’d)
Share-based Payments – (cont’d)
The fair value of stock options granted during the year, have been estimated using the Black-Scholes Option
Pricing Model based on the following weighted average assumptions:
201620152014
 
$0.22
Weighted average share price
-
$0.22
Weighted average exercise price-
Risk-free interest rate
-
1.62%
5 years
-
Expected life
74.01%
-
Expected volatility
Expected dividend yield
-
0%
-
-
-
-
-
-
14.
Financial Instruments
All significant financial assets, financial liabilities and equity instruments of the Company are either recognized
or disclosed in the consolidated financial statements together with other information relevant for making a
reasonable assessment of future cash flows, interest rate risk and credit risk. Cash and short-term investments
are carried at their fair value. There are no material differences between the carrying values and the fair values
of any other financial assets or liabilities.
In the normal course of business, the Company’s assets, liabilities and future transactions are impacted by
various market risks, including currency risks associated with inventory, revenues, cost of sales, capital
expenditures, interest earned on cash and the interest rate risk associated with floating rate debt.
a)
Currency Risk
Currency risk is the risk to the Company's earnings that arises from fluctuations of foreign exchange rates and
the degree of volatility of these rates. The Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure
to foreign currency risk. At April 30, 2016, the Company had the following financial assets and liabilities
denominated in CAD and denominated in MP:
In ‘000 of
 
Cash
Long term liabilities
Other working capital amounts - net$ (4,619)
CAD DollarsMP
 
$ 451
$ 2,163
MP 35,112
-
MP (105,118)
At April 30, 2016, US dollar amounts were converted at a rate of $1.2549 Canadian dollars to $1 US dollar and
MP were converted at a rate of MP17.19 to $1 US Dollar. A 10% increase or decrease in the US dollar
exchange may increase or decrease annual earnings from mining operations by approximately $52. A 10%
increase or decrease in the MP exchange rate will decrease or increase annual earnings from mining
operations by approximately $18.
32
14.
b)
Financial Instruments – (cont’d)
Interest Rate Risk
The Company’s cash earns interest at variable interest rates. While fluctuations in market rates do not have a
material impact on the fair value of the Company’s cash flows, future cash flows may be affected by interest rate
fluctuations. The Company is not significantly exposed to interest rate fluctuations and interest rate risk consists
of two components:
(i)
(ii)
To the extent that payments made or received on the Company’s monetary assets and liabilities are affected
by changes in the prevailing market interest rates, the Company is exposed to interest rate cash flow risk.
To the extent that changes in prevailing market interest rates differ from the interest rates in the Company’s
monetary assets and liabilities, the Company is exposed to interest rate price risk.
c)
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk that one party to a financial instrument will fail to discharge an obligation and cause the
other party to incur a financial loss. The Company is exposed to credit risk with respect to its cash and short-
term investments, the balance of which at April 30, 2016 is $4,248 (July 31, 2015 -$3,370; July 31, 2014 -
$5,454) and $5,742 (July 31, 2015 - $2,615; July 31, 2014 - $4,324), respectively. Cash of $566 (July 31, 2015 -
$1,371; July 31, 2014 - $151) and short-term investments of $1,976 (July 31, 2015 - $Nil; July 31, 2014 - $400)
are held at a Mexican financial institution, cash of $19 (July 31, 2015 – $Nil; July 31, 2014 - $Nil) are held at a
US financial institution and the remainder of $3,663 (July 31, 2015 - $1,999; July 31, 2014 - $5,303) and the
short-term investment of $3,766 (July 31, 2015 - $2,615; July 31, 2014 - $3,924) are held at a chartered
Canadian financial institution; the Company is exposed to the risks of those financial institutions. There are $Nil
(July 31, 2015 - $Nil; July 31, 2014 - $351) trade receivables owed and the taxes receivable are comprised of
Mexican VAT taxes receivable of $1,910 (July 31, 2015 - $3,167; July 31, 2014 - $2,825) and GST receivable of
$45 (July 31, 2015 - $35; July 31, 2014 - $31), which are subject to review by the respective tax authority.
d)
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk arises from the excess of financial obligations over available financial assets due at any point in
time. The Company’s objective in managing liquidity risk is to maintain sufficient readily available reserves in
order to meet its liquidity requirements. The Company accomplishes this by achieving profitable operations and
maintaining sufficient cash reserves. As at April 30, 2016, the Company was holding cash of $4,248 (July 31,
2015 - $3,370; July 31, 2014 - $5,454) and short-term investments of $5,742 (July 31, 2015 - $2,615; July 31,
2014 - $4,324).
Obligations due within twelve months
 of April 30,
 
Trade and other payables
Current portion of loan payable
Non-current portion of loan payable -
Reclamation and closure obligations $ -
$ 3,091$ -
4,619 -
2016 2017 201820192020 and beyond
$ -
-
1,369-
$ -
$ -
$ -
-
-
$ -
$ -
-
-
$ 1,401
The Company’s trade and other payables are due in the short term. Long-term obligations include the
Company’s reclamation and closure cost obligations, other long-term liabilities and deferred income taxes.
Management believes that profits generated from the mine will be sufficient to meet its financial obligations.
33 
 
14.
e)
Financial Instruments – (cont’d)
Commodity Risk
Mineral prices and marketability fluctuate and any decline in mineral prices may have a negative effect on the
Company. Mineral prices, particularly gold and silver prices, have fluctuated widely in recent years. The
marketability and price of minerals which may be produced and sold by the Company will be affected by
numerous factors beyond the control of the Company. These other factors include delivery uncertainties related
to the proximity of its resources to processing facilities and extensive government regulations related to price,
taxes, royalties, allowable production land tenure, the import and export of minerals and many other aspects of
the mining business. Declines in mineral prices may have a negative effect on the Company. A 10% decrease
or increase in metal prices may result in a decrease or increase of USD $2,033 in revenue and net income.
15.
Commitments and related party transactions
Except as disclosed elsewhere in these consolidated financial statements, the Company has the following
commitments outstanding at April 30, 2016:
As at April 30, 2016, the Company has shared lease commitments for office space of approximately $144 per
year, expiring at various dates up to April 2020, which includes minimum lease payments and estimated
taxes, but excluded operating costs, taxes and utilities, to expiry.
As at April 30, 2016, the Company has a land lease agreement commitment with respect to the land at the
mine site, for $132 per year until December 2017. The Company also has ongoing commitments on the
exploration and evaluation assets of approximately $220 per year.
As at April 30, 2016, the Company has management contracts to officers and directors totaling $840 per year,
payable monthly, expiring in January 2020.
a)
b)
c)
The Company paid the following amounts to key management and directors in the period:
For theNine months ending April 30, 2016Year ending 
July 31, 2015
 
 
Management fees
Legal fees
Directors fees
Share-based payments -
 
 
$ 950
Total
$ 840
95
60
107
 
$ 1,102
$ 624
256
70
Year ending July 31, 2014
$ 900
14
41
215
 
$ 1,170
34
16.
Capital Disclosures
The Company’s objective when managing capital is to safeguard the Company’s ability to continue as a going
concern, so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders.
The Company considers the items included in the consolidated statements of changes in equity as capital. The
Company manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions
and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the
Company may issue new shares through private placements, sell assets to reduce debt or return capital to
shareholders. The Company is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements and there were no
changes to the capital management in the period ended April 30, 2016.
17.
Segmented Information
The Company operates in three reportable geographical and one operating segment. Selected financial
information by geographical segment is as follows:
April 30, 2016
Mexico CanadaUSA Total
$ 20,326$ -
3,653
(3,429) (29) 195
$ -
$ 20,326
Revenue
Earnings (loss) for the period
Mining interest, plant and equipment56,364 254
Non-Current assets
Total assets
 
 
 
Revenue
Earnings (loss) for the year
Mining interest, plant and equipment50,278 273
Non-current assets
Total assets
56,618
-
260 64,628
1,85178,907
61,323 3,045
71,876 5,180
 
 
Mexico Canada USA Total
$ 28,405$ -
2,563
$ 28,405
$ -
210
(2,379) 26
81
50,632
205 57,177
821 69,197
54,427 2,545
63,590 4,786
July 31, 2015
Revenue
Earnings (loss) for the year
Mining interest, plant and equipment44,672 59
Non-current assets
Total assets
(2,894) -
-
47,536 1,259 -
59,020 6,074 -
Mexico CanadaUSATotal
$ 33,136$ -
5,859
2,965
44,731
48,795
65,094
$ - $ 33,136
July 31, 2014
During the periods ended April 30, 2016 and July 31, 2015, the Company earned all of its revenues from one
customer. During the year ended July 31, 2014, the Company earned its revenue from three third parties. As at
April 30, 2016, July 31, 2015 & 2014, the Company does not consider itself to be economically dependent on
their customers as transactions with these parties can be easily replaced by transactions with other parties on
similar terms and conditions. The balance owing from customers on April 30, 2016 was $Nil (July 31, 2015 -
$Nil; July 31, 2014 - $351).
35
18.
Earnings per Share
The Company calculates the basic and diluted income (loss) per share using the weighted average number of
shares outstanding during each year and the diluted income (loss) per share assumes that the outstanding
vested stock options and share purchase warrants had been exercised at the beginning of the year.
The denominator for the calculation of income (loss) per share, being the weighted average number of shares,
is calculated as follows:
Nine months ended
Year ended
Year ended July 31, 2014
April 30, 2016
Issued common share, beginning of year 37,986,761
8,470,313
Weighted average issuances
 
 
Basic weighted average common shares 46,457,074
Effect of dilutive warrants and options
 
Diluted weighted average common shares46,457,074
-
July 31, 2015
 
35,878,866 35,847,616
1,567,496
 
37,446,362 35,860,887
-
 
37,446,362 36,090,619
229,732
13,271
Vested share purchase options totalling 2,846,250 and share purchase warrants totalling 139,284 at April 30,
2016 were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share as the effect was anti-dilutive.
19.
Income Taxes
Current and deferred income tax expenses differ from the amount that would result from applying the Canadian
statutory income tax rates to the Company’s earnings before income taxes. This difference is reconciled as
follows:
For the
For the
Nine months
ended
Year
ended
Year ended
July 31,
April 30, 2016
(Loss) Earnings before income taxes
 
Canadian statutory income tax rate
 
Income tax expense (recovery) at statutory rate
Difference from higher statutory tax rates on earnings of foreign
subsidiaries
Permanent Difference
Effect of Mexican mining royalty tax (SMD) on deferred income tax
liabilities
Mexican mining royalty tax (SMD)
Recognition of previously unrecognized non-capital loss carry forward
and other deductible tax benefits
Unrecognized benefit of temporary differences and others
 
Income tax (recovery) expense
$ (2,444)
 
26%
 
(635)
(310)
(1,773)
(361)
-
440
-
 
$ (2,639)
36
2014
July 31,
2015
 
 
$ (1,710) $ 5,031
 
26%
 
(445)
26%
 
1,308
(2,253)
(658)
-
114
127
625
2,362
135
1,322
(2,305)
(186)
-
 
$ (1,920) $ 2,066
19.
Income Taxes – (cont’d)
The Company’s statutory rate is 26% for the period ended April 30, 2016 (July 31, 2015 - 26%; July 31, 2014 –
26%). The significant components of the Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities are as follows:
Deferred income tax assets (liabilities):
Mining interest, plant and equipment
Payments to defer
Insurance
Reclamation and closure costs provision
Expenses reserve
Pension-fund reserve
Deferred mining tax
Share issuance costs
Non-capital losses and other deductible tax benefits1,680
Other
 
Deferred income tax liabilities, net
93
 
$ (6,883)
April 30, 2016July 31, 2015July 31, 2014
 
 
$ (7,288)
(527)
(4)
960
131
76
(2,004)
-
$ (13,096)
(601)
(3)
883
80
63
-
-
2,969
-
 
$ (9,705)
$ (13,606)
(469)
(21)
689
81
202
 
22
3,750
249
 
$ (9,103)
Unrecognized deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and unused tax credits are attributable to
the following:
April 30, 2016
Net capital losses
Non-capital losses
Resource pools
Property and equipment
Unrealized foreign exchange losses-
Canadian eligible capital
$ -
24,333
3,674
159
1,426
 
$ 29,592
July 31,
July 31,
2014
2015
 
$ 369 $ 369
1,625 -
640
-
-
-
 
$ 2,634 $ 2,837
865
-
1,603
-
At April 30, 2016, the Company has tax losses of approximately $11,894 (July 31, 2015 - $8,767; July 31, 2014 -
$4,893) in Canada and $12,439 (July 31, 2015 - $626; July 31, 2014 - $Nil) in Mexico available for carry-
forward to reduce future years’ taxable income, expiring between 2026 and 2036 in Canada. In addition the
Company has tax resource pools and other deductible amounts available of $5,259 (July 31, 2015 - $8,953;
July 31, 2014 - $4,978), amortizable at various rates from 100% to 10% without expiry. Deferred income tax
assets have been recognized only to the extent the Company believes it is probable they will be utilized in the
future.
In accordance with Mexican tax law, Bernal is subject to income tax. Income tax is computed taking into
consideration the taxable and deductible effects of inflation, such as depreciation calculated on restated asset
values. Taxable income is increased or reduced by the effects of inflation on certain monetary assets and
liabilities through an inflationary component.
37
19.
Income Taxes – (cont’d)
Mexico Tax Reform
During December 2013, the 2014 Tax Reform (the “Tax Reform”) was published in Mexico’s official gazette with
changes taking effect January 1, 2014. The Tax Reform included the implementation of a 7.5% Special Mining
Duty (“SMD”) and a 0.5% Extraordinary Mining Duty (“EMD”).
The Company has taken the position that SMD is an income tax under IAS 12 Income tax, as it is calculated
based on a form of earnings before income tax less certain specified costs. The EMD is a calculation based on
gross revenue and is therefore not considered an income tax. Both the SMD and EMD will be deductible for
income tax purposes.
In the year ended July 31, 2014, the effect of this change in the rate at which taxes are determined for SMD
resulted in a further one time charge to the provision for deferred taxes, with a corresponding one-time increase
to net deferred tax liabilities of $2,362. During the current year end, the tax liability was decreased by $358 to
$2,004.
Management is currently disputing the SMD, in a joint action lawsuit with other Mexican mining companies, with
the applicable Mexican government authority. Management believes that the SMD is unconstitutional and
should be overturned. In accordance with IFRS reporting standards, however, the estimated effect of the SMD
has been accrued to the current and deferred income tax provisions as stated above. Should the Company be
successful in overturning the SMD, in whole or in part, the accrued tax liabilities stated above will be reversed to
recovery of income taxes in the applicable period.
38