
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549  
FORM 10-K
[X] ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Fiscal Year Ended May 31, 2012
[   ] TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ________________ to ________________.
Commission file number 000-50907
HANDENI GOLD INC.  
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation of organization)
Nevada
98-0430222
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Plot 228, Regent Estate, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania
(Address of Principal Executive Offices)
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
+255-222-70-0084
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: None
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Common Stock, Par Value $0.001
(Title of class)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.
[   ] Yes     [X] No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act.
[   ] Yes     [X] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
[X] Yes     [   ] No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Website, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to
submit and post such files.
[X] Yes     [   ] No
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers in response to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best 
of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form
10-K. [   ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Non-accelerated filer   [   ] (do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Large accelerated filer [   ]
Accelerated filer                   [   ]
Smaller reporting company [X]
Indicate by checkmark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
Yes [   ]     No [X]
i
The aggregate market value of the registrant’s stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of November 30, 2011, computed by reference to the price at
which such stock was last sold on the OTC Bulletin Board ($0.11 per share) on that date, was approximately $17,499,165.
The registrant had 308,416,654 shares of common stock outstanding as of August 24, 2012.
__________
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ITEM 1. 
ITEM 1A. 
ITEM 1B. 
ITEM 2. 
ITEM 3. 
ITEM 4. 
ITEM 5.
ITEM 6. 
ITEM 7. 
ITEM 7A. 
ITEM 8. 
ITEM 9. 
ITEM 9A. 
ITEM 9B. 
ITEM 10. 
ITEM 11. 
ITEM 12.
ITEM 13. 
ITEM 14. 
ITEM 15.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS 
BUSINESS 
RISK FACTORS 
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
PROPERTIES 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 
(REMOVED AND RESERVED) 
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF 
EQUITY SECURITIES 
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
OTHER INFORMATION 
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER 
MATTERS 
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE 
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 
EXHIBITS
1 
3 
21 
26 
26 
26 
26 
27
28 
29 
36
36 
63 
63 
64 
64 
64 
73
74 
75 
77
iii
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report on Form 10-K and the documents incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Such forward-
looking statements concern our anticipated results and developments in our operations in future periods, planned exploration and, if warranted, development of our properties, 
plans related to our business and other matters that may occur in the future. These statements relate to analyses and other information that are based on forecasts of future 
results, estimates of amounts not yet determinable and assumptions of management.
Any statements contained herein that are not statements of historical fact and that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, 
projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance may be  deemed to be forward-looking statements. In  some cases, you can identify  forward-looking 
statements by terminology such as “may”, “might”, “could”, “will”, “would”, “should”, “expect”, “plan”, “intend”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate”, “predict”, “potential”
or “continue”, the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. In evaluating these statements, you should consider various factors, including the assumptions, 
risks and uncertainties outlined in this annual report under “Risk Factors”. These factors or any of them may cause our actual results to differ materially from any forward-
looking statement made in this annual report. Forward-looking statements in this annual report include, among others, statements regarding:
(cid:122) our capital needs;
(cid:122) business plans;
(cid:122) drilling plans, timing of drilling and costs;
(cid:122) results of our various projects;
(cid:122) ability to lower cost structure in certain of our projects;
(cid:122) our growth expectations;
(cid:122) timing of exploration of the Company’s properties;
(cid:122) the performance and characteristics of the Company’s mineral properties;
(cid:122) capital expenditure programs;
(cid:122) the impact of national, federal, provincial, and state governmental regulation on the Company;
(cid:122) expected levels of exploration costs, general administrative costs, costs of services and other costs and expenses;
(cid:122) expectations regarding our ability to raise capital and to add reserves through acquisitions, exploration and development; and
(cid:122) other expectations.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and reflect our current judgment regarding future events, the
forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors. Our actual results will likely vary, sometimes materially, 
from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested herein. Some of the risks and assumptions include, without limitation:
(cid:122) our need for additional financing;
(cid:122) our limited operating history;
(cid:122) our history of operating losses;
(cid:122) our exploration activities may not result in commercially exploitable quantities of ore on our current or any future mineral properties;
(cid:122) the risks inherent in the exploration for minerals such as geologic formation, weather, accidents, equipment failures and governmental restrictions;
(cid:122) the competitive environment in which we operate;
(cid:122) changes in governmental regulation and administrative practices;
(cid:122) our dependence on key personnel;
(cid:122) conflicts of interest of our directors and officers;
(cid:122) our ability to fully implement our business plan;
(cid:122) our ability to effectively manage our growth;
(cid:122) risks related to our ability to execute projects being dependent on factors outside our control;
(cid:122) risks related to seasonal factors and unexpected weather;
(cid:122) risks related to title to our properties;
1
(cid:122) risks related to our being able to find, acquire, develop and commercially produce mineral reserves;
(cid:122) risks related to our stock price being volatile; and
(cid:122) other regulatory, legislative and judicial developments.
This list is not exhaustive of the factors that may affect any of our forward-looking statements. We advise the reader that these cautionary remarks expressly
qualify in their entirety all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf. Important factors that you should also consider, include,
but are not limited to, the factors discussed under “Risk Factors” in this annual report. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materializes, or if underlying
assumptions prove incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from those expected, estimated or projected.
Forward-looking statements in this document are not a prediction of future events or circumstances, and those future events or circumstances may not occur.
Given these uncertainties, users of the information included herein, including investors and prospective investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
such forward-looking statements. Investors should consult our quarterly and annual filings with U.S. securities commissions for additional information on risks
and uncertainties relating to forward-looking statements. We do not assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of these statements.
The forward-looking statements in this annual report are made as of the date of this annual report and based on our beliefs, opinions and expectations at the time
they are made. We do not assume any obligation to update our forward-looking statements if those beliefs, opinions, or expectations, or other circumstances,
should change, to conform these statements to actual results, except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.) files annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements, and other information with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (the “Commission” or “SEC”). You may read and copy documents referred to in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that have been 
filed with the Commission at the Commission’s Public Reference Room, 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. You may obtain information on the operation
of  the  Public  Reference  Room  by  calling  the  Commission  at  1-800-SEC-0330.  You  can  also  obtain  copies  of  our  Commission  filings  by  going  to  the
Commission’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
REFERENCES
As used in this annual report on Form 10-K: (i) the terms “we”, “us”, “our”, “Handeni”, “Handeni Gold”, “Douglas Lake” and the “Company” mean Handeni 
Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.); (ii) “SEC” refers to the Securities and Exchange Commission; (iii) “Securities Act” refers to the United States 
Securities Act of 1933, as amended; (iv) “Exchange Act” refers to the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and (v) all dollar amounts 
refer to United States dollars unless otherwise indicated.
2
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
Corporate Organization
PART I
We  were incorporated  on January  5,  2004  under the laws  of the State of  Nevada. Effective January 21,  2009, we effected  a five for  one stock split of our
common stock and increased our authorized capital to 500,000,000 shares of common stock having a $0.001 par value. On February 14, 2012, the Company
changed its name from Douglas Lake Minerals Inc. to Handeni Gold Inc.
Our principal office is located at Plot 228, Regent Estate, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania, with the phone number of +255 222 70 0084 and the
fax number of +255 222 70 00 52. Our Vancouver office is located at Suite 500, 666 Burrard Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3P6, with the telephone
number of (604) 642-6164 and the fax number of (604) 642-6168.
General
Handeni Gold Inc. is an exploration stage company engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. We have interests in mineral claims known
as the Handeni District Project and the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, located in the Republic of Tanzania in East Africa, through prospecting licenses issued by
the government of the Republic of Tanzania.
None of our mineral claims contain any substantiated mineral deposits, resources or reserves of minerals to date. Exploration has been carried out on these
claims, in particular the 4 PLs (prospecting licenses) of 800 km2 in the Handeni District. Accordingly, additional exploration of these mineral claims is required
before any conclusion can be drawn as to whether any commercially viable mineral deposit may exist on any of our mineral claims. Our plan of operations is to
continue exploration and drilling work in order to ascertain whether our mineral claims warrant further advanced exploration to determine whether they possess
commercially exploitable deposits of minerals. We will not be able to determine whether or not any of our mineral claims contain a commercially exploitable
mineral deposit, resource or reserve, until appropriate exploratory work has been completed and an economic evaluation based on that work concludes economic
viability.
We are considered an exploration or exploratory stage company, because we are involved in the examination and investigation of land that we believe may
contain valuable minerals, for the purpose of discovering the presence of ore, if any, and its extent. There is no assurance that a commercially viable mineral
deposit exists on the properties underlying our mineral claim interests, and considerable further exploration will be required before a final evaluation as to the
economic and legal feasibility for our future exploration is determined.
Our Mineral Claims
Handeni District Prospecting Licenses
Currently, our primary focus is on the Handeni District Project. Effective September 21, 2010, our Board of Directors ratified the entering into of and immediate
closing of a certain Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement (the “Acquisition Agreement”) dated September 15, 2010 with IPP Gold Limited (“IPP Gold”), 
pursuant  to  which  we  acquired  an  undivided  100%  legal,  beneficial  and  registerable  interest  in  and  to  four  prospecting  licences  (the  “PLs”),  totaling 
approximately 800 square kilometres, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania and which were owned or controlled by IPP Gold and its affiliates.
In accordance with the terms of the Acquisition Agreement, effective September 21, 2010, IPP Gold has now become a major stakeholder in our Company.
Pursuant to the terms of the Acquisition Agreement, we issued 133,333,333 restricted shares of common stock to IPP Gold in exchange for 100% interest in the
four PLs of the Handeni Project, with no further payments in shares or cash required.
The Commissioner for Minerals of Tanzania has confirmed the recording in the Central Register and the transfer of 100% of each of the Prospecting License
Nos. 6742/2010, 6743/2010, 6744/2010 and 6779/2010, which comprise the Handeni Project, from IPP Gold to our Company, and that such transfer has been
duly recorded on the terms and conditions contained in such Prospecting Licenses.
We obtained a Technical Report on the Handeni Property (the “Handeni Report”), dated April 25, 2011, as prepared at our request by Avrom E. Howard, MSc, 
FGA, PGeol (Ontario), Principal Consultant at Nebu Consulting LLC. Mr. Howard is a Qualified Person in accordance with Canadian National Instrument 43-
101 “Standards for Disclosure of Mineral Projects” and its Companion Policy (collectively, “NI 43-101”) and is a Practicing Professional Geologist registered 
with the Association of Professional Geoscientists of Ontario (registration number 0380). The Handeni Report follows on the heels of a detailed geological
compilation and exploration report prepared in 2010 by Dr. Reyno Scheepers, a South African professional geologist who has been a director of our Company
since  2010  and  is  our  current  Chief  Executive  Officer.  Upon  independent  review  by,  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  Mr.  Howard,  much of  the  content  from  Dr.
Scheepers’s report has been referred to and referenced in the Handeni Report.
3
On August 5, 2011, the Company entered a Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement (the “2011 Acquisition Agreement”) with Handeni Resources Limited 
(“Handeni Resources”), a limited liability company registered under the laws of Tanzania. The Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company has an
existing ownership and/or beneficial interest(s) in Handeni Resources. Pursuant to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement, the Company had an exclusive option to
acquire from Handeni Resources a 100% interest in mineral licenses covering an area of approximately 2.67 square kilometers to the east of Magambazi Hill,
which  is  adjacent  to  the  area  covered  by  the  Company’s  four  existing  prospecting  licenses  (totaling  approximately  800  square  kilometers)  in  the  Handeni
District.
On November 30, 2011, the Company completed the 2011 Acquisition Agreement and issued 15,000,000 restricted common shares to Handeni Resources as
payment. As at November 30, 2011, the fair market price of the Company’s common stock was $0.11 per share; accordingly, the Company recorded a total fair
market value of $1,650,000 as the mineral licenses acquisition cost.
To comply with the laws and regulations of the Republic of Tanzania whereby foreign companies may not own primary mining licenses (“PMLs”), on July 19, 
2012, the Company:
(1)
(2)
entered into an Addendum agreement to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement whereby Handeni Resources will administer the 32 PMLs until
such time as a mining license (“ML”) on the 32 PMLs (2.67 km2 ) have been allocated; and 
 
during this period Handeni Resources will be conducting exploration and mining activities on the PMLs as directed by the Company.
Much of the information regarding the Handeni District Project as provided below is based on information provided in the Handeni Report.
The author of the Handeni Report visited the Handeni property on February 26, 2011, accompanied by Dr. Scheepers. Given the almost total absence of outcrop
across the property area, on the one hand, and the abundance of district to regional scale geological data, recent exploration data, intensive artisanal mining
activity in the boundary area between the Company’s Handeni property and the adjacent Magambazi property belonging to Canaco Resources Inc. and their
well-publicized news releases and developments, on the other, the author of the Handeni Report determined that he was able to complete a meaningful property
visit within the timeframe of a single day to his technical satisfaction sufficient for the purpose of preparing the Handeni Report.
Location and Access
The Handeni property lies within the historic Handeni artisanal gold mining district, located in Tanga Province, roughly 175 kilometers northwest of Tanzania’s 
largest city, Dar Es Salaam, and 100 kilometers southwest of the more northerly coastal city of Tanga. The road from Dar Es Salaam to Tanga is paved; the
secondary road that heads northwest from this road to the town of Handeni, a distance of 65 kilometers, is currently being upgraded and paved. The Handeni
property  is  located  roughly  35  kilometers  south  of  the  town  of  Handeni.  From  this  point,  a  number  of  dirt  roads  head  south  across  various  portions  of  the
Handeni property and beyond. Driving time from Dar Es Salaam is approximately five hours, depending on traffic and the weather.
Access  during  the  dry  season  is  not  difficult  and  does  not  even  require  a 4X4  vehicle.  Roads  within  the  licenses are  mostly  tracks,  some of  which  are  not
accessible during the rainy season. The area experiences two rainy seasons, namely a short wet period during November and December and the main rain season
lasting from April to June. Exploration conditions during the rainy periods may be difficult, specifically during the April to June period. Fuel is available at a
number of points along the north - south portion of the journey and in Handeni town itself.
The average elevation in the Company’s license area is 450 meters above sea level. The area is densely vegetated with tall trees and grass over undulating hills
of gneiss that comprise the main topographic feature in the area. Muddy, slow moving rivers and creeks crisscross the valleys and plains; some of the larger
streams may experience high flow during intense rainfalls.
The area is scarcely populated with occasional small villages where people are engaged in small scale mixed farming and artisanal gold mining. Handeni town is
a community of several thousand inhabitants haphazardly spread over a series of small, rounded hills, where basic services and accommodation are available.
4
LOCATION MAP: HANDENI PROPERTY IN TANZANIA
Property Description
The property comprises four PLs encompassing nearly 800 square kilometers, all of which are in good standing.
The following table provides details about each PL.
List of Prospecting Licenses, Handeni Property
PL No.
Area
(Sq Km)
Issue Date
Original  
Recipient
Transfer Date
(To IPP  
Gold)
Transfer Date  
(To Handeni
Gold)
Expiry  
Date
Renewal
Date
6742/2010 
6743/2010 
6744/2010 
6779/2010
197.98 
195.48 
198.70 
197.74
05/10/10 
13/10/10 
13/09/10 
13/09/10
Diamonds Africa Ltd. 
Gold Africa Ltd. 
M-Mining Ltd. 
Tanzania Gem Center 
Ltd.
18/11/10 
18/11/10 
18/11/10 
18/11/10
12/12/10 
12/12/10 
12/12/10 
12/12/10
04/10/13 
12/10/13 
12/09/13 
12/09/13
05/10/13 
13/10/13 
13/09/13 
13/09/13
Within the property are several, smaller areas that belong to small scale artisanal miners, all of which are indicated in red in the license map presented below.
The areas found within PL 6742/2010 predate the arrival of IPP Gold and remain in the hands of the local artisanal miners to whom Primary Licenses, or what
are informally known as “Primary Mining Licenses” or PMLs have been issued. The rectangular area in red on PL6743/2010 belonged to Handeni Resources as 
discussed below. Artisanal gold mining activity remains ongoing in some of these areas.
5
License Map, Handeni Property Prospecting Licenses, showing excluded areas in red
Toward the western edge of PL 6743/2010 are several more PMLs that do not belong to the Company. The area colored in green in the figure below is a unitized
block of four PMLs that were acquired by Canaco Resources Inc. (“CRI”) from their owners; this is where the most intensive artisanal gold mining activity is
currently taking place, with laborers working at a variety of mining and milling sites adjacent to and up the hill from a shanty town of huts that is found just
north of Magambazi hill. It is the Company’s understanding that CRI has reached an agreement with the original owners of these PMLs and the people currently
working there which will lead to their ceasing artisanal operations and vacating the site.
Ownership of a single, isolated claim block, depicted in fuchsia below remains uncertain; and which is something that IPP Gold and the Company are attempting
to ascertain. Ownership of the smaller, rectangular red block that overlies the CRI-Company boundary also remains unknown; and which again is another matter
that IPP Gold and the Company are currently pursuing. The remaining block of 32 PMLs, shown as a grid of blue lines below, belongs to the Company as
described above.
6
History
General. Mining in Tanzania in the modern era dates back over one hundred years, first under German colonial rule; during the First World War a number of
military  engagements  took  place  there.  After  the  war  ended  control  of  the  area  was  ceded  to  the  British,  under  whose  colonial  authority  mining  and  other
activities continued and expanded. Mining focused on gold, diamonds and a variety of colored gemstones, notably including the discovery and development of
the world’s largest diamondiferous kimberlite pipe (to date) by Canadian geologist John Williamson, a deposit that remains in production to this day. Shortly
after achieving independence from the British in 1961, Tanzania nationalized most private sector industries, in turn resulting in the exodus of foreign investment
and private capital and the consequent decline in economic activity in all sectors, including mining. Finally, beginning in the 1990s, in line with many other
developing  countries  around  the  world,  the  Tanzanian  government  instituted  several  reforms  to  move  towards  a  free  market  economy,  privatize  the  mining
industry  and  encourage  both  domestic  and  foreign  investment  in  all  economic  sectors.  In  the  case  of  the  mining  industry,  this  was  supplemented,  in  1998,
through the passage of a new, more industry-friendly mining code. This code has been streamlined under the Mining Act of 1998 (revised 2010) (the “Mining 
Act”) currently controlling exploration, mining and related activities in the country.
Tanzania is a significant producer of gold, diamonds and a variety of colored gemstones including tanzanite; the trade name for generally heat treated, bluish-
purple epidote. The Merelani Hills, east of Arusha, is the only place o n e a r t h where this gemstone variety of V-rich zoisite is found in commercial quantities. 
A recently discovered uranium deposit is currently under development, as well, in the southeast area of the country. Tanzania is Africa’s third leading gold 
producer, after Ghana and South Africa, with several major and junior companies producing and exploring for gold, mostly in northwestern Tanzania, south of
Lake Victoria, in an area informally known as the Lake Victoria gold belt.
The Handeni Property. Gold has been known in the Handeni area for many years with some attributing its discovery to the Germans prior to World War One;
however, it was the increase in gold prices and consequent increase in artisanal gold mining activity in the Handeni area that led to the discovery of larger
deposits of placer gold, in turn leading in 2003 to a classic gold rush. The discovery and mining of lode deposits followed, soon after, along with the growth of a
shanty mining town at the northern base of Magambazi Hill.
In 2005, the Company’s majority shareholder, IPP Gold, entered into negotiations with a group of 34 local artisanal miners that collectively controlled four
PMLs  on  and  near  Magambazi  Hill,  site  of  the  area’s  known  lode  mineralization,  and  upon  failing  in  this  endeavor  acquired  a  number  of  PMLs  east  of 
Magambazi Hill from other local owners. A portion of a large (1,200 km2) Prospecting Reconnaissance License (“PLR”) which belonged to Midlands Minerals
Tanzania Limited was also acquired by IPP Gold.
Between 2005 and 2010, IPP Gold carried out exploration over its PLR leading to the upgrading of its holdings from one PLR to four PLs of 800 km2, in August
2010.  Exploration  work  included  airborne  magnetic  and  radiometric  surveys,  ground  magnetic  surveys,  reconnaissance  geological  mapping,  soil  sampling,
pitting and trenching. It is these four PLs that were acquired by the Company from IPP Gold.
Geological Setting
Regional Geology. The geological framework of Tanzania reflects the geologic history of the African continent as a whole. Its present appearance is a result of a 
series  of  events  that  began  with  the  evolution  of  the  Archean  shield,  followed  by  its  modification  through  metamorphic  reworking  and  accretion  of  other
continental  rocks,  in  turn  covered  by  continentally  derived  sediments.  Pre-rift  magmatism  followed  by  active  rifting  has  also  left  a  major  mark  upon  the
Tanzanian landscape.
Several regional geological mapping programs have been carried out across the country over the past one hundred plus years, which has led to the recognition of
several major litho-structural provinces from Archean to recent age. The Archean craton covers most of the western two thirds of the country, roughly bounded
to the east by the East African Rift. Archean rocks host all of the country’s kimberlite pipes and contained lode diamond deposits, and most of its lode gold
deposits. The Archean basement terrain is bounded to the east and west by a series of Proterozoic mobile belts; this area, particularly that to the east, hosts most
of the country’s wide variety of colored gemstone deposits. Some recent research suggests that portions of this assumed Proterozoic terrane may actually consist
of Archean crust that has undergone a later phase of higher grade metamorphism.
The Phanerozoic is represented by a series of sedimentary units of Paleozoic to Mesozoic age, in turn followed by a pre-rift period of kimberlitic and related,
alkalic,  mantle-derived  intrusive  and  extrusive  activity  that  presaged  active  rifting.  Rocks  related  to  this  event  intrude  up  to  Upper  Mesozoic  and  Lower
Cenozoic  sedimentary  formations.  Next came a period of rift-related  intrusive and extrusive activity concentrated in the  Arusha area  – to the northeast  and 
Mbeya area – to the southwest, which is responsible for volcanoes such as Mt. Meru and Mt. Kilimanjaro. Finally, a wide variety of recent and largely semi- to 
un-consolidated wind, water and weathering-derived recent formations are found across the country, a number of which host placer gold, diamond and colored 
gemstone deposits.
Property  Geology.  The  geology  of  t  h  e  Handeni  area  comprises amphibolite  to  granulite  facies  metamorphic  rocks  interpreted  to  originally  have  formed  a 
sequence  of  ultramafic  to  felsic  volcanic  flows,  black  shales  and  quartz-bearing  sedimentary  rocks.  High  grade  metamorphism  has  converted  these  original
lithologies to a variety of metamorphic equivalents, including biotite-hornblende-garnet-pyroxene gneiss, migmatitic augen garnet- hornblende-pyroxene gneiss, 
quartzo-feldspathic hornblende-biotite-pyroxene gneiss, pyroxene-hornblende-biotite-garnet granulite and others. The entire assemblage has been folded into a 
synform with a northwest-southeast axis, complicated by numerous faults, some of which are spatially associated with gold mineralization.
7
Recent research by geologists from the University of Western Australia suggests that much of what has previously been considered to be of Proterozic age
(Usagaran System) may in fact be overprinted Archean crust. This hypothesis has been invoked to help interpret the geology within which gold in this area is
found and as the basis for an analogy between this gold mineralization and that found in less metamorphosed, bona fide Archean rocks in the Lake Victoria gold
district, a few hundred km to the northwest. However, this is a hypothesis, only, one that may be used for exploration modeling purposes but one that still
requires more work.
Mineralization
The Handeni property is at an early stage of exploration. There are no known mineral resources or reserves on the Handeni property, nor are there any known
deposits on the property.
Insufficient work has been completed on the Company’s property to be able to comment to any significant extent about the nature of gold mineralization found
and that may be found therein. However, comments regarding mineralization may be made upon the basis of information released by CRI, the company that
owns the immediately adjacent Magambazi gold deposit, a deposit that remains the subject of an ongoing drilling program and geological studies and which is
considered to be the type occurrence/deposit for the evolving Handeni district. The hill within which this deposit is found extends southeast onto the Company’s 
property.
According  to  the  aforementioned  report  prepared  by  Dr.  Scheepers,  gold  is  found  within  garnet-amphibolite  zones  within  biotite-feldspar  gneiss  at  three 
locations in the Company’s property, locations where historical lode gold occurrences have been documented. Gold occurs in quartz veins as well as within the
garnet amphibolites adjacent to the quartz veins. Proof of this association is informally corroborated by the testimony of local, artisanal miners, who apparently
recover gold both from quartz veins and gold-bearing gneiss that is not quartz vein bearing. Gold in the Company’s property has also been documented in soils 
and placers, at a variety of locations, as well.
Exploration Activities
Whereas gold was known in the Handeni area prior to the arrival in 2005 of the Company’s predecessor, IPP Gold, there is no history of any formal exploration 
in the area aside from limited work at Magambazi Hill itself. IPP Gold’s initial work consisted of soil sampling and a ground magnetic survey over an area of
200  square  kilometers  covering  the  area  now  located  within  PL6743/2010  immediately  east  of  Magambazi  Hill.  Over  the  five  years  that  ensued,  this  was
followed by a series of exploration campaigns involving a variety of exploration methods, in turn followed by interpretation and further work in an iterative
fashion. A table summarizing the work completed by IPP Gold (much of which was completed under the supervision of Dr. Scheepers) may be found below.
Work
Trenching, Pitting & Sampling 
Stream Sediment Sampling 
Soil Sampling
Airborne Magnetic & 
Radiometric Survey 
Geological Mapping
Ground Magnetic Survey
Regional Structural Interpretation
Summary of Historical Exploration Work, Handeni Property
Year 
2009 
2008 
2009  
2010
2009
2008  
2010 
2009  
2010 
2009  
2010
Location(s)
Magambazi Hill 
Northeast quadrant of PL6744/2010 
East of Magambazi Hill  
Over geophysically delineated zones  
in PL6779/2010 & PL6742/2010 
PL6744/2010, PL6744/2010 & PL6779/2010
Over geochemically anomalous and 
artisanal mining areas 
PL6743/2010
Entire property
Worker
IPP Gold 
IPP Gold 
IPP Gold  
IPP Gold  
IPP Gold 
South African Council for 
Geoscience 
IPP Gold  
IPP Gold 
IPP Gold
IPP Gold  
The Company
Several exploration targets were delineated on the basis of the aforementioned work either based upon anomalous gold soil geochemical results alone, or other
features singly or in combination, that based upon gold deposit models have been deemed significant. Paramount among these are structural features are folds,
shear zones, faults and thrust faults that have been interpreted on the basis of the magnetic and radiometric data, particularly where they have been seen to be
coincident with anomalous gold in soils or locations of historical artisanal mining. Regardless of the gold deposit model one favors, structure is of fundamental
significance as a conduit for and host to gold bearing solutions and, in this light therefore, all locations where anomalous gold has been found coincident with
interpreted structures must be considered significant, particularly at this early stage of exploration on the Handeni property and in the district as a whole.
8
Conclusions and Recommendations
The author of the Handeni Report indicated that the most important conclusions to be derived at this juncture are:
1.
2. 
 
3. 
 
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Based upon CRI’s public disclosure, it appears as if a bona fide gold deposit has been discovered at Magambazi Hill, a deposit where ongoing
drilling is finding more gold; 
 
The southeast extension of Magambazi Hill and, presumably, gold mineralization found within, continues onto the Company’s PL6743/2010;
 
Historical placer and lode artisanal mining was a guide to Magambazi’s potential;
 
There are a number of other locations where intensive placer and artisanal gold mining took place within the Handeni property, notably the
Kwandege and Mjembe areas; 
 
Processed airborne magnetic and radiometric data have delineated linear features that have been interpreted to represent a variety of structures
such as shears, thrust faults and cross faults; 
 
Limited soil geochemical surveying, carried out across some of these interpreted northwest-southeast trending structural features, has revealed 
several locations hosting anomalous gold in soils (statistically established to be gold values exceeding 10 parts per billion);
 
G old appears to be further concentrated at the intersection between the northwest-southeast trending structural features and northeast-southwest 
trending structural features, interpreted to represent later cross faults; and
 
These associations suggest a relationship between structures and gold, in turn providing a basis upon which to select additional areas within the
Handeni property for more detailed gold exploration.
Exploration conducted 2011/2012.
During our fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, we achieved the following:
a)
b)
c)
d) 
 
e)
A helicopter based TEM electromagnetic and radiometric aerial survey program was completed by FUGRO over the entire Company licence area (800
km2 ) at 200 meter spaced flight lines in a north-south direction. Electromagnetic (TEM) as well as radiometric data for K (Potassium), U (Uranium),
and Th (Thorium), as well as total count was collected simultaneously for the 4740 line kilometres flown. Selected areas were flown at a line spacing of
100 meters. 
 
The  interpreted  data  clearly  delineated  subsurface  geological  features  of  importance  to  gold  and  base  metal  mineralization  in  this  high  grade
metamorphic terrain. The data proved to be invaluable in the definition of structurally important sites and target definition. 
 
An intensive ground based geophysical program on the Magambazi East as well as the Kwandege target zones was completed. This data (combined with
geochemical results) were used to create drill targets on the two selected areas, the results of which are reported below. 
 
A multi-element soil geochemical program was completed on the Kwandege target delineating the extent of the mineralization zone and assisting the
interpretation of the geophysical data to locate drill positions.
 
A large soil sampling program of two targets in PL6743/2010 was initiated and is still continuing.
 
28 diamond core holes (5,347 meters) were drilled on the Magambazi East and related targets (figure below). 20 of these holes (4228 m or 79.1% of the
total 5347 meters of drilling) were drilled on the main geophysical and geochemical anomaly considered to be an extension of the main Magambazi Hill
mineralization zone. A single hole (MZD 28; 159 m or 3.0%) was drilled on a potential mineralization zone north of the main Magambazi mineralization
trend and one hole (MZD 25; 201 m or 3.8%) was drilled on a potential mineralization zone south of the main mineralization zone. Both these zones
were delineated by ground geophysics and soil geochemistry producing well defined drill targets. Six holes (MZD 05, MZD 12, MZD 13, MZD 15,
MZD 26 and MZD 27 totaling 445 m or 14.2%) were drilled on targets potentially related to the Magambazi Hill mineralization zones by faulting and /
or folding.
9
Drill hole positions for the 28 drilled Magambazi core drill holes.
The drilling program on the Magambazi East targets outlined the following:
f)
i)
ii)
iii)
A gold enriched mineralization zone extends for a distance of approximately 500 m to the south east of the Magambazi Hill mineralization as
defined by CRI. Gold mineralization along the zone is related to a folded sequence of garnet amphibolite and consists of free gold closely related
to quartz veins  as well  as gold related  to sulphides  within this  zone. The mineralization is structurally  complex and is most likely  part of a
synclinal structure plunging to the north west with higher grade gold zones confined to the fold axis of steeply northwest plunging secondary
fold structures on the limbs of the syncline. The repetition distances of these structures are unpredictable based on the current results and drill
spacing and an intensive and directed drilling program will be needed to investigate their economic potential. The best intersection achieved on
the main zone was 4.2 g/t over 5 meters. 
 
A  mineralization  zone  to  the north  of  the  main  zone (the  North  eastern Zone)  shows  gold  potential.  The  strike  distance  of  this  zone  on the
Handeni Gold property is approximately 330 m. Three mineralized intersections were obtained. The zone may be interpreted as refolded main
zone on the north eastern flank of the syncline or a “lower amphibolite zone” at a lower level of the main Magambazi synclinal structure. The 
most promising intersection on this zone was 3.75 g/t over 1 meter.
 
A mineralization zone with a strike distance of approximately 450 m to the south of the main zone (the South western Zone) was intersected.
The geological interpretation is the same as for the North eastern zone. Four mineralized intersections were obtained in this zone of which 1.31
g/t over 1 meter was the intersection obtained. 
 
Evaluation of the economic potential of the three mineralization zones will only be possible with closely spaced directional drilling to follow out
the mineralization. We will continue its evaluation of the Magambazi East project based on a detailed interpretation of the available drill core
and an intensive program of close spaced ground geophysics. The project will finally be ranked against 15 other already identified targets (the
decision to continue drilling on its Kwandege project has already been taken) before a decision on a possible continuation of the drilling program
on Magambazi East will be taken. Intercepts were reported as drilling widths due to extreme folding of layers. More drilling will be needed to
confirm true widths. For the holes reported for this phase of the assay program sampling was conducted along one meter continuous intervals of
the core.
37 drill holes (4,989 meters in total) have been drilled on the Kwandege mineralized zone, completing the first phase drilling program on this project.
The total number of drill holes on the main Kwandege target for the first phase drilling phase were 33, including a single hole abandoned due to bad
drilling ground. 26 of the 32 drill holes on the main Kwandege target yielded gold assay values of more than 0.5 g/t over a one-meter interval or thicker 
intersection,  whereas  four  of  the  remaining  holes  had  anomalous  gold  values  of  up  to  0.49  g/t.  Three  holes  were  drilled  on  a  chargeability  and
radiometric target south of the main Kwandege target and one on a potential south eastern extension of the main Kwandege target (Figure below).
10
Kwandege drill hole positions.
Blue dots represent positions of current artisanal workings and the area outlined in purple is an approximately 1km2 sulphide and 
 
radioelement enriched zone. Hole KW2_10 was drilled on a potential south eastward extension of the main Kwandege mineralized 
zone.
Of the three drill holes drilled on the chargeability zone (outlined in purple on figure above (KW3_01, KW3_02 and KW3_03) (Fig. 1), all three intersected the zone
associated  with  gold  mineralization  in  the  Handeni  area  but  only  KW3_01  yielded  anomalous  gold  values  of  0.24  g/t  over  1  m  intersections.  Thus,  despite  large
percentages of pyrite, as well as some arsenopyrite being present in most of the core intersected on the chargeability anomaly as outlined, general gold values over this
anomaly are unexpectedly low. The potential for gold on the perimeter of the chargeability zone however remains high and further drilling is required.
Anomalous gold values were intercepted over large portions of drill core in KW2_10, drilled on a potential south eastern extension of the main Kwandege mineralization
zone. Although no values of economic grade are present in this single drill hole, the garnet amphibolite (the favourable zone for gold mineralization) was intersected. The
lower values are most likely due to an unfavourable sub-surface structural intersection and further drilling is necessary to assess the (new) south eastern extension of the
main Kwandege target.
The best intersections obtained on the first phase of the Kwandege drilling project (32 holes) were:
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi)
KW2_01 with 4.40 g/t over 12 meters, including 29.5 g/t over 1 m as well as 3.54 g/t over 1 m;
KW2_07 with 6.20 g/t over 5 m including 29.60 g/t over 1 m;
KW1_08 with 1.1 g/t over 9 m including 5.67 g/t over 1 m;
KW1_14 with 1.74 g/t over 6 m including 2.45 g/t over 2m and 3.51 g/t over 1m;
KW1_07 and KW4_03 each with 2.11 g/t over 1 m, and
KW2_08 with 3.70 g/t over 1 m.
An important feature of the Kwandege target is the fact that low level gold values (0.5 g/t to 1 g/t) were encountered in numerous intersections in the drill holes and also
confirmed by the latest assay results. Anomalous gold with some potentially economic intersections have been encountered in an E - W (strike) direction of 1,501 meters 
(based on the results of the completed phase 1 drilling program). The open ended nature of the mineralization in an E-W direction was confirmed.
 
The structural control on the gold mineralization is an important feature of mineralization at Kwandege. Based on the current results, gold is particularly enriched in the
upper of two garnet amphibolite layers separated by a felsic gneiss unit. Within the garnet amphibolite, gold is most likely concentrated in the proximity of fold noses.
The package of garnet amphibolite as well as felsic gneiss units are contained within a SSW towards NNE thrust unit.
 
A confined alluvial mining evaluation program was initiated to investigate the potential to economically mine alluvial gold on the prospecting licenses.
g)
The Company is currently focusing its exploration efforts on:
a) 
b) 
c)
the ranking of its seventeen identified targets and upgrading of the most promising targets to drill target status;
detailed work on the Kwandege project to plan the second phase of drilling; and
the evaluation of selected alluvial targets.
The estimated budget for the completion of these exploration programs is provided below:
11
EXPLORATION WORK
Ground Geophysics 
Mapping, trenching, sampling, etc. 
Drilling 
Geologists, field personnel and general exploration 
Sundry & contingencies 
TOTAL
BUDGET (US$)
250,000 
250,000 
950,000 
550,000 
500,000 
$2,500,000
Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project
Our other property of interest is the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project. On June 27, 2008 but effective on August 4, 2008 when ratified by our Board of Directors,
we entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita (“Mr. Maita”), the registered holder of certain PLs over certain areas covering approximately 430
square kilometers located in the Liwale and Nachigwea Districts of Tanzania. Pursuant to this agreement we had the right to enter, sample, drill and otherwise
explore for minerals on the property underlying the prospecting licenses as granted by the Government of Tanzania under the Mining Act, subject to a perpetual
net smelter royalty return of 3% payable to Mr. Maita.
Effective on July 14, 2009, our Board of Directors ratified, confirmed and approved our entering into of a new Joint Venture Agreement (the “New Mkuvia 
Agreement”) with Mr. Maita. The New Mkuvia Agreement covers a slightly smaller area than the original agreement, covering an area of approximately 380
square kilometers located in the Liwale and Nachigwea Districts of Tanzania, and more particularly described as follows:
(cid:122) Prospecting License No. 5673/2009;
(cid:122) Prospecting License No. 5669/2009;
(cid:122) Prospecting License No. 5664/2009; and
(cid:122) Prospecting License No. 5662/2009.
The  New  Mkuvia  Agreement,  which  is  dated  for  reference  June  5,  2009,  supersedes  and  replaces  the  prior  joint  venture  agreement  as  entered  into  by  and
between our Company and Mr. Maita (the “Prior Agreement”) regarding prior prospecting licenses held by Mr. Maita over substantially the same area, known as 
the “Mkuvia Project”, which is the focus of our current exploration and development efforts.
Pursuant to the terms of the New Mkuvia Agreement we shall continue to have the right to enter, sample, drill and otherwise explore for minerals on the property
underlying the new PLs as granted by the Government of Tanzania under the Mining Act and any other rights covered by the PLs listed above.
In consideration for the entry into of the New Mkuvia Agreement, we were required to pay Mr. Maita US$40,000 upon signing of the New Mkuvia Agreement.
In addition, and upon commencement of any production on the property underlying the prospecting licenses, Mr. Maita is still entitled to receive a perpetual net
smelter royalty return of 3% from any product realized from the property underlying the PLs under the New Mkuvia Agreement. By entering into the New
Mkuvia Agreement, we are no longer required to pay Mr. Maita the balance of approximately US$460,000 in aggregate yearly cash payments previously due
under the Prior Agreement in consideration, in part, of our Company reducing the current unexplored property area underlying the prospecting licenses under the
New Mkuvia Agreement by approximately 50 square kilometers.
The Company is informed that these PLs expired during May and June of 2012. The Company is also informed that renewal applications were submitted (50%
of each of the four properties) by the owner, Mr. Maita, as renewal licenses, and that applications for the remaining 50% of each of the four licenses were
submitted. If there are other applicants for the remaining 50% of each of the four PLs, the Company understands that there will be a tender process for the same.
At this time the Company is considering its interest in the same going forward but no final determination has been made as of yet.
The  property  has  several  overlying  primary  mining  licenses  (again  PMLs)  that  have  mineral  rights  that  lie  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Mkuvia  property.
Generally, PMLs represent limited mining rights which allow the small scale exploration of minerals by local miners and must predate the establishment of a
prospecting license. PMLs are retained exclusively for Tanzanian citizens. The maximum size of the demarcated area for a PML for all minerals other than
building materials is 10 hectares. The PML is granted for a period of five years, renewable once upon request. When a PML expires, the mineral rights succeed
to the underlying PL and cannot be renewed or re-staked thereafter, so long as the PL remains valid. Specifically, the PMLs on the Mkuvia property consist of
approximately 115 licenses owned by Mr. Maita, and have been provided for in the New Mkuvia Agreement. Upon a successful mining permit application and
receipt, the PMLs will be collapsed and superseded by the PL rights.
We obtained a Technical and Recourse Report on the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, dated July 24, 2009, as prepared by Laurence Stephenson, P. Eng., and
Ross McMaster, MAusIMM. This report was prepared in accordance with NI 43-101. Much of the information regarding the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project as
provided below is based on information provided in that NI 43-technical report.
12
Effective November 7, 2009, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc. (“Ruby Creek”), pursuant to 
which Ruby Creek has the right to purchase a 70 percent interest in 125 square kilometres of our 380 square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project upon
payment of $3,000,000 over a three-year period. The schedule by which Ruby Creek is to pay such $3,000,000 to our Company is as follows:
(cid:122) $100,000 within five business days of signing of the Purchase Agreement (received);  
(cid:122) $150,000 within 15 business days of signing of the Purchase Agreement (received);  
(cid:122) $100,000 upon satisfactory completion of Ruby Creek’s due diligence (received);  
(cid:122) $400,000 upon closing under the Purchase Agreement and receipt of the first mining license;  
(cid:122) $750,000 within 12 months of closing;  
(cid:122) $750,000 within 24 months of closing and  
(cid:122) $750,000 within 36 months of closing (this final payment may be made, in Ruby Creek’s discretion, in cash or shares of Ruby Creek).
In a further purchase agreement between our Company and Ruby Creek dated for reference May 19, 2010 and fully executed on June 16, 2010 (the “Further 
Purchase Agreement”), Ruby Creek agreed to purchase 70% of the remaining 255 sq km of the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project in accordance with the terms of 
such Further Purchase Agreement. Under the terms of the Further Purchase Agreement, Ruby Creek will earn a 70 percent interest in the remaining 255 square
kilometres of our 380 square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project by making payments totaling $6,000,000 to us. The schedule by which Ruby Creek is to
pay such $6,000,000 to us is as follows:
(cid:122) $200,000 due within seven days of execution of the Further Purchase Agreement (received);  
(cid:122) $150,000 (received) plus the issuance of 4 million restricted shares of common stock of Ruby Creek, with an agreed upon value of $0.80 per share for a
stated valuation of $3.2 million, within 30 days of the receipt of Certificates of Acknowledgement for all underlying and related Agreements from the
Commissioner for Minerals in Tanzania as required by the Mining Act of Tanzania (Certificates of Acknowledgement received August 12, 2010, and
shares issued on December 16, 2010);
(cid:122) $450,000 on June 1, 2011 (unpaid);  
(cid:122) $1,000,000 on June 1, 2012 (unpaid); and  
(cid:122) $1,000,000 on June 1, 2013 (which may be satisfied by the issuance of stock by Ruby Creek).
Thus,  the  combined  payments  under  the  November  2009  and  the  June  2010  Purchase  Agreement  and  Further  Purchase  Agreement  provide  for  a  total
commitment of $9,000,000 payable to our Company by Ruby Creek to purchase a 70% interest in the entire 380 square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project.
The ownership structure of the interest in the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project shall be a 70% interest for Ruby Creek, a 25% interest for our Company and a 5%
interest for Mr. Mkuvia Maita, the original owner of the underlying PLs. In addition, Mr. Maita retains a 3% net smelter royalty. However, the Further Purchase
Agreement also provides that Ruby Creek may increase its ownership position from a 70% interest to 75%, reducing our position to 20%, by giving notice to us
and paying $1,000,000 to us by June 1, 2011 (unpaid).
As indicated in Item 3 of this Annual Report – “Legal Proceedings”, on February 8, 2012, Ruby Creek filed a lawsuit against the Company in the Supreme
Court, State of New York, in which Ruby Creek alleges that the Company participated in a fraudulent transfer of the mineral property interests that Ruby Creek
had the right to purchase pursuant to the above-referenced Purchase Agreement and Further Purchase Agreement with the Company. The Company is of the
view that such allegations are without merit and intends to vigorously contest the action. On February 23, 2012, the Company filed a lawsuit against Ruby Creek
in the Supreme Court of British Columbia, seeking relief for Ruby Creek’s breach of its payment obligations under the above-referenced Purchase Agreement 
and Further Purchase Agreement and seeking an order that Ruby Creek remove the U.S. restrictive legend from Ruby Creek shares issued to the Company under
the agreements. To date, Ruby Creek is in default with respect to over $1.3 million in scheduled payments due to the Company under the Purchase Agreement
and Further Purchase Agreement.
Location and Access
The 380 square kilometers Mkuvia Project is located in the Nachingwea District, Lindi Region of the United Republic of Tanzania, and approximately 140
kilometers west of Nachingwea town. Lindi Region is one of the three regions forming Southern Zone of United Republic of Tanzania, the other regions being
Mtwara and Ruvuma. The Mtwara and Ruvuma regions border northern Mozambique and eastern Malawi. A central point in the mining license is located at
361600 mE, 8856946 mN, UTM Zone 37 Southern Hemisphere (WGS 84)
13
The Lindi Region is one of the 20 Regions in Tanzania Mainland. The Region lies between South latitude 08°30’ and 10°30’ and East longitude 37°30’ and 39°
30’. It is bordered by four other regions, the Coastal and Morogoro regions to the North, the Ruvuma region to the West, the Mtwara region to the South and the
Indian Ocean to the East.
The main road from Dar es Salaam to the southern regions passes through the Coastal, Lindi, Mtwara and Ruvuma regions. The road connects to northern
Mozambique and eastern Malawi via the Mtwara and Ruvuma regions. Recently funding from external donors and the central government have significantly
improved the road from Dar Es Salaam to the Lindi and Mtwara regions from gravel to tarmac level, covering a total distance of about 700 kilometres, including
the construction of 1 kilometre long bridge across the Rufiji River.
The Lindi Region is served by 4 airstrips, in Lindi, Nachingwea, Liwale and Kilwa Masoko. These gravel strips are capable of supporting small to medium size
planes only. There is no commercial air service to the region.
LOCATION MAP: MKUVIA PROPERTY IN TANZANIA
The Mkuvia Property is accessible by dirt gravel road from Nachingwea town via Mbondo, Kilimarondo and Kiegeyi villages. However, during intense rain,
access to the property from Kiegeyi village can only be achieved by using 4 x 4 trucks. Operations for the exploration of the Mkuvia Property would be based
out of the  town of Nachingwea  located  140 kilometres  east of  the  property  and about 600 kilometres  southwest of  Dar es  Salaam, the capital  of Tanzania.
Nachingwea town, which is one of the districts within Lindi Region, has an airstrip facility on which up to medium size aircrafts can safely be utilized.
Access to the property is via main Tanzanian highways to the village of Kiegeyi and then by field road to our main field camp. Field roads exist throughout the
property.
Although the electrical power grid is reaching most areas of Tanzania it does not extend to the area of the Mkuvia property and will not likely be available in the
near future. Since Tanzania has a vibrant mining community, a large pool of experienced mining personnel and equipment is available, some of it locally.
There are no waste treatment plants in the immediate area.
Topography and Climate
The topography of the area ranges between 480 to 760 metres and is relatively moderately rugged to the central, west and the southwest, and flat to the eastern
part. Many of the rivers and streams which are flowing to the south, north and east directions are seasonally dry. The main Mbwemkuru River flows all year
round and water availability for all aspects of the exploration and development program will not be a problem. The area is dense vegetated with thick bushes
along the rivers and streams valleys.
14
There are four main climatic zones that can affect the whole of Tanzania: the coastal area where conditions are tropical; the central plateau, which is hot and dry;
the semi-temperate highland areas; and the high, moist  lake regions.  There are two rainy seasons in the north, from November to  January and from March
through May. In the Lindi Region, annual rainfall ranges from 600mm in low lands to 1200mm in the highland plateau. Most parts of the coastal, central and
north eastern highlands are currently experiencing extreme drought conditions after a prolonged period of below average annual rainfall in consecutive seasons.
Plans to develop water resources could not only facilitate operations but might provide a local resource that will attract government approval and funding.
The mean annual temperatures vary with altitude from the valley bottom to the mountain top. The average annual temperature varies between 18 degrees C on
the mountains to 30 degrees C in river valleys. In most parts of the region, the average temperatures are almost uniform at 25 degrees C. In general the hot
season runs from July to September.
History
Gold mineralization in the area was first discovered at the time of the government’s Geological Survey of Tanzania, a countrywide geochemical survey program
conducted  in  the  1990s.  The  property  is  part  of  a  previously  described  gold  district,  the  Kitowero  Prospect,  in  which  a  State  Mining  Corporation  reported
mineral concentrates in the current rivers, including the Mbwemkuru River. The authors of the 43-101 Report have advised that they have not been able to verify 
this information, and no historical estimates or details is available on the source of this information.
Small scale artisanal mining activities commenced in 2002 by local miners, with the aim of exploring and mining gemstone along the main Mbwemkuru River
and its tributaries. However, gold was recovered from the concentrates and hence the area turned from gemstone to alluvial gold mining. The current production
from  artisanal  mining  work  by  local  miners,  as  reported  by  them  averages  between  1.5  to  2  kilograms  of  gold  per  month,  recovered  from  loose  sands  and
gravels. The authors of the 43-101 Report have not been able to verify this information.
Geological Setting
Tanzania has a geological environment representing all the known chronostratigraphical units of the world ranging from Archaean, Proterozoic, Phanerozoic to
Quarternary ages. These geological formations host a variety of minerals such as gold, base metals, diverse types of gemstones (including tanzanite, diamonds,
emerald, sapphires, colored quartz, ruby, beryl, tourmaline, garnet), various industrial minerals, building materials, phosphate, coal, salt, kaolin, tin, water and
hydrocarbons.
Regional  Geology.  Much  of  the  central  and  northern  part  of  the  country  is  underlain  by  the  Tanzania  Archaean  Craton.  The  central  part  of  the  country  is 
composed  of  the  high  grade  metamorphic  terrain  (the  Dodoman  Supergroup  dominated  by  rafts  of  amphibolite  to  granulite  facies  metamorphic  rocks  in
migmatitic granite terrain), whereas the northern part is covered by the Greenstone Belt (the Nyazian – Kavirondian Supergroup comprising sequences of mafic 
to felsic volcanics, chert/banded iron formation and clastic sediments). The Tanzania Archaean Craton is well known as a host for world-class gold deposits 
similar to other Archaean Cratons around the world. The Craton is also intruded by a number of diamondiferous kimberlite pipes.
The Tanzania Archaean Craton is engulfed to southeast and southwest by Palaeaproterozoic Usagaran and Ubendian mobile belts respectively, with high grade
crystalline metamorphic rocks with a number of postorogenic gabbroic and granitic intrusives hosting base metals, shear zone hosted gold, various types of
gemstones and industrial minerals. The eastern part of the Usagaran Belt is mobilized by the Neoproterozoic Pan African Orogeny forming the Mozambique
Belt with lithological, structural and metallurgical characteristics similar to that of the Usagaran - Ubendian Belt.
The Palaeoproterozoic Ubendian mobile belt is bound to the west by the mildly metamorphosed Mesoproterozoic Fold Belt (the Kibaran –Bukoban - Karagwe-
Ankolean Supergroup). The supercrustal rocks of this Belt (mainly meta – argillites, phyllites, low-grade sericite schists and quartzites) are intruded by post 
orogenic granites which have alteration haloes containing veins with tin and tungsten mineralization. The Belt is also characterized by post – orogenic basic 
intrusives hosting platinum group metals (PGMs).
The  Uha  -  Malagarasi  Neoproterozoic  to  early  Palaeozoic  age  is  an  intracratonic  formation  consisting  of  sedimentary  –  volcanic  depositional  sequences  of 
sandstones,  quartzites,  shales,  red  beds,  dolomitic  limestones,  cherts  and  amygdaloidal  lavas  with  indications  of  strata-bound  copper  deposits  and  various
industrial minerals.
Phanerozoic formations in Tanzania include the following:
(cid:122) the Karoo Supergroup of Late carboniferous to Jurassic age made up of continental sedimentary rocks famous for hosting good-quality coal resources
occurring in several isolated coalfields located in south west of Tanzania;
(cid:122) Marine Formations that are dominated by shelf-facies clay bound sands, marls and some isolated coral reefs good for production of portland cement, lime 
and construction aggregates. The marls and sands are respectively, good source and reservoir rocks of hydrocarbons. At Mandawa there are salt domes
made up of gypsums and other evaporates salts that can be used for various industrial purposes; and
15
(cid:122) Neogene to Quarternary continental formations in isolated basins and river channels composed of clays (red soils, ochre, kaolin, bentonites, meerschaum,
bauxite),  limestone,  evaporates  (gypsum,  nitrates  and  halides)  and  sands;  volcanic  rocks  ranging  in  composition  from  lavas  (basalts,  andesites,  and
phonolites) good for aggregates, apatite and niobium bearing carbonatites (good for fertilizers), tuffs, ash and pumice (good for production of pozzolana
cement) and dimension stones; volcanic fumarolic exhalative deposits (mainly sulphur and fluorites).
Property Geology. The Mkuvia Project is situated at the eastern margin of the Selous Basin where Karoo and young sedimentary rock are in fault contact with 
low to high-grade metamorphosed rocks of Neoproterozoic age belonging to the Mozambique Belt. The Proterozoic basement rocks are bounded by Palaeozoic,
Mesozoic and Cenozoic basins to the east, north and west. The dominant rocks are biotite schist and gneiss, granitic gneiss, garnetiferous amphibolites, quartzite,
pegmatite dyke and mafic sills which are unconformably overlain by palaeo-placer sand and pebble beds and recent superficial deposits. The regional structural 
trends that control the deposition appear to be trending at northwest and northeast.
The geology of the property is dominated by thick (up to 10 m) of transported cover consisting of palaeo-placer sand, gravel and pebble beds derived from 
Karoo to the west and younger sedimentary rocks. The sand horizon is massive, graded from fine to coarse grained, characterized by orange-yellow sands, well 
exposed at Old Matandani Prospect, and white-grey sands which cover the large part of the property. The basal conglomerate pebbles (auriferous pebbles and
cobbles beds) are well rounded, well sorted, dominantly made of quartzite, quartz rocks, and other basement rocks.
The thickness of palaeo-placer sand–pebble beds and the overlaying black clays material increase toward the eastern part of Mbwemkuru River as observed at
Mkilikage  Prospect.  This  would  be  expected  if  the  source  of  the  deltaic  or  beach  placer material  is  from  the  west.  At  Mkilikage  Prospect,  a  thick  layer  of
medium to coarse grained sandy bed (~ 2.5 m thick) resulted from modern river deposition is overlaying palaeo-placer sand-pebble beds. This sandy bed is 
characterized by well developed cross bedding sedimentary structures with minimal gold content until the lower reaches.
The red-brown sands are massive with no obvious bedding. They comprise subangular quartz grains with a matrix of hematite clay. They range from <1 m up to
3 m thickness, and generally appear to be thicker upslope, particularly at the western extremity of the property, well exposed at Old Matandani workings. They
have been reworked in the current river bed, with removal of the clay, to produce white friable sands that extend for up to 300 m, but generally less, upslope.
These are clearly gold-bearing as they have been extensively mined by artisanals, but panning suggests that they are low grade.
The sands overlie a polymictic conglomerate sequence that comprises several clay-rich, horizontally bedded units interlayered with sandy beds. The clasts range
from pebbles through cobbles to boulders, the latter being only sporadically developed, but suggesting that there may be distinct channels in the conglomerate
sequence upslope from the present river. Artisanal activity and panning indicate that the conglomerates have higher gold grades than the overlying sands. This
feature would be anticipated in a delta or beach placer forming river fan.
Most of the Neoproterozoic basement rocks are exposed on the NE-SW trending ridge located in the central-eastern portion of the property with few outcrops 
observed  in  the  south  part,  exposed  on  the  river  banks  and  beds.  The  basement  geology  consists  of  granite-gneisses,  biotite  gneiss,  schists  and  quartzo-
feldspathic gneiss and quartzite, which have been intruded by pegmatite veins and mafic dykes and quartz veins.
The quartzite has a bedded sugary texture. The biotite gneiss is fine grained, well bedded with biotite, feldspar and quartz. Quartz-feldspar gneiss additionally 
contains minor biotite and was also observed to contain some large augen like feldspar crystals. Pegmatite was generally seen to have graphic texture with very
coarse grained feldspar and smaller quartz crystals, and with only biotite or chlorite as an accessory mineral. The granite-gneiss characterized by granoblastic
texture and weakly developed foliation fabrics.
Mineralization
Thus far, the known gold mineralization in Mkuvia Property occurs as placer deposits comprising of a significant, but unquantified accumulation of gold in
alluvium hosted by: 1) reworked palaeo-placer by the Mbwemkuru River and its tributaries; and 2) an over 10 m thick zone of palaeo-placer sand and pebble 
beds non-conformably overlying biotite schist, gneiss, quartzite, garnet-amphibolite and granitoids. The latter comprises a poorly sorted palaeo-beach placer 
plateau  extending  over  29  km  along  a  NW-SE  direction  and  ~5  km  wide  along  a  NE-SW  direction.  In  addition  there  are  extensive  troughs  with  similar 
continental alluvium further west in the Karroo Basin. It is however notable that at the highest point on the property, pebble conglomerates were noted on the
surface that have been worked sporadically by the artisanal miners (due to lack of water resources) suggesting that gold is present. This is consistent with the
proposition that the mineralization is associated with a wide spread beach placer environment.
Gold-bearing alluvium along the Mbwemkuru River occurs within a 0.35 to 2.0 m thick zone between the bedrock and sandy-gravelly material related to present 
drainage active channels and terraces. This zone contains an estimated 1.0 grams per cubic metre that the small-scale miners are currently reportedly recovering.
16
Gold is very fine-grained in general, suggesting a distal source, although some coarser-grained flakes are present. The gold is associated with the black sands 
that comprise fine-grained ilmenite and pink garnet and minor magnetite. These may be represented by distinct ferruginous layers in the conglomerate sequence.
The minerals in the black sand are consistent with the beach placer model.
Artisanal miners have been active since 2002 exploiting these deposits using simple sluice techniques and hence dependant on water for treatment. Placer type
gold occurs as very fine flat pieces implying reworking or a distal source. Other elements (such as Pt, Pd, Ag, U and Th) in the placer are of passing interest
only. Pt and Pd do not appear to be a consistent constituent.
The area was loosely defined by the surface inspection of the beach placer type gravel formations in place. The wide spread area remains to definitively be
surveyed to confirm that the boundaries indicated are correctly delineated. This delineation should be treated as speculative and will need further exploration
work to define.
Exploration Activities
The Mkuvia Property is without known reserves and our activities to date have been exploratory in nature.
An estimated total of US$2.1 million has been spent on Mkuvia property during the period from April to December 2008 for various exploration activities,
which include casual labour salaries, transport, field costs, office and administration and hardware. Reconnaissance exploration work on the project to date has
consisted of pitting and sampling, geological mapping and bedrock sampling, and stream and sediments sampling, as described below.
Pitting and Sampling. Pitting work commenced in June 2008 and continued throughout to March 2009. The initial pit sampling program on the Mkuvia property
was undertaken at the Matandani Main workings, along the Mbwemkuru River. A total of 161 pits consisting of 498 samples were completed from 10 sections
during the period from June to December 2008. These pits were deepened and sampled trying to reach bedrock (12-15 m estimate, bedrock was not encountered) 
where possible. Analysis of the gold content in the pit samples continued through to May 2009.
Lines were run north south across the area on a line spacing of 500 m and with a pit being dug to the bedrock refusal at 50 m intervals along the line. The
sampling was done volumetrically from the surface, where a 100 litre sample was collected from each cubic meter of material recovered. The pit sampling was
done based on the geological control. Each individual horizon (sand, gravel, pebble) was sampled separately, maintaining a 100 litre sample size.
The pit samples were then treated using a Knelson Concentrator on site in September 2008.
The compilation of all heavy mineral and gold results was completed by TMEx staff in laboratory conditions at Arusha, Tanzania, which included separating and
weighing the gold recovered from each sample where measurable gold was observed. Each sample was taken from a designated and mapped stratigraphy as a
measured volume of loose material (e.g.: sands, gravel) and usually were 100 litres in field estimated volume. Sample treatment was by a 7.5 inch Knelson
concentrator to produce a heavy mineral concentrate. After further hand panning in the TMEx laboratory reduced the concentrate, it was dried and the gold was
finally separated from all other minerals, described and weighed to give a result in g/Lcm. (A loose cubic metre (Lcm) is defined as the expansion of the in situ
measurement  of  material  that  once excavated  increases  by a  20-30%  factor  that  will  be determined  exactly  in  further  test  work.)  TMEx  took  charge  of  the
concentrate from the Knelson concentrator and proceeded to calculate the weight of gold.
All pits were geologically mapped, level surveyed and generated cross sections. Of significance is that where the test pits were able to penetrate below the
pebble conglomerate the encountered clay rich units were significantly devoid of gold colour counts and assay analysis.
The  pit  sampling  has  successfully  identified  the  sand  and  pebble  conglomerates  as  auriferous  in  the  area  of  the  Matandani  Main  workings,  along  the
Mbwemkuru River.
Geological  Mapping  and  Bedrock  Sampling.  Geological  mapping  work  is  ongoing  in  the  Mkuvia  Project.  The  mapping  is  conducted  at  scale  of  1:20,000.
However, most of the Mkuvia Property lies under superficial covers, with outcrops being exposed on the NE-SW trending Mbwemkuru ridge located in the 
central  - eastern portion of the property and along rivers and streams beds flowing in the southern portion. The dominant basement lithologies encountered
during the mapping, stream sampling and pitting activities are biotite-hornblende gneiss, which developed strong foliation fabrics and compositional banding
and  weakly  foliated  to  massive  quartzo-feldspathic  gneiss  referred  as  granite-gneiss,  with  granular  igneous  texture  being  preserved.  The  granite-gneiss  is 
characterized by granoblastic texture and weak foliation fabrics. Quartz-magnetite subcrops and rubbles are exposed on the northern part along Mbwemkuru
ridge. The rock is characterized by alternating narrow bands/layers of quartz and magnetite. The basement rocks have been intruded by the late pegmatite dykes
and veins and quartz veins.
The  superficial  covers  which  dominated  the  western  part  of  the  project  consist  of  palaeo-sands,  gravels,  pebbles  and  cobbles  deposition,  with  recent  river 
deposition and clayey material. The pebbles and cobbles are well rounded, made up of mainly quartzite and quartz vein.
17
Calcrete formations have been observed, mostly formed in the swamps.
Bedrock sampling work is taking place concurrently with the geological mapping. Thus far, a total of 60 bedrock samples were collected for gold and base
metals assaying and references. The samples for assaying were sent to SGS Laboratory, Mwanza for analysis. Many of the bedrock samples were collected from
the central-eastern portion of the property where basement rocks are well exposed along Mbwemkuru Hill and river beds.
Stream and Sediments Sampling. Reconnaissance stream sediments sampling work commenced in September 2008 in all prioritized rivers and streams within 
the Mkuvia Property. The objective of the program was to quickly define the pattern and limit of the placer gold mineralization within the property. The program
was undertaken in the eastern and northeast part of the property. The stream samples were taken from at least one meter deep pits dug to the base of the selected
part of the stream where gravels and heavy minerals are concentrated. A total of 73 stream sediments samples were collected during the period from September
to December 2008.
From  September  2008,  sample  treatment  was  by  a  7.5  inch  Knelson  Concentrator  to  produce  a  heavy  mineral  concentrate.  This  concentrate  was  dried  and
examined under a binocular microscope to identify heavy minerals of interest and gold. The gold was recovered, described, and gold grain counts were recorded
to guide exploration in the reconnaissance stream samples.
A preliminary review heavy mineral stream sampling, field observations and interpretation of available aerial photography has resulted in the identification of
substantial additional areas of recent palaeo-alluvial deposits in the Mkuvia project area. The initial reconnaissance heavy mineral sampling has highlighted 
several drainages and gravel ridges that warrant exploration and further evaluation.
Of the 256 stream samples, over a hundred had gold colours of more than 10 with 16 having over 100. With reference to the work done in the pits, and since the
samples taken from the stream sediments were done with the same volumetric procedure, the high colour counts suggest that other zones with grade potential
could be identified on the property.
Results and Recommendations
The authors of the NI 43-101 report concluded that the Mkuvia Property is a significant property of exploration merit and have recommended a two-phase 
exploration program, as described below, which we intend to implement, subject to sufficient funding.
Phase I has a budget of $2.58 million and will lead directly to the implementation of Phase II. Phase II is contingent on positive results that show the presence of
gold in measurable quantities throughout the units identified and tested in Phase I. A decision will be made at the completion of Phase I as to whether to proceed
to Phase II.
Phase  II  is  recommended  to  expand  on  the  results  of  Phase  I  with  a  full  test  mining  program  which  will  include  development  and  resource  definition  and
consisting of further Auger or a reverse circulation drilling program, a further local test mining pit sampling along sections of newly selected areas, and full scale
test placer operation. Phase II has a budget of $7.42 million.
A break-down of the budgets for each of Phase I and Phase II are as follows:
PHASE I
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Total:
Action 
Quaternary Surface geological mapping and drill site selection 
Additional Pit Sampling on Cross section 
Drilling 3000 metres @ $125/metre (15 to 20 metres /hole) 
Assaying (Pan cons, soil, etc.) 
Permitting and bonding 
Support, logistical and operational, travel & supplies 
Drill Site preparation 
Test Pit Equipment and Operation 
Supervision, report writing & contingency (20%)
PHASE II
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Total:
Action 
Drilling 6000 metres @ $125/ metre (15 to 20 metres /hole 
Quaternary Surface geological mapping and drill site selection 
Test Pit Operation 
Large Scale Test Pit Equipment and Operation 
Support logistical and operational, travel & supplies 
Supervision, report writing & contingency (25%)
18
Budgeted Cost
$25,000 
$150,000 
$375,000 
$30,000 
$20,000 
$250,000 
$100,000 
$1,000,000 
$430,000 
$2,580,000
Budgeted Cost
$750,000 
$40,000 
$250,000 
$2,500,000 
$2,500,000 
$1,380,000 
$7,420,000
Exploration conducted during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 to date
We have not received any update from Ruby Creek on its exploration activities conducted on the Mkuvia properties during the financial year ended May 31,
2012 to date. The Company is hopeful that it will be able to receive such exploration data in order to assist it in determining whether to make application for the
remaining PLs through what the Company is informed is a tender process to come.
Glossary of Terms
The definitions of geological and technical terms used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are provided below:
Amygdaloidal lavas
Archaean 
 
Boudin structure 
 
Feldspars 
 
Ferromagnesian minerals 
 
Granulites
Metamorphic rocks
Mobile belt 
 
Orogenic style 
 
PL 
 
PLR 
 
PML 
 
Proterozoic 
 
Red beds
Quartz 
 
Rifting 
 
Ubendian
Unconformably
Usagaran
An effusive rock with large, slightly elongated pores filled with secondary deposits of various minerals (quartz,
zeolites, chlorites, and calcite). 
  
The 3800 million to 2500 million years period in the earth’s history.  
  
A normally sausage shaped structure formed by deformation of rocks.  
  
A group of minerals most abundant on earth and consisting mainly of K, Na, Ca and Al as well as O (oxygen). 
  
Minerals with Fe or Mg as a major chemical component in their composition.  
  
Granulites  are  medium  to  coarse–grained  metamorphic  rocks  that  have  experienced  high  temperature
metamorphism, composed mainly of feldspars sometimes associated with quartz and anhydrous ferromagnesian
minerals.  
  
Rocks that have been subjected to pressure, temperature or chemical conditions different from which they were
formed under. 
  
A long, relatively narrow crustal region of tectonic activity. 
  
The style of the process of mountain formation, especially by a folding and faulting of the earth's crust. 
  
Prospecting license. 
  
Reconnaissance prospecting license. 
  
Primary mining license. 
  
The time period from 2 500 million years to 500 million years in the history of the earth. 
  
Refers to strata of reddish-colored sedimentary rocks such as sandstone, siltstone or shale that were deposited in
hot climates under oxidizing conditions. 
  
A mineral Group consisting mainly of Si and O (oxygen). 
  
A place where the Earth's crust and lithosphere are being pulled apart.  
  
A phase of mountain building whose precise dates are uncertain but which probably occurred about 1800–1700 
Ma ago, producing what is now a NW—SE belt in southern Tanzania, northern Zambia, and the eastern Congo. 
  
Rock strata consisting of a series of younger strata that do not succeed the underlying older rocks in age or in
parallel position, as a result of a long period of erosion or nondeposition.  
  
A metamorphic belt in Tanzania in which deformation took place at about 2000 million years ago.
19
Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement
As previously disclosed in our Current Report on Form 8-K as filed with the SEC on August 10, 2011, effective August 5, 2011, our Board of Directors ratified
the entering into of a certain 2011 Acquisition Agreement with Handeni Resources. Pursuant to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement, the Company had an exclusive
option (the “Option”) to acquire from Handeni Resources a 100% interest in mineral licenses covering an area of approximately 2.67 square kilometers to the
east of Magambazi Hill (the “Property”), which is adjacent to the area covered by the Company’s four existing prospecting licenses (totaling approximately 800 
square kilometers) in the Handeni District.
Pursuant to the terms of the 2011 Acquisition Agreement, and in order to keep the Option in good standing during the 30-day period starting on August 5, 2011 
(the “Option Period”, which period had been extended to October 4, 2011 upon the mutual agreement of our Company and Handeni Resources), we are required 
to provide the following consideration to Handeni Resources:
(cid:122) Share issuance: issue from treasury and to the order and direction of Handeni Resources prior to and at the end of the Option Period an aggregate of
15,000,000 restricted common shares in the share capital of the Company (each a “Share”), at a deemed issuance price of U.S. $0.40 per Share; and
(cid:122) Maintenance payments: pay, or cause to be paid, to or on Handeni Resource’s behalf as the Company may determine, in the Company’s sole and absolute 
discretion, all underlying option, regulatory and governmental payments and assessment work required to keep the mineral property interests comprising
the Property and any underlying option agreements respecting any of the mineral property interests comprising the Property in good standing during the
Option Period.
Mr. Reginald Mengi, the Chairman of the Board of Directors of our Company, has an existing direct and/or indirect ownership interest in Handeni Resources
and/or beneficial interest(s) in and to Handeni Resources. As such, Mr. Mengi did not participate in any discussions by the Board of Directors regarding the
2011  Acquisition  Agreement.  In  addition,  Mr.  Mengi  did  not,  and  was  not  entitled  to,  vote  on  the  Board  of  Directors’  ratification  of  the  2011  Acquisition
Agreement.
On November 30, 2011, the Company completed the 2011 Acquisition Agreement and issued 15,000,000 restricted common shares to Handeni Resources as
payment. As at November 30, 2011, the fair market price of the Company’s common stock was $0.11 per share; accordingly, the Company recorded a total fair
market value of $1,650,000 as the mineral licenses acquisition cost.
To comply with the laws and regulations of the Republic of Tanzania whereby foreign companies may not own PMLs, in July 2012, Handeni Gold Inc. entered
into an Addendum agreement to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement with Handeni Resources whereby Handeni Resources will administer the 32 PMLs until such
time as a mining license (ML) on the 32 PMLs (2.67 km2) have been allocated. During this  period Handeni Resources will be conducting exploration and
mining activities on the PMLs as directed by the Company.
Compliance with Government Regulation
We  are  subject  to  local  laws  and  regulation  governing  the  exploration,  development,  mining,  production,  importing  and  exporting  of  minerals;  taxes;  labor
standards; occupational health; waste disposal; protection of the environment; mine safety; toxic substances; and other matters. We require licenses and permits
to conduct exploration and mining operations. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities of mining companies or more
stringent implementation thereof could have a material adverse impact on our Company. Applicable laws and regulations will require us to make certain capital
and operating expenditures to initiate new operations. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to close an operation once it is started until a particular
problem is remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse effect on our results and financial condition.
Our  mineral  interests  in  Tanzania  are  held  under  PLs  granted  pursuant  to  the  Mining  Act  for  an  initial  period  of  three  years  and  a  prospecting  license
reconnaissance issued for initial periods of two years, and are renewable in two successive periods of two years only. We must pay annual rental fees for our
prospecting licenses at a rate of $20 per square kilometer. There is also an initial one-time “preparation fee” of $200 per license. Upon renewal, we pay a fee of 
$200 per license. Renewals of our PLs can take many months and even years to process by the regulatory authority in Tanzania.
All PLs in Tanzania require the holder to employ and train local residents, typically amounting to $5,000 per year, and make exploration expenditures, as set out
in the Mining Act. At each renewal, at least 50% of our licensed area must be relinquished. If we wish to keep the relinquished one-half portion, we must file a 
new application for the relinquished portion.
The geographical area covered by a PL may contain one or more previously granted PML. A PLM is a mining license granted only to a Tanzanian citizen
consisting of an area of not to exceed 10 hectares. Once a PL is granted, no additional PMLs can be granted within the geographical area covered by the PL. The
PL is subject to the rights of previously granted and existing PMLs. The holder of a PL will have to work around the geographical area of the PML unless the PL
holder acquires the PML and any rights to the land covered by the PML.
20
We must hold a mining license to carry on mining activities, which are granted only to the holder of a PL covering a particular area. A mining license is granted
for a period of 25 years or the life of the mine. It is renewable for a period not exceeding 15 years. Other than the PMLs being held under Handeni Resources,
we do not hold any mining licenses, only PLs. An application for the 32 PMLs being held under agreement by Handeni Resources to be changed into a mining
license  (ML)  is  underway.  Prospecting  and  mining  license  holders  must  submit  regular  reports  in  accordance  with  mining  regulations.  Upon  commercial
production, the government of Tanzania imposes a royalty on the gross value of all production at the rate of 3% of all gold produced. The applicable regulatory
body in Tanzania is the Ministry of Energy and Minerals.
In  July  1999,  environmental  management  and  protection  regulations  under  the  Mining  Act  came  into  force.  An  environmental  impact  statement  and  an
environmental  management  plan  must  accompany  special  mining  license,  mining  license  and  gemstone  mining  license  applications  for  mineral  rights.  In
addition  to  the  establishment  of  environmental  regulations,  the  Tanzanian  government  has  improved  management  procedures  for  effective  monitoring  and
enforcement of these regulations by strengthening the institutional capacity, especially in the field offices. The government has provided rules for the creation of
reclamation funds to reinstate land to alternative uses after mining and it has developed guidelines for mining in restricted areas, such as forest reserves, national
parks, near sources of water and other designated areas. These regulations have not had any material effect on our operations to date.
Competition
We  operate in a  highly competitive  industry,  competing  with  other  mining and  exploration  companies,  and institutional  and  individual  investors,  which are
actively seeking minerals exploration properties throughout the world together with the equipment, labour and materials required to exploit such properties.
Many of our competitors have financial resources, staff and facilities substantially greater than ours. The principal area of competition is encountered in the
financial ability to cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals
exploration properties is intense, with many properties available in a competitive bidding process in which we may lack technological information or expertise
available to other bidders. Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing profitable properties in the face of this competition. No
assurance can be given that a sufficient number of suitable minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
Employees
Other than our officers and directors, we had approximate 24 full-time equivalent employees and consultants during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, 22 of 
which were located in Tanzania. We retain independent geologists and consultants on a contract basis to conduct the work programs on our mineral properties in
order to carry out our plan of operations.
Research and Development Expenditures
We have not incurred any research or development expenditures since our incorporation.
Subsidiaries
The Company has two subsidiaries, both of which are Tanzanian companies: (i) HG Limited (formerly DLM Tanzania Limited); and (ii) Douglas Lake Tanzania
Limited, which is inactive.
Patents and Trademarks
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patent or trademark.
21
ITEM 1A.      RISK FACTORS
An investment in a company engaged in mineral exploration involves an unusually high amount of risk, both unknown and known, present and potential,
including,  but  not  limited  to  the  risks  enumerated  below.  An  investment  in  our  common  stock  involves  a  number  of  very  significant  risks.  You  should
carefully consider the following risks and uncertainties in addition to other information in this annual report in evaluating our Company and its business
before purchasing shares of our common stock. Our business, operating results and financial condition could be seriously harmed or cause actual results to
differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements due to any of the following risks. The risks described below may not be all of the 
risks facing our Company. Additional risks not presently known to us or that we currently consider immaterial may also impair our business operations and 
we cannot assure you that we will successfully address these risks or other unknown risks that may affect our business. You could lose all or part of your
investment due to any of these risks.
Risks Related to Our Company
We are a recently organized business with a limited operating history.
We were incorporated in January 2004 and have a limited operating history which makes it difficult to evaluate the investment merits of our Company. As of
May 31, 2012, we had not generated any revenues from operations and incurred a net loss since inception of $109,411,161.
We have incurred net losses since our inception and expect losses to continue.
We have not been profitable since our inception. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, we had a net loss of $6,903,557. Since our inception on January 5,
2004  to  May  31,  2012,  we  had  an  accumulated  net  loss  of  $109,411,161.  We  have  not  generated  revenues  from  operations  and  do  not  expect  to  generate
revenues from operations unless and until we are able to bring a mineral property into production. The expenditures to be made by us in the exploration of our
properties may not result in discoveries of commercially recoverable mineral reserves. There is a risk that we may never bring a mineral property into production
that our operations will not be profitable in the future and you could lose your entire investment.
We may not be able to continue as a going concern if we do not obtain additional financing or attain profitable operations.
Our  independent  accountants’  audit  report  states  that  there  is  substantial  doubt  about  our  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.  The  Company's  ability  to
continue as a going concern is dependent upon attaining profitable operations and obtaining sufficient financing to meet obligations and continue exploration and
development  activities.  We  have  incurred  only  losses  since  our  inception.  Whether  and  when  the  Company  can  attain  profitability  is  uncertain.  These
uncertainties cast significant doubt upon the Company’s ability to continue as going concern, because we will be required to obtain additional funds in the future 
to continue our operations and there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain such funds, through equity or debt financing, or any combination thereof, or
we are able to raise additional funds, that such funds will be in the amounts required or on terms favourable to us.
Our exploration activities are highly speculative and involve substantial risks.
The mineral properties that we held interests in during our year ended May 31, 2012 are in the exploration stage and no proven mineral reserves have been
established. Our exploration work may not result in the discovery of mineable deposits of ore in a commercially economical manner. There may be limited
availability of water, which is essential to mining operations, and interruptions may be caused by adverse weather conditions. Our operations are subject to a
variety  of  existing  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  exploration  and  development,  permitting  procedures,  safety  precautions,  property  reclamation,  employee
health and safety, air quality standards, pollution and other environmental protection controls. Our exploration activities are subject to substantial hazards, some
of which are not insurable or may not be insured for economic reasons. Any of these factors could have a material adverse effect on our results and financial
condition.
We cannot accurately predict whether commercial quantities of ores will be established.
Whether an ore body will be commercially viable depends on a number of factors beyond our control, including the particular attributes of the deposit such as
size, grade and proximity to infrastructure, as well as mineral prices and government regulations, including regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land
tenure, land use, importing and exporting of minerals and environmental protection. We cannot predict the exact effect of these factors, but the combination of
these factors may result in a mineral deposit being unprofitable which would have a material adverse effect on our business. We have no mineral producing
properties at this time. We have not defined or delineated any proven or probable reserves or resources on any of our properties to date.
We may not be able to establish the presence of minerals on a commercially viable basis.
Substantial expenditures will be required to develop the exploration infrastructure at any site chosen for exploration, to establish ore reserves through drilling, to
carry out environmental and social impact assessments, and to develop metallurgical processes to extract the metal from the ore. We may not be able to discover
minerals in sufficient quantities to justify commercial operation, and we may not be able to obtain funds required for exploration on a timely basis. Accordingly,
you could lose your entire investment.
22
We  will  need  to  incur  substantial  expenditures  in  an  attempt  to  establish  the  economic  feasibility  of  mining  operations  by  identifying  mineral  deposits  and
establishing ore reserves through drilling and other techniques, developing metallurgical processes to extract metals from ore, designing facilities and planning
mining operations. The economic feasibility of a project depends on numerous factors beyond our control, including the cost of mining and production facilities
required to extract the desired minerals, the total mineral deposits that can be mined using a given facility, the proximity of the mineral deposits to a user of the
minerals, and the market price of the minerals at the time of sale. Our existing or future exploration programs or acquisitions may not result in the identification
of deposits that can be mined profitably and you could lose your entire investment.
Our competition is intense in all phase of our business.
We  operate in a  highly competitive  industry,  competing  with  other  mining and  exploration  companies,  and institutional  and  individual  investors,  which are
actively seeking minerals exploration properties throughout the world together with the equipment, labour and materials required to exploit such properties.
Many of our competitors have financial resources, staff and facilities substantially greater than ours. The principal area of competition is encountered in the
financial ability to cost effectively acquire prime minerals exploration prospects and then exploit such prospects. Competition for the acquisition of minerals
exploration properties is intense, with many properties available in a competitive bidding process in which we may lack technological information or expertise 
available to other bidders. Therefore, we may not be successful in acquiring, exploring and developing profitable properties in the face of this competition. No
assurance can be given that a sufficient number of suitable minerals exploration properties will be available for acquisition, exploration and development.
Our exploration activities are subject to various local laws and regulations
We  are  subject  to  local  laws  and  regulation  governing  the  exploration,  development,  mining,  production,  importing  and  exporting  of  minerals;  taxes;  labor
standards; occupational health; waste disposal; protection of the environment; mine safety; toxic substances; and other matters. We require licenses and permits
to conduct exploration and mining operations. Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations and activities of mining companies or more
stringent implementation thereof could have a material adverse impact on our Company. Applicable laws and regulations will require us to make certain capital
and operating expenditures to initiate new operations. Under certain circumstances, we may be required to close an operation once it is started until a particular
problem is remedied or to undertake other remedial actions. This would have a material adverse effect on our results and financial condition.
We have uninsurable risks.
We may be subject to unforeseen hazards such as unusual or unexpected formations and other conditions. We may become subject to liability for pollution,
cave-ins or hazards against which we cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. The payment of such liabilities may have a material adverse
effect on our financial position.
Exploration activities, including test mining and operating activities are inherently hazardous.
Mineral exploration activities, including test mining activities, involve many risks that even a combination of experience, knowledge and careful evaluation may
not be able to overcome.
Operations that we undertake will be subject to all the hazards and risks normally incidental to exploration, test mining and recovery of gold and other metals,
any of which could result in work stoppages, damage to property and possible environmental damage. The nature of these risks are such that liabilities might
result in us being forced to incur significant costs that could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and business prospects.
We depend on key management personnel.
The success of our operations and activities is dependent to a significant extent on the efforts and abilities to attract and maintain qualified key management and
technical personnel. Competition for such personnel is intense and we may not be able to attract and retain such personnel. We do not maintain key-man life 
insurance on any of our officers. A loss of any of them could adversely affect our business.
Our officers and directors may have potential conflicts of interest due to their responsibilities with other entities.
The officers and directors of the Company serve as officers and/or directors of other companies in the mining industry, which may create situations where the
interests  of  the  director  or  officer  may  become  conflicted.  The  companies  to  which  some  of  our  officers  and  directors  provide  services  may  be  potential
competitors with the Company at some point in the future. The directors and officers owe the Company fiduciary duties with respect to any current or future
conflicts of interest.
23
We may experience difficulty managing our anticipated growth.
We  may  be  subject  to  growth-related  risks  including  capacity  constraints  and  pressure  on  our  internal  systems  and  controls.  Our  ability  to  manage  growth
effectively  will  require  us  to  continue to  implement  and  improve  our  operational  and  financial  systems  and  to  attract  and  retain  qualified  management  and
technical personnel to meet the needs of our anticipated growth. Our inability to deal with this growth could have a material adverse effect on our business,
financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
We are subject to the volatility of metal and mineral prices.
The economics of developing metal and mineral properties are affected by many factors beyond our control including, without limitation, the cost of operations,
variations in the grade ore or resource mined, and the price of such resources. The market prices of the metals for which we are exploring are highly speculative
and volatile. Depending on the price of gold or other resources, we may determine that it is impractical to commence or continue commercial production. The
price of gold has fluctuated widely in recent years. The price of gold and other metals and minerals may not remain stable, and such prices may not be at levels
that will make it feasible to continue our exploration activities, or commence or continue commercial production.
We may not have clear title to our properties.
Acquisition  of  title  to  mineral  properties  is  a  very  detailed  and  time-consuming  process,  and  title  to  our  properties  may  be  affected  by  prior  unregistered
agreements or transfer, or undetected defects. Some of our prospecting licenses are currently subject to renewal by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of
Tanzania. There is a risk that we may not have clear title to all our mineral property interests, or they may be subject to challenge or impugned in the future,
which would have a material adverse effect on our business.
Our mineral property interests may be subject to other mining licenses.
Local residents in Tanzania may have registered the right to mine in small areas located within a prospecting license, such rights are evidenced by a mining
license. There can be no guarantee that we will be successful in negotiating with mining license owners to acquire their rights if we determine that we need their
permission to drill or mine on the land covered by such mining licenses.
We have requirements for and there is an uncertainty of access to additional capital.
At May 31, 2012, we had cash of $886,889 and working capital of $1,515,046. We will continue to incur exploration costs to fund our plan of operations and
intend to fund our plan of operations from working capital and equity subscriptions. Ultimately, our ability to continue our exploration activities depends in part
on our ability to commence operations and generate revenues or to obtain financing through joint ventures, debt financing, equity financing, production sharing
agreements or some combination of these or other means. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any such financing.
We have no cash flow from operations and depend on equity financing for our operations.
Our current operations do not generate any cash flow. Any work on our properties may require additional equity financing. If we seek funding from existing or
new joint venture partners, our project interests will be diluted. If we seek additional equity financing, the issuance of additional shares will dilute the current
interests of our shareholders. We may not be able to obtain additional funding to allow us to fulfill our obligations on our existing exploration property or any
future  exploration properties.  Our  failure  to obtain such  additional  financing could result in  delay or indefinite postponement  of further  exploration and the
possible partial or total loss of our potential interest in certain properties or dilution of our interest in certain properties which would have a material adverse
effect on our business.
Our directors and officers are indemnified for any monies they pay in settlement of actions performed while a director or officer.
Sections 78.7502 and 78.751 of the Nevada Revised Statutes provide for indemnification of our officers and directors in certain situations where they might
otherwise personally incur liability, judgments, penalties, fines and expenses in connection with a proceeding or lawsuit to which they might become parties
because of their position with our Company. We have authorized the indemnification of our officers and directors to the full extent available under the Nevada
Revised Statutes.
Risks related to government controls and regulations
We are subject to complex federal, provincial, state, local and other laws, controls and regulations that could adversely affect the cost, manner and feasibility
of conducting our operations.
Mineral  exploration,  production,  marketing  and  transportation  activities  are  subject  to  extensive  controls  and  regulations  imposed  by  various  levels  of
government, which may be amended from time to time. Governments may regulate or intervene with respect to price, taxes, and the exportation. Regulations
may  be  changed  from  time  to  time  in  response  to  economic  or  political  conditions.  The  implementation  of  new  regulations  or  the modification  of  existing
regulations affecting the mining industry could increase our costs, any of which may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results
of operations and prospects. In addition, in order to conduct operations, we require licenses from various governmental authorities. We cannot assure you that we
will be able to obtain all of the licenses and permits that may be required to conduct operations that we may desire to undertake.
24
Our business activities are conducted in Tanzania.
Our  mineral  exploration  activities  in  Tanzania  may  be  affected  in  varying  degrees  by  political  stability  and  government  regulations  relating  to  the  mining
industry  and  foreign  investment  in  that  country.  The  government  of  Tanzania  may  institute  regulatory  policies  that  adversely  affect  the  exploration  and
development (if any) of our properties. Any changes in regulations or shifts in political conditions in this country are beyond our control and may materially
adversely affect our business. While the Company’s management will propose a measure to mitigate the effects, our operations may be affected in varying 
degrees  by  government  regulations  with  respect  to  restrictions  on  production,  price  controls,  export  controls,  foreign  exchange  controls,  income  taxes,
expropriation of property, environmental legislation and mine safety.
As a public company, our compliance costs and risks have increased in recent years.
Legal, accounting and other expenses associated with public company reporting requirements have increased significantly in the past few years. We anticipate
that  general  and  administrative  costs  associated  with  regulatory  compliance  will  continue  to  increase  with  on-going  compliance  requirements  under  the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as well as any new rules implemented by the SEC in the future. These rules and regulations have significantly increased our legal
and  financial  compliance  costs  and  made  some  activities  more  time  consuming  and  costly.  We  cannot  assure  you  that  we  will  effectively  meet  all  of  the
requirements  of  these  regulations,  including  Section  404  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act.  Any  failure  to  effectively  implement  internal  controls,  or  to  resolve 
difficulties  encountered  in  their  implementation,  could  harm  our  operating  results,  cause  us  to  fail  to  meet  reporting  obligations,  or  result  in  our  principal
executive officer and principal financial officer being required to give a qualified assessment of our internal control over financial reporting. Any such result
could cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial information, which could have a material adverse effect on the trading price of our common
stock and our ability to raise capital. These rules and regulations have made it more difficult and more expensive for us to obtain director and officer liability
insurance in the future. As a result, it may be more difficult for us to attract and retain qualified individuals to serve on our board of directors or as executive
officers.
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
The trading price of our common stock may be volatile.
The price of our common shares may increase or decrease in response to a number of events and factors, including: trends in the mineral sector in which we
operate;  changes  in  the  market  price  of  gold;  current  events  affecting  the  global  economic  situation;  changes  in  financial  estimates;  our  acquisitions  and
financings; quarterly variations in our operating results; the operating and share price performance of other companies that investors may deem comparable; and
purchase or sale of blocks of our common shares. These factors, or any of them, may materially adversely affect the prices of our common shares regardless of
our operating performance.
A decline in the price of our common stock could affect our ability to raise further working capital and adversely impact our operations.
A decline in the price of our common stock could result in a reduction in the liquidity of our common stock and a reduction in our ability to raise additional
capital for our  operations.  Because our  operations  to  date have  been principally financed through the sale of equity securities, a  decline  in  the  price  of our
common stock could have an adverse effect upon our liquidity and our continued operations. A reduction in our ability to raise equity capital in the future would
have a material adverse effect upon our business plan and operations, including our ability to continue our current operations. If our stock price declines, we may
not be able to raise additional capital or generate funds from operations sufficient to meet our obligations.
We could be required to rescind an offering of our shares.
On January 23, 2006, the Pennsylvania Securities Commission (“PSC”) issued an inquiry letter to our Company. The inquiry alleged that we offered and sold
securities to investors without being in compliance with Regulation D and without registration. The PSC notified us that an acceptable course of action was for
us to offer the Pennsylvania state residents an opportunity to rescind their investment with us. While the Pennsylvania state residents have rejected our offer to
repurchase their shares, we do not plan to make the same offer to our other US investors, residents of California, or our British Columbia resident investors. If
the investors invoke their rescission right or if any securities commission requires us to offer a right of rescission to the investors, we may have to refund the
related funds.
25
Our stock is a penny stock. Trading of our stock may be restricted by the SEC’s penny stock regulations and FINRA’s sales practice requirements, which
may limit a stockholder’s ability to buy and sell our stock.
Our common stock will be subject to the “Penny Stock” Rules of the SEC, which will make transactions in our common stock cumbersome and may reduce the
value of an investment in our common stock.
Our  common  stock  is  quoted  on  the  OTCQB,  which  is  generally  considered  to  be  a  less  efficient  market  than  markets  such  as  NASDAQ  or  the  national
exchanges, and which may cause difficulty in conducting trades and difficulty in obtaining future financing. Further, our securities will be subject to the “penny 
stock rules” adopted pursuant to Section 15(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). The penny stock rules apply generally
to companies whose common stock trades at less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain limited exemptions. Such rules require, among other things, that brokers
who  trade  “penny  stock”  to  persons  other  than  “established  customers”  complete  certain documentation,  make suitability  inquiries  of  investors  and  provide 
investors with certain information concerning trading in the security, including a risk disclosure document and quote information under certain circumstances.
Many brokers have decided not to trade “penny stock” because of the requirements of the “penny stock rules” and, as a result, the number of broker-dealers 
willing to act as market makers in such securities is limited. In the event that we remain subject to the “penny stock rules” for any significant period, there may
develop an adverse impact on the market, if any, for our securities. Because our securities are subject to the “penny stock rules”, investors will find it more 
difficult to dispose of our securities. Further, it is more difficult: (i) to obtain accurate quotations, (ii) to obtain coverage for significant news events because
major wire services, such as the Dow Jones News Service, generally do not publish press releases about such companies, and (iii) to obtain needed capital.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules promulgated by the SEC, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”) has adopted rules that require a broker-
dealer to have reasonable grounds for believing that an investment is suitable for a customer when recommending the investment to that customer. Prior to
recommending speculative low-priced securities to their non-institutional customers, broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about 
the customer’s financial status, tax status, investment objectives and other information. Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high
probability that speculative low priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers. FINRA requirements make it more difficult for broker-dealers 
to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock and have an adverse effect on the market for
our shares.
ITEM 1B.      UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 2.        PROPERTIES
Our principal office is located at Plot 228, Regent Estate, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania and our Vancouver office is located at Suite 500-666 
Burrard Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3P6, Canada.
Our mineral claim interests and the properties underlying such interests are described above under Item 1, “Business”.
ITEM 3.        LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Except as disclosed below, management is not aware of any legal proceedings contemplated by any governmental authority or any other party involving us or
our properties. As of the date of this report, no director, officer or affiliate is (i) a party adverse to us in any legal proceeding or (ii) has an adverse interest to us
in any legal proceedings. Management is not aware of any other legal proceedings pending or that have been threatened against us or our properties.
On February 8, 2012, Ruby Creek filed a lawsuit against the Company in the Supreme Court, State of New York, in which Ruby Creek alleges that the Company
participated in a fraudulent transfer of certain mineral property interests in Tanzania that Ruby Creek had the right to purchase pursuant to a series of agreements
with the Company. The Company is of the view that such allegations are without merit and intends to vigorously contest the action.
On February 23, 2012, the Company filed a lawsuit against Ruby Creek in the Supreme Court of British Columbia seeking relief for Ruby Creek’s breach of its 
payment obligations under the above-referenced agreements and seeking an order that Ruby Creek remove the U.S. restrictive legend from Ruby Creek shares
issued to the Company under the agreements. To date, Ruby Creek is in default with respect to over $1.3 million in scheduled payments due to the Company
under the agreements.
ITEM 4.        MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
26
PART II
ITEM 5.   MARKET  FOR  REGISTRANT’S  COMMON  EQUITY,  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER  MATTERS  AND  ISSUER  PURCHASES  OF  EQUITY
SECURITIES
Market Information
Our shares of common stock were quoted for trading on the OTC Bulletin Board under the symbol “DLKM.OB” on March 23, 2005. On February 14, 2012, the Company 
changed its name to Handeni Gold Inc., and its trading symbol was changed to “HNDI”. Our common stock is currently trading on OTCQB market tier. The market for our 
common stock is limited, volatile and sporadic. The following table sets forth the high and low prices relating to our common stock for the periods indicated, as provided by 
the OTC Bulletin Board. These quotations reflect inter-dealer prices without retail mark-up, mark-down, or commissions, and may not reflect actual transactions.
QUARTER ENDED 
May 31, 2012 
February 28, 2012 
November 30, 2011 
August 31, 2011 
May 31, 2011 
February 28, 2011 
November 30, 2010 
August 31, 2010 
May 31, 2010
Holders
HIGH 
$0.13 
$0.20 
$0.38 
$0.48 
$0.67 
$0.80 
$0.47 
$0.18 
$0.26
LOW 
$0.03 
$0.08 
$0.10 
$0.27 
$0.40 
$0.28 
$0.10 
$0.09 
$0.11
As at August 21, 2012, we had 308,416,654 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding, which were held by approximately 151 registered holders. We believe that 
there are in excess of 1,150 beneficial owners of our common stock.
Our transfer agent is Transhare Corporation, whose address is 4626 S. Broadway, Englewood, CO 80113, U.S.A., telephone phone number is 303-662-1112 and fax number 
is 303-662-1113.
Dividend Policy
No dividends have been declared or paid on our common stock. We have incurred recurring losses and do not currently intend to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable 
future.
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Compensation Plans
We adopted a Stock Option Plan, dated April 27, 2007 (the “2007 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 
10,000,000 shares of common stock. No more options may be granted or exercised under the 2007 Stock Option Plan.
We adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated October 20, 2008 (the “2008 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to 
a total of 10,000,000 shares of common stock. No more options may be granted or exercised under the 2008 Stock Option Plan.
We adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated August 11, 2010 (the “August 2010 Stock Option Plan”), under which we were authorized to grant stock options to 
acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common shares. No more options may be granted or exercised under the August 2010 Stock Option.
We adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated November 29, 2010 (the “November 2010 Stock Option Plan”), under which we are authorized to grant stock options to 
acquire up to a total of 40,000,000 shares of common shares. The following summary of the November 2010 Stock Option Plan is not complete and is qualified in its entirety 
by reference to the November 2010 Stock Option Plan, a copy of which is incorporated by reference as an exhibit hereto.
The  November  2010  Stock  Option  Plan  provides  for  the  granting  of  stock  options,  stock  appreciation  rights,  restricted  stock  and  other  equity  awards  as  set  out  in  the 
November 2010 Stock Option Plan to our directors, officers, employees or consultants. The maximum number of shares that may be issued under the November 2010 Stock 
Option Plan are 40,000,000 shares of our common stock. As of May 31, 2012, there remained 11,700,000 shares of common stock available to be issued under the November 
2010 Stock Option Plan; as of the date of this annual report, there remain 10,300,000 shares of common stock available to be issued under the November 2010 Stock Option 
Plan. No insider of the Company is eligible to receive an award under the Plan where (i) the insider is not a director or senior officer of the Company, (ii) any award, together 
with all of the Company’s previously established or proposed awards under the Plan could result at any time in (a) the number of shares reserved for issuance pursuant to 
options granted to the insider exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue of common stock or (b) the issuance to the insider pursuant to the exercise of options within a one-year 
period of the number of shares exceeding 50% of the outstanding issue of our common stock. Unless the administrator under the Plan determines that an award to a grantee is 
not designed to qualify as performance-based compensation, the maximum number of shares with respect to options and/or stock appreciation rights that may be granted 
during any one calendar year under the November 2010 Stock Option Plan to any one grantee is 20,000,000, all of which may be granted as incentive stock options, and the 
maximum aggregate grant of restricted stock, unrestricted shares, restricted stock units and deferred stock units in any one calendar year to any one grantee is 20,000,000. The 
November 2010 Stock Option Plan is administered by a committee consisting of two or more members of our Board of Directors, who have the authority to, among other 
things, interpret the November 2010 Stock Option Plan, select eligible participants, determine whether and to what extent awards are granted under the November 2010 Stock 
Option Plan, approve award agreements under the November 2010 Stock Option Plan and amend the terms of any outstanding award granted under the November 2010 Stock 
Option Plan.
27
The table set forth below presents information relating to our equity compensation plans as of the date of May 31, 2012:
Plan Category
Equity Compensation Plans  
to be Approved by Security  
Holders 
Equity Compensation Plans  
Not Approved by Security  
Holders (2007, 2008, August  
2010 and November 2010  
Stock Incentive Plans)
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
Number of
Securities to be  
Issued Upon  
Exercise of  
Outstanding
Options, Warrants
and Rights
(a)
Weighted-Average  
Exercise Price of
Outstanding
Options, Warrants
and Rights
(b)
Number of Securities  
Remaining Available  
for Future Issuance
Under Equity
Compensation Plans  
(excluding column (a))
N/A 
 
 
 
 
28,300,000
N/A 
 
 
 
 
$0.24
N/A 
 
 
 
 
11,700,000
Any sales of unregistered securities during the Company’s fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 to the date of this annual report have been previously reported in a
quarterly report on Form 10-Q or in a current report on Form 8-K, except as disclosed below:
On July 4, 2012, the Company issued a total of 1,000,000 shares of common stock to five independent directors under the Company’s November 2010 Stock 
Incentive  Plan  at  a  deemed  issuance  price  of  $0.04  per  common  share.  The  Company  relied  on  an  exemption  from  the  registration  requirements  under  the
Securities Act pursuant to Regulation D or Regulation S and/or Section 4(2) with respect to the issuance of these shares.
No Repurchases
Neither we nor any affiliated purchaser has made any purchases of our equity securities during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year ended May 31, 2012.
ITEM 6.        SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
28
ITEM 7.        MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition, changes in financial position, plan of operations and results of operations should be read in conjunction with
(i) our audited consolidated financial statements as at May 31, 2012, May 31, 2011 and for the period from inception (January 5, 2004) to May 31, 2012 and (ii)
the  section  entitled  “Business”  included  in  this  annual  report.  All  financial  information  in  this  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  (“MD&A”  or  the 
“discussion”)  is  expressed  and  prepared  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  All  dollar  references  are  to  the  U.S.  dollar,  the 
Company’s reporting currency, unless otherwise noted. Some numbers in this MD&A have been rounded to the nearest thousand for discussion purposes.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions with respect to the Company’s activities and future financial 
results, which are made based upon management’s current expectations and beliefs. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, including 
statements regarding the Company’s capital needs, business plans and expectations. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these
forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
Any  statements  contained  herein  that  are  not  statements  of  historical  facts  may  be  deemed  to  be  forward-looking  statements.  Management  disclaims  any 
obligation  to  publicly  update  these  statements,  or  disclose  any  difference  between  its  actual  results  and  those  reflected  in  these  statements.  Given  these
uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.
Overview
To take advantage of Tanzania’s rich natural resources, the Company is engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties in the United Republic
of Tanzania, Africa, through its  wholly-owned subsidiaries, HG  Limited (formerly:  DLM Tanzania  Limited)  and  Douglas Lake Tanzania Limited, which  is
inactive. Over these years, the Company has built strong relationships with the Ministry of Mines, the Geological Survey of Tanzania, and other government
agencies in Tanzania.
In the past year, the Company has made a strategic decision to focus exclusively on its highly prospective gold property, namely, the recently purchased 800
square kilometer Handeni Gold Project located in Tanzania. Our past year exploration program and achievements are highlighted as follows:
a)
b)
c)
d) 
 
e)
The  Company  completed  a  ground  Induced  Polarization  /  Resistivity  and  ground  magnetic  geophysical  survey  over  an  approximately  four  square
kilometer  surveyed  grid  on  the  Handeni  East  Magambazi  target  and  we  commenced  diamond  drilling.  In  October  2011,  the  Company  completed  a
helicopter based TEM electromagnetic and radiometric aerial survey program on all 800 square kilometers of the Handeni Gold property at 200 meter
spaced flight lines in a north-south direction. Electromagnetic (TEM) as well as radiometric data for K (Potassium), U (Uranium) and Th (Thorium), as
well as total count was collected simultaneously for the 4,740 line kilometers flown. Selected areas were flown at a line spacing of 100 meters.
 
The  interpreted  data  clearly  delineated  subsurface  geological  features  of  importance  to  gold  and  base  metal  mineralization  in  this  high  grade
metamorphic terrain. The data proved to be invaluable in the definition of structurally important sites and target definition. 
 
An intensive ground based geophysical program on the Magambazi East as well as the Kwandege target zones was completed. This data (combined with
geochemical results) were used to create drill targets on the two selected areas.
 
A multi-element soil geochemical program was completed on the Kwandege target delineating the extent of the mineralization zone and assisting the
interpretation of the geophysical data to locate drill positions.
 
A large soil sampling program of two targets in PL6743/2010 was initiated and is still continuing.
 
28 diamond core holes (5,347 meters) were drilled on the Magambazi East and related targets. 20 of these holes (4,228 m or 79.1% of the total 5,347
meters  of  drilling)  were  drilled  on  the  main  geophysical  and  geochemical  anomaly  considered  to  be  an  extension  of  the  main  Magambazi  Hill
mineralization zone. A single hole (MZD 28; 159 m or 3.0%) was drilled on a potential mineralization zone north of the main Magambazi mineralization
trend and one hole (MZD 25; 201 m or 3.8%) was drilled on a potential mineralization zone south of the main mineralization zone. Both these zones
were delineated by ground geophysics and soil geochemistry producing well defined drill targets. Six holes (totaling 445 m or 14.2%) were drilled on
targets potentially related to the Magambazi Hill mineralization zones by faulting and / or folding. Gold mineralization trends defined North, South and
South East of Magambazi Hill by our first phase drill results and more drilling will be needed to confirm true widths.
29
f)
g)
37 drill holes (4,989 meters in total) had been drilled on the Kwandege mineralized zone, completing the first phase drilling program on this project. The
total number of drill holes on the main Kwandege target for the first phase drilling phase were 33, including a single hole abandoned due to bad drilling
ground.  26  of  the  32  drill  holes  on  the  main  Kwandege  target  yielded  gold  assay  values  of  more  than  0.5  g/t  over  a  one-meter  interval  or  thicker
intersection,  whereas  four  of  the  remaining  holes  had  anomalous  gold  values  of  up  to  0.49  g/t.  Three  holes  were  drilled  on  a  chargeability  and
radiometric target south of the main Kwandege target and one on a potential south eastern extension of the main Kwandege target.
We have also drilled three water wells, with constant water flow, for both alluvial wash plants and future drilling programs.
The Company is currently focusing its exploration efforts on:
a) 
 
b) 
 
c)
the ranking of its seventeen identified targets and upgrading of the most promising targets to drill target status; 
 
detailed work on the Kwandege project to plan the second phase of drilling; and
 
the evaluation of selected alluvial targets.
The Company’s Technical Advisory Committee has been specifically constituted to enable the Company to effectively operate in the geological environments 
associated with mineralized systems in Archaean and Proterozoic terranes. Additional expertise comprising other disciplines may be co-opted to the committee 
from time to time, as the situation may require.
Plan of Operations
Our plan of operations for the next twelve months is to focus on the exploration of our mineral properties in Tanzania, particularly on the Handeni property. We
anticipate that we will require approximately $2,500,000 for our plan of the exploration work over the next 12 months, as follows:
EXPLORATION WORK
Ground Geophysics 
Mapping, trenching, sampling, etc. 
Drilling 
Geologists, field personnel and general exploration 
Sundry & contingencies 
TOTAL
BUDGET (US$)
250,000 
250,000 
950,000 
550,000 
500,000 
$2,500,000
We also estimate that we will need approximately $1,500,000 for consulting, general and administration, professional and other operating expenses over the next
12 months.
At May 31, 2012, we had cash of $887,000 and working capital of $1.5 million. Our actual expenditures may exceed our estimations. As such, we estimate we
will  need  a minimum of  $2.5 million  in additional funds to  cover our  planned operations  over the next 12, either through the  sale  of capital  stock or from
borrowing. To date, we have received subscription funds in the amount of $650,000 ($150,000 prior to May 31, 2012 and $500,000 subsequent to May 31, 2012)
pursuant to proposed private placements related to the Company’s Tanzanian and East African fund raising. If we are not able to obtain financing in the amounts
required or on terms that are acceptable to us, we may be forced to scale back, or abandon, our plan of operations.
During the 12 month period following the date of this annual report, we anticipate that we will not generate any revenue. Accordingly, we will be required to
obtain additional financing in order to pursue our plan of operations beyond the next 12 months. We believe that debt financing will not be an alternative for
funding additional phases of exploration as we do not have tangible assets to secure any debt financing. We anticipate that additional funding will be in the form
of equity financing from the sale of our common stock. We cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the
sale of our common stock to fund our acquisition and exploration program going forward. In the absence of such financing, we will not be able to continue
acquisition and exploration of mineral claims and our business plan will fail. Even if we are successful in obtaining equity financing to fund our acquisition and
exploration program beyond the next 12 months, there is no assurance that we will obtain the funding necessary to pursue any advanced exploration of any
mineral claims. If we do not continue to obtain additional financing, we will be forced to abandon our mineral claims and our plan of operations.
30
Results of Operations
The following table sets out our losses for the periods indicated:
Expenses 
     Consulting fees 
     Depreciation 
     Exploration expenses 
     General and administrative 
     Impairment of mineral property 
     Professional 
     Rent 
     Travel and investor relations 
  
Total Expenses 
  
Loss from Operations 
  
Other Income (Expenses) 
     Gain on write down of accrued liabilities 
     Loss on write-down of amounts receivable 
     Interest income 
     Mineral property option payments received 
     Loss on sale of investment securities 
     Recovery on mineral property costs for 
     stock not issuable 
  
  
Net Loss
For the years ended
May 31, 2012
$
2,216,751 
161,255 
4,958,141 
803,239 
-
806,192 
156,670 
345,297
9,447,545
(9,447,545)
371,839 
(81,641) 
790 
-
-
2,253,000 
2,543,988
(6,903,557)
May 31, 2011
$
13,707,976  
35,875  
401,377  
587,092  
60,000,000  
442,622  
57,174  
376,159  
 
75,608,275  
 
(75,608,275) 
 
 
86,219  
- 
- 
3,110,000  
-
23,475,116 
239,883 
7,396,857 
2,391,157 
77,492,074 
2,368,359 
347,582 
1,889,286
Accumulated from
 
  January 5, 2004 (Date
of Inception) to 
   
May 31, 2012
   
   
$
458,058 
(81,641) 
790 
3,616,017 
(57,071)
115,600,314
(115,600,314)
- 
3,196,219  
 
(72,412,056)
2,253,000 
6,189,153
(109,411,161)
Year Ended May 31, 2012 Compared to Year Ended May 31, 2011
Our net loss for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 was $6,904,000, compared to $72,412,000 for the same period ended May 31, 2011, mainly due to the
following expenses changes.
Our operating expenses for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 decreased by $66 million to $9,448,000 from $75,608,000 for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2011, as follows:
(cid:122) our  consulting  fees  decreased  by  $11.5  million  to  $2,217,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2012  (2011  -  $13,708,000),  primarily  due  to  a 
decrease in stock-based compensation. The stock-based compensation was $1,729,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $12,711,000);
(cid:122) our  depreciation  fees  increased  by  $125,000  to  $161,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2012  (2011  -  $36,000)  mainly  due  to  our  increased
expenditures on camp and equipment;
(cid:122) our exploration expenses increased by $4.6 million to $4,958,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $401,000) due to our increased
exploration and drilling activities during the period;
(cid:122) our general and administrative expenses increased by $216,000 to $803,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $587,000) primarily due
to increased operations and administration during the period;
(cid:122) impairment of mineral property decreased to $Nil during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $60,000,000, which represented the impairment of
the Handeni Property acquisition costs);
(cid:122) our  professional  fees  increased  by  $363,000  to  $806,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2012  (2011  -  $443,000)  primarily  as  a  result  of 
significantly increased legal costs associated with increased operations, management changes and the November 30, 2011 acquisition of further Handeni
property interests. We have also incurred additional audit and professional accounting services fees associated with our Tanzania subsidiary;
31
(cid:122) our rent expenses increased by $100,000 to $157,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $57,000) mainly due to our Tanzania office
rented commencing March, 2011; and
(cid:122) our travel and investor relations expenses decreased by $31,000 to $345,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 (2011 - $376,000).]
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has been reviewing its budgets for its current business needs and its further exploration. We estimate that our total expenditures for our fiscal year
ending May 31, 2013 will be approximately $4 million, as outlined above under the heading “Plan of Operations”. At May 31, 2012, we had cash of $887,000
and working capital of approximately $1.5 million. As such, we believe that we have insufficient capital to fund our plan of operations in the next 12 months and
we estimate we will need a minimum of $2.5 million in additional funds to fund our planned operations through to our fiscal year ending May 31, 2013, either
through the sale of capital stock or from borrowing. To date, we have received subscription funds in the amount of $650,000 ($150,000 prior to May 31, 2012
and $500,000 subsequent to May 31, 2012) pursuant to proposed private placements related to the Company’s Tanzanian and East African fund raising. If we are 
not able to obtain financing in the amounts required or on terms that are acceptable to us, we may be forced to scale back, or abandon, our plan of operations.
We have not generated revenues since the date of inception on January 5, 2004, and our cash has been generated primarily from the sale of our securities. During
the 12-month period following the date of this annual report, we anticipate that we will not generate any revenue. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain 
additional  financing in order to  pursue  our plan of operations over  the  next  12  months.  We  anticipate  that  additional funding  will  be  in  the  form of  equity
financing from the sale of our common stock. We cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of
our common stock to fund our acquisition and exploration program going forward. In the absence of such financing, we will not be able to continue acquisition
and exploration of mineral claims and our business plan will fail. Even if we are successful in obtaining equity financing to fund our acquisition and exploration
program, there is no assurance that we will obtain the funding necessary to pursue any advanced exploration of any mineral claims. If we do not continue to
obtain additional funding, we will be forced to abandon our mineral claims and our plan of operations.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $5.7 million during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, as compared to $5.5 million during the fiscal year ended May
31, 2011. During the fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2012, net cash used in operating activities was $1.2 million, as compared to $4.3 million during the same
period in 2011. Net cash used in operating activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to May 31, 2012 was $17.4 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net  cash  used  in  investing  activities  was  $391,000  during  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2012  (primarily  for  the  purchase  of  equipment),  as  compared  to
$312,000 used in purchase of equipment during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011. During the fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2012, net cash used in investing
activities was $29,000, as compared to $285,000 during the same period in 2011. Net cash used in investing activities from our inception on January 5, 2004 to
May 31, 2012 was $877,000.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, we received $164,000 net cash from financing activities (receipt of stock subscriptions), as compared to $12,647,000
during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011. During the fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2012, net cash from financing activities was $50,000, as compared to $11.2
million during the same period in 2011. We have funded our business to date primarily from sales of our common stock. From our inception on January 5, 2004
to May 31, 2012, net cash provided by financing activities was $19,213,000.
There are no assurances that we will be able to achieve further sales of our common stock or any other form of additional financing. If we are unable to achieve
the financing necessary to continue our plan of operations, then we will not be able to continue our exploration of the property underlying our mineral claim
interest and our venture will fail.
Going Concern
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to pursue any extensive exploration activities. For these reasons our
auditors stated in their report on our audited financial statements for the year ended May 31, 2012 that they have substantial doubt we will be able to continue as
a going concern.
32
Future Financings
We anticipate continuing to rely on equity sales of our common shares in order to continue to fund our business operations beyond the next 12 months. Issuances
of additional shares will result in dilution to our existing shareholders. There is no assurance that we will achieve any additional sales of our equity securities or
arrange for debt or other financing to fund our planned exploration activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in
financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Related Party Transactions
The details of related party transactions are disclosed in footnote 8 of our Company’s audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended May 31,
2012 (Item 8 – FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, below).
Segment Disclosures
The Company operates in one reportable segment, located in Tanzania Africa, being the acquisition and exploration of mineral properties. The details of segment
disclosures  are  disclosed  in  footnote  17  of  our  Company’s  audited  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2012  (Item  17  –
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, below).
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial condition.
Contractual Obligations
a)
b)
The Company is committed to the payment of a cash fee of 7% within 48 hours of the receipt of proceeds from the exercise of any warrants attached to
the 17,757,777 units sold in the March 2011 private placements.
 
The Company is committed to the payment of a cash fee of 7% of the purchase price and the issuance of warrants equal to 7% of the shares issued with
respect to any public or private financing provided by investors whom Rodman & Renshaw introduced, directly or indirectly, in the March 2011 private
placements within 24 months of the closing of the March 2011 private placements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a
consistent  basis.  The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires  management  to  make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are based on 
historical experience, on information from third party professionals, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and 
circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial
statements.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States, and are expressed in U.S. dollars. The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries described
as follows. In June 2011, the Company incorporated in Tanzania a new wholly-owned subsidiary, DLM Tanzania Limited (now known as HG Limited), which
undertakes  mineral  property  exploration  activities  in  Tanzania.  The  Company  also  has  a  wholly-owned  non-operating  Tanzanian  subsidiary  (Douglas  Lake 
Tanzania Limited).
All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. The Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31.
33
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts
of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. The Company regularly evaluates estimates and assumptions related to the recoverability and useful life of
long-lived  assets,  mineral  prospecting  licenses,  stock-based  compensation,  deferred  income  tax  asset  valuation  allowances  and  contingent  liabilities.  The 
Company  bases  its  estimates  and  assumptions  on  current  facts,  historical  experience  and  various  other  factors  that  it  believes  to  be  reasonable  under  the
circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses
that  are  not  readily  apparent  from  other  sources.  The  actual  results  experienced  by  the  Company  may  differ  materially  and  adversely  from  the  Company’s 
estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected.
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share which requires presentation of both basic and diluted 
earnings  per  share  (“EPS”)  on  the  face  of  the  income  statement.  Basic  EPS  is  computed  by  dividing  net  income  (loss)  available  to  common  shareholders
(numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common
shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, 
the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants.
Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
ASC 220, Comprehensive Income establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive loss and its components in the financial statements. As at 
May 31, 2012, the Company’s components of other comprehensive income (loss) and accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) are an unrealized fair 
value gain (loss) on available for sale marketable securities.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at fair value and they comprise cash on hand, deposits held with banks and other highly liquid investments. Highly liquid
investments are readily convertible to cash and generally have maturities of three months or less from the time acquired. The Company places its cash and cash
equivalents with high quality financial institutions which the Company believes limits credit risk.
Marketable Securities
The  Company  reports  investments  in  marketable  equity  securities  at  fair  value  based  on  quoted  market  prices.  All  investment  securities  are  designated  as
available for sale with unrealized gains and losses included in stockholders’ equity. Unrealized losses that are other than temporary are recognized in earnings. 
Realized gains and losses are accounted for on the specific identification method.
The Company periodically reviews these investments for other-than-temporary declines in fair value based on the specific identification method and writes down
investments to their fair value when an other-than- temporary decline has occurred. When determining whether a decline is other-than-temporary, the Company 
examines (i) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value of an investment has been lower than its carrying value: (ii) the financial condition and
near-term prospects of the investee, including any specific events that may influence the operations of the investee such as changes in technology that may 
impair the earnings potential of the investee: and (iii) the Company’s intent and ability to retain its investment in the investee for a sufficient period of time to 
allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. The Company generally believes that an other-than-temporary decline has occurred when the fair value of 
the investment is below the carrying value for one year, absent of evidence to the contrary.
Property and Equipment
Equipment consists of office furniture and equipment, automobiles, camp and equipment, and computer software recorded at cost and depreciated on a straight-
line basis as follows:
Automobiles 
Camp and equipment 
Computer software 
Office furniture and equipment
3 years 
3 years 
1 year 
3 years
34
Mineral Property Costs
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on January 5, 2004 and has not yet realized any revenues from its planned operations. It is
primarily  engaged  in  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mining  properties.  Mineral  property  exploration  costs  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Mineral  property
acquisition costs are initially capitalized. The Company assesses the carrying costs for impairment under ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment at each 
fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves,
the costs then incurred to develop such property, are capitalized. Such costs will be amortized using the units-of-production method over the estimated life of the 
probable reserve. If mineral properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations.
Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property Plant and Equipment the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability when events or changes in
circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to: significant
decreases in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors; accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the
amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a
forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly
before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value which is generally determined
based on the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain
instances. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company accounts for asset retirement obligations in accordance with the provisions of ASC 440 Asset Retirement and Environmental Obligations which 
requires the Company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation associated with the
retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or normal use of the assets. The Company did not have 
any assets retirement obligations as of May 31, 2012 and 2011.
Financial Instruments
ASC 825, Financial Instruments requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and the fair value of financial instruments, which include cash and 
cash equivalents, restricted cash equivalent, restricted marketable securities, and accounts payable were estimated to approximate their carrying values due to the
immediate or short-term maturities of these financial instruments.
The Company’s operations are in Canada and Africa, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The financial risk is the
risk to the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates. Currently, the Company does 
not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
Income Taxes
The  Company  accounts  for  income  taxes  using  the  asset  and  liability  method  in  accordance  with  ASC  740,  Income  Taxes.  The  asset  and  liability  method 
provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting
and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently
enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax
assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
Foreign Currency Translation
The  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  the  Company  is  the  United  States  dollar.  Monetary  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  foreign  currencies  are
translated to United States dollars in accordance with ASC 740, Foreign Currency Translation Matters, using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet 
date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at rates of exchange in effect at the date of the transaction. Average
rates are used to translate revenues and expenses.
Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income. The
Company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
35
To the extent that the Company incurs transactions that are not denominated in its functional currency, they are undertaken in Canadian dollars and Tanzanian
shillings. The Company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Stock-based Compensation
The  Company  records  stock-based  compensation  in  accordance  with  ASC  718,  Compensation  –  Stock  Based  Compensation  and  ASC  505, Equity  Based 
Payments  to  Non-Employees,  which  requires  the  measurement  and  recognition  of  compensation  expense  based  on  estimated  fair  values  for  all  share-based 
awards made to employees and directors, including stock options.
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The Company uses the Black-
Scholes option-pricing model as its method of determining fair value. This model is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as assumptions regarding a 
number of subjective variables. These subjective variables include, but are not limited to the Company’s expected stock price volatility over the term of the 
awards,  and  actual  and  projected  employee  stock  option  exercise  behaviours.  The  value  of  the  portion  of  the  award  that  is  ultimately  expected  to  vest  is
recognized as an expense in the statement of operations over the requisite service period.
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the
consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
Recent Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its consolidated financial statements and does not
believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of
operations.
Reclassification
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior years’ financial statements to conform to the current year’s presentation.
ITEM 7A.      QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
ITEM 8.         FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets, May 31, 2012 and 2011 
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended May 31, 2012 and 2011 and from inception (January 5, 2004) through May 
31, 2012 
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended May 31, 2012 and 2011 and from inception (January 5, 2004) through May 31, 2012 
 
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) from inception (January 5, 2004) through May 31, 2012 
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
36
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders of  
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.) (An Exploration Stage Company)
as of May 31, 2012 and 2011 and the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, cash flows and stockholders' equity (deficit) for the
years then ended and accumulated for the period from January 5, 2004 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2012. These financial statements are the responsibility of
the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we
plan  and  perform  the  audits  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether  the  financial  statements  are  free  of  material  misstatement.  An  audit  includes
examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. The Company is not required to have, nor were we
engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. An audit includes consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis
for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of internal control
over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  referred  to  above  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of  Handeni  Gold  Inc.
(formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.) (An Exploration Stage Company) as of May 31, 2012 and 2011, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the
years then ended and accumulated for the period from January 5, 2004 (Date of Inception) to May 31, 2012 in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the
consolidated financial statements, the Company has not generated any revenues and has incurred operating losses since inception. These factors raise substantial
doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also discussed in Note 1. The consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP”
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, Canada
August 23, 2012
37
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Balance Sheets  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
ASSETS
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
Current Assets 
       Cash and cash equivalents 
       Amounts receivable 
       Marketable securities (Note 3) 
       Prepaid expenses and deposits (Note 4) 
  
Total Current Assets 
  
Restricted cash equivalent (Note 5) 
Restricted marketable securities (Note 3) 
Mineral licenses (Note 7 and 8(a)) 
Property and equipment, net (Note 6) 
  
TOTAL ASSETS
Current Liabilities 
       Accounts payable 
       Accrued liabilities (Note 9) 
       Due to related parties (Note 8) 
Total Current Liabilities 
  
Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 1, 7 and 13) 
  
Stockholders' Equity 
Common stock (Note 10) 
         Authorized: 500,000,000 shares, $0.001 par value  
         Issued and outstanding: 307,416,654 shares 
             (May 31, 2011 – 292,416,654 shares) 
Additional paid-in capital (Note 10) 
Subscriptions received (receivable) (Note 10) 
Common stock issuable (Note 10) 
Donated capital 
Accumulated other comprehensive (loss) income 
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage 
Total Stockholders' Equity 
  
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' EQUITY
May 31, 2012  
 
 
 886,889  
602,286  
- 
189,937  
 
1,679,112  
 
56,531  
1,160,000  
1,650,000  
463,521  
 
 5,009,164  
 
 
 
 13,362  
150,704  
- 
164,066
307,417  
115,289,842  
150,000  
- 
109,000  
(1,600,000) 
(109,411,161) 
4,845,098  
 
 5,009,164
$
$
$
$
May 31, 2011
6,795,474 
654,614 
4,000,000 
2,036,011
13,486,099
-
-
-
305,936
13,792,035
179,102 
312,848 
1,112 
493,062
292,417 
111,925,974 
(13,814) 
2,253,000 
109,000 
1,240,000 
(102,507,604) 
13,298,973
13,792,035
$
$
$
$
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
38
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Revenue 
  
Expenses 
     Consulting fees 
     Depreciation 
     Exploration expenses 
     General and administrative 
     Impairment of mineral property 
     Professional 
     Rent 
     Travel and investor relations 
  
Total Expenses 
 
Loss From Operations 
 
Other Income (Expenses) 
     Gain on write-down of accrued liabilities (Note 7e) 
     Loss on write-down of amounts receivable 
     Interest income 
     Mineral property option payments received 
     Loss on sale of investment securities 
     Recovery of mineral property costs for 
          stock not issuable (Note 10) 
  
Net Loss 
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
     Unrealized (loss) gain on marketable securities 
  
Comprehensive Loss 
  
Net Loss per Share - Basic and Diluted 
 
Basic and Diluted Weighted Average Number  
     of Common Shares Outstanding
$
$
$
-
$
2,216,751 
161,255 
4,958,141 
803,239 
-
806,192 
156,670 
345,297
9,447,545
(9,447,545)
371,839 
(81,641) 
790 
-
-
2,253,000 
2,543,988 
(6,903,557)
(2,840,000)
(9,743,557)  $
(0.02)  $
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
39
299,957,638
204,249,000
For the Years Ended,
May 31, 2012
May 31, 2011
Accumulated from 
January 5, 2004
(Date of Inception)  
 
to May 31, 2012
- 
 
 
13,707,976  
35,875  
401,377  
587,092  
60,000,000  
442,622  
57,174  
376,159  
 
75,608,275  
 
(75,608,275) 
 
 
86,219  
 
- 
3,110,000  
-
- 
3,196,219  
(72,412,056) 
 
1,240,000
(71,172,056)  $
(0.35)
$
-
23,475,116 
239,883 
7,396,857 
2,391,157 
77,492,074 
2,368,359 
347,582 
1,889,286
115,600,314
(115,600,314)
458,058 
(81,641) 
790 
3,616,017 
(57,071)
2,253,000 
6,189,153 
(109,411,161) 
-
(1,600,000)
(111,011,161)
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS PROVIDED BY (USED IN): 
Operating Activities: 
 Net loss 
   Adjustments for non-cash items in net loss: 
       Depreciation and amortization 
       Donated services and rent 
       Impairment of mineral property acquisition costs 
       Loss on sale of investment securities 
       Mineral property option payments 
       Stock-based compensation 
       Gain on unrealized foreign exchange 
       Gain on write-down of accrued liabilities 
       Loss on write-down of amounts receivable 
       Write-off of equipment 
       Recovery of mineral property costs for stock not issuable (Note 10) 
       Shares received from mineral property option payment 
   Changes in non-cash operating working capital: 
       Amount receivable 
       Prepaid expenses and deposits 
       Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
       Convertible debentures, current portion 
       Due to related parties 
Cash Used in Operating Activities 
  
Investing Activities: 
 Mineral property acquisition costs 
 Proceeds from mineral property options 
 Purchase of restricted cash equivalent 
 Purchase of property and equipment 
Cash Used in Investing Activities 
  
Financing Activities: 
 Checks issued in excess of funds on deposit 
 Proceeds from issuance of common stock 
 Proceeds from stock subscriptions 
 Share issuance costs 
Cash Provided by Financing Activities 
  
(Decrease) / Increase in cash and cash equivalents 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, at beginning of the period 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, at end of the period 
  
Supplemental Cash Flow Information (Note 16)
$
$
(6,903,557)  $
161,255 
-
-
-
-
1,728,868 
-
(371,839) 
81,641 
15,360 
(2,253,000) 
-
(29,313) 
1,846,074 
43,955
(1,112) 
(5,681,668)
-
-
(56,531) 
(334,200) 
(390,731)
-
-
163,814 
-
163,814
(5,908,585)
6,795,474
886,889
$
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
40
For the Years Ended,
May 31, 2012
May 31, 2011
Accumulated from 
January 5, 2004
(Date of Inception)  
 
to May 31, 2012
(72,412,056)  $
$
35,875  
- 
60,000,000  
- 
- 
12,710,947  
- 
(86,219) 
- 
3,693  
- 
(2,760,000) 
 
- 
(2,677,134) 
(233,927) 
 
(120,761) 
(5,539,582) 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
(312,206) 
(312,206) 
 
 
(3,313) 
13,637,017  
- 
(986,442) 
12,647,262  
 
6,795,474  
 
- 
 
 6,795,474
(109,411,161)
239,883 
9,000 
77,492,074 
57,071 
(156,017) 
19,786,651 
-
(458,058) 
81,641 
19,053 
(2,253,000) 
(2,760,000) 
-
(683,927) 
(189,937) 
(76,834) 
-
853,943 
(17,449,618)
(697,677) 
600,000 
(56,531) 
(722,457) 
(876,665)
-
20,370,549 
163,814 
(1,321,191) 
19,213,172
886,889
-
886,889
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – January 5, 2004 (Date of Inception) 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash: 
 
 At $0.001 per share 
 At $0.05 per share 
 At $0.25 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Donated services 
 
Net loss for the period 
 
Balance – May 31, 2004 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash: 
 At $0.01 per share 
 At $0.25 per share 
 
Common stock subscribed 
 
Donated services 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2005 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.30 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Issuance of common shares to acquire mineral properties 
 
Shares gifted to the Company to settle accounts payable 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2006
#
Shares
– 
 
  
 
2,000,000  
1,050,000  
41,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
3,091,000  
 
  
22,000  
945,400  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
4,058,400  
 
1,322,332  
 
– 
 
16,000,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
21,380,732
–
2,000 
1,050 
41
–
–
–
3,091
22 
945
–
–
–
4,058
1,323
–
–
–
51,450 
10,209
(6,475)
–
–
55,184
198 
228,217
–
–
–
283,599
395,377
(2,974)
16,000
5,604,000
–
–
–
–
21,381
6,280,002
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
336,766
–
–
336,766
(336,766)
–
–
–
–
–
Amount
$
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Stock
Subscriptions 
Receivable
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
Other
Accumulated 
 
 
  Comprehensive   
 
  Income (Loss)
$
$
Donated 
Capital
–
– 
– 
–
–
2,500
–
2,500
– 
–
–
3,500
–
6,000
–
–
–
100,000
–
106,000
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
–
–
–
–
–
–
(36,874)
(36,874)
–
–
–
–
–
2,000 
52,500 
10,250
(6,475)
2,500
(36,874)
23,901
220 
229,162
336,766
3,500
(430,090)
(430,090)
(466,964)
163,459
–
–
–
–
59,934
(2,974)
5,620,000
100,000
(5,985,395)
(5,985,395)
(6,452,359)
(44,976)
– 
 
  
 
– 
– 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
  
– 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
41
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – May 31, 2006 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.70 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued for consulting services 
 
Common shares issued for mineral licenses acquired 
 
Common shares subscribed for mineral licenses acquired 
 
Common shares subscribed for consulting services 
 
Fair value of stock options granted 
 
Donated rent 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2007 
 
Shares issued for mineral licenses acquired 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.30 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued upon cashless exercise of options 
 
Common shares subscribed for cash at $0.10 per share 
 
Common shares subscribed for cash at $0.15 per share 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2008
#
Shares
21,380,732  
 
2,430,133  
 
– 
 
150,000  
 
11,650,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
35,610,865  
 
900,000  
 
300,000  
 
– 
 
4,575,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
41,385,865
21,381
2,430
–
150
6,280,002
1,698,670
(143,900)
105,600
11,650
8,265,100
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,482,998
–
–
35,611
18,688,470
900
300
–
4,575
–
–
–
633,600
89,700
(27,000)
(4,575)
–
–
–
41,386
19,380,195
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,837,500
50,000
–
–
–
106,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
3,000
–
2,887,500
109,000
(634,500)
–
–
–
50,000
195,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,498,000
109,000
Amount
$
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Stock
Subscriptions 
Receivable
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
Donated 
Capital
Other
Accumulated 
 
 
  Comprehensive   
 
  Income (Loss)
$
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
(6,452,359)
(44,976)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1,701,100
(143,900)
105,750
8,276,750
2,837,500
50,000
2,482,998
3,000
(16,342,946)
(16,342,946)
(22,795,305)
(1,074,724)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
90,000
(27,000)
–
50,000
195,000
(491,929)
(491,929)
(23,287,234)
(1,258,653)
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
42
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – May 31, 2008 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.10 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.15 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.20 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.25 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.30 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.40 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued upon cashless exercise of options 
 
Issuance of common shares upon the exercise of options at 
$0.30 per share 
 
Common shares subscribed for cash at $0.25 per share 
 
Stock-based compensation 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2009
#
Shares
41,385,865  
 
1,000,000  
 
12,000,013  
 
6,462,500  
 
1,400,404  
 
500,000  
 
362,500  
 
– 
 
3,365,000
170,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
66,646,282
Amount
$
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Stock
Subscriptions 
Receivable
41,386
19,380,195
1,000
12,001
6,462
1,400
500
362
–
3,365
99,000
1,787,999
1,286,038
348,700
149,500
144,638
(141,000)
(3,365)
170
50,830
–
–
–
–
1,188,706
–
66,646
24,291,241
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
2,498,000
(50,000)
(195,000)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
323,000
–
–
$
Donated 
Capital
109,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,576,000
109,000
Other
Accumulated 
 
 
  Comprehensive   
 
  Income (Loss)
$
Deficit
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
(23,287,234)
(1,258,653)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
50,000
1,605,000
1,292,500
350,100
150,000
145,000
(141,000)
–
51,000
323,000
1,188,706
(4,759,010)
(4,759,010)
(28,046,244)
(1,003,357)
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
–
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
–
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
43
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – May 31, 2009 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.20 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.25 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued upon cashless exercise of options 
 
Stock-based compensation 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2010 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.05 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares for cash at $0.45 per share 
 
Share issuance costs 
 
Common shares issued upon cashless exercise of options 
 
Issuance of common shares upon the exercise of options at 
$0.30 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares upon the exercise of warrants at 
$0.075 per share 
 
Issuance of common shares to acquire mineral properties 
 
Issuance of common shares for debt 
 
Issuance of finders’ fee warrants 
 
Stock-based compensation 
 
Unrealized gain on marketable securities 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2011
#
Shares
66,646,282  
 
75,000  
 
1,392,000  
 
– 
 
4,200,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
72,313,282  
 
22,000,000  
 
27,173,372  
 
– 
 
13,800,000
75
1,392
4,200
66,646
$
Amount
72,313
22,000
27,174
–
–
–
–
13,800
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
24,291,241
14,925
346,608
(13,400)
(4,200)
1,519,382
–
26,154,556
1,078,000
12,200,843
(1,477,401)
(13,800)
$
Stock
Subscriptions 
Receivable
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
130,000
2,000,000  
 
150,000,000  
 
5,000,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
292,416,654
130
38,870
2,000
148,000
150,000
59,850,000
5,000
3,780,505
(13,814)
–
–
–
–
490,960
9,675,441
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
Donated 
Capital
2,576,000
109,000
–
(323,000)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
2,253,000
109,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
$
–
–
$
Stage
Other
(28,046,244)
Deficit
Accumulated 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
 
  Comprehensive   
Exploration 
 
  Income (Loss)
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
–
(30,095,548)
–
–
–
–
–
–
(2,049,304)
–
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
1,240,000  
 
– 
 
1,240,000
Total
$
(1,003,357)
15,000
25,000
(13,400)
–
1,519,382
(2,049,304)
(1,506,679)
1,100,000
12,228,017
(1,477,401)
–
39,000
150,000
60,000,000
3,771,691
490,960
9,675,441
1,240,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
292,417
111,925,974
(13,814)
2,253,000
109,000
(72,412,056)
(72,412,056)
(102,507,604)
13,298,973
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
44
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Balance – May 31, 2011 
 
Issuance of common shares for property 
 
Cancellation of share issue obligation 
 
Subscription received 
 
Stock-based compensation 
 
Unrealized loss on marketable securities 
 
Net loss for the year 
 
Balance – May 31, 2012
#
Shares
292,416,654  
 
15,000,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
307,416,654
Amount
$
Additional
Paid-in 
Capital
$
Stock
Subscriptions 
Receivable
$
Common
Stock
Subscribed
$
$
Donated 
Capital
292,417
111,925,974
(13,814)
2,253,000
15,000
1,635,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1,728,868
–
–
307,417
115,289,842
–
–
–
(2,253,000)
13,814
150,000
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
150,000
109,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
109,000
$
Other
Accumulated 
 
 
  Comprehensive   
 
  Income (Loss)
1,240,000  
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
 
(2,840,000) 
 
– 
 
(1,600,000)
Accumulated 
During the 
Exploration
Stage
$
Total
$
(102,507,604)
13,298,973
–
–
–
–
–
1,650,000
(2,253,000)
163,814
1,728,868
(2,840,000)
(6,903,557)
(6,903,557)
(109,411,161)
4,845,098
(The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements)
45
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012  
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
1.
2.
Nature of Operations and Continuance of Business 
 
The Company was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January 5, 2004. On February 14, 2012, the Company changed its name from Douglas Lake
Minerals Inc. to Handeni Gold Inc. (the “Company”). The Company is an Exploration Stage Company, as defined by Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (“ASC”)  915,  Development  Stage  Entities.  The  Company’s  principal  business  is  the 
acquisition and exploration of mineral resources located in Tanzania, Africa. The Company has not presently determined whether its properties contain
mineral reserves that are economically recoverable. 
 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies the Company will continue to realize its assets and
discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has never generated revenues since inception and has never paid any dividends
and is unlikely to pay dividends or generate earnings in the immediate or foreseeable future. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is
dependent  upon  the  continued  financial  support  from  its  shareholders,  the  ability  of  the  Company  to  obtain  necessary  equity  financing  to  continue
operations  and  to  determine  the  existence,  discovery  and  successful  exploitation  of  economically  recoverable  reserves  in  its  resource  properties,
confirmation of the Company’s interests in the underlying properties, and the attainment of profitable operations. As at May 31, 2012, the Company has
not generated any revenues and has accumulated losses of $109,411,161 since inception. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s 
ability to continue as a going concern. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of
recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
 
The Company's plans for the next twelve months are to focus on the exploration of its mineral properties in Tanzania. Management intends to raise
additional funds through debt and/or equity financing, if necessary.
 
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 
 
a)
Basis of Presentation 
 
These  consolidated  financial  statements  and  related  notes  are  presented  in  accordance  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the
United  States,  and  are  expressed  in  U.S.  dollars.  These  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  the  Company  and  its
subsidiaries described as follows. In June 2011, the Company incorporated in Tanzania a new wholly-owned subsidiary, HG Limited (formerly
DLM Tanzania Limited), which undertakes mineral property exploration activities in Tanzania. The Company also has a wholly-owned non-
operating Tanzanian subsidiary (Douglas Lake Tanzania Limited).
 
All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated. The Company’s fiscal year-end is May 31.
 
Use of Estimates 
 
The  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  United  States  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial
statements  and  the  reported  amounts  of  revenue  and  expenses  in  the  reporting  period.  The  Company  regularly  evaluates  estimates  and
assumptions related to the recoverability and useful life of long-lived assets, mineral prospecting licenses, stock-based compensation, deferred 
income tax asset valuation allowances and contingent liabilities. The Company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical
experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments  about  the  carrying  values  of  assets  and  liabilities  and  the  accrual  of  costs  and  expenses  that  are  not  readily  apparent  from  other
sources. The actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely from the Company’s estimates. To the extent there 
are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected. 
 
Basic and Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
 
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, Earnings per Share which requires presentation of both basic
and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement. Basic EPS is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to
common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) during the period. Diluted EPS gives
effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock
using the if-converted method. In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares
assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants. Diluted EPS excludes all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-
dilutive.
b)
c)
46
2.
e)
f)
g)
h)
i)
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
d)
Comprehensive Income (Loss) 
 
ASC 220, Comprehensive Income establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive loss and its components in the financial
statements.  As  at  May  31,  2012,  the  Company’s  components  of  other  comprehensive  income  (loss)  and  accumulated  other  comprehensive
income (loss) are an unrealized fair value gain (loss) on available for sale marketable securities.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 
Cash  and  cash  equivalents  are  carried  at  fair  value  and  they  comprise  cash  on  hand,  deposits  held  with  banks  and  other  highly  liquid
investments.  Highly  liquid  investments  are  readily  convertible  to  cash  and  generally  have  maturities  of  three  months  or  less  from  the  time
acquired. The Company places its cash and cash equivalents with high quality financial institutions which the Company believes limits credit
risk. 
 
Marketable Securities 
 
The  Company  reports  investments  in  marketable  equity  securities at  fair  value  based  on  quoted  market  prices.  All  investment  securities  are
designated as available for sale with unrealized gains and losses included in stockholders’ equity. Unrealized losses that are other than temporary 
are recognized in earnings. Realized gains and losses are accounted for on the specific identification method. 
 
The Company periodically reviews these investments for other-than-temporary declines in fair value based on the specific identification method
and writes down investments to their fair value when an other-than-temporary decline has occurred. When determining whether a decline is
other-than-temporary, the Company examines (i) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value of an investment has been lower than
its  carrying  value:  (ii)  the  financial  condition  and  near-term  prospects  of  the  investee,  including  any  specific  events  that  may  influence  the
operations of the investee such as changes in technology that may impair the earnings potential of the investee: and (iii) the Company’s intent 
and ability to retain its investment in the investee for a sufficient period of time to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. The
Company generally believes that an other-than-temporary decline has occurred when the fair value of the investment is below the carrying value
for one year, absent of evidence to the contrary.
 
Property and Equipment 
 
Equipment  consists  of  office  furniture  and  equipment,  automobiles,  camp  and  equipment,  and  computer  software  recorded  at  cost  and
depreciated on a straight-line basis as follows:
Automobiles 
Camp and equipment 
Computer software 
Office furniture and equipment
3 years 
3 years 
1 year 
3 years
Mineral Property Costs 
 
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its inception on January 5, 2004 and has not yet realized any revenues from its planned
operations. It is primarily engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mining properties. Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as
incurred. Mineral prospecting licenses and mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized. The Company assesses the carrying costs
for impairment under ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment at each fiscal quarter end. When it has been determined that a mineral property
can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable reserves, the costs then incurred to develop such property, are
capitalized.  Such  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-production  method  over  the  estimated  life  of  the  probable  reserve.  If  mineral
properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to operations. 
 
Long-Lived Assets 
 
In accordance with ASC 360, Property Plant and Equipment the Company tests long-lived assets or asset groups for recoverability when events 
or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but
are not limited to: significant decreases in the market price of the asset; significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors;
accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset; current period
cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and current
expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed significantly before the end of its estimated useful life. Recoverability is
assessed based on the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value which is generally determined based on the sum of the undiscounted cash
flows expected to result from the use and the eventual disposal of the asset, as well as specific appraisal in certain instances. An impairment loss
is recognized when the carrying amount is not recoverable and exceeds fair value.
47
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
j)
2.
Asset Retirement Obligations 
 
The  Company  accounts  for  asset  retirement  obligations  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  ASC  440  Asset Retirement and Environmental
Obligations which requires the Company to record the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a
legal obligation associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development and/or
normal use of the assets. The Company did not have any asset retirement obligations as of May 31, 2012 and 2011. 
 
Financial Instruments 
 
ASC 825, Financial Instruments requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and the fair value of financial instruments, which
include  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  restricted  cash  equivalent,  restricted  marketable  securities,  and  accounts  payable  were  estimated  to
approximate their carrying values due to the immediate or short-term maturities of these financial instruments. 
 
The Company’s operations are in Canada and Africa, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The
financial risk is the risk to the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these
rates. Currently, the Company does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk. 
 
Income Taxes 
 
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. The asset and liability 
method provides that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between
the  financial  reporting  and  tax  bases  of  assets  and  liabilities,  and  for  operating  loss  and  tax  credit  carry-forwards.  Deferred  tax  assets  and 
liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The
Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
 
Foreign Currency Translation 
 
The  functional  and  reporting  currency  of  the  Company  is  the  United  States  dollar.  Monetary  assets  and  liabilities  denominated  in  foreign
currencies are translated to United States dollars in accordance with ASC 740 Foreign Currency Translation Matters, using the exchange rate 
prevailing at the balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at rates of exchange in
effect at the date of the transaction. Average rates are used to translate revenues and expenses.
 
Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination
of income. The Company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign
currency fluctuations. 
 
To the extent that the Company incurs transactions that are not denominated in its functional currency, they are undertaken in Canadian dollars
and Tanzanian shillings. The Company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact
of foreign currency fluctuations. 
 
Stock-based Compensation 
 
The  Company  records  stock-based  compensation  in  accordance  with  ASC  718,  Compensation  –  Stock  Based  Compensation  and  ASC  505, 
Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense based on estimated fair
values for all share-based awards made to employees and directors, including stock options.
 
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The Company 
uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as its method of determining fair value. This model is affected by the Company’s stock price as 
well  as  assumptions  regarding  a  number  of  subjective  variables.  These  subjective  variables  include,  but  are  not  limited  to  the  Company’s 
expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviours. The value of the
portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the statement of operations over the requisite service
period. 
 
All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the
fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable.
k)
l)
m)
n)
48
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
2.
3.
4.
5.
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies (continued)
 
o)
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements 
 
The Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its consolidated financial statements
and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its
financial position or results of operations. 
 
Reclassification 
 
Certain reclassifications have been made to the prior years’ financial statements to conform to the current year’s presentation.
p)
Restricted Marketable Securities
Ruby Creek Resources Inc., 4,000,000 
shares
$
Cost
May 31, 2012
Fair Value 
Based On 
Quoted
Market Price
$
Accumulated 
Unrealized 
Gain (Loss)
$
Fair Value 
Based On 
Quoted
Market Price
$
May 31, 2011
Accumulated 
Unrealized 
Gain (Loss)
$
2,760,000
1,160,000
(1,600,000)
4,000,000
1,240,000
The four million restricted shares of common stock of Ruby Creek Resources Inc. (“RCR”) were issued to the Company on December 16, 2010 as 
partial consideration to purchase the mineral property interests under the agreements between RCR and the Company. The fair market value of these
shares was $2,760,000 based on RCR’s quoted stock price on that date (refer to Note 7(b)). As of May 31, 2012, the fair market value of these shares
was $1,160,000 based on RCR’s quoted stock price. The fair market value of these RCR shares was recorded as non-current assets as of May 31, 2012.
 
Prepaid Expenses and Deposits 
 
The components of prepaid expenses and deposits are as follows:
General and administrative 
Professional fees 
Rent 
Travel and exploration expenses
May 31,
2012
$
9,423  
2,066  
128,670  
49,778  
 
189,937
May 31,
2011
$
264,575 
30,616 
116,472 
1,624,348
2,036,011
Restricted Cash Equivalent 
 
As of May 31, 2012, the Company has pledged $56,531 of GICs (May 31, 2011: $Nil) as security held on corporate credit cards.
49
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Property and Equipment
Automobile vehicles 
Camp and equipment 
Office furniture and equipment 
Software
Cost
$
378,477 
197,011 
99,393 
3,037
677,918
$
Accumulated 
Depreciation
155,949 
23,428 
32,110 
2,910
214,397
May 31,
2012
Net Book
Value
$
222,528  
173,583  
67,283  
127  
 
463,521
May 31,
2011
Net Book
Value
$
220,234 
-
83,760 
1,942
305,936
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.
Mineral Licenses 
 
a)
Handeni Properties, Tanzania, Africa 
 
On  September  21,  2010,  the  Company  completed  a  Mineral  Property  Acquisition  Agreement  with  IPP  Gold  Limited  (“IPP  Gold”),  and  the 
Company acquired four prospecting licences totalling approximately 800 square kilometres, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania (the
“Handeni Properties”). IPP Gold retained a 2.5% net smelter royalty (“NSR”) on the Handeni Properties and the Company has the option to 
reduce the NSR to 1.25% by paying $5,000,000. If the NSR is reduced to 1.25% the maximum NSR for any year is capped at $1,000,000. In any
year  the  NSR  payment  is  less  than  $1,000,000  the  difference  between  the  actual  NSR  payment  and  $1,000,000  will  be  carried  forward  to
subsequent years. In addition if the London spot price for gold is equal to or greater than $1,500 then the NSR will increase from 2.5% to 3%.
The Company issued 133,333,333 restricted shares of common stock to IPP Gold to acquire the Handeni Properties and no further payments to
IPP Gold in shares or cash is required. 
 
On September 1, 2010, the Company entered into a Transaction Fee Agreement with a consultant for services related to soliciting offers from
and in assisting in the negotiation with potential Company financiers, purchasers, acquisition targets and/or joint venture development partners
(each such party being a “Potential Investor”). The initial term of the agreement is a period of 60 days and automatically renews monthly unless
otherwise specifically renewed in writing by each party or terminated by the Company. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company agreed to pay
the consultant a transaction fee for each completed property acquisition transaction in Tanzania (a “Completed Transaction”). The transaction 
fee is 12.5% of the shares issuable under each Completed Transaction, payable in restricted common shares at the lowest priced security issuable
under each Completed Transaction. On September 30, 2010, the Company issued 16,666,667 restricted shares of common stock pursuant to the
Transaction Fee Agreement in relation to the acquisition of the Handeni Properties.
 
The fair value of the 133,333,333 shares of the Company’s common stock issued to IPP Gold pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement and the
16,666,667 shares of the Company’s common stock issued pursuant to the Transaction Fee Agreement totalled $60,000,000.
 
On November 30, 2010, the capitalized acquisition costs of the Handeni Properties were tested for impairment by the Company’s management 
as required by ASC 360. Management determined that no positive cash flows from the Handeni Properties could be identified or supported and a
full impairment loss was recognized in expenses for the $60,000,000 acquisition cost.
 
On  August  5,  2011,  the  Company  entered  a  Mineral  Property  Acquisition  Agreement  (the  “2011  Acquisition  Agreement”)  with  Handeni 
Resources Limited (“Handeni Resources”), a limited liability company registered under the laws of Tanzania. The Chairman of the Board of
Directors  of  the  Company  has  an  existing  ownership  and/or  beneficial  interest(s)  in  Handeni  Resources.  Pursuant  to  the  2011  Acquisition
Agreement, the Company had an exclusive option to acquire from Handeni Resources a 100% interest in mineral licenses covering an area of
approximately  2.67  square kilometres  to  the east  of Magambazi Hill, which is  adjacent  to the area  covered by  the  Company’s four existing 
prospecting licenses (totalling approximately 800 square kilometres) in the Handeni District.
50
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
7.
Mineral Licenses (continued)
a)
b)
Handeni Properties, Tanzania, Africa (continued)
 
On November 30, 2011, the Company completed the 2011 Acquisition Agreement and issued 15,000,000 restricted common shares to Handeni
Resources as payment. As at November 30, 2011, the fair market price of the Company’s common stock was $0.11 per share; accordingly, the 
Company recorded a total fair market value of $1,650,000 as the mineral licenses acquisition cost.
 
Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, Tanzania, Africa
 
On June 27, 2008, the Company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement that grants the Company the right to explore for minerals on properties
in Liwale and Nachigwea Districts of Tanzania known as the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, in consideration for the payment of $1,000,000
(paid) upon signing the agreement and $540,000 over five years beginning July 15, 2008. The $540,000 is payable in stages on a quarterly basis
of which $80,000 must be paid in the first year, and $460,000 over the next five years. The holder of the property licenses retains a net smelter
royalty return of 3%. 
 
On June 5, 2009, the Company entered into a new joint venture which reduced the area covered by the original agreement to approximately 380
square  kilometres.  Pursuant  to  the  new  joint  venture  agreement,  the  Company  was  required  to  pay  $40,000  upon  the  signing  of  the  new
agreement. In addition, the joint venture partner is still entitled to receive a perpetual net smelter royalty return of 3% from any product realized
from the property underlying the prospecting licenses. By entering into the new joint venture agreement, the Company is no longer required to
pay the balance of the $460,000 previously due under the prior joint venture agreement. The new joint venture agreement covers prospecting
licenses No. 5673/2009, No. 5669/2009, No. 5664/2009, and No. 5662/2009, all of which were renewed on June 12, 2009 for a period of three
years. 
 
On November 7, 2009, the Company entered into its first agreement with Ruby Creek Resources Inc. (“RCR”) in which RCR had the right to 
acquire a 70% interest in 125 square kilometres of the Company’s interest in the 380 square kilometres covered by the four prospecting licenses
in the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project in consideration for $3,000,000 payable as follows:
i) 
 
ii) 
 
iii) 
 
iv) 
 
v) 
 
vi) 
 
vii)
$100,000 within 5 business days of signing the agreement (received);
 
$150,000 within 15 business days of signing the agreement (received);
 
$100,000 upon satisfactory completion of RCR due diligence (received);
 
$400,000 upon closing and receipt the first mining license;
 
$750,000 payable within 12 months of closing;
 
$750,000 payable within 24 months of closing, and
 
$750,000 payable within 36 months of closing. This payment may be made in common shares of RCR. The shares will be valued at the
10 day average trading price of RCR’s common stock prior to the payment date.
During fiscal 2010 the Company recognized $350,000 in other income for the receipt of option payments (i), (ii) and (iii).
On May 24, 2010, in a second agreement (fully executed on June 16, 2010) between RCR and the Company, RCR had the right to earn a 70%
interest  in  the  remaining  255  square  kilometres  of  the  380  square  kilometre  Mkuvia  Alluvial  Gold  Project  by  making  additional  payments
totalling $6,000,000 to the Company.
The schedule by which RCR is to pay such $6,000,000 to the Company is as follows:
i)
ii)
iii) 
 
iv) 
 
v)
$200,000  due  within  seven  days  of  execution  of  the  agreement  (received)  with  $100,000  applied  towards  costs  of  environmental
permitting and the initial mining license (applied);
 
$150,000 (received) plus the issuance of four million restricted shares of common stock of RCR, with an agreed upon value of $0.80 per
share for a deemed valuation of $3,200,000, within 30 days of the receipt of Certificates of Acknowledgement for all underlying and
related  agreements  from  the  Commissioner  for  Minerals  in  Tanzania  as  required  by  the  Mining  Act  of  Tanzania  (Certificates  of
Acknowledgement received August 12, 2010). The four million restricted shares of common stock of RCR were issued to the Company
on December 16, 2010 and had a fair market value totaling $2,760,000 based on RCR’s quoted stock price on that date.
 
$450,000 on June 1, 2011 (unpaid); 
 
$1,000,000 on June 1, 2012; and 
 
$1,000,000 on June 1, 2013 (which may be satisfied by the issuance of stock by RCR).
51
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Mineral Licenses (continued) 
 
b)
7.
c)
d)
e)
Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project, Tanzania, Africa (continued)
 
Thus, the combined payments under the November 7, 2009 and the May 24, 2010 agreements provide for a total commitment of $9,000,000
payable to the Company by RCR to purchase a 70% interest in the entire 380 square kilometre Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project. The ownership
structure of the interest in the Mkuvia Alluvial Gold Project shall be a 70% interest RCR, a 25% interest for the Company, and a 5% interest for
Mr. Mkuvia Maita, the original owner of the underlying prospecting licenses. In addition, Mr. Maita retains a 3% net smelter royalty.
 
On  June  3,  2010,  the  Company  and  RCR  incorporated  Ruby  Creek  Resources  (Tanzania)  Limited  (“Ruby  Creek  Tanzania”)  to  manage  the 
mining operations  in the Mkuvia Gold  Project  in  Tanzania.  Ruby  Creek  Resources  (Tanzania)  Limited,  a  joint venture  company (the  “Joint 
Venture Company”), is owned by Ruby Creek Resources (70%), the Company (25%) and Mr. Mkuvia Maita (5%). 
 
During fiscal 2011 the Company recognized a total of $3,110,000 in other income for the receipt of the shares at fair market value and the option
payments (i) and (ii). The Company has not yet received the $450,000 subsequent option payment (iii) which is overdue and the agreement is in
default. Prospecting licenses numbered 5664/2009 and 5669/2009, which form a part of the joint venture project, were registered to a third party
without the Company’s approval. 
 
RCR filed a lawsuit against the Company in the Supreme Court, State of New York, on February 8, 2012, alleging the Company’s involvement 
in a fraudulent transfer and breach of agreements. The Company is of the view that such allegations are without merit and intends to vigorously
contest the action. On February 23, 2012, the Company filed a lawsuit against RCR in the Supreme Court of British Columbia, seeking relief for
RCR’s breach of its payment obligations under these agreements and seeking an order that RCR remove the U.S. restrictive legend from RCR
shares issued to the Company under the agreements (see Note 13c).
 
On  April  27,  2006,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Strategic  Alliance  Agreement  with  Canaco  Resources  Inc.  (“Canaco”),  a  Canadian  public 
company.  Under  the  terms  of  the  agreement,  Canaco  paid  $350,000  (received  during  fiscal  2007)  to  the  Company.  In  connection  with  this
agreement,  the  Company  was  required  to  issue  200,000  restricted  shares  of  common  stock  with  a  fair  value  of  $88,000.  As  at  May  31  and
November  30,  2011,  the 200,000  shares  were  not  issued  and  $88,000  was  included  in  common  stock  subscribed.  During  fiscal  2012  it  was
determined that the Company no longer has any obligations under this agreement, including the obligation to issue such 200,000 shares, and
therefore $88,000 was recorded as a recovery of mineral property costs for stock no longer issuable.
 
On November  17,  2006,  the Company  entered  into  an Asset Purchase  Agreement  with Atlas to acquire Prospecting  License No.  3920/2006
known as “Shinyanga” or “Magembe,” which covers an area of approximately 46 square kilometres in Tanzania. The Licenses were transferred
to the Company’s name on signing the agreement for an aggregate purchase price of $200,000 (paid) and 4,500,000 restricted shares of common
stock. The Company determined the fair value of the shares to be $3,172,500. As at May 31, 2007, the Company issued 1,500,000 shares at the
fair value of $1,057,500. During fiscal 2010, the Company decided to focus on other properties and has let the Magembe prospecting license
lapse. As at May 31 and November 30, 2011, the remaining 3,000,000 shares at the fair value of $2,115,000 was included in common stock
subscribed. During fiscal 2012 it was determined that the Company no longer has any obligations under this agreement, including the obligation
to issue such 3,000,000 shares, and therefore the $2,115,000 was recorded as a recovery of mineral property costs for stock no longer issuable.
 
On November 17, 2006, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro Geos to acquire six Prospecting Licenses, which
covered  an  area  of  approximately  2,388.79  square  kilometres  in  Tanzania.  Prospecting  License  No.’s  3868/2006,  3671/2005,  3398/2005,
3105/2005, 3211/2005, and 2961/2004 had been transferred to the Company’s name on signing the agreement for a then aggregate and proposed 
purchase price of $600,000 (the “Cash Payments”) and the proposed issuance of 4,000,000 restricted shares of the Company’s common stock at 
a fair value of $2,820,000. An initial Cash Payment of $150,000 was made on the signing of the agreement, however, no further Cash Payments
were made and no common shares of the Company were issued due to the fact that the underlying Prospecting Licenses were allowed to lapse by
Hydro Geos. As at May 31, 2011 and November 30, 2011, $250,000 was included in accrued liabilities. During fiscal 2012 it was determined
that the Company no longer has any obligations under this agreement, including the obligation to pay such $250,000, and therefore the accrued
$250,000 liability was written off.
52
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Related Party Transactions and Balances 
 
a)
8.
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
On  September  21,  2010,  the  Company  completed  a  Mineral  Property  Acquisition  Agreement  with  IPP  Gold  Limited  (“IPP  Gold”),  and  the 
Company acquired four prospecting licences totalling approximately 800 square kilometres, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania (the
“Handeni Properties”). The Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Chairman”) has an existing ownership and/or beneficial
interest(s) in IPP Gold. The Company issued 133,333,333 restricted shares of common stock to IPP Gold to acquire the Handeni Properties and
no further payments to IPP Gold in shares or cash is required (see Note 7a).
 
On  August  5,  2011,  the  Company  entered  a  Mineral  Property  Acquisition  Agreement  (the  “2011  Acquisition  Agreement”)  with  Handeni 
Resources Limited (“Handeni Resources”), a limited liability company registered under the laws of Tanzania. The Chairman has an existing
ownership  and/or  beneficial  interest(s)  in  Handeni  Resources.  Pursuant  to  the  2011  Acquisition  Agreement,  the  Company  had  an  exclusive
option to acquire from Handeni Resources a 100% interest in mineral licenses covering an area of approximately 2.67 square kilometres to the
east of Magambazi Hill, which is adjacent to the area covered by the Company’s four existing prospecting licenses (totalling approximately 800 
square kilometres) in the Handeni District. On November 30, 2011, the Company completed such acquisition and issued 15,000,000 shares of
restricted common stock at a fair market price of $0.11 per share to Handeni Resources in connection with the acquisition (see Note 7a).
 
On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to the Chairman 10,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $164,000 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and professional services fees to a director, 
the current President and Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”). The Company also paid $25,200 (2011 - $Nil) represented 60% of rental expenses
associated with renting CEO’s family house in Tanzania, pursuant to the Executive Services Agreement. In addition, the Company paid $43,000
(2011 - $Nil) of geological and investor relations service fees to a private company controlled by a person who is related to CEO.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company granted the CEO 1,500,000 stock options at a price of $0.45 per share exercisable for 10
years (2011: 4,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years).
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $168,000 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and consulting fees to the former President 
and CEO who resigned effective on November 22, 2011 and who continues to provide consulting services and is presently a director. During the
year ended May 31, 2012, the Company granted to the former CEO 3,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.45 per share exercisable for 10 years
(2011: 4,500,000 stock options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years).
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid a total of $58,480 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and professional services fees to a 
private company controlled by the Company’s current Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) who was appointed effective on March 1, 2012, $20,888 
of which was paid prior to March 1, 2012 as professional consulting fees. The Company also granted the CFO 1,000,000 stock options at a price
of $0.11 per share exercisable for 5 years. 
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid consulting fees of $15,441 (2011 - $161,773) to the former CEO who resigned effective 
on June 21, 2011. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, the Company also paid $50,113 (Year ended May 31, 2011 - $30,458) of investor 
relations service fees to a person related to the former CEO.
 
On September 20, 2010, the former CEO converted $616,186 of related party debt into 5,000,000 units. Each unit consisted of one share of the
Company’s common stock and one share purchase warrant to purchase an additional share of common stock at $0.25 for two years. Due to an
error, the Company issued units for $133,814 more than owed. During the year ended May 31, 2011, the former CEO paid the additional cash of
$120,000 of subscriptions for the shares and the remaining $13,814 during the year ended May 31, 2012. The Company recorded stock based
compensation of $3,035,505, equal to the difference between the fair value of the units of $3,785,505 and the $750,000 sum of debt settled and
subscription receivable. On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to this former CEO 9,000,000 stock options exercisable at a price of
$0.20 per share, such options were forfeited during the year ended May 31, 2012.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $49,484 (2011 - $Nil) of consulting fees to the Company’s former CFO who resigned 
effective on December 12, 2011. The Company also granted to this former CFO 750,000 stock options at a price of $0.45 per share, and such
options were forfeited on March 14, 2012. 
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $65,023 (Year ended May 31, 2011 - $77,050) of consulting fees to the former CFO 
who resigned effective on September 22, 2011, of which $26,738 was for executive services and $38,285 was for continuing consulting services.
As at May 31, 2012, the Company was indebted to the former CFO for $Nil (May 31, 2011 – $1,112). The amounts due are non-interest bearing, 
unsecured and due on demand. On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to this former CFO 1,000,000 stock options exercisable at a price
of $0.20 per share, of which 400,000 unvested options were forfeited during the year ended May 31, 2012.
53
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
8.
9.
10.
Related Party Transactions and Balances (Continued)
 
h)
Effective on April 10, 2012, the Board of Directors (the “Board”) approved a compensation package to independent directors of the Company as
follows: 
 
 
(1) 
annual independent director fees of $30,000;
 
 
meeting attendance fees of $1,000 per meeting;
(2) 
 
 
additional annual fees of $10,000 to the Company’s Board Committee Chairperson; and
(3) 
 
 
additional annual fees of $20,000 to the Vice Chairman of the Board.
(4) 
 
 
Accordingly, the Company accrued $30,000 of independent directors’ fees for the period ended May 31, 2012.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company paid directors fees of $15,268.
Accrued Liabilities 
 
The components of accrued liabilities are as follows:
Mineral property expenditures 
Professional fees 
Directors fees (Note 8(h)) 
General and administrative expenses 
  
Total Accrued Liabilities
May 31,
2012
$
60,355  
59,860  
30,000  
489  
 
150,704
May 31,
2011
$
250,000 
52,848 
-
10,000
312,848
Common Stock and Additional Paid-in Capital 
 
The authorized common stock of the Company consists of 500,000,000 shares, with $0.001 par value. The following is a summary of the Company’s 
issued and outstanding common stock during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2012 and 2011:
Balance as at May 31, 2010 
Shares Issued for Private Placement 
Shares Issued for Debt Settlement @0.42 
Shares Issued for Mineral Property Acquisition 
Shares Issued for Exercise of Cashless Options 
Shares Issued for Exercise of Stock Options 
Shares Issued for Exercise of warrants 
Value Assigned to Options Granted or Vested 
Value Assigned to Warrants Issued as Finders Fees 
Share Issuance Costs (Cash and Finders’ Fee Warrants) 
  
Balance as at May 31, 2011 
  
Shares Issued for Mineral Licenses 
Value Assigned to Options and Warrants Granted or Vested 
  
Balance as at May 31, 2012
54
Common Stock
Shares
#
72,313,282 
49,173,372 
5,000,000 
150,000,000 
13,800,000 
130,000 
2,000,000
-
-
292,416,654
15,000,000 
-
307,416,654
Par Value
$
72,314  
49,173  
5,000  
150,000  
13,800  
130  
2,000  
 
- 
- 
 
292,417  
 
15,000  
- 
 
307,417
$
Capital
26,154,556 
13,278,844 
3,780,505 
59,850,000 
(13,800) 
38,870 
148,000 
9,675,441 
490,960 
(1,477,402)
Additional Paid-In
1,635,000 
1,728,868
115,289,842
111,925,974
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
10.
Common Stock and Additional Paid-in Capital (continued)
a)      For the Year Ended May 31, 2012
Pursuant to the terms of the mineral license acquisition agreement on November 30, 2011, the Company issued 15,000,000 restricted common shares to
Handeni Resources at a fair market price of $0.11 per share for a total fair market value of $1,650,000.
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company received $13,814 from the former CEO related to a share issuance during the fiscal year ended May
31, 2011. During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company also received $150,000 for advanced subscriptions in a private placement. The private
placement has not yet closed.
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company determined it no longer has any obligations to issue $2,203,000 in shares for lapsed mineral property
agreements and $50,000 in shares for an expired mineral property consulting agreement. Therefore, a total of $2,253,000 was recorded as a recovery of
mineral property costs for stock not issuable.
b)      For the Year Ended May 31, 2011
On April 4, 2011, the Company issued 30,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 30,000 stock options for proceeds of $9,000.
On  March  29,  2011,  the  Company  issued  12,311,110  units at  $0.45  per  unit  for  proceeds  of  $5,540,000  pursuant  to  a  private  placement.  Each  unit
consists of one share of common stock and one purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of
$0.52 per share until September 29, 2013.
On March 21, 2011, the Company issued 3,576,768 units at $0.45 per unit for proceeds of $1,609,545 pursuant to a private placement. Each unit consists
of one share of common stock and one purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.52 per
share until September 21, 2012.
On March 17, 2011, the Company issued 10,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 10,000 stock options for proceeds of $3,000.
On  March  11,  2011,  the  Company  issued  11,285,494  units at $0.45  per  unit  for  proceeds  of  $5,078,472  pursuant  to  a  private  placement.  Each  unit 
consists of one share of common stock and one purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of
$0.52 per share until September 11, 2012. The Company paid finders’ fees and legal expenses in an aggregate amount of $788,382 in relation to the
three private placements. On March 29, 2011, the Company also issued 1,243,045 warrants with a fair value of $490,960 as finders’ fees. The fair value 
of  the  finders’  fee  warrants  was  estimated  at  the  date  of  issue  using  the  Black-Scholes  option-pricing  model.  Each  warrant  is  exercisable  for  one 
additional common share of the Company at an exercise price of $0.52 per share, expiring on September 29, 2013.
On February 23, 2011, the Company issued 20,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 20,000 stock options for proceeds of $6,000.
On February 4, 2011, the Company issued 2,900,000 shares of common stock upon the cashless exercise of 2,900,000 stock options.
On January 31, 2011, the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 2,000,000 warrants for proceeds of $150,000.
On January 18, 2011, the Company issued 1,100,000 shares of common stock upon the cashless exercise of 1,100,000 stock options.
On January 12, 2011, the Company issued 20,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 20,000 stock options for proceeds of $6,000.
On January 11, 2011, the Company issued 22,000,000 units at $0.05 per unit for proceeds of $1,100,000 pursuant to a private placement. Each unit
consists of one share of common stock and one purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of
$0.075 per share until January 10, 2013.
On November 23, 2010, the Company issued 50,000 shares of common stock upon the exercise of 50,000 stock options for proceeds of $15,000.
On September 20, 2010, the Company issued 5,000,000 units with a fair value of $3,785,505 to the Chief Executive Officer of the Company at the time
to settle debt of $614,352. Each unit consists of one share of common stock and one purchase warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of
common stock at an exercise price of $0.25 per share expiring on September 20, 2012.
On September 15, 2010, the Company issued 133,333,333 shares of common stock pursuant to the Acquisition Agreement described in Note 7(a).
On September 15, 2010, the Company issued 16,666,667 shares of common stock pursuant to the Transaction Fee Agreement described in Note 7(a).
On August 23, 2010, the Company issued 9,800,000 shares of common stock upon the cashless exercise of 9,800,000 stock options.
55
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
11.
Stock Options 
 
The Company adopted a Stock Option Plan, dated October 20, 2008 (the “2008 Stock Option Plan”), under which the Company is authorized to grant 
stock  options  to  acquire  up  to  a  total  of  10,000,000  shares  of  common  stock.  On  August  11,  2010,  the  Company  granted  stock  options  to  acquire
3,800,000 common shares at a price of $0.05 per share exercisable for 10 years. Such options were exercised during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2011.
During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2012,  the  option  holders  forfeited  2,993,333  options  granted  and  vested  prior  to  July  2009.  At  May  31,  2012,  the
Company had no shares of common stock available to be issued under the 2008 Stock Option Plan.
 
The Company adopted an additional Stock Option Plan, dated August 11, 2010 (the “August 2010 Stock Option Plan”), under which the Company is 
authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 10,000,000 shares of common shares. On August 11, 2010, the Company granted stock
options to acquire 6,000,000 common shares at a price of $0.05 per share exercisable for 10 years and on October 21, 2010, the Company granted stock
options to acquire 4,000,000 common shares at a price of $0.30 per share exercisable for 10 years. Such options were exercised during the fiscal year
ended May 31, 2011. At May 31, 2012, the Company had no shares of common stock available to be issued under the August 2010 Stock Option Plan.
 
The  Company  adopted  an  Stock  Option  Plan,  dated  November  29,  2010  (the  “November  2010  Stock  Option  Plan”),  under  which  the  Company  is 
authorized to grant stock options to acquire up to a total of 40,000,000 shares of common shares. On November 29, 2010, the Company granted stock
options to acquire 33,500,000 common shares at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years, and the Company also granted stock options to
acquire 4,500,000 common shares on November 30, 2011 at a price of $0.45 per share, 750,000 on December 14, 2011 at a price of $0.45 per share and
1,000,000  on  March  1,  2012  at a  price  of  $0.11  per  share.  During the  year  ended May  31,  2012,  5,530,000  vested  options  and  5,920,000  unvested
options  under  such  plan  were  forfeited.  At  May  31,  2012,  the  Company  had  11,700,000  shares  of  common  stock  available  to  be  issued  under  the
November 2010 Stock Option Plan. 
 
There were no stock options exercised during the year ended May 31, 2012, and there were no intrinsic values of outstanding options at May 31, 2012.
The total intrinsic value of stock options exercised during the year ended May 31, 2011 was $1,653,600 and the intrinsic value of outstanding options at
May 31, 2011 was $8,824,000. 
 
The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s stock options:
Outstanding, May 31, 2010 
Granted 
Exercised 
  
Outstanding, May 31, 2011 
Granted 
Forfeited 
  
Outstanding, May 31, 2012 
  
Exercisable, May 31, 2012
Number of 
Options 
#
3,123,333 
47,300,000 
(13,930,000)
36,493,333 
6,250,000 
(14,443,333)
28,300,000
21,610,000
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price 
$
0.30 
0.18 
0.12
0.21 
0.40 
0.23
0.24
0.22
Weighted 
Average 
Remaining 
Contractual 
Term 
(years)
8.93  
7.61  
6.60  
 
8.93  
7.61  
6.60  
 
8.53  
 
8.43
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value 
$
-
5,676,000 
1,653,600
8,824,000 
-
-
-
-
A summary of the status of the Company’s non-vested stock options as of May 31, 2012 and 2011, and changes during the years ended May 31, 2012
and 2011, are presented below:
56
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
11.
12.
Stock Options (continued)
Non-vested stock options 
  
  
  
  
Non-vested at May 31, 2010 
Granted 
Vested 
  
Non-vested at May 31, 2011 
Granted 
Forfeited 
Vested 
  
Non-vested at May 31, 2012
Number of 
Options 
# 
 
- 
47,300,000  
(27,200,000) 
 
20,100,000  
5,500,000  
(5,920,000) 
(12,990,000) 
 
6,690,000
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Date 
Fair Value 
$
-
0.30 
0.26
0.36 
0.45 
0.33 
0.24
0.23
As at May 31, 2012, there was $430,692 (2011: $4,655,790) of total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested stock option agreements. 
That cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of six months.
 
The stock options outstanding are exercisable for cash or on a cashless exercise basis using a prorated formula whereby the number of shares issuable is
equal to (a) the average closing price for the five days prior to exercise date (“ACP”) in excess of the exercise price, divided by (b) the exercise price 
multiplied by (c) the number of options exercised. During the year ended May 31, 2012, no cashless stock options were exercised (2011 – 13,800,000).
 
Common Stock Purchase Warrants 
 
Pursuant to a release and indemnification agreement, the Company granted 300,000 stock purchase warrants on July 7, 2011 to acquire 300,000 common
shares at a price of $0.30 per share exercisable for one year period. The fair value of the granted warrants was $81,158 estimated at the date of grant
using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The following table summarizes the continuity of the Company’s share purchase warrants:
Balance, May 31, 2010 
Issued 
Exercised 
Expired 
  
Balance, May 31, 2011 
Issued 
  
Balance, May 31, 2012
Number of 
Warrants 
#
733,500 
55,416,417 
(2,000,000) 
(733,500)
53,416,417 
300,000
53,716,417
Weighted  
Average  
Exercise  
Price  
$
0.39  
0.33  
0.08  
0.39  
 
0.33  
0.30  
 
0.33
As at May 31, 2012, the following common share purchase warrants were outstanding:
57
Weighted Average 
Remaining 
 
Contractual Life 
 
(years)
0.07 
1.68 
–
–
1.68 
0.10
0.67
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
12.
13.
14.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants (continued)
Number of  
Warrants 
# 
5,000,000 
20,000,000 
11,285,494 
3,576,768 
13,554,155 
300,000
53,716,417
Exercise Price 
$ 
0.25 
0.075 
0.52 
0.52 
0.52 
0.30
Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(years) 
0.31 
0.61 
0.28 
0.31 
1.33 
0.10
Commitments and Contingency 
 
a)
The Company is committed to the payment of a cash fee of 7% within 48 hours of the receipt of proceeds from the exercise of any warrants
attached to the 17,757,777 units sold by Rodman & Renshaw in the March 2011 private placements.
 
The Company is committed to the payment of a cash fee of 7% of the purchase price and the issuance of warrants equal to 7% of the shares
issued with respect to any public or private financing provided by investors whom Rodman & Renshaw introduced, directly or indirectly, in the
March 2011 private placements within 24 months of the closing of the March 2011 private placements. 
 
On  February  8,  2012,  RCR  filed  a  lawsuit  against  the  Company  in  the  Supreme  Court,  State  of  New  York,  in  which  RCR  alleges  that  the
Company participated in a fraudulent transfer of certain mineral property interests in Tanzania that RCR had the right to purchase pursuant to a
series of agreements with the Company (see Note 7b).
 
On February 23, 2012, the Company filed a lawsuit against RCR in the Supreme Court of British Columbia, seeking relief for RCR’s breach of 
its payment obligations under these agreements and seeking an order that RCR remove the U.S. restrictive legend from RCR shares issued to the
Company (see Note 3) under the agreements. As of May 31, 2012, RCR is in default with respect to over $1.3 million in scheduled payments
due to the Company under the agreements. 
 
The Company is of the view that RCR’s allegations are without merit and intends to continue to vigorously defend against the RCR lawsuit and
to pursue its claims against RCR. No future legal costs that may be incurred have been accrued as an expense and no loss or gain from the
lawsuit and claim can be reasonably estimated or recorded at this time.
Fair Value Measurements 
 
ASC 820 requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820
establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial
instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC
820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
b)
c)
Level 1
Level 1 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2
Level 2 applies to assets or liabilities for which there are inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability such as
quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets with insufficient volume
or  infrequent  transactions  (less  active  markets);  or  model-derived  valuations  in  which  significant  inputs  are  observable  or  can  be  derived
principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data.
Level 3
Level  3  applies  to  assets  or  liabilities  for  which  there  are  unobservable  inputs  to  the  valuation  methodology  that  are  significant  to  the
measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
Our  financial  instruments  consist  principally  of  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  restricted  cash  equivalent,  restricted  marketable  securities,  and  accounts
payable.  Pursuant  to  ASC  820,  the  fair  values  of  our  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  restricted  cash  equivalent,  and  restricted  marketable  securities  are
determined based on “Level 1” inputs, which consist of quoted prices in active markets for identical assets.
58
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
Fair Value Measurements (continued) 
 
Assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis were presented on the Company’s balance sheet as of May 31, 2012, as follows:
Fair Value Measurements Using
Assets: 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash equivalent 
Restricted marketable securities 
  
Total assets measured at fair value
$
 
 
    
$
Quoted Prices in 
Active Markets 
For Identical
Instruments 
(Level 1)
886,889 
56,531 
1,160,000
2,103,420
$
14.
15.
Significant 
Other 
Observable 
Inputs 
(Level 2)
Significant 
Unobservable 
Inputs 
(Level 3)
$
$
–
–
–
–
$
 
 
 
$
Balance as of 
May 31, 
2012
886,889 
56,531 
1,160,000
2,103,420
– 
– 
– 
 
 –
Management believes that the recorded values of all of our other financial instruments approximate their current fair values because of their nature and
respective maturity dates or durations. 
 
The Company has operations in Tanzania, which results in exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates. The financial risk is the risk
to the Company’s operations that arise from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates. Currently, the Company
does not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
 
Stock-based Compensation 
 
The fair values for stock options and common stock purchase warrants granted were estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing
model under the following weighted average assumptions:
Expected dividend yield 
Risk-free interest rate 
Expected volatility 
Expected option life (in years)
For Stock Options
Years Ended May 31,
2012 
0% 
3.0% 
163% 
8.02
2011 
0% 
2.81% 
161% 
10.00
For Stock Purchase Warrants
Years Ended May 31,
2012 
0%  
0.20%  
136%  
1.00
2011 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
The weighted average fair value of stock options granted during the year ended May 31, 2012 was $0.09 per share (2011 - $0.29) and the weighted 
average fair value of stock purchase warrants granted during the year ended May 31, 2012 was $0.27 (2011 - $Nil). During the year ended May 31, 2012
and 2011, the Company expensed the following stock-based compensations as consulting fees.
Fair value for stock options 
Fair value for stock purchase warrants 
Fair value for common stock units granted to former CEO (note 8e) 
Total stock based compensation
59
$
$
Years Ended May 31,
2012 
 
 1,647,710  
81,158  
– 
 1,728,868
$
$
2011
9,675,442 
–
3,035,505 
12,710,947
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
16.
17.
18.
Supplemental Cash Flow Information 
 
Investing and financing activities that do not have a direct impact on current cash flows are excluded from the cash flow statements. A summary of non-
cash transactions and other cash information for the accumulated from January 5, 2004, the date of inception, to May 31, 2012, and for the years ended
May 31, 2012 and 2011 is as follow:
Changes in non-cash financing and investing activities: 
  Amount owing pursuant to mineral license acquisition agreements  
       included in accrued liabilities 
   Common stock issued to settle related party payable 
   Common stock subscribed for mineral licenses acquired 
   Common stock issued for mineral licenses 
   Common stock gifted to the Company to settle liabilities 
   Investment securities received and sold 
Other cash flow information: 
   Interest paid 
   Taxes paid
Accumulated from 
January 5, 2004 (Date of 
Inception) to 
May 31, 2012
$
$
250,000 
619,306 
2,203,000 
76,446,750 
100,000 
79,603
–
–
$
$
For the Years Ended May 31,
2012
2011
$
$
–
–
–
1,650,000 
–
–
–
–
–
619,306 
–
60,000,000 
–
–
–
–
Segment Disclosures 
 
The  Company  operates  in  one  reportable  segment,  being  the  acquisition  and  exploration  of  mineral  properties.  Segmented  information  has  been
compiled based on the geographic regions of the Company and its subsidiary.
 
Assets by geographical segment as at May 31, 2012, are as follows:
Current assets 
   Restricted cash equivalent 
   Restricted marketable securities 
   Mineral licenses 
   Equipment, net 
Total assets, at May 31, 2012
$
$
Canada 
941,374 
56,531 
1,160,000 
-
10,141 
2,168,046
$
$
Tanzania, Africa  
 737,738  
- 
- 
1,650,000  
453,380  
 2,841,118
$
$
Total 
1,679,112 
56,531 
1,160,000 
1,650,000 
463,521 
5,009,164
Income Taxes 
 
The  Company  accounts  for  income  taxes  under  ASC  740,  Income  Taxes.  Deferred  income  tax  assets  and  liabilities  are  determined  based  upon
differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect
when the differences are expected to reverse. The measurement of deferred income tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any
tax benefits, which are, on a more likely than not basis, not expected to be realized. The effect on deferred income tax assets and liabilities of a change in
tax rates is recognized in the period that such tax rate changes are enacted.
 
The Company is subject to U.S. federal and statement income tax and has concluded substantially all U.S. federal and state income tax matters for tax
years through May 31, 2009. The tax filings for years from 2010 to 2012 are subject to be audited by U.S. jurisdictions. The Company’s Tanzania
subsidiaries are subject to Tanzania income tax, the tax filing for year 2012 is subjected to be audited by Tanzania jurisdictions.
 
Income tax expense differs from the amount that would result from applying the U.S federal income tax rates to earnings before income taxes. The
Company has net operating losses carried forward of approximately $21 million available to offset taxable income in future years which begin expiring
in fiscal 2025. Pursuant to ASC 740, the potential benefits of the net operating losses carried forward has not been recognized in the financial statements
since the Company cannot be assured that it is more likely than not that such benefit will be utilized in future years.
60
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
18.
19.
Income Taxes (continued) 
 
The income tax benefit differs from the amount computed by applying the federal income tax rate of 35% to net loss before income taxes for the years
ended May 31, 2012 and 2011 as a result of the following:
Loss before taxes 
Statutory rate 
Computed expected tax recovery 
Permanent differences 
Temporary differences 
Foreign tax rate differences 
Valuation allowance change 
Provision for income taxes
May 31, 
2012 
$
(6,903,557) 
35%  
(2,416,245) 
2,660,957  
– 
237,365  
(482,077) 
–
May 31, 
2011 
$
(72,412,056) 
35% 
(25,344,220) 
23,307,188 
(9,255) 
190,911 
1,855,376 
–
The significant components of deferred income tax assets and liabilities at May 31, 2012 and 2011, after applying enacted federal income tax rates, are
as follows:
Net operating losses carried forward 
Capital losses available 
Mineral properties tax basis in excess of book value 
Valuation allowance 
Net deferred income tax asset
May 31, 
2012 
$
7,341,171  
19,975  
4,649,814  
(12,010,960) 
–
May 31, 
2011 
$
8,788,280 
–
3,704,757 
(12,493,037) 
–
The Company has recognized a valuation allowance for the deferred income tax asset since the Company cannot be assured that it is more likely than not
that  such  benefit  will  be  utilized  in  future  years.  When  circumstances  change  and  which  cause  a  change  in  management’s  judgment  about  the 
realizability of deferred income tax assets, the impact of the change on the valuation allowance is generally reflected in current income.
 
Subsequent Events
a)
In July 2012, the Board approved a compensation package to its independent directors (five of the Company’s directors) as follows:
(1)
cash compensation with the effective date on April 10, 2012:
i) 
 
ii) 
 
iii) 
 
iv)
annual independent director fees of $30,000;
 
meeting attendance fees of $1,000 per meeting;
 
additional annual fees of $10,000 to the Company’s Board Committee Chairperson; and 
 
additional annual fees of $20,000 to the Vice Chairman of the Board.
Accordingly, the Company accrued such fees as payables, but has not paid yet; and
(2)
stock-based compensation under the Company’s November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan with the effective date on July 4, 2012:
 
i)
each  independent director is granted  by the Company  from  treasury,  as fully paid  and non-assessable, 200,000 shares of the 
Company’s common stock at a deemed issuance price of $0.04 per share for a total of 1,000,000 shares; and
 
each independent director is granted by the Company a fully vested stock option to each purchase up to an aggregate of 200,000
shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of U.S. $0.08 per share for a total of 1,000,000 shares.
ii)
61
Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements as of May 31, 2012 
(Expressed in U.S. dollars)
19.
c)
Subsequent Events (continued) 
 
b)
In June 2012, the Company received $500,000 for advance subscriptions in a private placement related to the Company’s Tanzanian and East 
African fund raising. The private placement has not yet closed.
 
To  comply  with  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the  Republic  of  Tanzania  whereby  foreign  companies  may  not  own  primary  mining  licenses
(“PMLs”),  on  July  19,  2012,  the  Company  entered  into  an  Addendum  agreement  to  the  2011  Acquisition  Agreement  whereby  Handeni
Resources, on behalf of the Company, administers the 32 PMLs until such time as a mining license on the 32 PMLs (2.67 km2) have been
allocated. During this period Handeni Resources is conducting exploration and mining activities on the PMLs as directed by the Company.
62
ITEM 9.             CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
We have had no disagreements with our principal independent accountants.
ITEM 9A.           CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
An evaluation was performed under the supervision and with the participation of the Company’s management, including the Company’s Chief Executive Officer 
(“CEO”),  Reyno  Scheepers,  and  the  Company’s  Chief  Financial  Officer  (“CFO”),  Melinda  Hsu,  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  design  and  operation  of  the
Company’s disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Rules 13a-15b) and 15d-15b) under the Exchange Act as of the end of the period covered by this
annual report. Based upon the evaluation, the Company’s CEO and CFO have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15
(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) were not effective as of the end of the period covered by this annual report, due to the deficiencies in our internal
control over financial reporting as described below under Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) 
under the Exchange Act.
The management of the Company assessed the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria for effective internal
control over financial reporting established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (“COSO”) and SEC guidance on conducting such assessments. Based on this assessment, management concluded that, as of the end of our fiscal
year ended May 31, 2012, our internal control over financial reporting was not effective due to material weaknesses, as more fully described below.
Management identified the following material weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting:
1. 
 
2. 
 
3.
4.
5.
Certain entity level controls establishing a “tone at the top” were considered material weaknesses.
 
The Company has limited segregation of duties which is not consistent with good internal control procedures. 
 
Over  the  first  three  fiscal  quarters,  the  Company  did  not  have  a  separate  Audit  Committee  –  the  entire  Board  of  Directors  acted  as  the 
Company’s  Audit  Committee.  Prior  to  the  fourth  fiscal  quarter,  the  Company  had  a  lack  of  a  majority  of  independent  directors  on  the
Company’s  the  Board  of  Directors  and  had  not  identified  an  “expert”,  one  who  is  knowledgeable  about  reporting  and  financial  statement 
requirements. 
 
There  was  lack  of  oversight  by  the  Company’s  audit  committee,  compensation  and  corporate  governance  committee,  and  by  the  board  of
directors in timely review and approval of the certain financial expenses incurred by the Company.
 
Although the Company is current working on written internal control over financial reporting procedure manual, the Company did not have, as
of May 31, 2012, a written internal control over financial reporting procedure manual which outlines the duties and reporting requirements of the
directors and any staff to be hired in the future.
Management believes that the material weaknesses set forth above did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial results and information required to 
be disclosed by the Company in its reports that it files or submits to the SEC under the Exchange Act within the time period specified in applicable rules and
forms. However, management believes that these material weaknesses resulting in ineffective oversight in the establishment and monitoring of required internal
control over financial reporting can impact the Company’s financial statements for future years. As a result material errors could occur.
The Company and its management are endeavoring to correct the above noted weaknesses in internal control over financial reporting. During the fourth fiscal
quarter ended May 31, 2012, we have established an audit committee, compensation committee and corporate governance committee with sufficient independent
members, and we have identified an “expert” for the audit committee to advise other members as to correct accounting and reporting procedures. In addition, we
intend to establish written policies outlining the duties of each of the directors and officers of the Company to facilitate better internal control procedures.
63
Management will continue to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the Company’s internal controls and procedures and its internal controls over financial
reporting on an ongoing basis and is committed to taking further action and implementing additional enhancements or improvements, as necessary and as funds
allow.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There were no changes to our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the last quarter of our fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2012, that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
As noted above, during our fourth fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2012, we established an audit committee, compensation committee and corporate governance
committee with sufficient independent members, and we identified an “expert” for the audit committee to advise other members as to correct accounting and
reporting procedures. We believe that these changes improve and enhance our internal control over financial reporting, but we do not believe that they have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B.           OTHER INFORMATION
None.
ITEM 10.           DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Our executive officers and directors and their respective ages as of the date of this annual report are as follows:
Name 
 
Reginald Mengi 
 
Reyno Scheepers
William Lamarque 
 
Mohan Kaul
Douglas Boateng
Emmanuel Ole Naiko 
 
John Gerson
Gizman Abbas 
 
Melinda Hsu
Age 
 
69 
 
55
57 
 
68
47
60 
 
67
39 
 
48
Position Held
Chairman and Director
President, Chief Executive Officer and a 
director
Board Committee Memberships
N/A
N/A
Vice Chairman and a director
Audit Committee (Chair)
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Compensation Committee (Chair); Corporate 
Governance Committee (Chair)
Compensation Committee; Corporate 
Governance Committee
Audit Committee
Compensation Committee; Corporate 
Governance Committee
Audit Committee
Secretary, Treasurer and Chief Financial 
Officer
N/A
The following describes the business experience of each of our directors and executive officers, including other directorships held in reporting companies:
Reginald Mengi has served as our Chairman of our Board of Directors since September 21, 2010. Mr. Reginald Mengi is the Chairman and owner of IPP Gold
Limited. He also chairs IPP Ltd., one of the largest private sector holding companies in Tanzania. Mr. Mengi commenced IPP Ltd.’s business in the mid 1980’s 
manufacturing  ball  point  pens.  Today  the  IPP  group  of  companies  is  engaged  in  various  areas  including  bottling  of  Coca  Cola  products,  drinking  water,
manufacturing and bottling of drinks and spirits, mining of minerals and gemstones, gemstone cutting, lapidary and media.
64
Until 1985, Mr. Mengi also worked as a Chartered Accountant for Coopers & Lybrand Tanzania where he served in the role as Chairman and Managing Partner
and led auditing and consultancy teams and participated in the establishment of companies and institutions.
Reyno Scheepers has served as a director since September 21, 2010 and as our President and Chief Executive Officer since November 21, 2012. Dr. Reyno 
Scheepers’ involvement with the mining industry stretches for a period of 28 years. He started off as a researcher at the Fuel Research Institute (CSIR) of South 
Africa where he gained experience in the composition and characteristics of various South African coal fields. This was followed by a two year period as a
geologist at a South African gold mine where he gained experience in underground geology, underground and surface exploration and gold exploration project
planning. He then joined the University of Stellenbosch where he became a professor in petrology/mineralogy in 1999.
Since 1995 Dr. Scheepers directed his efforts towards the investigation of gemstone deposits covering alluvial and kimberlitic diamond deposits in South Africa,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Tanzania. One of his major achievements in Tanzania was the investigation of the geology and technical aspects of
the Merelani tanzanite deposit which eventually led to the successful listing of the first colored gemstone company on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.
Dr. Scheepers is also closely involved in the application and development of geochemical analytical techniques and was in charge of the running of an XRF
laboratory, an ICP=AES laboratory and a micro thermometric laboratory. He participated in the development of international geochemical reference standards
and completed numerous challenging analytical problems for the industry over the years.
Dr. Scheepers’ interest in providing small scale miners with the necessary skills to conduct safe and effective mining led to the establishment of the Gemstone 
Research  Centre  at  Stellenbosch  University  and  currently  the  Unit  for  Gemstone  Geology  (“UGG”).  The  UGG  is  a  collaborative  training  and  research  unit 
between Free State and Dar Es Salaam Universities through which research on gemstone deposits is currently conducted.
Dr. Scheepers received his B.Sc. (Hons), Cum Laude in 1979, his M.Sc, Cum Laude in 1982 and his PhD in 1990 from the University of Stellenbosch.
William Lamarque has served as a director since March 15, 2012, our Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors and the Chairman of the Audit Committee
since April 10, 2012. Mr. Lamarque currently serves as the Chief Executive Officer of Ecometals Ltd. He is also a Partner and co-founder of Balor Capital 
Management, LLC. Mr. Lamarque is, prior to his Handeni Gold appointment, on the board of three privately held and one publicly traded mining company, and
President of Hanson Capital Asia Ltd.
On graduating from Cambridge University where he won an Open Exhibition in Classics, Mr Lamarque joined Jardine Matheson and Co, a Hong Kong based
group with interests in trading, shipping, civil aviation, engineering, construction, property and financial services, focused on East Asia. He had postings in
London, Hong Kong and Shanghai and studied Chinese at the Mandarin Daily News Institute in Taipei, before becoming the General Manager responsible for
the Group's overall activities in the Peoples’ Republic of China (“PRC”).
Mr Lamarque joined NM Rothschild and Sons, the London based investment bank, in 1986, as PRC country manager, on the boards of the bank's affiliates in
Hong  Kong  and  Singapore.  Returning  to  London  in  1989,  Mr  Lamarque  became  a  main  board  director  of  the  bank  and  held  various  positions  within  the
Treasury Division, with an emphasis on precious and LME metals trading and mine finance, and the bank's activities in emerging markets, in particular with the
official sector. He moved to New York in 2000, to head the Group's Treasury activities in the Americas. Mr Lamarque left Rothschilds in 2002 to join Hanson
Capital, a London based boutique investment bank and was a founding partner of Balor Capital, a private trading and derivative advisory business based on Wall
Street in 2006. Mr Lamarque sits on various mining company boards including those of Ecometals (for which he is also CEO) and Ivanplats, a large privately
held exploration company with interests in the DRC and South Africa. He is also a non-executive director of a UK-based warehousing and trucking company,
Hanson  Logistics.  At  various  times  Mr  Lamarque  has  served  on  the  World  Gold  Council's  Central  Bank  Committee  and  the  China  Committee  of  British
Invisibles and has chaired the Public Affairs Committee of the London Bullion Market Association. He was also for several years a Member of the Comex.
Mohan Kaul has served as a director since February 1, 2012. Dr. Mohan Kaul is the Chief Executive Officer of the Commonwealth Business Council (CBC), an 
organization  established  by  the  Commonwealth  Heads  of  Government  in  Edinburgh  in  October  1997  to  foster  socio-economic  development  through  the 
promotion of good governance and sound market-oriented economic policies. Prior to this he served as a director and senior member of the Commonwealth
Secretariat, as a United Nations adviser and as a Professor and Dean at the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad.
65
Dr. Kaul continues to assist various governments and is currently a member of the Presidential Advisory Councils of Mozambique, Uganda and Zambia. In
addition he is also, amongst others, Chairman of Commonwealth Inclusive Growth Services (India) Limited, Chair of the Governance Committee of ICICI Bank
(UK) and a Board member the Crown Agents Foundation.
Dr. Kaul holds a PhD in Management Science from the University of Paris-Sorbonne and was conferred the honorary Doctorate of Letters by Cape Breton
University  Canada  in  2007.  He  is  also  a  fellow  of  UK  Chartered  Institute  of  Personnel  Development,  Fellow  of  International  Institute  of  Trading  &
Development, USA, and Fellow of Computer Society of India.. Dr Kaul is a Liveryman of the City of London.
Douglas Boateng has served as a director since September 21, 2010 and as our President and Chief Executive Officer from August 18, 2011 to November 20, 
2012. Dr. Douglas Boateng has over 18 years of extensive multi-sector international experience. His career includes positions as a CEO, director and senior level
consulting in Technology (ICT), Chemicals/Pharma-chemical, Pharmaceutical and Biotechnology, Aviation, Engineering, Business management, Mergers and
Acquisitions, Strategic alliance and partnerships, Logistics and Supply Chain Management, Media, Consulting, Corporate and Strategic Business Development,
Corporate  Governance  and  Advisory  services  to  selected  Government  ministries.  Dr.  Boateng  has  also  successfully  worked  and  consulted  for  some  of  the
world’s leading corporation’s in Europe, the United States and Africa.
Prior to joining the Company, Dr. Boateng founded PanAvest International, an organization with a vision to assist companies profitably extend their market
reach through the application of innovative Business Development Logistics and Supply Chain Management solutions. He has acted as an independent advisor
and consultant to one of Scandinavia’s largest generic pharmaceutical companies on logistics, supply chain and business development and strategies and one of
Africa’s leading healthcare distributors. Dr. Boateng is also a post graduate visiting professor on logistics and supply chain management and a Masters and
Doctoral project supervisor at one of Africa’s largest and most respected business schools. He current sits on the editorial board of Smart Procurement, the
largest supply chain related portal in Africa and the Middle East.
Dr.  Boateng  holds  a  Graduate  Diploma  in  Company  Direction  from  the  Institute  of  Directors,  a  Doctorate  in  Engineering  Business  Management  from  the
University of Warwick-UK, an MSc in Industrial Logistics from the University of Central England-UK and a post graduate diploma in transport and logistics 
from Cranfield Institute of Technology, UK.
Gizman  Abbas  has  served  as  a  director  since  February  1,  2012.  Mr.  Gizman  Abbas  is  Managing  Partner,  DI  Development  LLC,  a  development  company
focusing on the New York City real estate market, which he founded in 2011 to take advantage of the opportunities resulting from the 2008 financial downturn.
Before DI Development, Mr. Abbas was a Partner at Apollo Commodities Partners, L.P., where he helped build Apollo Global Management’s newly established 
commodities  business.  He  joined  Apollo  from  Goldman  Sachs  where  he  was  a  Vice  President  in  the  Commodities  Asset  Investment  business.  While  at
Goldman, he worked on transactions involving resources, power, biofuels, emissions and agriculture. Prior to joining Goldman, he was a banker at Morgan
Stanley where he spent time in the power and energy banking group.
Mr. Abbas began his career at Southern Company working at a coal-fired power plant, followed by a period as an oil and gas engineer at Exxon Mobil. Mr.
Abbas graduated with a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Auburn University and received his MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern
University.
Emmanuel Ole Naiko has served as a director since April 16, 2012. Mr. Naiko currently serves as the managing director of Stesta Consulting, a firm focusing 
on  among  other  things,  mining  advisory  services.  Mr.  Naiko  is  a  qualified  mining  and  metallurgical  engineer  and  a  professional  member  of  the  American
Society of Mining Engineers and Metallurgists. In 2011, Mr. Naiko retired after five years as Chief Executive Officer of the Tanzanian Investment Centre. Mr.
Naiko’s  extensive  experience  during  the  course  of  his  career  includes  serving  in  the  following  positions:  Vice  President,  World  Association  of  Investment
Promotion  Agencies  (WAIPA);  board  member,  Tanzania  State  Mining  Corporation;  board  member,  Tanzania  Petroleum  Development  Corporation;  board
member, Bank of Africa; board member, Tanzania Private Sector Foundation; board member, Maganga-Mtatitu Iron Project; and board member, University of 
Dar-es-Salaam Investment Committee.
Mr. Naiko graduated from the Haileybury School of Mines (Canada) and Colorado School of Mines (USA). He also holds investment educational certificates
from the Centre for Applied Studies on International Negotiations (Switzerland), Nanning Technological University (Singapore) and the Hans Seidel Foundation
(Germany).
John Gerson has served as a director since April 24, 2012. Mr. Gerson is a Visiting Senior Fellow of King’s College, London University and he is a political 
adviser to businesses and institutions with international interests. Until January 2012 he was Head of Government and Political Affairs at BP, having joined the
company in 2000. He played a role in BP’s business in all parts of the world, including Russia, Angola and Indonesia, and served as Chairman of BP China Ltd 
and BP South East Asia Ltd.
66
This followed a career in the British Foreign Service between 1968 and 1999 during which he held a number of posts in British diplomatic missions abroad,
chiefly in Asia (he was HM Consul in China from 1974 to 1977) and with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and Home Civil Service in London. He was
appointed CMG in New Year’s Honours.
Having studied Art History at the University of Freiburg, Mr. Gerson took a degree in History at King’s College, Cambridge. He has been an Associate Member 
of University College London’s Centre for the Study of Socialist Legal Systems, and in 1992 was Visiting Fellow in East Asian Studies at Princeton University.
Melinda Hsu has served as our Secretary, Treasurer and Chief Financial Officer since March 1, 2012 and as our controller since November 2011. Ms. Hsu has
been  the  president  and  principal  of  AMICA  Resource  Inc.  (“AMICA”),  a  private  company,  since  September  2007.  Through  AMICA,  Ms.  Hsu  provides
consulting services to various public and private companies, including Dejour Energy Inc. as a senior consultant since February 2011 and as controller from
September 2007 to April 2008, and Silverado Gold Mines Ltd. as controller from April 2008 to October 2010.
Ms. Hsu has been directly involved in mining and oil and gas industries for more than ten years, with strengths in Canadian and U.S. public financial reporting
and  regulatory  compliance,  Canadian  and  U.S.  tax,  internal  control  policies,  budgeting  and  strategic  planning.  In  addition,  Ms.  Hsu  has  over  24  years  of
diversified business experience in areas of accounting, finance, budget, corporate development, marketing and administration experience in Canada and China.
She received her Certified General Accountant designation from the CGA Association of British Columbia, Canada, in 2004 and graduated from the People’s 
University of China in 1988 with a Master’s degree in Business Administration.
Term of Office
Our  directors  are  appointed  for  a  one-year  term  to  hold  office  until  the  next  annual  general  meeting  of  our  stockholders  or  until  removed  from  office  in
accordance with our bylaws. Our officers are appointed by our Board of Directors and hold office until removed by the Board.
Significant Employees
Other than the officers and directors described above, we had approximate 24 full-time equivalent employees and consultants during the fiscal year ended May 
31, 2012, 22 of which were located in Tanzania. We retain independent geologists and consultants on a contract basis to conduct the work programs on our
mineral properties in order to carry out our plan of operations.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our directors or officers.
Involvement in Certain Legal Proceedings
To the best of our knowledge and belief, none of our directors or executive officers has been involved in any of the following events during the past ten years
that is material to an evaluation of the ability of such person to serve as an executive officer or director of our Company:
1.
2.
3.
a petition under the Federal bankruptcy laws or any state insolvency law was filed by or against, or a receiver, fiscal agent or similar officer was
appointed by a court for the business or property of such person, or any partnership in which he was a general partner at or within two years
before the time of such filing, or any corporation or business association of which he was an executive officer at or within two years before the
time of such filing; 
 
such person was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and
other minor offenses); 
 
such person  was  the subject of any order, judgment, or decree, not subsequently reversed,  suspended or  vacated,  of any court of  competent
jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining him from, or otherwise limiting, the following activities: 
 
(i)
acting  as  a  futures  commission  merchant,  introducing  broker,  commodity  trading  advisor,  commodity  pool  operator,  floor  broker,
leverage transaction merchant, any other person regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, or an associated person of
any  of  the  foregoing,  or  as  an  investment  adviser,  underwriter,  broker  or  dealer  in  securities,  or  as  an  affiliated  person,  director  or
employee  of  any  investment  company,  bank,  savings  and  loan  association  or  insurance  company,  or  engaging  in  or  continuing  any
conduct or practice in connection with such activity;
67
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
(ii) 
 
(iii)
engaging in any type of business practice; or
 
engaging in any activity in connection with the purchase or sale of any security or commodity or in connection with any violation of
Federal or State securities laws or Federal commodities laws;
such person was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any Federal or State authority
barring, suspending or otherwise limiting for more than 60 days the right of such person to engage in any activity described in paragraph 3(i)
above, or to be associated with persons engaged in any such activity;
 
such  person  was  found  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  in  a  civil  action  or  by  the  Commission  to  have  violated  any  Federal  or  State
securities law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commission has not been subsequently reversed, suspended, or vacated;
 
such person was found by a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil action or by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to have violated
any Federal commodities law, and the judgment in such civil action or finding by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has not been
subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated; 
 
such person was the subject of, or a party to, any Federal or State judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree, or finding, not subsequently
reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation of:
 
(i) 
 
(ii)
any Federal or State securities or commodities law or regulation;
 
any law or regulation respecting financial institutions or insurance companies including, but not limited to, a temporary or permanent
injunction, order of disgorgement or restitution, civil money penalty or temporary or permanent cease-and-desist order, or removal or 
prohibition order; or 
 
any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business entity; or
(iii) 
 
such person was the subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, of any self-regulatory 
organization (as defined in Section 3(a)(26) of the Exchange Act), any registered entity (as defined in Section 1(a)(29) of the United States
Commodity Exchange Act), or any equivalent exchange, association, entity or organization that has disciplinary authority over its members or
persons associated with a member.
We are not aware of any material legal proceedings in which any of the following persons is a party adverse to our Company or has a material interest adverse to
our Company: (a) any current director, officer, or affiliate of the Company, or any owner of record or beneficial owner of more than five percent of any class of
voting securities of the Company; (b) any person proposed for appointment or election as a director or officer of our Company; or (c) any associate of any such
person.
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our directors and officers, and the persons who beneficially own more than ten percent of our common stock, to file
reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the SEC. Copies of all filed reports are required to be furnished to us pursuant to Rule 16a-3 promulgated 
under the Exchange Act. Based solely on the reports received by us and on the representations of the reporting persons with respect to our most recent fiscal
year, we believe that these persons have complied with all applicable filing requirements during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics applicable to our principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons
performing similar functions. A copy of our code of ethics is incorporated by reference as an exhibit to this Report and can be reviewed on our corporate website
located at www.handenigold.com. If we make any amendments to our Code of Ethics other than technical, administrative, or other non-substantive amendments, 
or grant any waivers, including implicit waivers, from a provision of our Code of Ethics, we will disclose the nature of the amendment or waiver, its effective
date and to whom it applies on our website or in a report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC.
68
Committees
Audit Committee
The Company’s Board of Directors has a separately-designated standing Audit Committee established for the purpose of overseeing the accounting and financial 
reporting processes of the Company and audits of the Company’s annual financial statements in accordance with Section 3(a)(58)(A) of the Exchange Act. As of 
the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, the Company’s Audit Committee is comprised of William Lamarque (who acts as Chairman), Gizman Abbas and
Emmanuel Ole Naiko.
In  the  opinion  of  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors,  all  the  members  of  the  Audit  Committee  are  independent  (as  defined  under  Rule  5605(c)(2)  of  the
NASDAQ listing rules and as determined under Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act). Mr. William Lamarque services as the Chairman of the Audit Committee and
is qualified as an audit committee financial expert pursuant to the definition adopted by SEC and Sections 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. All three members of 
the Audit Committee are financially literate, meaning they are able to read and understand the Company’s financial statements and to understand the breadth and 
level of complexity of the issues that can reasonably be expected to be raised by the Company’s financial statements.
The members of the Audit Committee do not have fixed terms and are appointed and replaced from time to time by resolution of the Board of Directors.
The Audit Committee is to assist the Board of Directors in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities and its primary duties and responsibilities are to:
(cid:122) review management’s identification of principal financial risks and monitor the process to manage such risks;
(cid:122) oversee and monitor the Company’s compliance with legal and regulatory requirements;
(cid:122) receive and review the reports of the Audit Committee of any subsidiary with public securities;
(cid:122) oversee and monitor the integrity of the Company’s accounting and financial reporting processes, financial statements and system of internal controls
regarding accounting and financial reporting and accounting compliance;
(cid:122) oversee the audit of the Company’s financial statements;
(cid:122) oversee and monitor the qualifications, independence and performance of the Company’s external auditors and internal auditing department;
(cid:122) provide an avenue of communication among the external auditors, management, the internal auditing department and the Board of Directors; and
(cid:122) report to the Board of Directors regularly.
The Audit Committee has the authority to conduct any review or investigation appropriate to fulfilling its responsibilities. It shall have unrestricted access to
personnel and information, and any resources necessary to carry out its responsibility. In this regard, the Audit Committee may direct internal audit personnel to
particular areas of examination.
Corporate Governance Committee and Compensation Committee
The Company has a Corporate Governance Committee and a Compensation Committee, which are each composed of three directors, Mohan Kaul, Douglas
Boateng and John Gerson. Mr. Mohan Kaul services as the Chairman of both the Corporate Governance Committee and the Compensation Committee. Mr.
Douglas Boateng is not independent as defined under Rule 5605(c)(2) of the NASDAQ listing rules and as determined under Rule 10A-3 of the Exchange Act.
The  Corporate  Governance  Committee  is  to  (i)  identify  and  recommend  to  the  Board  individuals  qualified  to  be  nominated  for  election  to  the  Board,  (ii)
recommend to the Board the members and Chair for each Board committee and (iii) periodically review and assess the Corporation’s corporate governance 
principles and make recommendations for changes thereto to the Board.
The Compensation Committee is to assist the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities relating to officer and director compensation, succession planning
for senior managements, development and retention of senior management, and such other duties as directed by the Board.
69
Technical Advisory Committee
The Technical Advisory Committee has been specifically constituted to enable the Company to effectively operate in the geological environments associated
with mineralized systems in Archaean and Proterozoic terranes. Additional expertise comprising other disciplines may be co-opted to the committee from time 
to time, as the situation may require.
Currently the Company’s Technical Committee consists of the following members:
Dr. P.G. Gresse (Structural- and Exploration Geology) is a renowned structural geologist with a lifetime experience in Africa. He has extensive experience in
field  geological  mapping,  structural  geology  and  basin  analysis.  Dr.  Gresse  has  been  involved  in  various  international  research  and  mapping  programs
specialising  in  Late  Proterozoic geology.  Dr.  Gresse  has  published  widely  in  local  and  international  journals  (33)  and  has  attended  and  presented  papers  at
numerous international conferences and symposia (25).
Mr.  C.  Lötter  (Geophysics  and  Exploration  Geology)  has  30  years  experience  in  mining  and  exploration  geophysics  and  has  run  his  own  consulting  and
contracting business for 20 years. He has extensive experience in the Greenstone terrains of southern, eastern and western Africa as well as the Zambian and
Botswana Copper belts. Mr. Lotter is involved in survey planning and design and QC/QA and interpretation, including 2D/3D forward and inversion modelling,
on a daily basis.
Mr. B. McDonald (Exploration- and Economic Geology) is an exploration geologist with vast experience in Africa, South America, Mexico, and Cuba. He has
been exploration manager on numerous successful projects for various prestigious companies including Billiton S.A.(aka BHP Billiton) and GENCOR S.A. as
well  as  managing  exploration  projects  for  smaller  companies  including  Trans  Hex,  the  O’Okiep  Copper  Company,  and  along  with  numerous  others.  The 
commodities  within  his  experience  portfolio  span  from  base  metals,  gold,  precious  metals,  asbestos,  uranium,  diamonds,  and  coloured  gemstones.  His  gold
experience covers the spectrum from sedimentary to high grade metamorphic related gold. Complementing his geological achievements are his people skills,
often successfully managing a work force of more than 100 people, including several teams of professionals concurrently under difficult operational conditions.
Mr. E. D. Ole Naiko (Mining Engineering and Mineral Economics) conducted his post graduate studies in Mineral Economics and Metallurgical Engineering at
the  Colorado  School  of  Mines.  He  has  been  an  executive  director  of  the  Tanzania  Investment  Centre  and  the  manager  of  various  state  mining  companies,
including  gold  mining  companies,  as  well  as  an  executive  director  of  the  TIC  (Tanzania  Investment  Centre)  in  Tanzania.  Mr.  Naiko  plays  a  major  role  in
promoting the minerals industry of the country and attracting investment to the sector.
Dr. R. Scheepers (Petrology, Geochemistry, Exploration Geology) has been involved with geology and the mining industry over a period of 28 years. He is the
Company’s CEO and a director. Dr. Scheepers is a registered Professional Natural Scientist in Geological Science and a member of:
(cid:122) Geological Society of South Africa (since 1984);  
(cid:122) SACNASP Registered (since 1984);  
(cid:122) The Mineralogical Society of South Africa (1996 to 2001);  
(cid:122) Geological Society Western Province Branch (1985 to 2002);  
(cid:122) Society of Geology Applied to Mineral Deposits (1989 to 1997);  
(cid:122) Council member: Geological Society of South Africa (1996 to 1999);  
(cid:122) Council member: The Mineralogical Society of South Africa (2002);  
(cid:122) Committee member: Geological Society Western Province Branch (1985 to 1989); and  
(cid:122) Committee member: The S.A. Code for Stratigraphy Committee, since 1993.
70
ITEM 11.           EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to our executive officers by any person for all services rendered in all capacities to
us during our fiscal years ended May 31, 2012 and 2011.
Name and  
Principal Position 
Reyno Scheepers (1)  
President & Chief  
Executive Officer  
Melinda Hsu (2)  
Chief Financial  
Officer, Secretary  
and Treasurer 
Douglas Boateng (3)  
Former President &  
Chief Executive  
Officer 
Debra  
Farquharson (4)  
Former Chief  
Financial Officer,  
Secretary and  
Treasurer 
Harpreet Sangha (5)  
Former President &  
Chief Executive  
Officer 
Herminder Rai (6)  
Former Chief  
Financial Officer,  
Secretary and  
Treasurer
Year 
2012 
2011
2012
2011
2012
2011
2012 
2011
2012 
2011
2012 
2011
Salary
($) 
Nil 
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Summary Compensation Table
Bonus
($)
Nil 
N/A
Stock
Awards
($)
Nil 
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Option
Awards
($)
$165,000 
$1,390,572
$113,187
N/A
$330,000
$1,564,394
$7,500 
N/A
Nil 
$3,128,788
Nil 
$347,643
Non-
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Comp-
ensation
($)
Nil 
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
Non- 
qualified 
Deferred 
Comp- 
ensation 
Earnings 
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
 
Nil
N/A
Nil
N/A
Nil 
N/A
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
All Other
Comp-
ensation
($)
$189,200(1)
N/A
Total
($)
$354,200 
$1,390,572
$58,480(2)
N/A
$171,667
N/A
$168,000(3)
N/A
$498,000
$1,564,394
$49,484(4)
N/A
$56,984 
N/A
$15,441(5)
$3,197,278(5)
$15,441 
$6,326,066
$65,023(6)
$77,050(6)
$65,023 
$424,693
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Mr. Scheepers was appointed as our President and Chief Executive Officer effective on November 21, 2011 and as our Chief Operating Officer effective
on October 6, 2011. Mr. Scheepers has been a director since September 21, 2010. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Scheepers consists of $164,000 in
consulting fees (including $68,000 of consulting fees was paid prior to October 2011 for his professional and interim management services rendered to
the Company) as well as $25,200, which represents the payment of 60% of Mr. Scheepers expenses associated with renting a family house in Dar Es
Salaam pursuant to his Executive Services Agreement with the Company.
Ms. Hsu was appointed as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer effective on March 1, 2012. The “Other Compensation” to Ms. Hsu 
consists of $58,480 in consulting fees, which were paid to a private company controlled by Ms. Hsu. Included in the consulting fees is $20,888 paid
prior to March 2012 for Ms. Hsu’s professional services as our controller on a part-time basis.
Mr. Boateng was appointed as our President and Chief Executive Officer effective on August 18, 2011 and resigned effective on November 21, 2011.
Mr. Boateng has been a director since September 21, 2010. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Boateng consists of $168,000 in consulting fees, $30,000
of which was paid prior to August 2011 for his interim executive services and $78,000  of which was paid after  November 2011 for his continuing
services rendered as a director. 
Ms.  Farquharson  was  appointed  as  our  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Secretary  and  Treasurer  effective  on  September  22,  2011  and  resigned  effective  on
December 12, 2011. The “Other Compensation” to Ms. Farquharson consists of $49,484 in consulting fees, $9,726 of which was paid in January 2012
for Ms. Farquharson’s continuing services. 
Mr.  Sangha  resigned  as  our  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  effective  on  June  21,  2011.  The  “Other  Compensation”  to  Mr.  Sangha  in  2012 
consists of $15,441 in consulting fees. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Sangha in 2011 consists of $161,773 in consulting fees as well as $3,035,505
in stock-based compensation, as follows: On September 20, 2010, Mr. Sangha converted $614,352 of related party debt into 5,000,000 units. Each unit
consisted of one share of the Company’s common stock and one share purchase warrant to purchase an additional share of common stock at $0.25 for
two years. Due to an error, the Company issued units for $133,814 more than was owing to Mr. Sangha. During the year ended May 31, 2011, Mr.
Sangha paid $120,000 of subscriptions for the shares, and the remaining $13,814 subsequent to the end of the period. The Company recorded stock
based  compensation  of  $3,035,505,  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  fair  value  of  the  units  of  $3,785,505  and  the  $750,000  of  debt  settled  and
subscriptions received as stock based compensation.
71
(6)
Mr. Rai resigned as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary and Treasurer effective on September 22, 2011. The “Other Compensation” to Mr. Rai in 
2012 and 2011 consists of consulting fees. Included in the consulting fees, $38,285 was paid from October 2011 to March 2012 for Mr. Rai’s continuing
services rendered as a consultant.
Outstanding Equity Awards
The following table sets forth information at our fiscal year ended May 31, 2012 relating to outstanding equity awards that have been granted to the named
executive officers listed in the table above:
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT FISCAL YEAR-END
Name 
  
  
Reyno Scheepers 
  
Melinda Hsu 
Douglas Boateng 
  
Debra Farquharson 
Harpreet Sangha 
Herminder Rai
OPTION AWARDS
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Number of 
Securities
Awards:
Number of
Number of 
Securities 
Securities
Underlying  Underlying  Underlying
Unexercised  Unexercised  Unexercised
Unearned
Exercisable  Unexercisable  Options
Options
Options
(#)
3,200,000 
750,000 
1,000,000 
3,600,000 
1,500,000 
N/A 
N/A 
600,000
(#)
800,000 
750,000 
N/A 
900,000 
1,500,000 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
(#)
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
Option
Exercise
Price
($)
$0.20 
$0.45 
$0.11 
$0.20 
$0.45 
N/A 
N/A 
$0.20
Option
Expiration
Date
11/29/2020 
11/30/2021 
03/01/2017 
11/29/2020 
11/30/2021 
N/A 
N/A 
06/30/2012
Number of
Shares or
Units of
Stock That
Have Not
Vested
(#)
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
Market 
Value of 
Shares or 
Units of 
Stock 
That
($)
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
STOCK AWARDS
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Equity
Incentive
Plan
Awards:
Awards:
Number  Market or
of
Payout
Unearned  Value of  
Unearned
Shares,
Units or
Shares,
Units or
Other
Other
Rights
That
Rights
Have Not  Have Not  That Have  
Vested 
Not Vested
Vested
(#)
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
(#)
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A
Compensation of Directors
Effective on April 10, 2012, the Board of Directors approved a compensation package to independent directors of the Company as follows:
(1) 
 
(2) 
 
(3) 
 
(4)
annual independent director fees of $30,000; 
 
meeting attendance fees of $1,000 per meeting; 
 
additional annual fees of $10,000 to the Company’s Board Committee Chairperson; and
 
additional annual fees of $20,000 to the Vice Chairman of the Board.
The table below summarizes all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to our directors during our fiscal year ended May 31, 2012. Certain of our current
or former directors served or have served as officers of the Company and any compensation they received due to their services are disclosed in the tables above
and are not included in the table below.
72
Stock  
Awards
Option  
Awards
Director Compensation
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Non-Equity  
Incentive
Plan
Compen-
sation
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Nonqualified
Deferred  
Compen-
sation
Earnings
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
All Other  
Compen-
sation
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Fees earned  
or paid in
cash  
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
$8,500 
$7,250 
$4,750 
$4,750 
$4,750
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Name and Principal  
Position 
Reginald Mengi 
Reyno Scheepers (1) 
Douglas Boateng (1) 
William Lamarque 
Mohan Kaul 
John Gerson 
Emmanuel Naiko 
Gizman Abbas 
Harpreet Singh Sangha 
(2)
Honorable Joseph 
Rugumyamheto(3) 
Wenqin Zhang(3)
Total  
($) 
Nil 
N/A 
N/A 
$8,500 
$7,250 
$4,750 
$4,750 
$4,750
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
N/A
Nil 
Nil
See summary compensation table above. 
See summary compensation table above. Mr. Sangha resigned as a director on June 21, 2011.
Mr. Rugumyamheto and Mr. Zhang resigned effective September 6, 2011.
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
ITEM 12.   SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND  MANAGEMENT  AND  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS
The following table sets forth certain information concerning the number of shares of our common stock owned beneficially as of the date of this annual report
by: (i) each person (including any group) known to us to own more than 5% of any class of our voting securities, (ii) each of our directors, (iii) each of our
officers and (iv) our officers and directors as a group. Each stockholder listed possesses sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares shown.
Officers and Directors
Title of class
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock 
Common Stock
5% or Greater Shareholders:
Name and address of beneficial owner (1)
Reginald Mengi(1) 
Reyno Scheepers(1) 
Douglas Boateng(1) 
William Lamarque (1) 
Mohan Kaul (1) 
John Gerson (1) 
Emmanuel Naiko (1) 
Gizman Abbas (1) 
Melinda Hsu (1) 
All executive officers and directors as a group
Amount and nature of
beneficial owner(2)
Percentage of class (3)
158,333,333(4) 
5,500,000(5) 
7,500,000(6) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
400,000(7) 
1,000,000(8) 
174,333,333
51.34% 
1.78% 
2.43% 
0.13% 
0.13% 
0.13% 
0.13% 
0.13% 
0.32% 
56.53%
Title of class
Common Stock 
Common Stock
Name and address of beneficial owner
Reginald Mengi(1) 
Zoeb Hassuji(9)
Amount and nature of
beneficial owner(2)
158,333,333(4) 
16,666,667
(3) Percentage of class
51.34% 
5.40%
1.
The address of our officers and directors is our Company’s address, which is Plot 228, Regent Estate, Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of
Tanzania.
73
2.
3. 
4.
5.
6.
7. 
8. 
9.
Under Rule 13d-3 of the Exchange Act a beneficial owner of a security includes any person who, directly or indirectly, through any contract,
arrangement, understanding, relationship or otherwise has or shares: (i) voting power, which includes the power to vote or to direct the voting of
shares; and (ii) investment power, which includes the power to dispose or direct the disposition of shares. Certain shares may be deemed to be
beneficially owned by more than one person (if, for example, persons share the power to vote or the power to dispose of the shares). In addition,
shares are deemed to be beneficially owned by a person if the person has the right to acquire the shares (for example, upon exercise of an option)
within 60 days of the date as of which the information is provided. In computing the percentage ownership of any person, the amount of shares
outstanding is deemed to include the amount of shares beneficially owned by such person (and only such person) by reason of these acquisition
rights. 
Based on 308,416,654 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding as of August 24, 2012.
Includes 133,333,333 shares held by IPP Gold Limited, 15,000,000 shares held by Handeni Resources Limited, and 10,000,000 stock options
held by Mr. Mengi with an exercise price at $0.20 per share. 8,000,000 of options are vested and the remaining 2,000,000 of options will be
vested on November 29, 2012. 
Represents stock options, of which 3,950,000 are vested and the remaining 1,550,000 will be vested as to 375,000 on August 31, 2012, 800,000
on November 29, 2012 and the remaining 375,000 on November 30, 2012.
Represents stock options, of which 5,100,000 are vested and the remaining 2,400,000 will be vested as to 750,000 on August 31, 2012, 900,000
on November 29, 2012 and the remaining 750,000 on November 30, 2012.
Represents 200,000 shares of our common stock and 200,000 fully vested stock options.
Represents fully vested stock options. 
The registered address of this shareholder is Bonite Bottlers, Moshi, Kilimanjaro, Tanzania.
Changes in Control
We are unaware of any contract, or other arrangement or provision of our Articles, the operation of which may at any subsequent date result in a change in
control of the Company.
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
The details refer to Item 5. above.
ITEM 13.           CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Except as described below, none of the following parties has, in the last two fiscal years, had any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction with us or
in any presently proposed transaction that has or will materially affect us:
1. 
 
2. 
 
3.
4.
any of our directors or officers; 
 
any person proposed as a nominee for election as a director;
 
any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached to our outstanding shares
of common stock; or 
 
any member of the immediate family (including spouse, parents, children, siblings and in-laws) of any of the above persons.
Related Party Transactions
a)
b)
On September 21, 2010, the Company completed a Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement with IPP Gold, and the Company acquired four prospecting
licences totalling approximately 800 square kilometres, located in the Handeni District of Tanzania (the “Handeni Properties”). The Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Company has an existing ownership and/or beneficial interest(s) in IPP Gold. The Company issued 133,333,333 restricted
shares of common stock to IPP Gold to acquire the Handeni Properties and no further payments to IPP Gold in shares or cash is required.
 
On August 5, 2011, the Company entered the 2011 Acquisition Agreement with Handeni Resources. The Chairman has an existing ownership and/or
beneficial interest(s) in Handeni Resources. Pursuant to the 2011 Acquisition Agreement, the Company had an exclusive option to acquire from Handeni
Resources a 100% interest in mineral licenses covering an area of approximately 2.67 square kilometers to the east of Magambazi Hill, which is adjacent
to the area covered by the Company’s four existing prospecting licenses (totaling approximately 800 square kilometers) in the Handeni District. On
November 30, 2011, the Company completed such acquisition and issued 15,000,000 shares of restricted common stock at a fair market price of $0.11
per share to Handeni Resources in connection with the acquisition.
 
On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to the Chairman 10,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $164,000 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and professional services fees to a director who is the
current President and CEO. The Company also paid $25,200 (2011 - $Nil) representing 60% of rental expenses associated with renting the CEO’s family 
house in Tanzania, pursuant to the CEO’s Executive Services Agreement with the Company. In addition, the Company paid $43,000 (2011 - $Nil) of 
geological and investor relations service fees to a private company controlled by a person who is related to the CEO.
74
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)
h)
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company granted the CEO 1,500,000 stock options at a price of $0.45 per share exercisable for 10 years
(2011: 4,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years).
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $168,000 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and consulting fees to the former President and CEO
who resigned effective on November 22, 2011 and who continues to provide consulting services and is presently a director. During the year ended May
31, 2012, the Company granted to the former CEO 3,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.45 per share exercisable for 10 years (2011: 4,500,000 stock
options at a price of $0.20 per share exercisable for 10 years).
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid a total of $58,480 (2011 - $Nil) of administration and professional services fees to a private
company controlled by the Company’s current CFO who was appointed effective on March 1, 2012, $20,888 of which was paid prior to March 1, 2012
as professional consulting fees. The Company also granted the CFO 1,000,000 stock options at a price of $0.11 per share exercisable for 5 years.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid consulting fees of $15,441 (2011 - $161,773) to the former CEO who resigned effective on 
June 21, 2011. During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2012, the Company also paid $50,113 (Year ended May 31, 2011 - $30,458) of investor relations 
service fees to a person related to the former CEO. 
 
On September 20, 2010, a former CEO converted $616,186 of related party debt into 5,000,000 units of the Company. Each unit consisted of one share
of the Company’s common stock and one share purchase warrant to purchase an additional share of common stock at $0.25 for two years. Due to an
error,  the  Company  issued  units  for  $133,814  more  than  owed.  During  the  year  ended  May  31,  2011,  the  former  CEO  paid  the  additional  cash  of
$120,000 of subscriptions for the shares and the remaining $13,814 subsequent to May 31, 2011. The Company recorded stock-based compensation of
$3,035,505 which is equal to the difference between the fair value of the units of $3,785,505 and the $750,000 sum of debt settled and subscription
receivable. On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to this former CEO 9,000,000 stock options exercisable at a price of $0.20 per share, and such
options were forfeited during the year ended May 31, 2012.
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $49,484 (2011 - $Nil) of consulting fees to the Company’s former CFO who resigned effective
on  December  12,  2011.  The  Company also granted  to  this former CFO 750,000 stock options  at  a price  of $0.45 per share,  and such  options were
forfeited on March 14, 2012. 
 
During the year ended May 31, 2012, the Company paid $65,023 (Year ended May 31, 2011 - $77,050) of consulting fees to the former CFO who
resigned effective on September 22, 2011, of which $26,738 was for executive services and $38,285 was for continuing consulting services. As at May
31, 2012, the Company was indebted to the former CFO for $Nil (May 31, 2011 – $1,112). The amounts due are non-interest bearing, unsecured and due 
on demand. On November 29, 2010, the Company granted to this former CFO 1,000,000 stock options exercisable at a price of $0.20 per share, of which
400,000 unvested options were forfeited during the year ended May 31, 2012.
 
The Company accrued $30,000 of independent director fees for the period ended May 31, 2012. During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company paid
directors fees of $15,268.
Director Independence
The  Board  has  analyzed  the  independence  of each  director  and has determined  that  the members of the  Board  listed below  are  independent  as  that  term  is
defined  under  Rule  5605(a)(2)  of  the  NASDAQ  listing  rules.  Each  director  is  free  of  relationships  that  would  interfere  with  the  individual  exercise  of
independent judgment. Based on these standards, the Board determined that each of the following directors is independent and has no relationship with the
Company, except as a director and shareholder:
(cid:122) William Lamarque;
(cid:122) Mohan Kaul;
(cid:122) Emmanuel Ole Naiko;
(cid:122) John Gerson; and
(cid:122) Gizman Abbas.
ITEM 14.           PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
Manning Elliott served as our independent registered public accounting firm and audited our financial statements for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2012 and
2011. Aggregate fees in Canadian dollar billed to the Company by Manning Elliott for professional services rendered during fiscal years ended May 31, 2012
and 2011 are set forth below:
75
Audit Fees 
Audit-Related Fees 
Tax Fees 
All Other Fees 
Total
Audit Fees
Year Ended  
May 31, 2012
Year Ended  
May 31, 2011
$87,740 
$2,960 
$6,410 
$2,760 
$99,870
$69,000 
$Nil 
$22,500 
Nil 
$91,500
Audit fees are the aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered by our independent auditors for the audit of our annual financial statements, the review
of the financial statements included in each of our quarterly reports and services provided in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
Audit Related Fees
Audit related fees are the aggregate fees billed by our independent auditors for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the performance of
the audit or review of our financial statements and are not described in the preceding category.
Tax Fees
Tax fees are billed by our independent auditors for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning.
All Other Fees
All other fees include fees billed by our independent auditors for products or services other than as described in the immediately preceding three categories.
Policy on Pre-Approval of Services Performed by Independent Auditors
It is our Board of Directors’ policy to pre-approve all audit and permissible non-audit services performed by the independent auditors. The Board of Directors
approved all services that our independent accountants provided to us in the past two fiscal years.
The Audit Committee is responsible for appointing, setting compensation for and overseeing the work of the independent registered public accounting firm. The
Audit Committee requires its pre-approval of all audit and permissible non-audit services provided by the independent registered public accounting firm. The
Audit Committee considers whether such services are consistent with the rules of the SEC on auditor independence.
76
ITEM 15.           EXHIBITS
The following exhibits are filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
Exhibit 
Number 
 
3.1(1) 
 
3.2(12) 
 
3.3(21) 
 
3.3(3) 
 
10.1(4) 
 
10.2(4) 
 
10.3(4) 
 
10.4(5) 
 
10.5(5) 
 
10.6(5) 
 
10.7(6) 
 
10.8(6) 
 
10.9(6) 
 
10.10(7) 
 
10.11(8) 
 
10.12(9) 
 
10.13(9) 
 
10.14(9) 
 
10.15(10) 
 
10.16(11) 
 
10.17(14) 
 
10.18(11) 
 
10.19(11) 
 
10.20(13) 
 
10.21(15) 
 
10.22(16) 
 
10.23(17) 
 
10.24(18)
Description of Exhibit
Articles of Incorporation. 
 
Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation. 
 
Articles of Merger as filed with the Nevada Secretary of State. 
 
Amended Bylaws, as amended on September 5, 2006. 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 1 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with KBT Discovery Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Hydro-Geos Consulting Group Tanzania Ltd. 
 
Amendment No. 2 to Asset Purchase Agreement with Megadeposit Explorers Ltd. 
 
Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
 
Option Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
 
Amendment Not. 1 to Strategic Alliance Agreement between the Company and Canaco Resources Inc. 
 
Kwadijava Option Agreement. 
 
Negero Option Agreement. 
 
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita. 
 
2007 Stock Incentive Plan. 
 
2008 Stock Incentive Plan. 
 
Consulting Agreement with Harpreet Sangha. 
 
Consulting Agreement with Rovingi. 
 
Joint Venture Agreement with Mkuvia Maita dated June 5, 2009. 
 
Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc. dated November 7, 2009. 
 
Purchase Agreement with Ruby Creek Resources, Inc., dated for reference May 19, 2010. 
 
August 2010 Stock Incentive Plan. 
 
Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement between the Company and IPP Gold Limited, dated September 15, 2010, ratified by the Company’s 
Board of Directors on September 21, 2010.
77
November 2010 Stock Incentive Plan.  
  
Mineral Property Acquisition Agreement between the Company and Handeni Resources Limited, dated August 5, 2011.  
  
Code of Ethics.  
  
Subsidiaries of the Registrant:  
a. Douglas Lake Tanzania Limited (Tanzania); and 
b. HG Limited (Tanzania) (formerly: DLM Tanzania Limited (Tanzania)). 
  
Consent of Auditor.  
  
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.  
  
Certifications of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.  
  
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes- Oxley Act of 2002.
10.26(19) 
 
10.27(20) 
 
14.1(2) 
 
21.1 
  
  
 
23.1* 
 
31.1* 
 
31.2* 
 
32.1* 
 
*
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
(21)
Filed Herewith.
Incorporated by reference to Form SB-2 Registration Statement filed on July 22, 2004.
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2005.
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2006.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 4, 2005.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 21, 2005.
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended November 30, 2005. 
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on May 4, 2006.
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2006.
Incorporated by reference to Quarterly Report on Form 10-SB for quarterly period ended August 31, 2007.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 6, 2008.
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for year ended May 31, 2007.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on January 27, 2009
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 16, 2009
Incorporated by reference to Registration Statement Form S-8 filed on December 30, 2008.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2009.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on June 21, 2010.
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2010.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 27, 2010.
Incorporated by reference to Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2011.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on August 10, 2011.
Incorporated by reference to Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 15, 2012.
78
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 and 15 (d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf
by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURES
HANDENI GOLD INC.
By:
 
 
 
 
 
By:
“Reyno Scheepers”
Reyno Scheepers 
President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and 
a director 
Date: August 24, 2012. 
 
“Melinda Hsu”
Melinda Hsu 
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal 
Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer 
Date: August 24, 2012.
__________
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrant and
in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
- 2 -
SIGNATURES
Signature 
  
  
“Reyno Scheepers” 
Reyno Scheepers 
  
“Reginald Mengi” 
Reginald Mengi 
  
“William Lamarque” 
William Lamarque 
  
“Mohan Kaul” 
Mohan Kaul 
  
Douglas Boateng” 
Douglas Boateng 
  
“John Gerson” 
John Gerson 
  
“Emmanuel Naiko” 
Emmanuel Naiko 
  
“Gizman Abbas” 
Gizman Abbas 
  
“Melinda Hsu” 
Melinda Hsu
Title
 
 
President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive 
Officer) and a director 
 
 
Chairman of the Board of Directors and a director 
 
 
Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors and a director 
 
 
Director 
 
 
Director 
 
 
Director 
 
 
Director 
 
 
Director 
 
 
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and 
Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
__________
Date 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
  
August 24, 2012 
  
August 24, 2012
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the use of our report dated August 23, 2012 relating to the financial statements of Handeni Gold Inc. (formerly Douglas Lake Minerals Inc.) that
are included in the Company’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2012, which is incorporated by reference in each of (i) the Company’s 
Form  S-8  Registration  Statement  filed  with  the  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  October  9,  2007  and  (ii)  the  Company’s  Form  S-8 
Registration Statement filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on December 30, 2008.
/s/ “Manning Elliott LLP”
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
Vancouver, Canada  
August 24, 2012
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Reyno Scheepers, certify that:
Exhibit 31.1
1. 
 
2.
3.
4.
5.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Handeni Gold Inc.;
 
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
 
Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this  report,  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
 
The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) 
for the registrant and have: 
 
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to
ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
 
Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
Evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  registrant’s  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  and  presented  in  this  report  our  conclusions  about  the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent 
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
b.
c.
d.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the Audit Committee of the registrant’s Board of Directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
 
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting, which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
 
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control 
over financial reporting.
b.
Date: August 24, 2012.
By: “Reyno Scheepers”  
       Reyno Scheepers  
       President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and a director
__________
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Melinda Hsu, certify that:
Exhibit 31.2
1. 
 
2.
3.
4.
5.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Handeni Gold Inc.;
 
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
 
Based  on  my  knowledge,  the  financial  statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this  report,  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report; 
 
The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (as  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) 
for the registrant and have: 
 
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to
ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those
entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
 
Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
 
Evaluated  the  effectiveness  of  the  registrant’s  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  and  presented  in  this  report  our  conclusions  about  the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
 
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent 
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially
affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
b.
c.
d.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the
registrant’s auditors and the Audit Committee of the registrant’s Board of Directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
 
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting, which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and 
 
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control 
over financial reporting.
b.
Date: August 24, 2012.
By: “Melinda Hsu”  
       Melinda Hsu  
       Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
__________
Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION OF CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
The undersigned, Reyno Scheepers, the Chief Executive Officer, and Melinda Hsu, the Chief Financial Officer, of Handeni Gold Inc. (the “Company”), each 
hereby certifies, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that, to his knowledge, the Annual 
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2012, fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
as amended, and that the information contained in the Annual Report on Form 10-K, as amended, fairly presents in all material respects the financial condition
and results of operations of the Company.
Date: August 24, 2012.
By: “Reyno Scheepers”  
       Reyno Scheepers  
       President, Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive Officer) and a director
By: “Melinda Hsu”  
       Melinda Hsu  
       Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer), Secretary and Treasurer
A signed original of this written statement required by Section 906, or other document authenticating, acknowledging, or otherwise adopting the signatures that
appear in typed form within the electronic version of this written statement required by Section 906, has been provided to the Company and will be retained by
the Company and furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request.
__________