
S-1/A 1 forms-1a.htm
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM S-1 /A
AMENDMENT NO. 1
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Commission File Number: 333-180424
VALMIE RESOURCES, INC.
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
Nevada
(State or Other Jurisdiction of  (Primary Standard Industrial  (IRS Employer
Incorporation or Organization) Classification Code Number) Identification Number)
45-3124748
3721
1001 S Dairy Ashford Road, Suite 100
Houston, TX 77077
(713) 595-6675
(Address, including zip code, and telephone
number, including area code, of registrant’s
executive office)
National Registered Agents Inc.
 311 South Division Street
 Carson City, NV 89703
 (775) 888-4070
(Name, address, including zip code, and
 
telephone number, including area code, of agent
for service)
Please send copies of all correspondence to:
Christopher Little
Bacchus Law Corporation
925 West Georgia Street, Suite 1820
Vancouver, British Columbia
Canada V6C 3L2
Phone: (604) 632-1281
Fax: (604) 632-1370
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after this
registration statement is declared effective
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933 please check the following box. [X]
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the
Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number
of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. [  ]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. [  ]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective
registration statement for the same offering. [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-
accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,”
“accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer[  ]Accelerated filer
[  ]
Non-accelerated filer [  ]Smaller reporting company[X]
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class Of Securities to be
Registered
Amount to
be
 
Registered
(1)
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
Offering
  
Price
per share
(2)
Proposed
Maximum
  
Aggregate
Offering Price (2)
Amount of
Registration
  
fee
$ 3,440,849.58
$ 346.49
Common Stock, $0.001 par value
2,212,765   $ 1.555
(1)
As further discussed herein, this registration statement registers for resale 2,212,765 shares of
common stock, par value $0.001 per share, of the registrant, as follows: (a) 2,000,000 shares
issued in a private placement transaction, and (b) 212,765 shares issued pursuant to an asset
purchase agreement with our sole officer and director, Gerald B. Hammack, by which we acquired
all of the right, title and interest in and to certain intellectual property related to the AIMD platform. In
the event of stock splits, stock dividends or similar transactions involving the common stock, the
number of shares registered shall, unless otherwise expressly provided, automatically be deemed
to cover the additional securities to be offered or issued pursuant to Rule 416 under the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”).
 
Estimated pursuant to Rule 457(c) under the Securities Act solely for the purpose of computing the
amount of the registration fee based on the average of the high and low prices reported on OTC
Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace on June 24, 2016, which was $1.555.
(2)
THE REGISTRANT HEREBY AMENDS THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT ON SUCH DATE OR
DATES AS MAY BE NECESSARY TO DELAY ITS EFFECTIVE DATE UNTIL THE REGISTRANT
SHALL FILE A FURTHER AMENDMENT WHICH SPECIFICALLY STATES THAT THIS
REGISTRATION STATEMENT SHALL THEREAFTER BECOME EFFECTIVE IN ACCORDANCE
WITH SECTION 8(a) OF THE SECURITIES ACT OR UNTIL THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE ON SUCH DATE AS THE COMMISSION, ACTING PURSUANT TO
SUCH SECTION 8(a), MAY DETERMINE.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. These securities may not be
sold until the registration statement filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”)
is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy
these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST 3 , 2016
2,212,765 SHARES OF COMMON STOCK
The selling shareholders identified in this prospectus may offer and sell up to 2,212,765 shares of our
common stock consisting of (a) 2,000,000 shares issued to Crystal Resource Corp. (“Crystal”) in a
private placement transaction, and (b) 212,765 shares issued pursuant to an asset purchase
agreement with our sole officer and director, Gerald B. Hammack, by which we acquired all of the right,
title and interest in and to certain intellectual property related to the AIMD platform.
We are not selling any shares of our common stock in this offering and will not receive any proceeds
from this offering; however, we did receive $200,000 from Crystal in the private placement transaction.
Mr. Hammack, our officer and director, is deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), in connection with the resale of his shares of
our common stock being registered hereunder.
The selling shareholders may offer the shares covered by this prospectus at fixed prices, at prevailing
market prices at the time of sale, at varying prices or negotiated prices, in negotiated transactions, or in
trading markets for our common stock. We will bear all costs associated with the registration of the
shares covered by this prospectus; provided, however, we will not be required to pay any underwriters’
discounts or commissions relating to the securities covered by the registration statement.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act,
sometimes called the JOBS Act. For more information, see “Risk Factors”, starting on page 6.
Our common stock trades on the OTC Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace under the symbol
“VMRI.” The closing price of our common stock on such markets on July 28 , 2016, was $1.58 per
share.
THE PURCHASE OF THE SECURITIES OFFERED THROUGH THIS PROSPECTUS INVOLVES
A HIGH DEGREE OF RISK. YOU SHOULD CAREFULLY READ AND CONSIDER THE SECTION
OF THIS PROSPECTUS ENTITLED “RISK FACTORS” BEGINNING ON PAGE 8 BEFORE
BUYING ANY SHARES OF OUR COMMON STOCK.
NEITHER THE SEC NOR ANY STATE SECURITIES COMMISSION HAS APPROVED OR
DISAPPROVED OF THESE SECURITIES OR PASSED UPON THE ADEQUACY OR ACCURACY
OF THIS PROSPECTUS. ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL
OFFENSE.
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
 
4
Prospectus Summary
4
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
6
The Offering
8
Risk Factors
12
Business Description
20
Description of Property
Legal Proceedings
20
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 20
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure24
Use of Proceeds
24
24
Selling Shareholders
25
Plan of Distribution
Description of Securities
26
28
Interests of Named Experts and Counsel
28
Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters
Directors, Executive Officers, Promoters and Control Persons
29
31
Executive Compensation
 
 
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management
32
33
Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions
35
Disclosure of Commission Position on Indemnification for Securities Act Liabilities
35
Reports to Security Holders
Where You Can Find More Information
35
35
Stock Transfer Agent
Dealer Prospectus Delivery Obligation
Financial Statements
35
F-1
This prospectus is part of a registration statement we filed with the SEC. Under this registration
process, the selling shareholders may, from time to time, offer and sell up to 2,212,765 shares of our
common stock, as described in this prospectus, in one or more offerings. This prospectus provides you
with a general description of the common stock the selling shareholders may offer. You should read
this prospectus carefully before making an investment decision.
You may only rely on the information contained in this prospectus or that we have referred you to. We
have not authorized anyone to provide you with additional or different information. This prospectus
does not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy any securities other than the
shares of our common stock offered by this prospectus. This prospectus does not constitute an offer to
sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy any common stock in any circumstances or any jurisdiction in
which such offer or solicitation is not permitted. You should not assume that the information contained
in this prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of this prospectus
regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of our common stock. The rules of the
SEC may require us to update this prospectus in the future.
As used in this prospectus, the terms “we,” “our,” “us,” the “Company” and similar terms refer to Valmie
Resources, Inc. and its subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.
3
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
The following summary highlights material information contained in this prospectus. This summary
does not contain all of the information you should consider before investing in the securities. Before
making an investment decision, you should read the entire prospectus carefully, including the risk
factors section, the financial statements and the notes to the financial statements. You should also
review the other available information referred to in the section entitled “Where You Can Find More
Information” in this prospectus and any amendment or supplement hereto.
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Information included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus may contain forward-looking
statements. This information may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors
which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from the
future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies and
expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “expect,” “anticipate,”
“estimate,” “believe,” “intend” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these
words or comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are based on current expectations and
beliefs concerning future developments and the potential effects on the parties and the transaction.
There can be no assurance that future developments actually affecting us will be those anticipated.
These developments may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those
expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
The forward-looking statements made in this prospectus relate only to events or information as of the
date on which the statements are made in this prospectus. Except as required by law, we undertake
no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new
information, future events or otherwise, after the date on which the statements are made or to reflect
the occurrence of unanticipated events. You should read this prospectus and the documents we refer
to in this prospectus and have filed as exhibits to this prospectus completely and with the
understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect.
Overview
We were incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Nevada on August 26, 2011. We have a
wholly owned subsidiary, Vertitek Inc., a Wyoming corporation (“Vertitek”), and a 50% interest in a joint
venture entity, AeroLift eXpress LLC, a Wyoming limited liability corporation (“AeroLift”). From our
inception until the quarter ended August 31, 2014, we were a mineral exploration company exploring
for precious metals, or gold and silver targets. Our property, known as the Carico Lake Valley Property
(the “Property”), was located in Lander County, Nevada.
In July 2014, the landowner notified us that our option to acquire an interest in the Property had been
terminated and that the Property had been sold to a third party. Our efforts from that date until our fiscal
year end on November 30, 2014 were primarily directed to identifying new development properties.
In early December 2014, our majority shareholder determined it was in the best interests of our
shareholders to change our business focus from mining to pursuing opportunities for the
commercialization of leading edge products and services in the rapidly expanding technology
industry. We therefore sought to develop or acquire concepts with valid business models positioned to
make a significant impact within the four key technology “megasectors”: software, hardware,
networking and semiconductors.
Business Strategy
The first major step in our shift to the technology sector was the appointment of Gerald B. Hammack as
our sole officer and director on December 8, 2014. Mr. Hammack has more than 30 years of
experience in a variety of technology-related fields, including programming, digital telephony and
database management, as well as substantial expertise in the setup and management of complex
data processing systems.
4
Over the past several years, Mr. Hammack has been developing a series of software platforms and
technologies designed to provide the near real-time data processing required by the ever-expanding
use of commercial Unmanned Aerial Vehicles or UAVs (more commonly referred to as drones).
Towards the end of 2014 we rebranded Mr. Hammack’s development efforts to date as the AIMD
(Automated Intelligence for Mobile Devices) data processing platform and adopted them as our own.
On July 15, 2015, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Mr. Hammack pursuant to which
we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to the intellectual property relating to the AIMD
platform in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth of our common stock to Mr. Hammack on
that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. Since we did not acquire any patents from Mr.
Hammack, we recognized an intangible asset value of $100,000 related to the acquisition.
While in the process of launching the AIMD platform, we determined that it would be necessary to find
a partner that had the technology and experience in the design and manufacture of UAVs in order to
design and build a prototype unit to test and refine our product and service offerings. After extensive
investigation we located a UAV manufacturer, Vertitek. Vertitek’s hardware and software technology is
being designed to enable a sophisticated level of autonomy for UAVs and other autonomous
mobilized devices, including precision guidance controls and advanced safety features. Vertitek’s
under development commercial V-1 DroneSM is a multi-rotor platform that incorporates an integrated,
fully autonomous autopilot, which could be connected to, and controlled from, the AIMD platform.
After significant discussion with Vertitek and its principal shareholder, on January 20, 2015 we entered
into a letter of intent (the “LOI”) with Vertitek to acquire 100% of the capital stock of Vertitek in
exchange for the issuance of shares of our common stock to the principal shareholder of Vertitek,
contingent upon certain due diligence requirements. On January 27, 2015 we entered into a share
exchange agreement with Vertitek and the sole shareholder of Vertitek, Masamos Services Ltd., a
Cypriot corporation (“Masamos”), on substantially the same terms as the LOI. On March 31, 2015, the
closing of the share exchange agreement occurred and we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common
stock to Masamos in exchange for 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. As a result,
Vertitek became our wholly owned subsidiary.
Although we have acquired intellectual property both as a result of the Vertitek acquisition and from
Mr. Hammack, we have not yet filed for any patent protection in relation to such intellectual property.
We intend to protect our intellectual property rights, including trademark and servicemark
opportunities, to the maximum extent possible in all jurisdictions in which we may operate. In the near
term, we anticipate protecting the trademark and service mark opportunities related to Vertitek, the V-
series drones and the AIMD platform.
On February 10, 2016, we were granted an exemption (No. 14749, Regulatory Docket No. FAA–
2015–4694) from Section 333 of Public Law 112-95 by the Federal Aviation Administration to operate
two models of the V-series drones to perform aerial data collection, and in particular, to conduct aerial
based agricultural applications, search and rescue operations, power-line inspections, pipe-line
inspections, infrastructure surveying and aerial imaging. The exemption is subject to industry standard
weight, speed and altitude limitations, as well as certain visual line of sight, visual observer, operating
document, safety and pre-flight inspection measures, among others.
The exemption will terminate on February 28, 2018, and we do not anticipate being unable to comply
with any conditions of the exemption during the term.
On April 15, 2016, we entered into a joint venture agreement with James Stafford to form AeroLift (the
“Joint Venture Agreement”). Pursuant to the Joint Venture Agreement, we currently own 50% of
AeroLift and have committed funding up to $500,000 to launch the AeroLift business model. AeroLift is
led by a team of military trained pilots, mission commanders and specialists with more than 60 years of
combined aviation experience. AeroLift’s aircraft are military grade construction adapted for
commercial applications. Together with state of the art ground control stations and flight control
software, AeroLift intends to deliver cutting edge unmanned services to clients in a variety of
challenging environments.
To date, we have not generated any revenue through the sales of UAVs or the provision of software,
hardware or cloud based services. As we are still developing our technologies, we have not yet
launched our manufacturing, sales or marketing operations and have not yet identified any customers
for our systems or solutions.
We have never declared bankruptcy, receivership or any similar proceedings nor have we had any
material reclassifications, mergers, consolidations, or purchases or sales of a significant amount of
assets not in the ordinary course of business.
Where You Can Find Us
Our principal executive office is located at 1001 S Dairy Ashford Road, Suite 100, Houston, TX 77077
and our telephone number is (713) 595-6675. Our website address is www.valmie.com.
5
THE OFFERING
The Issuer
 
Shares
being
Offered
Valmie Resources, Inc.
  
Up to 2,212,765 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value. Our common stock is
 
described in further detail in the section of this prospectus titled “Description of
Securities.”
  
There are 67,052,607 shares of common stock issued and outstanding as of the date of
Shares
this prospectus (which includes the 2,212,765 previously issued and outstanding shares
Outstanding 
being registered hereunder).
 
  
Registration
We estimate our total costs relating to the registration herein shall be approximately
 
Costs
$15,000.
 
  
Use of
We received net proceeds of $200,000 from the sale of promissory notes in the private
 
Proceeds
placement transaction. See “Use of Proceeds” for a complete description.
 
  
Trading
Our common stock is traded on the OTC Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace
 
Market
under the symbol “VMRI.”
  
 
An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully
consider the risk factors set forth under “Risk Factors” on page 6 and the other
 
information contained in this prospectus before making an investment decision
regarding our common stock.
Risk
Factors
6
Background of the Offering
The Private Placement Transaction
During the period from July 30, 2015 to April 26, 2016, we entered into a series of promissory notes
with Crystal in the aggregate principal amount of $200,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest
rate of 15%. These notes were secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment,
furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by Company on the date of the note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof.
On April 26, 2016, the Company and Crystal entered into a debt conversion agreement (the
“Conversion Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of its common
stock to Crystal in consideration for the cancellation of the debt. Upon the issuance of such shares,
Crystal agreed to waive any then due and payable interest. As a result of the conversion, Crystal
released all security interests it previously held in the Company’s assets.
In connection with the Conversion Agreement, we also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement
(the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Crystal. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, we
were obligated to file a registration statement with the SEC covering the shares of common stock
underlying the Conversion Agreement within 60 days after the execution of the agreement. In addition,
we are obligated to use all commercially reasonable efforts to have the registration statement declared
effective by the SEC within 90 days after the date the registration statement is filed and maintain the
effectiveness of such registration statement until the date on which Crystal has sold all of the shares
registered thereunder.
We issued the foregoing shares in reliance upon the exemption from registration provided by Section
4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. Our reliance on Section 4(a)(2) was based on the fact that none of the
issuances involved a “public offering” and Crystal provided representations to us that they acquired
the shares for investment purposes and not with a view to the distribution thereof in a transaction that
would violate the Securities Act or the securities laws of any state of the United States or any other
applicable jurisdiction.
The Hammack Technology Acquisition
On July 15, 2015, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Gerald B. Hammack, our sole
officer and director, pursuant to which we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to the
intellectual property relating to the AIMD platform from Mr. Hammack in consideration for the issuance
of $100,000 worth of our common stock to Mr. Hammack on that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per
share. The assets include, but are not limited to, all intellectual property, trade names, trade secrets,
trademarks, personnel contracts, web site domains and content, strategic partnerships, publications,
operating models, manuals, licenses, and all other confidential information relating to the AIMD
platform concept. As a result, Mr. Hammack received an aggregate of 212,765 shares of our common
stock.
Mr. Hammack determined the value of his intellectual property based on a good faith estimate of the
cost to recreate such intellectual property. While the intellectual property acquired from Mr. Hammack
does not include any patents or immediately patentable innovations, we did acquire the software
foundation for our under construction AIMD platform. We believe the acquisition reduced our software
development schedule by six to nine months.
We issued the foregoing shares in reliance upon the exemption from registration provided by Section
4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. Our reliance on Section 4(a)(2) was based on the fact that none of the
issuances involved a “public offering” and Mr. Hammack provided representations to us that he
acquired the shares for investment purposes and not with a view to the distribution thereof in a
transaction that would violate the Securities Act or the securities laws of any state of the United States
or any other applicable jurisdiction.
7
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
risks described below and the other information in this prospectus before investing in our common
stock. If any of the following risks occur, our business, operating results and financial condition could
be seriously harmed. The trading price of our common stock could decline due to any of these risks,
and you may lose all or part of your investment.
Risks Related to Our Business and Industry
We have a history of operating losses and there can be no assurance that we can achieve or
maintain profitability.
We have a history of operating losses and may not achieve or sustain profitability. We cannot
guarantee that we will become profitable. Even if we achieve profitability, given the competitive and
evolving nature of the industry in which we operate, we may be unable to sustain or increase
profitability and our failure to do so would adversely affect our business, including our ability to raise
additional funds.
Because our auditors have issued a going concern opinion, there is substantial uncertainty
that we will be able to continue our operations.
Our auditors have issued a going concern opinion. This means that there is substantial doubt that we
can continue to operate over the next 12 months. Our financial statements do not include any
adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts of and
classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event we cannot continue in existence. As
such, if we are unable to obtain new financing to execute our business plan we may be required to
cease our operations.
Product development is a long, expensive and uncertain process.
The development of both UAV software and hardware is a costly, complex and time-consuming
process, and investments in product development often involve a long wait until a return, if any, can be
achieved on such investment. We anticipate making significant investments in research and
development relating to our products and services, but such investments are inherently speculative.
Any unforeseen technical obstacles and challenges that we encounter in the research and
development process could result in delays in or the abandonment of product commercialization, may
substantially increase development costs, and may negatively affect our results of operations.
Successful technical development of our products does not guarantee successful
commercialization.
We may successfully complete the technical development of the AIMD platform, the V-1 DroneSM or
both, but still fail to achieve commercial success for a number of reasons, including the following:
●failure to obtain the required regulatory approvals for their use;
    
 ●prohibitive production costs;
    
 ●competing products;
    
 ●lack of product innovation;
    
 ●ineffective distribution and marketing;
    
 ●insufficient cooperation from our partners; and
    
 ●product demonstrations not aligning with or meeting customer needs.
Our success in the market for the products and services we develop will depend largely on our ability
to properly demonstrate their capabilities. Upon demonstration, the AIMD platform and the V-1
DroneSM may not have the capabilities they were designed to have or that we believed they would
have. Furthermore, even if we do successfully demonstrate our products’ capabilities, potential
customers may be more comfortable doing business with a larger, more established, more proven
company than us. Significant revenue from new product investments may not be achieved for a
number of years, if at all.
8
If we fail to protect our intellectual property rights, we could lose our ability to compete in the
marketplace.
Our acquired and under development intellectual property and proprietary rights are important to our
ability to remain competitive and for the success of our products and our business. Patent protection
can be limited and not all intellectual property can be patented. While we have acquired intellectual
property from both Vertitek and Mr. Hammack, we have not yet filed for patent protection in relation to
such intellectual property. We intend to protect our intellectual property rights, including trademark and
servicemark opportunities, to the maximum extent possible in all jurisdictions in which we may
operate. In the near term, we anticipate protecting the trademark and service mark opportunities
related to Vertitek, the V-series drones and the AIMD platform.
We expect to rely on a combination of patent, trademark, copyright, and trade secret laws as well as
confidentiality agreements and procedures, non-competition agreements and other contractual
provisions to protect our intellectual property, other proprietary rights and our brand. We have little
protection when we must rely on trade secrets and nondisclosure agreements. Our intellectual
property rights may be challenged, invalidated or circumvented by third parties. We may not be able to
prevent the unauthorized disclosure or use of our technical knowledge or other trade secrets by
employees or competitors. Furthermore, our competitors may independently develop technologies and
products that are substantially equivalent or superior to our technologies and products, which could
result in decreased revenues. Litigation may be necessary to enforce our intellectual property rights
which could result in substantial costs to us and substantial diversion of management attention. If we
do not adequately protect our intellectual property, our competitors could use it to enhance their
products. Our inability to adequately protect our intellectual property rights could adversely affect our
business and financial condition, and the value of our brand and other intangible assets.
Other companies may claim that we infringe their intellectual property, which could materially
increase our costs and harm our ability to generate future revenue and profit.
We do not believe that our technologies infringe on the proprietary rights of any third party, but claims
of infringement are becoming increasingly common and third parties may assert infringement claims
against us. It may be difficult or impossible to identify, prior to receipt of notice from a third party, the
trade secrets, patent position or other intellectual property rights of a third party, either in the United
States or in foreign jurisdictions. Any such assertion may result in litigation or may require us to obtain
a license for the intellectual property rights of third parties. If we are required to obtain licenses to use
any third party technology, we would have to pay royalties, which may significantly reduce any profit
on our products. In addition, any such litigation could be expensive and disruptive to our ability to
generate revenue or enter into new market opportunities. If any of our products were found to infringe
other parties’ proprietary rights and we are unable to come to terms regarding a license with such
parties, we may be forced to modify our products to make them non-infringing or to cease production of
such products altogether.
The nature of our business involves significant risks and uncertainties that may not be covered
by insurance or indemnity.
We have developed and plan to sell products and services in circumstances where insurance or
indemnification may not be available; for example, in connection with the collection and analysis of
various types of information. In addition, our products and services raise questions with respect to
issues of civil liberties, intellectual property, trespass, conversion and similar concepts, which may
create legal issues. Indemnification to cover potential claims or liabilities resulting from the failure of
any technologies that we develop or deploy may be available in certain circumstances but not in
others. We may not be able to maintain insurance to protect against all operational risks and
uncertainties. Substantial claims resulting from an accident, product failure, or liability arising from our
products and services in excess of any indemnity or insurance coverage (or for which indemnity or
insurance coverage is not available or is not obtained) could harm our financial condition, cash flows
and operating results. Any accident, even if fully covered or insured, could negatively affect our
reputation among our customers and the public, and make it more difficult for us to compete effectively.
9
If we are unable to recruit and retain key management, technical and sales personnel, our
business would be negatively affected.
For our business to be successful, we need to attract and retain highly qualified technical,
management and sales personnel. The failure to recruit additional key personnel when needed with
specific qualifications and on acceptable terms, or to maintain positive relationships with our partners
might impede our ability to continue to develop, commercialize and sell our products and services. To
the extent the demand for skilled personnel exceeds supply, we could experience higher labor,
recruiting and training costs in order to attract and retain such employees. The loss of any members of
our management team may also delay or impair achievement of our business objectives and result in
business disruptions due to the time needed for their replacements to be recruited and become
familiar with our business. We face competition for qualified personnel from other companies with
significantly more resources available to them and thus may not be able to attract the level of
personnel needed for our business to succeed.
We may indemnify our officers and directors against liability to us and our security holders, and
such indemnification could increase our operating costs.
Our Bylaws allow us to indemnify our officers and directors against claims associated with carrying out
the duties of their offices. Our Bylaws also allow us to reimburse them for the costs of certain legal
defenses. Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to
our officers, directors or control persons, we have been advised by the SEC that such indemnification
is against public policy and is therefore unenforceable.
Since our officers and directors are aware that they may be indemnified for carrying out the duties of
their offices, they may be less motivated to meet the standards required by law to properly carry out
such duties, which could increase our operating costs. Further, if any of our officers and directors files
a claim against us for indemnification, the associated expenses could also increase our operating
costs.
We may pursue strategic transactions in the future, which could be difficult to implement,
disrupt our business or change our business profile significantly.
We intend to consider potential strategic transactions, which could involve acquisitions of businesses
or assets, joint ventures or investments in businesses, products or technologies that expand,
complement or otherwise relate to our current or future business. We may also consider, from time to
time, opportunities to engage in joint ventures or other business collaborations with third parties to
address particular market segments. These activities create risks such as, among others: (i) the need
to integrate and manage the businesses and products acquired with our own business and products;
(ii) additional demands on our resources, systems, procedures and controls; (iii) disruption of our
ongoing business; and (iv) diversion of management’s attention from other business concerns.
Moreover, these transactions could involve: (a) substantial investment of funds or financings by
issuance of debt or equity securities; (b) substantial investment with respect to technology transfers
and operational integration; and (c) the acquisition or disposition of product lines or businesses. Also,
such activities could result in one-time charges and expenses and have the potential to either dilute
the interests of our existing stockholders or result in the issuance of, or assumption of debt. Such
acquisitions, investments, joint ventures or other business collaborations may involve significant
commitments of financial and other resources. Any such activities may not be successful in generating
revenue, income or other returns, and any resources we committed to such activities will not be
available to us for other purposes. Moreover, if we are unable to access capital markets on acceptable
terms or at all, we may not be able to consummate acquisitions, or may have to do so on the basis of a
less than optimal capital structure. Our inability to take advantage of growth opportunities or address
risks associated with acquisitions or investments in businesses may negatively affect our operating
results. Additionally, any impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets acquired in an acquisition
or in an investment, or charges to earnings associated with any acquisition or investment activity, may
materially reduce our earnings. Future acquisitions or joint ventures may not result in their anticipated
benefits and we may not be able to properly integrate acquired products, technologies or businesses
with our existing products and operations or successfully combine personnel and cultures. Failure to
do so could deprive us of the intended benefits of those acquisitions.
10
Risks Relating to our Common Stock
Because there is a limited public trading market for our common stock, investors may not be
able to resell their shares.
There is currently a limited public trading market for our common stock. We cannot assure investors
that there will be a liquid market in the future for our common stock. The trading of securities on the
OTC Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace is often sporadic and investors may have difficulty
buying and selling our shares or obtaining market quotations for them, which may have a negative
effect on the market price of our common stock. Investors may not be able to sell shares at their
purchase price or at any price at all.
Fen Holdings & Investments Ltd. has voting control over matters submitted to a vote of the
stockholders, and it may take actions that conflict with the interests of our other stockholders
and holders of our debt securities.
Our majority stockholder, Fen Holdings & Investments Ltd. (“Fen”), owns 2,000,000 shares of our
Series “A” preferred stock, each of which carries a voting weight equal to 50 shares of our common
stock. As a result, Fen controls approximately 60.9% of the votes eligible to be cast by our
stockholders and has the power to control all matters requiring the approval of our stockholders,
including the election of directors and the approval of mergers and other significant corporate
transactions.
The sale of securities by us in any equity or debt financing could result in dilution to our
existing stockholders and have a material adverse effect on our earnings.
Any sale of common stock by us in a future private placement offering could result in dilution to our
existing stockholders as a direct result of the issuance of additional shares of our capital stock. In
addition, our business strategy may include expansion through acquisitions or business combinations
with entities operating in our industry. In order to do so, or to finance the cost of our operations, we may
issue additional equity securities that could dilute our stockholders’ ownership positions. We may also
pursue debt financing, if and when available, and this could negatively impact our earnings and
results of operations.
We are subject to penny stock regulations and restrictions and investors may have difficulty
selling shares of our common stock.
Our common stock is subject to the provisions of Section 15(g) and Rule 15g-9 of the Exchange Act,
commonly referred to as the “penny stock rules”. Section 15(g) sets forth certain requirements for
transactions in penny stock, and Rule 15g-9(d) incorporates the definition of “penny stock” that is
found in Rule 3a51-1 of the Exchange Act. The SEC generally defines a penny stock to be any equity
security that has a market price less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. We are
subject to the SEC’s penny stock rules.
Since our common stock is deemed to be penny stock, trading in the shares of our common stock is
subject to additional sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell penny stock to persons
other than established customers and accredited investors. “Accredited investors” are generally
persons with assets in excess of $1,000,000 (excluding the value of such person’s primary residence)
or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 together with their spouse. For transactions
covered by these rules, broker-dealers must make a special suitability determination for the purchase
of such security and must have the purchaser’s written consent to the transaction prior to the purchase.
Additionally, for any transaction involving a penny stock, unless exempt, the rules require the delivery,
prior to the first transaction, of a risk disclosure document relating to the penny stock market. A broker-
dealer also must disclose the commissions payable to both the broker-dealer and the registered
representative and current quotations for the securities. Finally, monthly statements must be sent
disclosing recent price information for the penny stocks held in an account and information to the
limited market in penny stocks. Consequently, these rules may restrict the ability of a broker-dealer to
trade and/or maintain a market in our common stock and may affect the ability of our stockholders to
sell their shares of common stock.
There can be no assurance that our common stock will qualify for exemption from the penny stock
rules. In any event, even if our common stock was exempt from the penny stock rules, we would
remain subject to Section 15(b)(6) of the Exchange Act, which gives the SEC the authority to restrict
any person from participating in a distribution of penny stock if the SEC finds that such a restriction
would be in the public interest.
11
We do not expect to pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
We do not intend to declare dividends for the foreseeable future, as we anticipate that we will reinvest
any future earnings in the development and growth of our business. Therefore, our stockholders will
not receive any funds unless they sell their common stock, and stockholders may be unable to sell
their shares on favorable terms or at all.
Investors may face significant restrictions on the resale of their shares due to state “blue sky”
laws.
Each state has its own securities laws, commonly known as “blue sky” laws, which (1) limit sales of
securities to a state’s residents unless the securities are registered in that state or qualify for an
exemption from registration, and (2) govern the reporting requirements for broker-dealers doing
business directly or indirectly in the state. Before a security is sold in a state, there must be a
registration in place to cover the transaction, or it must be exempt from registration. The applicable
broker-dealer must also be registered in that state.
We do not know whether our securities will be registered or exempt from registration under the laws of
any state. A determination regarding registration will be made by those broker-dealers, if any, who
agree to serve as market makers for our common stock. There may be significant state blue sky law
restrictions on the ability of investors to sell, and on purchasers to buy, our securities. Investors should
therefore consider the resale market for our common stock to be limited, as they may be unable to
resell their shares without the significant expense of state registration or qualification.
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
Overview
We were incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Nevada on August 26, 2011. We have one
wholly owned subsidiary, Vertitek. From our inception until the quarter ended August 31, 2014, we
were a mineral exploration company exploring for precious metals, or gold and silver targets. Our
property, known as the Carico Lake Valley Property (the “Property”), was located in Lander County,
Nevada.
On April 16, 2014, Fen, a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands and our majority
stockholder, acquired an aggregate of 237,360,000 shares, or approximately 80.1% of our then issued
and outstanding common stock from Khurram Shroff, our former sole officer and director.
In July 2014, the landowner notified us that our option to acquire an interest in the Property had been
terminated and that the Property had been sold to a third party. Our efforts from that date until the end
of our fiscal year ended November 30, 2014, were primarily directed to identifying new development
properties.
In early December 2014, Fen determined it was in the best interests of our shareholders to change our
business focus from mining to pursuing opportunities for the commercialization of leading edge
products and services in the rapidly expanding technology industry. We therefore sought to develop or
acquire concepts with valid business models positioned to make a significant impact within the four
key technology “megasectors”: software, hardware, networking and semiconductors.
Business Strategy
The first major step in our shift to the technology sector was the appointment of Gerald B. Hammack as
our sole officer and director on December 8, 2014. Mr. Hammack has more than 30 years of
experience in a variety of technology-related fields, including programming, digital telephony and
database management, as well as substantial expertise in the setup and management of complex
data processing systems.
12
Over the past several years, Mr. Hammack has been developing a series of software platforms and
technologies designed to provide the near real-time data processing required by the ever-expanding
use of commercial Unmanned Aerial Vehicles or UAVs (more commonly referred to as drones).
Towards the end of 2014 we rebranded Mr. Hammack’s development efforts to date as the AIMD
(Automated Intelligence for Mobile Devices) data processing platform and adopted them as our own.
On July 15, 2015 we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Mr. Hammack pursuant to which
we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to the intellectual property relating to the AIMD
platform in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth of our common stock to Mr. Hammack on
that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. Since we did not acquire any patents from Mr.
Hammack, we recognized an intangible asset value of $100,000 related to the acquisition.
While in the process of launching the AIMD platform, we determined that it would be necessary to find
a partner that had the technology and experience in the design and manufacture of UAVs in order to
design and build a prototype unit to test and refine our product and service offerings. After extensive
investigation, we located a UAV manufacturer, Vertitek. Vertitek’s hardware and software technology
is being designed to enable a sophisticated level of autonomy for UAVs and other autonomous
mobilized devices, including precision guidance controls and advanced safety features. Vertitek’s
under development commercial V-1 DroneSM is a multi-rotor platform that incorporates an integrated,
fully autonomous autopilot, which could be connected to, and controlled from, the AIMD platform.
After significant discussion with Vertitek and its principal shareholder, Masamos, on January 20, 2015
we entered into the LOI with Vertitek to acquire 100% of the capital stock of that company in exchange
for the issuance of shares of our common stock to the principal shareholder of Vertitek, contingent
upon certain due diligence requirements. On January 27, 2015 we entered into the Share Exchange
Agreement with Vertitek and Masamos on substantially the same terms as the LOI, and on March 31,
2015 the closing of the Share Exchange Agreement occurred and we issued 1,000,000 shares of our
common stock to Masamos in exchange for 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. As
a result, Vertitek became our wholly owned subsidiary.
Although we have acquired intellectual property both as a result of the Vertitek acquisition and from
Mr. Hammack, we have not yet filed for any patent protection in relation to such intellectual property.
We intend to protect our intellectual property rights, including trademark and servicemark
opportunities, to the maximum extent possible in all jurisdictions in which we may operate. In the near
term, we anticipate protecting the trademark and service mark opportunities related to Vertitek, the V-
series drones and the AIMD platform.
On February 10, 2016, we were granted an exemption (No. 14749, Regulatory Docket No. FAA–
2015–4694) from Section 333 of Public Law 112-95 by the Federal Aviation Administration to operate
two models of the V-series drones to perform aerial data collection, and in particular, to conduct aerial
based agricultural applications, search and rescue operations, power-line inspections, pipe-line
inspections, infrastructure surveying and aerial imaging. The exemption is subject to industry standard
weight, speed and altitude limitations, as well as certain visual line of sight, visual observer, operating
document, safety and pre-flight inspection measures, among others.
The exemption will terminate on February 28, 2018, and we do not anticipate being unable to comply
with any conditions of the exemption during the term.
On April 15, 2016, we entered into the Joint Venture Agreement to form AeroLift. We currently own
50% of AeroLift and have committed funding up to $500,000 to launch the AeroLift business model.
AeroLift is led by a team of military trained pilots, mission commanders and specialists with more than
60 years of combined aviation experience. AeroLift’s aircraft are military grade construction adapted
for commercial applications. Together with state of the art ground control stations and flight control
software, AeroLift intends to deliver cutting edge unmanned services to clients in a variety of
challenging environments.
To date, we have not generated any revenue through the sales of UAVs or the provision of software,
hardware or cloud based services. As we are still developing our technologies, we have not yet
launched our manufacturing, sales or marketing operations and have not yet identified any customers
for our systems or solutions.
We have never declared bankruptcy, receivership or any similar proceedings nor have we had any
material reclassifications, mergers, consolidations, or purchases or sales of a significant amount of
assets not in the ordinary course of business.
13
Our Corporate History and Background
On December 3, 2013, the holders of a majority of our issued and outstanding common stock
approved an amendment to our bylaws (the “Bylaw Amendment”) and an increase in our authorized
capital from 100,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001, to 750,000,000 shares of
common stock, par value $0.001 (the “Authorized Capital Increase”). The purpose of the Bylaw
Amendment was to update our bylaws and make them more comprehensive, while the purpose of the
Authorized Capital Increase was to reorganize our capital structure in connection with the stock
dividend described below. We formally effectuated the Authorized Capital Increase on December 4,
2013 by filing a Certificate of Amendment with the Nevada Secretary of State.
Also on December 3, 2013, our former sole director approved a stock dividend of 59 authorized but
unissued shares of our common stock on each one (1) issued and outstanding share of our common
stock. On December 13, 2013, we received approval from FINRA to effectuate the stock dividend by
way of a forward split, and on December 17, 2013, our shareholders of record on December 16, 2013
received the dividend. As a result of the stock dividend, our issued and outstanding common stock
increased from 4,940,000 shares to 296,400,000 shares.
On September 1, 2014, we entered into a consulting agreement with Constant Consulting Corp., a
Wyoming corporation (“Constant”), pursuant to which Constant agreed to provide certain consulting
services to us, including operational plan and business model structuring, identifying potential
development partners, interfacing with third parties to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements,
and interfacing with other vendors as requested, for a period of one year in exchange for the payment
of $25,000 per month. On February 28, 2015, the parties agreed to terminate the monthly obligation to
Constant and that any future work would be compensated on an hourly basis. Our agreement with
Constant expired on August 31, 2015 and was not renewed. Other than with regard to the agreement,
we are unaware of any relationship between Constant and any of our officers, directors or
shareholders.
On December 10, 2014, the holders of a majority of our issued and outstanding common stock
approved a set of amended and restated articles of incorporation that, among other things, increased
our authorized capital to 760,000,000 shares, consisting of 750,000,000 shares of common stock, par
value $0.001, and 10,000,000 shares of “blank check” preferred stock, par value $0.001 (the “Blank
Check Preferred Stock”). We formally effectuated the authorized capital increase and the creation of
the Blank Check Preferred Stock by filing the amended and restated articles of incorporation
accompanied by the required certificate with the Nevada Secretary of State on December 11, 2014.
On December 11, 2014, our former sole director approved the designation of 2,000,000 shares of the
Blank Check Preferred Stock as Series “A” preferred stock (the “Designation”). We formally effected
the Designation by filing a Certificate of Designation with the Nevada Secretary of State on January
15, 2015.
The shares of Series “A” preferred stock carry certain rights and preferences. The Designation
provides that the Series “A” Preferred Stock may be converted into shares of our common stock on a
10 for one (1) basis at any time after 18 months from the date of issuance, and that each share of
Series “A” preferred stock has voting rights and carries a voting weight equal to 50 shares of common
stock.
On January 16, 2015, Fen agreed to cancel an aggregate of 237,360,000 shares, or approximately
80.1% of our issued and outstanding common stock, in exchange for the issuance of the 2,000,000
shares of Series “A” preferred stock described above. As a result, the number of issued and
outstanding shares of our common stock decreased from 296,400,000 to 59,040,000.
Between August 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, we issued eight promissory notes to three investors
(Shield Investments, Inc. a British Virgin Islands corporation (“Shield”), Tuverga Finance Ltd., a Cypriot
corporation (“Tuverga”) and Fairwinds Consulting LLC, a Texas limited liability corporation) in the
aggregate amount of $365,000 in exchange for advances to us in an identical amount. Each of the
promissory notes bears simple interest at an annual rate of 15% and matures two years from the date
of issuance. Seven of the eight promissory notes, in the aggregate amount of $350,000, were secured
by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies,
records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts, intellectual property rights (including
but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, service marks,
trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles, whether owned by us on the date of the
applicable note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof.
14
On April 6, 2015, we entered into debt conversion agreements with Shield and Tuverga pursuant to
which those investors converted an aggregate of $350,000 in debt into 3,500,000 shares of our
common stock at a price of $0.10 per share. As part of those debt conversion agreements, Shield and
Tuverga agreed to forgive any and all accrued interest and release their respective security interests in
our assets, rights or other property.
Also on April 6, 2015, we entered into a debt conversion agreement with Dome Capital LLC, a
Wyoming limited liability corporation, pursuant to which it converted an aggregate of $33,927 in debt
into 339,270 shares of our common stock at a deemed price of $0.10 per share.
On July 15, 2015, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Gerald B. Hammack, our sole
officer and director, pursuant to which we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to the
intellectual property relating to the AIMD platform from Mr. Hammack in consideration for the issuance
of $100,000 worth of our common stock to Mr. Hammack on that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per
share. The assets include, but are not limited to, all intellectual property, trade names, trade secrets,
trademarks, personnel contracts, web site domains and content, strategic partnerships, publications,
operating models, manuals, licenses, and all other confidential information relating to the AIMD
platform concept. As a result, Mr. Hammack received an aggregate of 212,765 shares of our common
stock.
Mr. Hammack determined the value of his intellectual property based on a good faith estimate of the
cost to recreate such intellectual property. While the intellectual property acquired from Mr. Hammack
does not include any patents or immediately patentable innovations, we did acquire the software
foundation for our under construction AIMD platform. We believe the acquisition reduced our software
development schedule by six to nine months.
During the period from July 30, 2015 to April 26, 2016, we entered into a series of promissory notes
with Crystal in the aggregate principal amount of $200,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest
rate of 15%. These notes were secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment,
furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by Company on the date of the note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof.
On April 26, 2016, the Company and Crystal entered into a debt conversion agreement pursuant to
which the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of its common stock to Crystal in consideration for the
cancellation of the debt. Upon the issuance of such shares, Crystal agreed to waive any then due and
payable interest. As a result of the conversion, Crystal released all security interests it previously held
in the Company’s assets.
The Vertitek Acquisition
On the Closing Date, we completed the Vertitek acquisition and Vertitek became our wholly owned
subsidiary. Vertitek was established to provide unmanned vehicle software, hardware and cloud
services for a wide range of commercial applications around the globe. Vertitek is in the process of
developing the V-1 DroneSM, a cutting edge multi-rotor UAV designed specifically to meet the
requirements of a growing commercial user base. The assets of Vertitek include, but are not limited to,
all intellectual property, trade name, trade secrets, trademarks, personnel contracts, website domain
and content, strategic partnerships, manuals, licenses and all other confidential information related to
the V-1 DroneSM and other technologies under development by Vertitek.
Our Solutions
Our UAV solutions will consist of aerial data collection hardware, software and data storage solutions
for commercial applications. We believe that our systems will collect and analyze the highest quality
aerial data in the most efficient manner possible. We are currently developing our software and data
storage solutions while we continue to test and refine our prototype hardware units.
15
AIMD Platform: Autonomous Intelligence for Mobilized Devices
We are creating a powerful and feature-rich system for connecting mobilized machines, drones and
robots to enable communication, automation and visibility. We expect to be able to offer choices from
dozens of industry applications that are experiencing a growing need for visibility to help maximize
operational efficiencies, and have taken into consideration the need for a seamless point of
integration, empowering the best-of-both-worlds – including hardware components and process
information – to work better together. We developed the AIMD platform as the intersection point for
real-time operational intelligence and effective work-flow that is accessible anywhere, anytime.
Our open application program interface (API) and support for industry standards are designed to make
it easy to add capabilities, integrate existing systems and innovate with our partners in exciting new
ways to harness all the power of their machines, devices and controllers. Designing enterprise-grade
scalability and security into the AIMD platform was at the forefront of our functional requirements. In
addition, simplicity, reducing the “speed to the field”, and filtering the crucial data are all at the top of
our list. Our cloud-based interface provides access to our customers’ own rule-based actions and
recognizes and reacts to empower all assets to perform better, even in extreme environments. We
believe that our system will differ from existing product offerings because it will be the first of its kind to
offer end users clearly defined next step options from a simplified user-friendly interface. In addition,
while the majority of our competition is focused on building proprietary hardware and software
systems, we are focused on making our solutions compatible with emerging industry standards,
allowing solutions to be easily integrated with offerings from other industry participants.
AIMDx – Learning Service Module
AIMDx is part of the predictive intelligence required for next level businesses. Designed as an out-of-
the-box external learning application, AIMDx lets clients connect, communicate and collaborate within
a secure, cloud-based network regardless of device type. AIMD transforms the data feedback loop into
usable information that allows for real-time streamlining of analysis and corrective action. From image
analysis to route discrepancies, the AIMDx module drives production and automating information flow
for a new level of efficiency, allowing for cross-referencing of first and third-party data sources. Unlike
automation software, AIMDx looks for deep contact points of engagement, authentic end-use
intelligence and lasting data assessment for use in the field. It’s quick and cost-effective via the cloud,
and is focused on helping our customers achieve results.
Our Hardware Systems
In collaboration with Vertitek, we are developing the extremely versatile V-1 DroneSM. The multi-rotor
platform features a large carbon fiber composite frame with high efficiency brushless motors. To further
increase efficiency, the motors include large diameter carbon fiber blades. This provides powerful lift
while increasing flight times. State-of-the-art lithium polymer batteries provide power to the rotor with
amazing power-to-weight ratios. These batteries not only save weight, but also provide longer flight
times than previous generations of batteries. Along with powerful batteries, the V-1 DroneSM will
feature a fully autonomous autopilot. The autopilot system is based on the powerful 32-bit Pixhawk
controller with many sensors and features. This controller provides more functionality with custom
sensor packages. These packages range from Sonar, to GPS mapping, to a live first person view
(FPV) of the surroundings. Each multi-rotor system can be customized to fit specific needs by
upgrading, optimizing, and personalizing individual components.
Images of the V-1 DroneSM
16
The following are the hardware specifications for the V-1 DroneSM:
●fully autonomous 32 bit Pixhawk flight controller
    
 ●lightweight customized carbon fiber frame
    
 ●high capacity lithium polymer batteries
    
 ●high voltage 20 amp brushless speed controllers
    
 ●large 17” carbon fiber propellers
    
 ●available customized sensor packages
To date we have built and tested approximately 10 prototypes of the V-1 DroneSM. Mr. Hammack is
allowing us the use of his ranchland to store and test the drones. When necessary we intend to
expand our testing area to include farmland and other agricultural areas for real world usability testing.
Suppliers
Both our hardware and software solutions rely on certain outside suppliers for either operational
components or software packages upon which our systems are constructed. While we rely heavily on
3D Robotics as our principle supplier for drone components, at this time there are multiple suppliers
for almost all of the components that are required in our business and we do not foresee a situation
under which we would be unable to receive the items required from these suppliers. Our V-1 DroneSM
prototype is constructed mostly from readily available components. When we begin to manufacture the
V-1 DroneSM for commercial sale, we will require certain proprietary components such as flight
controllers and network interfacers to be manufactured to our specifications. This will limit our supply
network and could leave us vulnerable in the event of an issue with such supplier. Where appropriate
we will try to diversify our supply network as much as possible to mitigate future supply risks.
Business Plan Implementation Schedule
We will be unable to implement the remainder of our business plan until we are able to secure total
financing of approximately $1,500,000. However, there can be no assurance that sufficient financing
will be available or available on suitable terms. We have not established a schedule for the
completion of specific tasks or milestones contained in our business plan, of which we have
implemented approximately 15% as of the date of this prospectus, focused mainly on the development
of our V-1 DroneSM. Virtually all aspects of our business plan are scalable in terms of size, quality, and
effectiveness, and the timing of their execution must be concurrent or near concurrent and progressive
over an eighteen-month period. We anticipate that we will require a total of $1,500,000 in order to
deliver upon our business goals within a 24-month period.
Sales and Marketing Strategy
We plan to begin producing revenues from sales related to drone services, either through one-time
contracts or through longer-term monitoring and data processing agreements. We plan to begin
discussions within the agriculture industry to determine the areas in which our services could have an
immediate impact, thus generating the most interest from early adopters. While we plan to attend
industry conferences and association meetings in order to introduce our services, we believe that
personal relationships and introductions will be our best avenue to capture revenues in the near-term.
We anticipate that within 24 months, we will be actively marketing our V-1 DroneSM for sale to
commercial customers. In order to effectively sell the V-1 DroneSM, we will need to engage a
professional sales and marketing team with experience in business-to-business sales. We expect that
as the UAV market matures over the coming years there will be opportunities for collaborations with
other interested parties which could provide additional markets for our product and services.
17
Characteristics and Make-Up of Target Market
The UAV market is constantly changing, due in large part to the current regulatory challenges faced by
the industry. It is impossible to predict exactly how new regulations will impact the market at this time.
Although our initial focus will be the agriculture and farming markets, our solutions, especially the V-1
DroneSM, will be applicable to a variety of markets. We will be constantly reviewing our target markets
to ensure the success of our business model.
As the UAV industry matures in the coming years, the demand for our solutions will only increase. Our
early entry into the commercial UAV marketplace will provide an opportunity to become one of the
major solution providers in our target markets.
Competition
The commercial UAV market is characterized by many participants that offer very similar products.
Therefore, our strategy is to begin offering advanced solutions that combine our software and
hardware offerings in such a way to bring clear value to our customers.
Although this industry operates in a highly specialized niche, competition for business will be intense.
We will face significant competition in the provision of both software solutions and hardware systems
from the following companies, among others:
Hardware Vendors
●Parrot Industries
    
 ●PrecisionHawk
    
 ●DJI Innovations
    
 ●Helico Aerospace Industries
Software Solutions Providers
●PrecisionHawk
    
 ●AirWare
    
 ●DroneCode
    
 ●NV Drones
Intellectual Property
Our policy is to capitalize intellectual property related to the filing and acquisition of internally
developed patents where appropriate.
Patent related expenses that are eligible for capitalization include:
●legal fees related to the preparation and filing of a patent application;
    
 ●legal fees related to the defense of a patent or patent application; and
    
 ●filing fees related to the filing of a patent application.
Intellectual property for internally developed patents will be capitalized only in the above
circumstances and will be amortized over the life of the patent, beginning on the grant date.
We have not filed any patents related to our UAV technologies as of the date hereof; however, we
anticipate that we will begin to complete such filings in the near future.
18
Research and Development
Our current research and development activities are solely focused on the continued development of
the AIMD platform as well as our collaboration on the V-1 DroneSM. We anticipate these efforts will
lead to additional products being developed from the foundation of these two systems. If and when we
are able to do this, engineering design development will be employed to aid in the development of
these systems. At this time, however, we have no plans to pursue pure research and development
activities at any point in the future.
Government Regulations
As a provider of technologies and services in the UAV industry we are likely to be subject to extensive
regulation at both the federal and municipal levels. This will be especially true if we begin to offer
operational services to our customers. We believe that increasing regulation in the drone space will be
beneficial not only to our business, but to all commercial drone operators and solution providers. The
barriers to entry created by such regulation will only help to differentiate the product and solutions
being offered by professional companies versus those that are intended for the consumer marketplace.
The regulatory environment for commercial UAV use has not yet been codified in the United States. In
addition to a few recent FAA exemptions, the key case, Huerta v. Pirker, has not brought definitive
clarity, just more clearly defined positions on both sides of the dispute over the regulated or
unregulated use of UAVs for commercial purposes.
UAV regulations for the United States airspace are still a patchwork of confusing, often contradictory
rulings, generally based on regulations, which, in some cases, were codified decades ago. Based on
the existing exemptions, those entities and organizations that are anticipating to utilize UAVs
commercially will be required to receive pilot certifications, including medical certifications, which the
FAA has attached to the few exemptions. Operators and pilots are likely to be distinguished. The FAA
has recently determined that a drone registry will be implemented in order to more effectively track
drones that stray into restricted airspace or are flown in violation of the law. We feel this registry is long
overdue and will help to reduce the negative attention paid to the industry when hobbyist operators do
not follow common sense guidelines for drone operations.
On the non-FAA side, there will be expanding barriers to entry into the UAV industry, especially if the
FAA regulations should surprise us with low thresholds for an entry into the commercial field. From
homeland security to privacy, there are real, and imaginary, dangers associated with the expanding
use of UAVs in the United States. As U.S. domestic regulation continues to fall behind that of more
forward thinking countries, it may become necessary for UAV companies to focus their efforts and
resources outside the United States until such time as UAV regulations become more conducive to the
game changing solutions that can only be delivered by tomorrow’s advanced UAV systems and
technologies.
On February 10, 2016, we were granted an exemption (No. 14749, Regulatory Docket No. FAA–
2015–4694) from Section 333 of Public Law 112-95 by the Federal Aviation Administration to operate
two models of the V-series drones to perform aerial data collection, and in particular, to conduct aerial
based agricultural applications, search and rescue operations, power-line inspections, pipe-line
inspections, infrastructure surveying and aerial imaging. The exemption is subject to industry standard
weight, speed and altitude limitations, as well as certain visual line of sight, visual observer, operating
document, safety and pre-flight inspection measures, among others.
The exemption will terminate on February 28, 2018, and we do not anticipate being unable to comply
with any conditions of the exemption during the term.
Employees
As of the date hereof, we do not have any full-time or part-time employees. We currently rely on the
efforts of Gerald B. Hammack, our sole executive officer and director, and Sean Foster, the sole officer
and director of Vertitek, to manage our operations. Mr. Hammack dedicates approximately 40 hours
per week to the management of our operations along with the oversight of our autonomous vehicle
software and hardware development projects, and Mr. Foster dedicates approximately 20 hours per
week to the continued development of Vertitek’s autonomous vehicle prototypes. From time to time,
we also engage consultants to provide specialized technical and support services, both in the
implementation of our corporate structure as well as the advancement of our products and services.
19
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY
Our principal executive office is located at 1001 S Dairy Ashford Road, Suite 100, Houston, TX 77077.
We lease this space from Regus Management Group, LLC, at a cost of $179 per month pursuant to a
virtual office agreement dated April 1, 2014, as amended on March 19, 2015. We believe that this
space is generally suitable to meet our needs for the foreseeable future; however, we will continue to
seek additional space as needed to satisfy our growth.
Our telephone number is (713) 595-6675 and our website address is www.valmie.com.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
We do not know of any material, active or pending legal proceedings against us, nor are we involved
as a plaintiff in any material proceedings or pending litigation. There are no proceedings in which any
of our directors, officers or affiliates, or any registered beneficial shareholders are an adverse party or
have a material interest adverse to us.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our financial statements are stated in United States dollars and are prepared in accordance with
United States generally accepted accounting principles.
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition has been
derived from and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes
thereto, that appear in the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part.
Overview
We were incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Nevada on August 26, 2011. We have not
yet generated any revenue from operations.
Results of Operations
Revenues
We have not generated any revenue since our inception. We anticipate that we will incur substantial
losses for the foreseeable future and our ability to generate any revenue during the next 12 months
continues to be uncertain.
Three Months ended May 31, 2016 and 2015
Expenses
During the three months ended May 31, 2016, we incurred $72,287 in operating expenses, including
$24,676 in professional fees, $30,262 in general and administrative expenses, $15,000 in
management fees and $2,349 in transfer agent fees. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we
incurred $88,406 in operating expenses, including $58,400 in professional fees, $17,299 in general
and administrative expenses, $11,000 in management fees and $1,707 in transfer agent fees. The
$16,119 decrease in our operating expenses between the two periods was therefore primarily
attributable to the significant decrease in our professional fees, which was in turn related to our
obligations under a consulting agreement we entered into on September 1, 2014 that was amended
effective February 28, 2015 to cancel the fixed monthly fee. During the three months ended May 31,
2016, our general and administrative expenses increased due to a general increase in our operations.
During the three months ended May 31, 2016, we incurred a $266,146 loss on the settlement of debt,
all of which was related to issuances of common stock to one creditor below market value, whereas
we incurred a $10,404,422 loss on the settlement of debt during the same period in fiscal 2016. That
loss was entirely due to issuances of common stock to various creditors that we completed on April 6,
2015, including 3,500,000 shares pursuant to the settlement of various promissory notes at a deemed
price of $0.10 per share, which was well below the market price of our common stock on that day.
During the three months ended May 31, 2016, we also incurred $7,448 in interest expenses, whereas
we received $8,001 in interest during the same period in fiscal 2015.
20
Net Loss
During the three months ended May 31, 2016, we incurred a net loss from operations of $72,287, a net
loss of $347,497, and a net loss per share of $0.01. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we incurred
a net loss from operations of $88,406, a net loss of $10,484,827, and a net loss per share of $0.17.
Six Months ended May 31, 2016 and 2015
Expenses
During the six months ended May 31, 2016, we incurred $149,896 in operating expenses, including
$75,025 in professional fees, $41,422 in general and administrative expenses, $30,000 in
management fees and $3,449 in transfer agent fees. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we
incurred $216,915 in operating expenses, including $168,460 in professional fees, $24,302 in general
and administrative expenses, $22,000 in management fees and $2,153 in transfer agent fees. The
decrease in our operating expenses between the two periods was largely attributable to the decrease
in our professional fees as described above, as offset by a much smaller increase in our general and
administrative expenses.
Net Loss
During the six months ended May 31, 2016, we incurred a net loss from operations of $149,896, a net
loss of $430,517, and a net loss per share of $0.01. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we incurred
a net loss from operations of $216,915, a net loss of $10,620,147 and a net loss per share of $0.09.
Y ears ended November 30, 2015 and 2014
Expenses
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we incurred $3,210,470 in operating expenses, including
$237,605 in professional fees, $52,000 in management fees, $38,143 in general and administrative
expenses, $5,578 in transfer agent fees and $2,877,144 in impairment losses. During the year ended
November 30, 2014, we incurred $164,155 in operating expenses, including $136,415 in professional
fees, $20,000 in management fees, $5,815 in general and administrative expenses and $1,925 in
transfer agent fees. The $3,046,315 increase in our operating expenses between the two years was
primarily attributable to the significant increases in our impairment losses related to intangible assets
acquired during the year and professional fees, which was in turn related to our obligations under a
consulting agreement we entered into on September 1, 2014. During the year ended November 30,
2015, our management fees, general and administrative expenses and transfer agent fees also
increased due to the general increase in our operations subsequent to the acquisition of Vertitek.
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we also incurred $10,403,232 in other expenses,
including a $10,404,422 loss on the settlement of debt, as offset by $1,190 in interest income.
Net Loss
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we incurred a loss from operations of $3,210,470, a net
loss of $13,613,702, and a loss per share of $0.15. During the prior year, we incurred a loss from
operations and a net loss of $164,155, and a loss per share of $0.00. The increase in our net loss
between the two years was attributable to both the increase in our net loss from operations as
described above as well as our other expenses, and in particular our significant loss on the settlement
of debt and impairment loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of May 31, 2016, we had $12,785 in cash and cash equivalents, $63,135 in current assets,
$104,325 in total assets, $107,600 in current liabilities, $132,713 in total liabilities, a working capital
deficit of $44,465 and a retained deficit of $14,368,261.
During the six months ended May 31 2016, we used $122,517 in net cash on operating activities due
to a combination of our adjusted net loss and our accounts payable increasing by $27,380. During the
same period in fiscal 2015 we used $244,532 in net cash on operating activities due to our adjusted
net loss and a $27,420 decrease in our accounts payable. The majority of our spending on operating
activities for the six months ended May 31, 2016 and 2015 was attributable to our net loss as
described above, as adjusted for any loss on the settlement of debt, and was associated with carrying
out our reporting obligations under applicable securities laws and pursuing opportunities for the
commercialization of products and services in the technology industry.
During the six months ended May 31, 2016, we used $10,074 in net cash on investing activities,
including our initial $10,000 investment in AeroLift. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we used
$32,836 in net cash on investing activities, substantially all of which was in the form of advances to
Vertitek.
21
During the six months ended May 31, 2016, we received $122,500 from financing activities, all of
which was in the form of proceeds from promissory notes. During the same period in fiscal 2015, we
received $300,000 from financing activities, all of which was also in the form of proceeds from
promissory notes.
During the six months ended May 31, 2016, our cash position decreased by $10,091 due to a
combination of our operating, investing and financing activities.
Our plans for the next 12 months are uncertain due to our current financial condition; however, we
intend to raise additional funds through public or private placement offerings. If we are unsuccessful in
raising enough money through such efforts, we may review other financing possibilities such as bank
loans. At this time we do not have a commitment from any broker-dealer to provide us with financing.
There is no assurance that any financing will be available to us or if available, on terms that will be
acceptable to us. In the absence of such financing, we may be forced to cease or significantly curtail
our operations.
Plan of Operations
We will need to raise additional capital to fully develop our business plan. We have a 24-month plan
during which we intend to implement our business development and marketing plan. We believe we
must raise approximately $1,500,000 to pay for expenses associated with the continued development
of our AIMD platform as well as the development and commercialization of the V-1 DroneSM. Of this,
we plan to use $500,000 to finance anticipated activities during Phase I of our development plan as
described below, and $1,000,000 to finance anticipated activities during Phase II.
Phase I
Description
Estimated Amount
 
 
($)
   200,000
Complete the development of the AIMD platform
Finalize the design of the V-1 DroneSM
   150,000
Hire sales staff to work with potential clients
   50,000
Additional working capital to cover general and administrative expenses   100,000
Total
   500,000
Phase II
Description
Estimated Amount
 
 
($)
Complete small-scale manufacturing of the V-1 DroneSM
  500,000
  200,000
Sales literature, displays and advertising expenses
Management and consulting fees, employee salaries
  200,000
Additional working capital to cover general and administrative expenses  100,000
Total
1,000,000
Many of the developments enumerated in Phase II are dependent on the completion of our Phase I
objectives, and both phases are dependent on us obtaining additional financing. There can be no
assurance that we will be able to secure such financing, and if we are able to raise some but not all of
the funds required to undertake the developments in Phase I and Phase II, our management will likely
need to re-examine our proposed business activities to use our resources most efficiently. In this
event, our focus will likely be on spending available funds to maintain our reporting status with the
SEC and developing our product designs to attract investors.
22
If we are unable to raise additional funds, we will not be able to complete any of the milestones in
either Phase I or Phase II. Due to the fact that many of the milestones are dependent on each other, if
we are unsuccessful in obtaining additional financing, we may not be able to implement any facets of
our business plan.
We intend to pursue capital through public or private financing as well as borrowings and other
sources, such as loans from our existing shareholders in order to finance our businesses activities. We
cannot guarantee that additional funding will be available on favorable terms, if at all. If adequate
funds are not available, then our ability to continue our operations may be significantly hindered.
Going Concern
Our financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates, among
other things, that we will continue to realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities in the normal course of
business. As at May 31, 2016, we had a working capital deficit of $44,465 and a retained deficit of
$14,368,261. We intend to fund our operations through equity financing arrangements, which may be
insufficient to fund our capital expenditures, working capital and other cash requirements for the next
12 months.
Our ability to continue in existence is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining additional
financing to continue our operations and the operations of Vertitek. These factors, among others, raise
substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not
include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in
the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date
of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting
period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our periodic filings with the Securities and
Exchange Commission include, where applicable, disclosures of estimates, assumptions,
uncertainties and markets that could affect our financial statements and future operations.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in banks, money market funds, and certificates of term
deposits with original maturities of less than three months, which are readily convertible to known
amounts of cash and which, in the opinion of management, are subject to an insignificant risk of loss in
value. We had $24,858 in cash and cash equivalents at February 29, 2016 (November 30, 2015 -
$22,876).
Capitalized Prototype Development Costs
Prototype development costs are costs associated with the development of software and hardware
related to advance drone fleet technology and are stated at historical cost. Prototype development
costs consist of salaries and costs of raw material in development. Until the prototype is substantially
completed and ready for its intended use, no depreciation expenses will be incurred. We currently
have no depreciation policy with respect to prototype development costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a
current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or
expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
23
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS
ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
On September 22, 2015, we notified our independent registered public accounting firm, Anderson
Bradshaw PLLC (“Anderson Bradshaw”), that we had decided to change auditors and were therefore
dismissing Anderson Bradshaw, effective immediately. Our decision was approved by our sole
director, also acting as the audit committee, on that same day, and concurrent with Anderson
Bradshaw’s dismissal, our sole director appointed Heaton & Company, PLLC (“Heaton”) as our new
independent registered public accounting firm.
During the fiscal years ended November 30, 2014 and 2013, and through September 22, 2015, neither
us nor anyone acting on our behalf consulted Heaton regarding (i) either the application of accounting
principles to a specified transaction, either completed or proposed, or the type of audit opinion that
might be rendered on our consolidated financial statements, and neither a written report nor oral
advice was provided to us that Heaton concluded was an important factor considered by us in
reaching a decision as to any accounting, auditing or financial reporting issue; or (ii) any matter that
was either the subject of a disagreement (as defined in Item 304(a)(1)(iv) of Regulation S-K and the
related instructions to Item 304 of Regulation S-K) or a reportable event (as defined in Item 304(a)(1)
(v) of Regulation S-K).
The reports of Anderson Bradshaw regarding our financial statements for the fiscal years ended
November 30, 2014 and 2013 did not contain any adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion and were
not qualified or modified as to uncertainty, audit scope, or accounting principles, except to indicate that
there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
During the fiscal years ended November 30, 2014 and 2013, and through September 22, 2015, we did
not (i) have any disagreements (as defined in Item 304(a)(1(iv) of Regulation S-K and the related
instructions to Item 304 of Regulation S-K) with Anderson Bradshaw on any matter of accounting
principles or practices, financial statement disclosure or auditing scope or procedures, which
disagreements, if not resolved to the satisfaction of Anderson Bradshaw, would have caused it to
make reference thereto in connection with its reports; or (ii) experience any reportable events (as
defined in Item 304(a)(1)(v) of Regulation S-K).
USE OF PROCEEDS
We received net proceeds of $200,000 from the sale of promissory notes to Crystal in the private
placement transaction, the conversion of which into our common stock resulted in the issuance of
2,000,000 shares. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the shares being registered
hereunder.
SELLING SHAREHOLDERS
The 2,212,765 shares of our common stock included in this prospectus were issued to the selling
shareholders in private sales in reliance upon the provisions of Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
Neither of the selling shareholders is a broker-dealer or an affiliate of a broker-dealer.
The following table sets forth, as to each of the selling shareholders: the number of shares of our
common stock beneficially owned, based on each selling shareholder’s ownership of the common
stock purchased pursuant to the Private Placement Transaction or the Hammack Technology
Acquisition; the number of shares of our common stock being offered by such selling shareholder
pursuant to this prospectus; and the number of shares of our common stock beneficially owned upon
completion of the offering and the percentage of beneficial ownership upon completion of the offering
based upon 67,052,607 shares of our common stock outstanding as of July 28 , 2016.
Information in the table below and the notes thereto has been provided to us by the selling
shareholders. Beneficial ownership and percentage have been determined in accordance with Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to the
securities. The information listed below is not necessarily indicative of beneficial ownership for any
other purpose.
24
Shares of
 
Common Stock
Held
Shares of  Common
  
Stock Being
Registered
Beneficial
  
Ownership After
Offering(1)
Percentage of Beneficial
  
Ownership After Offering
2,000,000
2,000,000
212,765
212,765
2,212,765
2,212,765
0
0
0
0
0
0
Name
Crystal
Resource
Corp. (2)
Gerald B.
Hammack (3)
 
Total
(1)
The numbers in this column assume each selling shareholder sells all of its shares being
registered pursuant to this prospectus.
 
Gregory Lyons exercises sole voting and investment power over the securities held by Crystal
Resource Corp.
(2)
(3)Mr. Hammack is our sole officer and director.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each selling shareholder may, from time to time, sell any or all of the shares covered hereby on the
OTC Bulletin Board, the OTC Pink marketplace or any other stock exchange, market or trading facility
on which our common stock is traded or in private transactions. These sales may be at fixed or
negotiated prices. A selling shareholder may use any one or more of the following methods when
selling shares:
●ordinary brokerage transactions and transactions in which the broker-dealer solicits purchasers;
    
 ●block trades in which the broker-dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position and
resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
    
 ●purchases by a broker-dealer as principal and resale by the broker-dealer for its account;
    
 ●an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
    
 ●privately negotiated transactions;
    
 ●settlement of short sales entered into after the effective date of the registration statement of which
this prospectus forms a part;
    
 ●in transactions through broker-dealers that agree with the selling stockholders to sell a specified
number of such shares at a stipulated price per share;
through the writing or settlement of options or other hedging transactions, whether through an
●options exchange or otherwise;
    
 ●a combination of any such methods of sale; or
    
 ●any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
Broker-dealers engaged by the selling shareholders may arrange for other brokers-dealers to
participate in sales. Broker-dealers may receive commissions or discounts from the selling
shareholders (or, if any broker-dealer acts as agent for the purchaser of shares, from the purchaser) in
amounts to be negotiated, but, except as set forth in a supplement to this prospectus, in the case of an
agency transaction not in excess of a customary brokerage commission in compliance with FINRA
Rule 2440; and in the case of a principal transaction a markup or markdown in compliance with
FINRA IM-2440.
In connection with the sale of the shares or interests therein, the selling shareholders may enter into
hedging transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions, which may in turn engage in
short sales of the shares in the course of hedging the positions they assume. The selling shareholders
may also sell shares short and deliver these shares to close out their short positions, or loan or pledge
the shares to broker-dealers that in turn may sell these shares. The selling shareholders may also
enter into option or other transactions with broker-dealers or other financial institutions or create one or
more derivative securities which require the delivery to such broker-dealer or other financial institution
of shares offered by this prospectus, which shares such broker-dealer or other financial institution may
resell pursuant to this prospectus (as supplemented or amended to reflect such transaction).
25
Broker-dealers or agents may receive compensation from the selling shareholders in the form of
commissions, discounts or concessions. Broker-dealers or agents may also receive compensation
from the purchasers of the registered securities for which they act as agents or to whom they sell as
principals, or both. A broker-dealer’s compensation will be negotiated in connection with the sale and
may exceed the broker-dealer’s customary commissions. Broker-dealers, agents or the selling
shareholders may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in
connection with sales of the registered securities. Any commission, discount or concession received
by these broker-dealers or agents and any profit on the sale of the registered securities purchased by
them may be deemed to be underwriting discounts or commissions under the Securities Act.
Because selling shareholders may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the
Securities Act, they will be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act. In
addition, any securities covered by this prospectus that qualify for sale pursuant to Rule 144 under the
Securities Act may be sold under Rule 144 rather than under this prospectus. The selling
shareholders have advised us that they have not entered into any agreements, understandings or
arrangements with any underwriter or broker-dealer regarding the sale of the registered securities.
There is currently no coordinating broker acting in connection with the proposed sale of the registered
securities by the selling shareholders.
We have agreed to keep the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part effective until
the date on which all of the registered securities have been sold pursuant to this prospectus. The
registered securities will be sold only through registered or licensed brokers or dealers if required
under applicable state securities laws. In addition, in certain states, the registered securities may not
be sold unless they have been registered or qualified for sale in the applicable state or an exemption
from the registration or qualification requirement is available and is complied with.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in the
distribution of the registered securities may not simultaneously engage in market making activities with
respect to the registered securities for a period of two business days prior to the commencement of the
distribution. In addition, the selling shareholders will be subject to applicable provisions of the
Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, including Regulation M, which may limit the
timing of purchases and sales of the registered securities by the selling shareholders or any other
person. We will make copies of this prospectus available to the selling shareholders and have
informed them of the need to deliver a copy of this prospectus to each purchaser at or prior to the time
of the sale.
We will pay all costs, expenses and fees associated with the registration of the registered securities,
including without limitation, SEC filing fees and expenses of compliance with state securities or “blue
sky” laws. The selling shareholders will pay all underwriting commissions and discounts, selling or
placement agent fees or broker fees and commissions, and transfer taxes, if any, associated with the
sale of the registered securities. The selling shareholders may agree to indemnify any broker-dealer or
agent that participates in sales of the registered securities against specified liabilities, including
liabilities arising under the Securities Act. The selling shareholders have agreed to indemnify certain
persons against specified liabilities in connection with the offering of the registered securities,
including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES
Introduction
In the discussion that follows, we have summarized selected provisions of our amended and restated
articles of incorporation, our amended and restated bylaws and the Nevada Revised Statues (the
“NRS”). This summary is not complete. This discussion is subject to the relevant provisions of Nevada
law and is qualified in its entirety by reference to our amended and restated articles of incorporation
and bylaws.
Common Stock
Our authorized capital consists of 750,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share.
As of July 28 , 2016, an aggregate of 67,052,607 shares of common stock were issued and
outstanding.
26
The holders of our common stock:
●have equal ratable rights to dividends from funds legally available if and when declared by our
Board of Directors;
    
 ●are entitled to share ratably in all of our assets available for distribution to holders of common stock
upon the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of our affairs;
    
 ●do not have preemptive, subscription or conversion rights and there are no redemption or sinking
fund provisions or rights; and
    
 ●are entitled to one non-cumulative vote per share on all matters on which stockholders may vote.
Preferred Stock
Our authorized capital also consists of 10,000,000 shares of shares of “blank check” preferred stock,
par value $0.001, 2,000,000 of which have been designated as Series “A” preferred stock. As of the
date hereof, all 2,000,000 shares of the Series “A” preferred stock are issued and outstanding and the
remaining 8,000,000 shares of “blank check” preferred stock have yet to be designated or issued.
The “blank check” preferred stock may be issued from time to time in one or more series, and our
Board of Directors is authorized to issue such stock in one or more series and to fix from time to time
the number of shares to be included in any series and the designations, powers, preferences and
relative, participating, option or other special rights, and qualifications, limitations or restrictions
thereof, of all shares of such series.
Subject to the rights of the holders of any series of preferred stock pursuant to the terms of any
preferred stock designation, the number of authorized shares of preferred stock may be increased or
decreased (but not below the number of shares thereof then outstanding) by the affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority of our capital stock entitled to vote generally in the election of directors.
The shares of Series “A” preferred stock carry certain rights and preferences, including that the Series
“A” Preferred Stock may be converted into shares of our common stock on a 10 for one (1) basis at any
time after 18 months from the date of issuance; that each share of Series “A” preferred stock has voting
rights and carries a voting weight equal to 50 shares of common stock; and that in the event of our
voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding-up, the Series “A” preferred stock has a
priority on liquidation senior to that of our other preferred stock.
Non-Cumulative Voting
Holders of our common stock do not have cumulative voting rights. This means that the holders of
more than 50% of the outstanding shares, when voting for the election of directors, can elect all of the
directors to be elected, if they so choose. In that event, the holders of the remaining shares will not be
able to elect any of our directors.
Dividends
On December 3, 2013, our former sole director approved a stock dividend of 59 authorized but
unissued shares of our common stock on each one (1) issued and outstanding share of our common
stock. On December 13, 2013, we received approval from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA) to effectuate the stock dividend by way of a forward split, and on December 17, 2013, our
shareholders of record on December 16, 2013 received the dividend. As a result of the stock dividend,
our issued and outstanding common stock increased from 4,940,000 shares to 296,400,000 shares.
Other than as described above, we have not paid any dividends to our shareholders. The declaration
of any future dividends is at the discretion of our board of directors and depends upon our earnings, if
any, our capital requirements and financial position, our general economic conditions, and other
pertinent conditions. It is our present intention not to pay any dividends in the foreseeable future, but
rather to reinvest earnings, if any, in our business operations.
27
INTEREST OF NAMED EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
No expert or counsel named in this prospectus as having prepared or certified any part of this
prospectus or having given an opinion upon the validity of the securities being registered or upon
other legal matters in connection with the registration or offering of the common stock was employed
on a contingency basis, or had, or is to receive, in connection with the offering, a substantial interest,
direct or indirect, in the registrant or any of its parents or subsidiaries. Nor was any such person
connected with the registrant or any of its parents or subsidiaries as a promoter, managing or principal
underwriter, voting trustee, director, officer, or employee.
Anderson Bradshaw PLLC of Salt Lake City, Utah, our former independent registered public
accountant, audited our financial statements included in this prospectus and registration statement to
the extent and for the periods set forth in its audit report. Anderson Bradshaw PLLC has presented its
report with respect to our audited financial statements. On September 22, 2015, we dismissed
Anderson Bradshaw PLLC as our independent registered public accountant. See “Changes in and
Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.”
Heaton & Company, PLLC of Farmington, Utah, our independent registered public accountant,
audited our financial statements included in this prospectus and registration statement to the extent
and for the periods set forth in its audit report. Heaton & Company, PLLC has presented its report with
respect to our audited financial statements.
Bacchus Law Corporation of 925 West Georgia Street, Suite 1820, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada V6C 3L2, has passed upon certain legal matters in connection with the validity of the
issuance of the shares of common stock.
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
General
As of the date hereof, we have 67,052,607 shares of common stock issued and outstanding.
Market Information
There is a limited public market for our common stock. Our common stock is quoted on the OTC
Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace under the symbol “VRMI”. Trading in stocks quoted on such
markets is often thin and is characterized by wide fluctuations in trading prices due to many factors that
may be unrelated to a company’s operations or business prospects. We cannot assure you that there
will be a market in the future for our common stock.
OTC market securities are not listed or traded on the floor of an organized national or regional stock
exchange. Instead, OTC market securities transactions are conducted through a telephone and
computer network connecting dealers in stocks. OTC market issuers are traditionally smaller
companies that do not meet the financial and other listing requirements of a regional or national stock
exchange.
Our common stock became eligible for quotation on the OTC Bulletin Board and OTC Pink
marketplace on December 6, 2012. The following quotations reflect the high and low bids for our
common stock based on inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and
may not represent actual transactions. The high and low bid quotations of our common stock for the
periods indicated below are as follows:
OTCBB / OTC Pink Marketplace
 High ($)  Low ($) 
Quarter Ended
   0.20
 
May 31, 2016
  0.75
   0.10
February 29, 2016   0.24
 
   0.122  
November 30, 2015  0.33
 
   0.22
August 31, 2015
  0.69
May 31, 2015
  6.00
   0.41
 
 
   0.31
February 28, 2015   2.55
 
   0.31
November 30, 2014  0.31
August 31, 2014
  0.31
   0.31
28
Holders
As of the date hereof, there are four  holders of record of our common stock, one of which is Cede &
Co.
Dividends
On December 3, 2013, our former sole director approved a stock dividend of 59 authorized but
unissued shares of our common stock on each one (1) issued and outstanding share of our common
stock. On December 13, 2013, we received approval from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA) to effectuate the stock dividend by way of a forward split, and on December 17, 2013, our
shareholders of record on December 16, 2013 received the dividend. As a result of the stock dividend,
our issued and outstanding common stock increased from 4,940,000 shares to 296,400,000 shares.
Other than as described above, we have never paid dividends on our common stock.
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
As of the date hereof, we do not have any compensation plans under which our equity securities are
authorized for issuance. We intend to adopt an equity compensation plan in which our directors,
officers, employees and consultants will be eligible to participate. However, no formal steps have been
taken as of the date of this prospectus to adopt such a plan.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
Our bylaws allow the number of directors to be fixed by our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors
has fixed the number of directors at one.
As of the date hereof, the name, age and positions of our sole executive officer and director were as
follows:
Name
Gerald B.
Hammack
Age Position
53
Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer, Director
Mr. Hammack will serve as our director until our next shareholder meeting or until his successor is
elected who accepts the position. Officers hold their positions at the will of the Board of Directors.
There are no arrangements, agreements or understandings between non-management shareholders
and management under which non-management shareholders may directly or indirectly participate in
or influence the management of our affairs.
Gerald B. Hammack – Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer, Director
Mr. Hammack has been our Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer,
Principal Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director since December 8, 2014. He has
more than 30 years of experience in a variety of technology-related fields, including programming,
digital telephony, database management as well as substantial expertise in the setup and
management of complex data processing systems. From 2008 to the present, he has acted as the
Managing Director of Wizard Technical Services, a boutique firm located in Cushing, Texas, focused
on the development of customized technology solutions for a diverse client base, including the
development and management of a cloud-based Internet telephony solution for a niche telephony
service provider as well as offsite management and oversight of legacy hardware and software
systems.
29
Prior to 2008, Mr. Hammack served as the Director of Technical Services for the Orleans Parish
Criminal Sheriff’s Office (OPCSO) in New Orleans, Louisiana. While holding the rank of Captain, Mr.
Hammack’s experience and dedication were instrumental in restarting OPCSO’s operations after the
devastation of Hurricane Katrina.
Mr. Hammack has not been a director of any company with a class of securities registered pursuant to
section 12 of the Exchange Act or subject to the requirements of section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, or
any company registered as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940,
during the past five years.
Significant Employees
Other than Mr. Hammack, Mr. Foster, the sole officer and director of Vertitek, and James Stafford, our
joint venture partner in AeroLift, we do not expect any other individuals to make a significant
contribution to our business at this time.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships among our sole director, sole executive officer or persons nominated
or chosen by us to become directors or executive officers.
Legal Proceedings
None of our directors, executive officers, promoters or control persons has been involved in any of the
following events during the past 10 years:
●any bankruptcy petition filed by or against any business of which such person was a general partner
or executive officer either at the time of the bankruptcy or within two years prior to that time;
    
 ●any conviction in a criminal proceeding or being subject to a pending criminal proceeding (excluding
traffic violations and other minor offenses);
●
being subject to any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated,
of any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining, barring, suspending or
otherwise limiting his involvement in any type of business, securities or banking activities;
●
being found by a court of competent jurisdiction (in a civil action), the SEC or the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission to have violated any federal or state securities or commodities law, and the
judgment has not been reversed, suspended or vacated;
●
being the subject of, or a party to, any federal or state judicial or administrative order, judgment,
decree or finding, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, relating to an alleged violation
of any law or regulation prohibiting mail or wire fraud or fraud in connection with any business
activity;
●
being the subject of, or a party to, any judicial or administrative order, judgment, decree or finding,
not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated relating to an alleged violation of any federal or
state securities or commodities law or regulation or any law or regulation respecting financial
institutions or insurance companies; or
●being the subject of, or a party to, any sanction or order, not subsequently reversed, suspended or
vacated, of any stock, commodities or derivatives exchange or other self-regulatory organization.
Except as set forth in our discussion below in “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions,” none
of our directors or executive officers has been involved in any transactions with us or any of our
directors, executive officers, affiliates or associates which are required to be disclosed pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the SEC.
30
Code of Ethics
We have not yet adopted a code of ethics that applies to our principal executive officer, principal
financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions,
because we have not yet finalized the content of such a code. Companies whose equity securities are
listed for trading on the OTC Bulletin Board and OTC Pink marketplace are not currently required to
implement a code of ethics.
Audit Committee
On September 30, 2013, we established an audit committee and appointed our former sole executive
officer and director as the sole member of the committee. He has since been replaced by our current
sole executive officer and director, Gerald B. Hammack. Mr. Hammack is not an independent member
of the committee pursuant to NASDAQ Listing Rule 5605(a)(2) since he is our sole executive officer.
The Board of Directors adopted a charter for the audit committee on September 30, 2013, a copy of
which was included as Exhibit 99.1 to our annual report for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2013,
filed with the SEC on March 14, 2014.
The audit committee is responsible for reviewing both our interim and annual financial statements. For
the purposes of performing their duties, the members of the audit committee have the right, at all times,
to inspect all our books and financial records and discuss with management and our auditors any
accounts, records and matters relating to our financial statements. The audit committee is required to
meet periodically with management and annually with our auditors.
Our Board of Directors has determined that we do not presently need an audit committee financial
expert on our Board of Directors carrying out the duties of the audit committee. Our Board of Directors
has determined that the cost of hiring a financial expert to act as one of our directors and to be a
member of the audit committee or otherwise perform audit committee functions outweighs the benefits
of having a financial expert on the Board.
We do not have any independent directors and have not voluntarily implemented various corporate
governance measures, in the absence of which, stockholders may have more limited protections
against interested director transactions, conflicts of interest and similar matters.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Summary Compensation Table
The following sets forth information with respect to the compensation awarded or paid to our current
and former sole officers and directors for all services rendered in all capacities to us. We do not have
any other executive officers and no other individual received total compensation from us in excess of
$100,000 during those years. Pursuant to Item 402(a)(5) of Regulation S-K, we have omitted certain
columns from the table since there was no compensation awarded to, earned by or paid to these
individuals required to be reported in such columns in either year.
Name and Principal Position
Year Ended November 30,
2015
Gerald B. Hammack,
   2014
Chief Executive Officer (1)
Timothy Franklin,
   2015
former Chief Executive Officer (2)   2014
   2015
Khurram Shroff,
Total 
 
($)
Salary 
($)
  47,000   47,000 
  N/A
 
  5,000    5,000  
  20,000   20,000 
 
  N/A
N/A
N/A
former Chief Executive Officer (3)   2014
-
-
(1)
(2)
Gerald B. Hammack has been our Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
Officer, Principal Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director since December 8,
2014.
 
Timothy Franklin was our President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director from April 16, 2014 until December 8,
2014.
 
Khurram Shroff was our President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director from September 30, 2013 until April 16,
2014.
(3)
31
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End
As of November 30, 2015, we did not have any outstanding equity awards.
Benefit Plans
We do not have any pension plan, profit sharing plan or similar plan for the benefit of our officers,
directors or employees. However, we may establish such plans in the future.
Director Compensation
We do not pay our directors any fees for attendance at Board meetings or similar remuneration or
reimburse them for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by them in connection with our business.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT
The following table sets forth certain information regarding our common stock beneficially owned as of
July 28 , 2016 for (i) each stockholder known to be the beneficial owner of 5% or more of our
outstanding shares of common stock, (ii) each of our officers and directors and (iii) our officers and
directors as a group. A person is considered to beneficially own any shares over which such person,
directly or indirectly, exercises sole or shared voting or investment power, or over which such person
has the right to acquire beneficial ownership at any time within 60 days through an exercise of stock
options or warrants or otherwise. Unless otherwise indicated, voting and investment power relating to
the shares shown in the table for our officers and directors is exercised solely by the beneficial owner
thereof.
For the purposes of this table, a person or group of persons is deemed to have “beneficial ownership”
of any shares of our common stock that such person has the right to acquire within 60 days. For the
purposes of computing the percentage of outstanding shares of our common stock held by each
person or group of persons named above, any shares that such person or persons has the right to
acquire within 60 days is deemed to be outstanding, but is not deemed to be outstanding for the
purpose of computing the percentage ownership of any other person. The inclusion herein of any
shares listed as beneficially owned does not constitute an admission of beneficial ownership.
Title of Class  Name of Beneficial Owner (1)
Amount and Nature of Beneficial
 
Ownership
Gerald B. Hammack (3)
Common
Stock
Common
Stock
Common
Stock
All Officers and Directors as a Group
Timothy Franklin (5)
Khurram Shroff (6)
Fen Holdings & Investments Ltd.
(7)
 
10 route de l’Aeroport
Geneva, Switzerland CH-1215
Preferred
Stock
212,765
-
-
212,765
2,000,000
Percent
  
of 
Class (2)
(4
-
-
(4
100
)
)
(1)
(2)
We are unaware of any shareholder who directly, or indirectly, controls or is the beneficial owner of
more than 5% of our common stock.
 
Based on 67,052,607 shares of our common stock and 2,000,000 shares of our Series “A”
preferred stock issued and outstanding as of July 28 , 2016.
32
Gerald B. Hammack has been our Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
Officer, Principal Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director since December 8,
2014.
(3)
(4)Less than 1%.
(5)
(7)
Timothy Franklin was our President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director from April 16, 2014 until December 8,
2014. To our knowledge, Mr. Franklin is not a current shareholder or beneficial owner of any
shares of our stock.
 
Khurram Shroff was our President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal
Accounting Officer, Secretary, Treasurer and sole director from September 30, 2013 until April 16,
2014. To our knowledge, Mr. Shroff is not a current shareholder or beneficial owner of any shares
of our stock.
 
Juergen Krause exercises sole voting and investment power over the securities held by Fen
Holdings & Investments Ltd.
(6)
Changes in Control
As of the date hereof, we are not aware of any arrangements, including any pledge by any person of
our securities, the operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change in our control.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
On April 16, 2014, Fen, a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands and our majority
stockholder, acquired an aggregate of 237,360,000 shares, or approximately 80.1% of our then issued
and outstanding common stock from Khurram Shroff, our former sole officer and director, for the
aggregate purchase price of $150,011.52. The acquisition of the shares by Fen was governed by the
terms of a stock purchase agreement between Fen and Mr. Shroff dated April 8, 2014. On January 16,
2015, Fen agreed to cancel those shares in exchange for the issuance of 2,000,000 shares of our
Series “A” preferred stock.
On January 20, 2015, we entered into the LOI with Vertitek to acquire 100% of the capital stock of that
company in exchange for the issuance of shares of our common stock to the principal shareholder of
Vertitek, contingent upon certain due diligence requirements. On January 27, 2015, we entered into a
share exchange agreement with Vertitek and the sole shareholder of Vertitek, Masamos, on
substantially the same terms as the LOI. On March 31, 2015, the closing of the share exchange
agreement occurred and we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock to Masamos in exchange
for 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. As a result, Vertitek became our wholly
owned subsidiary.
Between August 18, 2014 and March 20, 2015, we issued eight promissory notes to three investors
(Shield Investments, Inc. a British Virgin Islands corporation (“Shield”), Tuverga Finance Ltd., a Cypriot
corporation (“Tuverga”) and Fairwinds Consulting LLC, a Texas limited liability corporation
(“Fairwinds”)) in the aggregate amount of $365,000 in exchange for advances to us in an identical
amount. Each of the promissory notes bears simple interest at an annual rate of 15% and matures two
years from the date of issuance. Seven of the eight promissory notes, in the aggregate amount of
$350,000, were secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture,
fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by us on the date of the applicable note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds
thereof.
On April 6, 2015, we entered into debt conversion agreements with Shield and Tuverga pursuant to
which those investors converted an aggregate of $350,000 in debt into 3,500,000 shares of our
common stock at a price of $0.10 per share. As part of those debt conversion agreements, Shield and
Tuverga agreed to forgive any and all accrued interest and release their respective security interests in
our assets, rights or other property. Shield, Tuverga and Fairwinds were considered related persons to
us solely by virtue of the transactions described above.
On July 15, 2015, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with our sole officer and director,
Gerald B. Hammack, pursuant to which we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to certain
intellectual property related to the AIMD platform in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth of
common stock to Mr. Hammack on that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. As a result, Mr.
Hammack received an aggregate of 212,765 shares of our common stock. The entire $100,000 of
intellectual property was impaired and written-off as of November 30, 2015.
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we issued six promissory notes to Crystal in the aggregate
amount of $102,500 in exchange for advances to us in an identical amount. Each of the promissory
notes bears simple interest at an annual rate of 15% and matures two years from the date of issuance.
Each of the promissory notes is secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment,
furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by us on the date of the applicable note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds
thereof. Crystal is considered a related person to us solely by virtue of the transactions described
above.
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we paid management fees of $5,000 (2014 – $Nil) to
Timothy Franklin our former sole officer and director, and $47,000 (2014 – $Nil) to Mr. Hammack, and
converted $33,927 (2014 – $Nil) in debt previously owed to Mr. Shroff, resulting in a loss on the
settlement of debt in the amount of $919,422. Mr. Shroff assigned the debt to Dome Capital LLC prior
to its conversion.
During the year ended November 30, 2015, we had $10,781 (2014 – $Nil) in debt forgiven by Fen, our
majority stockholder.
33
As of November 30, 2015, we were obligated to Mr. Shroff for non-interest bearing, unsecured and
with no fixed terms of repayment loans with a balance of $Nil (November 30, 2014 – $19,146). We
also owed $Nil to Fen at November 30, 2015 (November 30, 2014 – $25,663).
During the period ended May 31, 2016, we entered into multiple promissory note agreements with
Crystal for an aggregate amount of $122,500 ($102,500 in aggregate during the year ended November
30, 2015). The promissory notes mature two years from the date of the inception of the notes and bear
simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%. The notes are secured by all of the assets, properties,
goods, inventory, equipment, furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents,
instruments, chattel paper, accounts, intellectual property rights (including but not limited to,
copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade
secrets) and other general intangibles, whether owned by us on the date of the applicable note or
thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof. On April 26, 2016, we settled $200,000 of the promissory
notes through the issuance of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock, and the associated accrued
interest of $13,854 was waived. We recognized a loss of $266,146 in connection with the debt
settlement.
During the period ended May 31, 2016, we paid management fees of $30,000 (2015 – $17,000) to Mr.
Hammack and $Nil (2015 – $5,000) to Mr. Franklin, and converted $Nil (2015 – $33,927) in debt owed
to Mr. Shroff resulting in a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $Nil (2015 – $919,422).
During the period ended May 31, 2016, we had $Nil (2015 – $10,782) in debt forgiven by Fen.
Other than as described above, we have not entered into any transactions with our officers, directors,
persons nominated for these positions, beneficial owners of 5% or more of our common stock, or
family members of those persons wherein the amount involved in the transaction or a series of similar
transactions exceeded the lesser of $120,000 or 1% of the average of our total assets for the last two
fiscal years.
Promoters
We believe that the following persons may be deemed to be our promoters as such term is defined in
Rule 405 under the Securities Act:
●
Khurram Shroff, our former sole officer and director and former majority shareholder, for the period
from September 30, 2013, the date he acquired his majority control, until April 16, 2014, the date he
sold his majority control to Fen; and
●
Mauro Baessato, our founder, former sole officer and director and former majority shareholder, from
our inception, the date he acquired his majority control, until September 30, 2013, the date he sold
his majority control to Mr. Shroff.
Director Independence
Because our common stock is not currently listed on a national securities exchange, we currently use
the definition in NASDAQ Listing Rule 5605(a)(2) for determining director independence, which
provides that an “independent director” is a person other than an executive officer or employee of the
company or any other individual having a relationship which, in the opinion of the company’s Board of
Directors, would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities
of a director. The NASDAQ listing rules provide that a director cannot be considered independent if:
●the director is, or at any time during the past three years was, an employee of the company;
●
the director or a family member of the director accepted any compensation from the company in
excess of $120,000 during any period of 12 consecutive months within the three years preceding the
independence determination (subject to certain exclusions, including, among other things,
compensation for board or board committee service);
●a family member of the director is, or at any time during the past three years was, an executive officer
of the company;
●
the director or a family member of the director is a partner in, controlling stockholder of, or an
executive officer of an entity to which the company made, or from which the company received,
payments in the current or any of the past three fiscal years that exceed 5% of the recipient’s
consolidated gross revenue for that year or $200,000, whichever is greater (subject to certain
exclusions);
●
the director or a family member of the director is employed as an executive officer of an entity where,
at any time during the past three years, any of the executive officers of the company served on the
compensation committee of such other entity; or
●
the director or a family member of the director is a current partner of the company’s outside auditor,
or at any time during the past three years was a partner or employee of the company’s outside
auditor, and who worked on the company’s audit.
34
We have determined that our sole director does not meet this definition of independence due to the
fact that he is also our sole executive officer.
We do not currently have a separately designated nominating or compensation committee.
DISCLOSURE OF COMMISSION POSITION ON INDEMNIFICATION
FOR SECURITIES ACT LIABILITIES
Our bylaws provide that we will indemnify our directors and officers to the fullest extent provided by
Nevada law.
The general effect of the foregoing is to indemnify a control person, officer or director from liability,
thereby making us responsible for any expenses or damages incurred by such control person, officer
or director in any action brought against them based on their conduct in such capacity, provided they
did not engage in fraud or criminal activity.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to our
directors, officers or control persons pursuant to the foregoing provisions, we have been informed that
in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities
Act and is therefore unenforceable.
REPORTS TO SECURITY HOLDERS
We plan to file annual, quarterly, and current reports, and other information with the SEC, where
applicable. You may read and copy any reports, statements, or other information we file at the SEC’s
public reference room at 100 F. Street, N.E., Washington D.C. 20549. You can request copies of these
documents, upon payment of a duplicating fee by writing to the SEC. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 for further information on the operation of the public reference rooms. Our SEC filings are
also available to the public on the SEC’s Internet site at http://www.sec.gov.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, 100 F Street NE, Washington, D.C.
20549, under the Securities Act a registration statement on Form S-1 of which this prospectus is a part,
with respect to the shares of common stock offered hereby. We have not included in this prospectus all
the information contained in the registration statement, and you should refer to the registration
statement and our exhibits for further information.
In the registration statement, certain items are contained in exhibits and schedules as permitted by the
rules and regulations of the SEC. You should read this prospectus and any prospectus supplement
together with the registration statement and the exhibits filed with or incorporated by reference into the
registration statement. The information contained in this prospectus speaks only as of its date unless
the information specifically indicates that another date applies.
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. No finder, dealer, sales person or
other person has been authorized to give any information or to make any representation in connection
with this offering other than those contained in this prospectus and, if given or made, such information
or representation must not be relied upon as having been authorized by the Company. This
prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy any of the securities
offered hereby by anyone in any jurisdiction in which such offer or solicitation is not authorized or in
which the person making such offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so or to any person to whom it
is unlawful to make such offer or solicitation.
STOCK TRANSFER AGENT
Island Stock Transfer is our transfer agent. It can be contacted by mail at 15500 Roosevelt Boulevard,
Suite 301 Clearwater, Florida 33760 or by phone at (727) 289-0010.
DEALER PROSPECTUS DELIVERY OBLIGATION
Until a date which is 90 days after the date of this prospectus, all dealers that effect transactions in
these securities, whether or not participating in this offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus.
This is in addition to the dealers’ obligation to deliver a prospectus when acting as underwriters and
with respect to their unsold allotments or subscriptions.
35
VALMIE RESOURCES, INC.
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
May 31, 2016
(Stated in US Dollars)
Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
Notes to the Unaudited Interim Consolidated Financial Statements F-4 – F-11
Page
  
 F-1
  
 F-2
  
 F-3
36
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
ASSETS
 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 4)
Stock subscription receivable
Prepaid expenses
Total Current Assets
 
Non-current Assets
Prototype development (at cost)
Investment in joint venture (Note 5)
Total Non-current Assets
 
Total Assets
 
LIABILITIES
 
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Promissory note (Note 9)
Total Current Liabilities
 
Promissory Notes (Note 9)
May 31,
 
2016
 (unaudited)
    
    
    
 $12,785
   50,000
   350
   63,135
    
    
   32,806
   8,384
   41,190
    
 $104,325
    
    
    
    
 $88,575
   19,025
   107,600
    
   25,113
November 30,
  
2015
   
     
     
     
  $22,876
    -
    350
    23,226
     
     
    32,732
    -
    32,732
     
  $55,958
     
     
     
     
  $61,195
    17,897
    79,092
     
    104,737
Total Liabilities
 
STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIENCY
 
Capital stock (Note 6)
Authorized:
10,000,000 preferred shares, $0.001 per share
750,000,000 common shares, $0.001 par value
Issued and outstanding:
2,000,000 preferred shares
66,452,395 common shares (November 30, 2015 – 64,092,035
common shares)
 
Additional paid-in capital
Retained deficit
 
Total Stockholders’ Deficiency
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
132,713
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
   2,000
183,829
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
    2,000
66,452
64,092
14,271,421     13,743,781
 
   (14,368,261)   (13,937,744 )
    
 
)
   (28,388
 
    
 $104,325
)   (127,871
     
  $55,958
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-1
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
Revenue
 
Operating Expenses
General and administrative
Management fees (Note 8)
Professional fees
Three Months
 
Ended 
May 31, 2016
Three Months
  
Ended 
May 31, 2015
$-
    
    
   30,262
   15,000
   24,676
$-
     
     
    17,299
    11,000
    58,400
Six Months
Ended 
  
May 31,
2016
   
  $-
     
     
    41,422
    30,000
    75,025
Six Months
  
Ended 
May 31, 2015
$-
     
     
    24,302
    22,000
    168,460
Transfer agent fees
 
Loss from Operations
 
Other expenses
Interest
Equity loss in joint venture (Note 5)
Loss on settlement of debt
 
 
Net Loss
 
Basic and Diluted Loss per Common
Share
 
Weighted Average Number of Common
Shares Outstanding
2,349
    
   (72,287
    
    
   (7,448
   (1,616
   (266,146
   (275,210
    
 $(347,497
$(0.01
2,153
3,449
     
)   (149,896 )   (216,915
     
     
    (12,859
    (1,616
1,707
 
     
 
)   (88,406
)
     
 
     
 
)   8,001
 
)   -
 
)   (10,404,422 )   (266,146 )   (10,404,422 )
)   (10,396,421 )   (280,621 )   (10,403,232 )
     
 
) $(10,484,827 ) $(430,517 ) $(10,620,147 )
)   1,190
)   -
) $(0.17
) $(0.01
) $(0.09
)
64,957,901
61,933,042
64,517,871    121,831,648
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-2
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net loss
Items not affecting cash
Loss on settlement of debt by issuing common stock
Equity loss in joint venture
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Prepaid expenses
Interest accrual
Net cash used in operations
Six Months
 
Ended 
May 31, 2016
  
    
 $ (430,517
    
   266,146
   1,616
    
   27,380
   -
   12,858
   (122,517
Six Months
  
Ended 
May 31, 2015
 
   
     
 
) $ (10,620,147)
     
 
    10,404,422  
 
    -
     
 
)
    (27,420
)
    (350
    (1,037
)
)
)   (244,532
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Advances to Vertitek Inc.
Cash acquired on the acquisition of Vertitek Inc.
Investment in joint venture
Increase in prototype development
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Proceeds from promissory notes
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Change in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents – beginning of period
 
Cash and cash equivalents – end of period
 
Supplementary Cash Flow Information
Cash paid for
Interest
Income taxes
 
Supplementary Disclosure of Non-Cash Investing Activity
Issuance of common stock for subsidiary
Issuance of common stock for settlement of promissory notes $ 200,000
-
   -
   (10,000
   (74
   (10,074
    
    
   122,500
   122,500
    
   (10,091
    
   22,876
    
 $ 12,785
    
    
    
 $ -
 $ -
    
    
 $ -
(25,500
)
    6,132
 
)   -
 
)   (13,468
)
)   (32,836
)
     
 
     
 
    300,000
 
    300,000
 
     
 
)   22,632
 
     
 
    12,565
 
     
 
  $ 35,197
 
     
 
     
 
     
 
  $ -
 
  $ -
 
     
 
     
 
  $ 2,770,000  
  $ -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-3
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
1. Organization
Valmie Resources, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated on August 26, 2011, in the State of Nevada,
U.S.A. The accounting and reporting policies of the Company conform to accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”), and the Company’s fiscal year end
is November 30.
In early December 2014, the Company changed its business focus from mining to pursuing
opportunities for the commercialization of leading edge products and services in the rapidly expanding
technology industry.
On March, 31, 2015, the Company acquired 100% interest in Vertitek Inc., a Wyoming corporation
(“Vertitek”). Vertitek was established to provide unmanned vehicle software, hardware and cloud
services for a wide range of commercial applications around the globe. Vertitek is in the process of
developing the V-1 DroneSM, a cutting edge multi-rotor UAV designed specifically to meet the
requirements of a growing commercial user base.
On April 15, 2016, the Company entered into a Joint Venture Agreement to form AeroLift eXpress LLC
(“AeroLift”). The Company owns 50% of AeroLift and has committed funding up to $500,000 to launch
the AeroLift business model.
2. Basis of Presentation
Unaudited Interim Financial Statements
The accompanying unaudited interim financial statements have been prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles for interim financial information and the rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). They do not include all information and
footnotes required by US GAAP for complete financial statements. However, except as disclosed
herein, there have been no material changes in the information disclosed in the notes to the financial
statements for the year ended November 30, 2015, included in the Company’s Form 10-K filed with
the SEC. The unaudited interim consolidated financial statements should be read in conjunction with
those financial statements included in the Form 10-K. In the opinion of Management, all adjustments
considered necessary for a fair presentation, consisting solely of normal recurring adjustments, have
been made. Operating results for the six months ended May 31, 2016, are not necessarily indicative of
the results that may be expected for the year ending November 30, 2016.
F-4
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
3. Acquisition of Vertitek Inc.
On March 31, 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of common stock in exchange for 100% of
the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. Vertitek was previously named Landstar Leasing, Inc.
(“Landstar”) and was incorporated pursuant to the Wyoming Business Corporation Act on February 19,
2014. On November 19, 2014, Landstar changed its name to Vertitek Inc. As a result of the acquisition,
Vertitek became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
In December 2014, the Company changed its business focus from mining to opportunities in the
technology industry. The acquisition of Vertitek enables the Company to pursue its new business
focus as Vertitek has focused on the development of unmanned vehicle software, hardware and cloud
services for a wide range of commercial applications around the globe. Vertitek is in the process of
developing the V-1 DroneSM, a cutting edge multi-rotor unmanned aerial vehicle (“UAV”) designed
specifically to meet the requirements of a growing commercial user base.
The acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition in accordance with US GAAP as Vertitek
did not meet the definition of a business. Vertitek did not consist of sufficient processes (systems,
standards, protocols, conventions or rules) that would be able to be applied to those inputs and have
the ability to create outputs as required by Accounting Standards Codification 805.
In exchange for common stock of $2,770,000, the Company acquired $18,355 of financial assets,
$2,777,145 of intangible assets related to intellectual property and $25,500 of financial liabilities. The
total value of the intangible assets related to intellectual property ($2,777,145) was impaired and
written-off as of November 30, 2015.
4. Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash on deposit $ 12,785
 
 $ 12,785
May 31, 2016  November 30, 2015
$ 22,876
  $ 22,876
5. Investment in Partnership
On April 15, 2016, the Company and its partner, James Stafford, a Texas resident (“Stafford”)
(collectively the “Members”), organized a joint venture entity, AeroLift Express LLC (“AeroLift”), to
develop and launch integrated service and solution offerings utilizing the latest advancements in the
UAV industry.
The material terms of the joint venture agreement between the Members are as follows:
●
The Company will contribute to AeroLift startup financing in periodic amounts, the total of which will
not exceed $500,000. Such financing will be made available to AeroLift in monthly installments of
$25,000 for the first 3 months from the date of execution of the joint venture agreement.
AeroLift will set aside a reserve fund, for operations, payroll, expansion, and employee bonuses
from AeroLift’s after-tax profit. The ratio of the reserve fund to AeroLift’s after-tax profit will not be
lower than 10% and may be a higher percentage with unanimous approval of the Members. The
distributed profit, which is the profit after above funds have been allocated, will be distributed to
Members, in proportion to their member interests.
●
F-5
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
5. Investment in Partnership (continued)
The carrying value of $8,384 at May 31, 2016 (November 30, 2015 - $Nil) includes $10,000 in
advances plus the Company’s share of the cumulative net loss of AeroLift of $1,616 (November 30,
2015 - $Nil).
Summary of financial information of AeroLift
For the period ended May 31,
2016   2015 
 
  
 
Office expenses
 $232   $ -  
Travel
   3,000   
-  
Net loss for the period $3,232  $ -
6. Capital Stock
Authorized Stock
At inception, the Company authorized 100,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001
per share. Each share entitles the holder to one vote, in person or proxy, on any matter on which
action of the stockholders of the corporation is sought.
On December 3, 2013, the holders of a majority of the Company’s issued and outstanding common
stock approved an increase in its authorized capital from 100,000,000 shares of common stock, par
value $0.001, to 750,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 (the “Authorized Capital
Increase”). The Company formally effected the Authorized Capital Increase on December 4, 2013 by
filing a Certificate of Amendment with the Nevada Secretary of State.
On December 3, 2013, the Company’s sole director approved a stock dividend of 59 authorized but
unissued shares of its common stock on each one (1) issued and outstanding share of its common
stock held by shareholders of record as of December 16, 2013. The payment date for the stock
dividend was December 17, 2013, as determined by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA). Upon the payment of the stock dividend, the Company had 296,400,000 issued and
outstanding shares of common stock, which represents an increase of 291,460,000 shares over its
prior total of 4,940,000 issued and outstanding shares of common stock. The split is reflected
retrospectively in the consolidated financial statements.
On December 10, 2014, the holders of a majority of the Company’s issued and outstanding common
stock approved a set of amended and restated articles of incorporation that, among other things,
increased the Company’s authorized capital to 760,000,000 shares, consisting of 750,000,000 shares
of common stock, par value $0.001, and 10,000,000 shares of “blank check” preferred stock, par value
$0.001.
On December 11, 2014, the Company’s sole director approved the designation of 2,000,000 shares of
the Company’s authorized but unissued “blank check” preferred stock, par value $0.001, as Series “A”
preferred stock. The shares of Series “A” preferred stock carry certain rights and preferences and may
be converted into shares of the Company’s common stock on a 10 for one (1) basis at any time after 18
months from the date of issuance, and that each share of Series “A” preferred stock has voting rights
and carries a voting weight equal to 50 shares of common stock.
F-6
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
6. Capital Stock (continued)
The preferred stock ranks senior to (a) any other series of preferred stock of the Company currently
existing or hereafter created (b) the common stock of the Company, now existing or hereafter issued
and (c) any other class of securities of the Company, in each case with respect to dividend
distributions and distributions of assets upon the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company
whether voluntary or involuntary.
The Company formally effected the designation by filing a Certificate of Designation with the Nevada
Secretary of State on January 15, 2015.
Share Issuances
On January 16, 2015, the owner of an aggregate of 237,360,000 shares of the Company’s common
stock agreed to cancel those shares in exchange for the issuance of the 2,000,000 shares of Series
“A” preferred stock. As a result, the number of issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s
common stock decreased from 296,400,000 to 59,040,000.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 3,500,000 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.10
per share in settlement of promissory notes totaling $350,000, including $300,000 in proceeds
received during the fiscal year. The stock was valued at the $2.81 trading price per share, resulting in
a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $9,485,000.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 339,270 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.10
per share in settlement of related party loans totaling $33,927. The stock was valued at the $2.81
trading price per share, resulting in a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $919,422.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of common stock at a price of $2.77 per share
for the acquisition of Vertitek. The stock was valued at $2.77 per share on the effective date of the
acquisition of Vertitek, March 31, 2015.
On July 21, 2015, the Company issued 212,765 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.47
per share for the purchase of all of the rights, title and interest in and to certain intellectual property
from the Company’s President.
On April 26, 2016, the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.10
per share in settlement of promissory notes totaling $200,000. The stock was valued at the $0.24
trading price per share, resulting in a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $280,000.
On May 9, 2016, the Company issued 360,360 shares of common stock to an investor at a deemed
price of $0.14 per share. Total proceeds of $50,000 were received subsequent to the period ended
May 31, 2016.
As of May 31, 2016, the Company had 66,452,395 issued and outstanding shares of common stock
and 2,000,000 issued and outstanding shares of Series “A” preferred stock.
At May 31, 2016, the Company had no issued or outstanding stock options or warrants.
F-7
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
7. Mineral Property Costs
Lander County, Nevada Claims
On September 30, 2011, the Company entered into an option agreement that would provide for the
purchase of a 100% interest in the Carico Lake Valley Property (the “Property”). The Property is
located in the State of Nevada.
To complete the option, the agreement requires the Company to make the following payments and
incur the following amounts on exploration and development:
a)$15,000 cash on September 30, 2011 (paid);
 
b)an additional $30,000 cash on September 30, 2013 (not paid);
 
c)an additional $60,000 cash on September 30, 2013 (not paid);
 
d)an additional $120,000 cash on September 30, 2014 (not paid) and
incur a minimum of $125,000 ($12,654 was incurred as of February 29, 2016) on exploration and
development work by December 31, 2013 and every subsequent year thereafter, through 2014.
e)
The entity that owns the Property has made the 2014 payments due to the Bureau of Land
Management, Nevada (“BLM”) and Lander County. The payments ($6,406) are reflected in accounts
payable and accrued liabilities and the annual exploration and development work.
The Company is responsible for any and all property payments due to any government authority on
the property during the term of this option agreement (BLM: $3,920 yr., Lander County: $294 yr.).
The entity that owns the Property terminated the option agreement with the Company on July 28, 2014
and the above mentioned reimbursement of $6,406 remains outstanding. The Company has no further
rights to the Property.
F-8
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
8. Related Party Transactions
On July 15, 2015, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement with its current President
pursuant to which the Company acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to certain intellectual
property from the President in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth of common stock on
that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. As a result, the Company issued 212,765 shares of
common stock to the President. The entire $100,000 of intellectual property was impaired and written-
off as of November 30, 2015.
During the period ended May 31, 2016, the Company paid management fees of $30,000 (2015 –
$17,000) to its current President and $Nil (2015 – $5,000) to a former director, and converted $Nil
(2015 – $33,927) in debt owed to a former director into common stock resulting in a loss on the
settlement of debt in the amount of $Nil (2015 – $919,422). The Company had $Nil (2015 – $10,782)
in debt forgiven by its majority shareholder.
9. Promissory Notes
On August 18, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor A for an
aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
August 18, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 500,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with the debt
settlement.
On October 7, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor A for an
aggregate amount of $25,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
October 7, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 250,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $677,500 in connection with the debt
settlement.
On October 22, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor B for an
aggregate amount of $15,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
October 22, 2016. As of May 31, 2016, $15,000 was received and interest accrued of $4,025 ($2,897
as at November 30, 2015).
On November 23, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor C for an
aggregate amount of $75,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
November 23, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
750,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $2,032,500 in connection with
the debt settlement.
On December 29, 2014, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $75,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on December 29, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
750,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $2,032,500 in connection with
the debt settlement.
On January 26, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on January 26, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
500,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with
the debt settlement.
F-9
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
9. Promissory Notes (continued)
On February 27, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $25,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on February 27, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
250,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $677,500 in connection with the
debt settlement.
On March 20, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A for
an aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
March 20, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 500,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with the debt
settlement.
During the period ended May 31, 2016, the Company entered into multiple promissory note
agreements with Investor D for an aggregate amount of $122,500 ($102,500 in aggregate during the
year ended November 30, 2015). The promissory notes mature two years from the date of the
inception of the notes and bear simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%. The notes are
secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture, fixtures, leases,
supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts, intellectual property rights
(including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, service
marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles, whether owned by Company on the
date of the note or hereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof. On April 26, 2016, $200,000 of the
promissory notes was settled through the issuance of 2,000,000 shares of common stock, and the
associated accrued interest of $13,854 was waived. The Company recognized a loss of $266,146 in
connection with the debt settlement.
The following are the long-term notes outstanding as at May 31, 2016:
May 20, 2016 
Due May 20, 2018
Principal  Accrued Interest
$25,000   $
$25,000   $
113
113
F-10
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
(Unaudited)
10. Going Concern and Liquidity Considerations
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue
as a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction
of liabilities in the normal course of business. As at May 31, 2016, the Company had a working capital
deficiency of $44,465 (November 30, 2015 – $55,866) and an accumulated deficit of $14,368,261
(November 30, 2015 – $13,937,744). The Company intends to fund operations through equity
financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund its capital expenditures, working capital and
other cash requirements for the next 12 months.
The ability of the Company to continue in existence is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining
additional financing to continue operations and the operations of Vertitek.
In response to these problems, management intends to raise additional funds through public or private
placement offerings.
These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a
going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result
from the outcome of this uncertainty.
11. Commitments
Pursuant to a letter of intent dated July 7, 2015, the Company is obligated to pay one vendor $5,000
for costs incurred to construct a prototype and testing of such prototype. As at May 31, 2016, $3,000
has been paid in relation to this obligation.
12. Subsequent Events
Subsequent to the period ended May 31, 2016, the Company issued 317,360 shares of common stock
to an investor at a deemed price of $0.32 per share for total proceeds of $100,000, and a further
155,738 shares of common stock to the same investor at a deemed price of $0.6421 per share for
additional proceeds of $100,000.
F-11
VALMIE RESOURCES, INC.
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
November 30, 2015
(Stated in US Dollars)
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Index
 
F-13
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets
 
Consolidated Statements of Operations
 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ DeficiencyF-17
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
 
Notes to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements
F-14
 
F-15
 
F-16
F-18
 
F-19
F-12
Heaton & Company, PLLC
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
Kristofer
Heaton,
CPA
William
R.
  
Denney,
CPA
To The Board of Directors and Stockholders of
 Valmie Resources, Inc.
  
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Valmie Resources, Inc. (the Company)
as of November 30, 2015, and the related statements of operations, changes in stockholders’
 
equity (deficit) and cash flows for the year then ended. These financial statements are the
responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on
these financial statements based on our audit.
  
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States of America). Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to
perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included
consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit
procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
 
an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining, on a test basis,
evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audit provides a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
  
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of Valmie Resources, Inc. as of November 30, 2015, and the
 
results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in conformity with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
  
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will
continue as a going concern.  As discussed in Note 10 to the financial statements, the
Company has negative working capital and has not generated revenues to cover operating
 
expenses.  These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability
to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to this matter are also
described in Note 10.  The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might
result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
240 N. East Promontory   
Suite 200
  
Farmington, Utah 84025  
  
(T) 801.218.3523
 
  
  
heatoncpas.com
/s/ Heaton & Company, PLLC 
 
 Farmington, Utah
 
 March 4, 2016
F-13
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Management
Russell E. Anderson, CPA  
Russ Bradshaw, CPA
William R. Denney, CPA  Valmie Resources, Inc.
1001 S Dairy Ashford, Suite 100
 Houston, TX  77077
  
We have audited the accompanying balance sheet of Valmie Resources,
Inc. as of November 30, 2014, and the related statements of operations,
changes in stockholders’ (deficit), and cash flows for the year then
 
ended.  These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s
management.  Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
financial statements based on our audit.
  
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States of America). Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged
to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit
included consideration of internal control over financial reporting, as a
basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the
 
circumstances but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit includes examining, on
a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in
the  financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our
audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
  
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in
all material respects, the financial position of Valmie Resources, Inc. as of
 
November 30, 2014, and the results of its operations, and its cash flows for
the year then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the
Company will continue as a going concern.  As discussed in Note 10 to the
financial statements, the Company has recurring losses and has not
 
generated revenues from its planned principal operations.  These factors
raise substantial doubt that the Company will be able to continue as a
going concern.  The financial statements do not include any adjustments
that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
5296 S. Commerce Dr
Suite 300
Salt Lake City, Utah
84107
USA
(T) 801.281.4700
(F) 801.281.4701
abcpas.net
/s/ Anderson Bradshaw PLLC 
 Anderson Bradshaw PLLC  
 
 Salt Lake City, Utah
 
 March 13, 2015
F-14
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(Stated in US Dollars)
ASSETS
 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 4)
Prepaid expenses
Total Current Assets
Prototype development (at cost) (Note 2)
Intangible assets (Notes 2 and 3)
Total Assets
 
LIABILITIES
 
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Due to related party (Note 7)
Promissory note (Note 8)
Total Current Liabilities
Promissory Notes (Note 8)
Total Liabilities
 
STOCKHOLDERS’ DEFICIENCY
 
Capital stock (Note 5)
Authorized:
10,000,000 preferred shares, $0.001 per share 
(Nil – November 30, 2014)
750,000,000 common shares, $0.001 par value 
(750,000,000 – November 30, 2014)
Issued and outstanding:
2,000,000 preferred shares 
(Nil – November 30, 2014)
64,092,035 common shares 
(296,400,000 – November 30, 2014)
Additional paid-in capital
Retained deficit
Total Stockholders’ Deficiency
 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity (deficiency) $ 55,958
64,092
2,000
13,743,781
   (13,937,744
   (127,871
-
-
-
November 30, 2015  November 30, 2014 
    
 
 
    
 
    
 $ 22,876
 
 
   350
 
   23,226
 
   32,732
   -
 
 
 $ 55,958
 
    
    
 
 
    
 
    
 $ 61,195
 
 
   -
 
   17,897
   79,092
 
 
   104,737
 
   183,829
$ 12,565
   
    12,565
   
   
  $ 12,565
   
   
   
   
  $ 83,250
    44,809
   
    128,059
    67,805
    195,864
-
-
296,400
(155,657
(324,042
(183,299
)  
)  
   
  $ 12,565
)
)
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-15
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Stated in US Dollars)
Revenue
 
Operating Expenses
General and administrative
Management fee (Note 7)
Professional fees
Transfer agent fees
Impairment loss
 
Loss from Operations
 
Other Income (Expenses)
Interest
Loss on settlement of debt
 
 
Net Loss
 
Basic and Diluted Loss per Common Share
 
Weighted Average Number of Common Shares
Outstanding
Year Ended 
 
 November 30,
2015
  
 $ -
    
    
   38,143
   52,000
   237,605
   5,578
   (2,877,144
    
   (3,210,470
    
    
   1,190
   (10,404,422
   (10,403,232
    
 $ (13,613,702
    
 $ (0.15
Year Ended 
  
 November 30,
2014
   
  $ -
     
     
    5,815
    20,000
    136,415
    1,925
)   -
     
)   (164,155
     
     
    -
)   -
)   -
     
) $ (164,155
     
) $ (0.00
90,336,662
296,400,000
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-16
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Deficiency
(Stated in US Dollars)
Common Stock
Number of
 
Shares
Amount
Preferred Stock
Number
  
of Shares
Amount
Additional
Paid-in
Capital
Accumulated
  
Deficit
Stockholders’
  
Deficiency
296,400,000     296,400    -
-
-
-
296,400,000   $296,400    -
-
-
$-
(155,657 )   (159,887
)   (19,144
-
(164,155
)   (164,155
$(155,657 ) $(324,042
) $(183,299
(237,360,000)   (237,360)  2,000,000    2,000     235,360
-
-
3,839,270
3,839
-
1,000,000
1,000
-
-
-
10,784,510    -
10,788,349
2,769,000     -
2,770,000
)
)
)
Balance –
November
30, 2013
Loss for the
year
Balance –
November
30, 2014
 
Exchange
of common
stock for
preferred
stock
Debt
settlement
Acquisition
of
subsidiary
Forgiveness
of debt –
related party
Acquisition
of intangible
assets
Loss for the
year
Balance –
November
30, 2015
-
-
212,765
213
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10,781
-
10,781
99,787
-
100,000
-
(13,613,702)   (13,613,702 )
64,092,035   $64,092    2,000,000  $2,000   $13,743,781  $(13,937,744) $(127,871
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-17
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Stated in US Dollars)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net loss for the year
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to cash used in operating
activities:
Loss on settlement of debt by issuing common stock (Note 8)
Impairment loss
 Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Prepaid expenses
Interest accrual
Net cash used in operations
 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Advances to Vertitek Inc. (Note 3)
Cash acquired on the acquisition of Vertitek Inc.
Increase in prototype development
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Proceeds from related party payable
Proceeds from promissory notes
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
Change in cash and cash equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents - beginning of year
 
Cash and cash equivalents - end of year
 
Supplementary Disclosure of Non-Cash Investing &
Financing Activity
Issuance of common stock for intangible assets
Issuance of common stock to settle debt
Year Ended
 
November 30,
2015
  
    
 $ (13,613,702
Year Ended
  
November 30,
2014
   
   
)   (164,155
10,404,422
   2,877,144
    
   (22,055
   (350
   (549
   (355,090
    
    
   (25,500
   6,133
   (32,732
   (52,099
    
    
   -
   417,500
   417,500
    
   10,311
    
   12,565
    
 $ 22,876
$ 2,870,000
 $ 383,927
-
    -
   
 
)   66,592
)   5,000
)   2,805
)   (89,758
   
 
   
 
)  
 
    -
)   -
)   -
 
   
   
 
    37,323
    65,000
    102,323
   
    12,565
   
 
    -
   
 
    12,565
$ -
  $ -
)
)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements
F-18
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
1. Organization
Valmie Resources Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated on August 26, 2011, in the State of Nevada,
U.S.A. The accounting and reporting policies of the Company conform to accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”), and the Company’s fiscal year end
is November 30.
In early December 2014, the Company changed its business focus from mining to pursuing
opportunities for the commercialization of leading edge products and services in the rapidly expanding
technology industry.
On March, 31, 2015, the Company acquired a 100% interest in Vertitek Inc., a Wyoming corporation
(“Vertitek”).
Vertitek was established to provide unmanned vehicle software, hardware and cloud services for a
wide range of commercial applications around the globe. Vertitek is in the process of developing the
V-1 DroneSM, a cutting edge multi-rotor UAV designed specifically to meet the requirements of a
growing commercial user base.
2. Significant Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires
management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial
statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual
results could differ from those estimates. The Company’s periodic filings with the Securities and
Exchange Commission include, where applicable, disclosures of estimates, assumptions,
uncertainties and markets that could affect the consolidated financial statements and future operations
of the Company.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in banks, money market funds, and certificates of term
deposits with original maturities of less than three months, which are readily convertible to known
amounts of cash and which, in the opinion of management, are subject to an insignificant risk of loss in
value. The Company had $22,876 in cash and cash equivalents at November 30, 2015 (November 30,
2014 – $12,565).
Mineral Acquisition and Exploration Costs
The Company has been in the exploration stage since its formation on August 26, 2011 and has not
yet realized any revenue from its operations. During the year ended November 30, 2015, the Company
changed its business focus from mining to opportunities in the technology industry. Mineral property
acquisition and exploration costs are expensed as incurred. When it has been determined that a
mineral property can be economically developed as a result of establishing proven and probable
reserves, the costs incurred to develop such property are capitalized. Such costs will be amortized
using the units-of-production method over the estimated life of the probable reserves.
F-19
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
2. Significant Accounting Policies – Continued
Concentrations of Credit Risk
The Company’s financial instruments that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk primarily consist
of its cash and cash equivalents and related party payables it will likely incur in the near future. The
Company places its cash and cash equivalents with financial institutions of high credit worthiness. At
times, its cash and cash equivalents with a particular financial institution may exceed any applicable
government insurance limits. The Company’s management plans to assess the financial strength and
credit worthiness of any parties to which it extends funds, and as such, it believes that any associated
credit risk exposures are limited.
Net Income or (Loss) per Share of Common Stock
The Company has adopted FASC Topic No. 260, “Earnings Per Share” (“EPS”), which requires
presentation of basic and diluted EPS on the face of the income statement for all entities with complex
capital structures and requires a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator of the basic EPS
computation to the numerator and denominator of the diluted EPS computation. In the consolidated
financial statements, basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income/loss by the
weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Foreign Currency Translations
The Company’s functional and reporting currency is the US dollar. All transactions initiated in other
currencies are translated into US dollars using the exchange rate prevailing on the date of transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into the US dollar at
the rate of exchange in effect at the balance sheet date. Unrealized exchange gains and losses arising
from such transactions are deferred until realization and are included as a separate component of
stockholders’ equity (deficit) as a component of comprehensive income or loss. Upon realization, the
amount deferred is recognized in income in the period when it is realized.
No significant realized exchange gain or losses were recorded as at November 30, 2015 and 2014.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
FASC Topic No. 220, “Comprehensive Income”, establishes standards for reporting and display of
comprehensive income and its components in a full set of general-purpose financial statements. As at
November 30, 2015 and 2014, the Company had no items of other comprehensive income. Therefore,
net loss equals comprehensive loss as at November 30, 2015 and 2014.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company’s operations in the technology industry are subject to significant risks and uncertainties
including financial, operational, technological, and other risks associated with operating a technology
development business.
Capitalized Prototype Development Costs
Prototype development costs are costs associated with the development of software and hardware
related to advance drone fleet technology and are stated at historical cost. Prototype development
costs consist of salaries and costs of raw material in development. Until the prototype is substantially
completed and ready for its intended use, no depreciation expenses will be incurred. The Company
currently has no depreciation policy with respect to prototype development costs.
F-20
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
2. Significant Accounting Policies – Continued
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are reviewed for impairment at least
annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying value of the asset may not be
recoverable.
Through the acquisition of Vertitek (see Note 3), the Company acquired the V-1 DroneSM and other
technologies that constitute the definition of indefinite-lived intangible assets. The Company performs
annual impairment tests of the intangible assets during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year and
assesses qualitative factors to determine the likelihood of impairment. The Company’s qualitative
analysis includes, but is not limited to, assessing the changes in macroeconomic conditions,
regulatory environment, industry and market conditions, financial performance versus budget and any
other events or circumstances specific to the technologies. If it is more likely than not that the fair value
of the technologies is greater than the carrying value, no further testing is required. Otherwise, the
Company will apply the quantitative impairment test method.
The key assumptions used in estimating the recoverable amounts of the technologies include:
i) the market penetration leading to revenue growth;
ii) the profit margin;
iii) the duration and profile of the build-up period;
iv) the estimated start-up costs and losses incurred during the build-up period; and
v) the discount rate.
Fair value less costs of disposal is the price that would be received to sell an asset in an orderly
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In order to determine the fair value
less costs of disposal, the Company uses either a market or income approach. Under a market
approach, the Company measures what an independent third party would pay to purchase the
technologies by looking to actual market transactions for similar assets. Under an income approach,
the fair value is determined to be the sum of the projected discounted cash flows over a discrete period
of time in addition to the terminal value.
The value in use amount is the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from the
asset. The determination of this amount includes projections of cash inflows from the continuing use of
the asset and cash outflows that are required to generate the associated cash inflows. These cash
inflows are discounted at an appropriate discount rate.
The Company determined that the value associated with the technologies under the market approach
was indeterminable. Given that the Company has no tentative plans to use the acquired technologies
and does not expect any sales or cash inflows associated with the technologies, the entire value of the
technologies has been fully impaired as at November 30, 2015.
F-21
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
2. Significant Accounting Policies – Continued
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements that are listed below did not, and are not currently expected to,
have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements, but will be implemented in
the Company’s future financial reporting when applicable.
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards
Update (“ASU”) 2016-02—Leases. The FASB amended lease accounting requirements to begin
recording assets and liabilities arising from leases on the balance sheet. The new guidance will also
require significant additional disclosures about the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows from
leases. This new guidance will be effective for the Company beginning on December 1, 2020 using a
modified retrospective approach. The modified retrospective approach includes a number of optional
practical expedients that entities may elect to apply. Currently, the Company’s operations do not
include significant leases. The Company is evaluating the potential future impact ASU 2016-02 will
have on its consolidated financial statements.
In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-01—Financial Instruments-Overall: Recognition and
Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities. ASU 2016-01 modifies how entities
measure equity investments and present changes in the fair value of financial liabilities. Under the
new guidance, entities will have to measure equity investments that do not result in consolidation and
are not accounted under the equity method at fair value and recognize any changes in fair value in net
income unless the investments qualify for the new practicality exception. A practicality exception will
apply to those equity investments that do not have a readily determinable fair value and do not qualify
for the practical expedient to estimate fair value, and as such these investments may be measured at
cost. Given that the Company currently does not hold any equity investments, it does not expect the
impact of ASU 2016-01 on its consolidated financial statements to be significant.
In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-17—Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Taxes,
which simplifies the presentation of deferred income taxes. ASU 2015-17 requires that deferred tax
assets and liabilities be classified as noncurrent assets or noncurrent liabilities. At this time, the
Company has not incurred or generated a significant amount of deferred tax assets or liabilities to be
recognized on the financial statements (see Note 9). The Company does not expect the impact of ASU
2015-17 on its consolidated financial statements to be significant.
In September 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-16—Simplifying the Accounting for Measurement-
Period Adjustments, which eliminates the requirement for an acquirer in a business combination to
account for measurement-period adjustments retrospectively. Instead, acquirers must recognize
measurement-period adjustments during the period in which they determine the amounts, including
the effect on earnings of any amounts they would have recorded in previous periods if the accounting
had been completed at the acquisition date. ASU 2015-16 will be effective beginning on January 1,
2016. The Company does not expect the impact of ASU 2015-16 on its consolidated financial
statements to be significant.
F-22
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
3. Acquisition of Vertitek Inc.
On March 31, 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of common stock in exchange for 100% of
the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. Vertitek was previously named Landstar Leasing, Inc.
(“Landstar”) and was incorporated pursuant to the Wyoming Business Corporation Act on February 19,
2014. On November 19, 2014, Landstar changed its name to Vertitek Inc. As a result of the acquisition,
Vertitek became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
In December 2014, the Company changed its business focus from mining to opportunities in the
technology industry. The acquisition of Vertitek enables the Company to pursue its new business
focus as Vertitek has focused on the development of unmanned vehicle software, hardware and cloud
services for a wide range of commercial applications around the globe. Vertitek is in the process of
developing the V-1 DroneSM, a cutting edge multi-rotor unmanned aerial vehicle (“UAV”) designed
specifically to meet the requirements of a growing commercial user base.
The acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition in accordance with US GAAP as Vertitek
did not meet the definition of a business .Vertitek did not consist of sufficient processes (systems,
standards, protocols, conventions or rules) that would be able to be applied to those inputs and have
the ability to create outputs as required by Accounting Standards Codification 805.
In exchange for common stock of $2,770,000, the Company acquired $18,355 of financial assets,
$2,777,145 of intangible assets related to intellectual property and $25,500 of financial liabilities. The
total value of the intangible assets related to intellectual property ($2,777,145) was impaired and
written-off as of November 30, 2015.
4. Cash and Cash Equivalents
November 30, 2015  November 30, 2014
$ 22,876
Cash on deposit
Funds held in trust
$ 22,876
-
$ 3,027
    9,538
  $ 12,565
5. Capital Stock
Authorized Stock
At inception, the Company authorized 100,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001
per share. Each share entitles the holder to one vote, in person or proxy, on any matter on which
action of the stockholders of the corporation is sought.
On December 3, 2013, the holders of a majority of the Company’s issued and outstanding common
stock approved an increase in its authorized capital from 100,000,000 shares of common stock, par
value $0.001, to 750,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 (the “Authorized Capital
Increase”). The Company formally effected the Authorized Capital Increase on December 4, 2013 by
filing a Certificate of Amendment with the Nevada Secretary of State.
On December 3, 2013, the Company’s sole director approved a stock dividend of 59 authorized but
unissued shares of its common stock on each one (1) issued and outstanding share of its common
stock held by shareholders of record as of December 16, 2013. The payment date for the stock
dividend was December 17, 2013, as determined by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA). Upon the payment of the stock dividend, the Company had 296,400,000 issued and
outstanding shares of common stock, which represents an increase of 291,460,000 shares over its
prior total of 4,940,000 issued and outstanding shares of common stock. The split is reflected
retrospectively in the consolidated financial statements.
F-23
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
5. Capital Stock – Continued
On December 10, 2014, the holders of a majority of the Company’s issued and outstanding common
stock approved a set of amended and restated articles of incorporation that, among other things,
increased the Company’s authorized capital to 760,000,000 shares, consisting of 750,000,000 shares
of common stock, par value $0.001, and 10,000,000 shares of “blank check” preferred stock, par value
$0.001.
On December 11, 2014, the Company’s sole director approved the designation of 2,000,000 shares of
the Company’s authorized but unissued “blank check” preferred stock, par value $0.001, as Series “A”
preferred stock. The shares of Series “A” preferred stock carry certain rights and preferences and may
be converted into shares of the Company’s common stock on a 10 for one (1) basis at any time after 18
months from the date of issuance, and that each share of Series “A” preferred stock has voting rights
and carries a voting weight equal to 50 shares of common stock.
The preferred stock ranks senior to (a) any other series of preferred stock of the Company currently
existing or hereafter created (b) the common stock of the Company, now existing or hereafter issued
and (c) any other class of securities of the Company, in each case with respect to dividend
distributions and distributions of assets upon the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company
whether voluntary or involuntary.
The Company formally effected the designation by filing a Certificate of Designation with the Nevada
Secretary of State on January 15, 2015.
Share Issuances
On January 16, 2015, the owner of an aggregate of 237,360,000 shares of the Company’s common
stock agreed to cancel those shares in exchange for the issuance of the 2,000,000 shares of Series
“A” preferred stock. As a result, the number of issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s
common stock decreased from 296,400,000 to 59,040,000.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 3,500,000 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.10
per share in settlement of promissory notes totaling $350,000, including $300,000 in proceeds
received during the fiscal year. The stock was valued at the $2.81 trading price per share, resulting in
a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $9,485,000.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 339,270 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.10
per share in settlement of related party loans totaling $33,927. The stock was valued at the $2.81
trading price per share, resulting in a loss on the settlement of debt in the amount of $919,422.
On April 6, 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 shares of common stock at a price of $2.77 per share
for the acquisition of Vertitek. The stock was valued at $2.77 per share on the effective date of the
acquisition of Vertitek, March 31, 2015.
On July 21, 2015, the Company issued 212,765 shares of common stock at a deemed price of $0.47
per share for the purchase of all of the rights, title and interest in and to certain intellectual property
from the Company’s President.
As of November 30, 2015, the Company had 64,092,035 issued and outstanding shares of common
stock and 2,000,000 issued and outstanding shares of Series “A” preferred stock.
At November 30, 2015, the Company had no issued or outstanding stock options or warrants.
F-24
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
6. Mineral Property Costs
Lander County, Nevada Claims
On September 30, 2011, the Company entered into an option agreement that would provide for the
purchase of a 100% interest in the Carico Lake Valley Property (the “Property”). The Property is
located in the State of Nevada.
To complete the option, the agreement requires the Company to make the following payments and
incur the following amounts on exploration and development:
a)$15,000 cash on September 30, 2011 (paid);
 
b)an additional $30,000 cash on September 30, 2013 (not paid);
c)an additional $60,000 cash on September 30, 2013 (not paid);
 
d)an additional $120,000 cash on September 30, 2014 (not paid) and
incur a minimum of $125,000 ($12,654 has been incurred as of November 30, 2015) on exploration
and development work by December 31, 2013 and every subsequent year thereafter, through 2014.
e)
The entity that owns the Property has made the 2014 payments due to the Bureau of Land
Management, Nevada (“BLM”) and Lander County. The payments ($6,406) are reflected in accounts
payable and accrued liabilities and the annual exploration and development work.
The Company is responsible for any and all property payments due to any government authority on
the property during the term of this option agreement (BLM: $3,920 yr., Lander County: $294 yr.).
The entity that owns the Property terminated the option agreement with the Company on July 28, 2014
and the above mentioned reimbursement of $6,406 remains outstanding. The Company has no further
rights to the Property.
7. Related Party Transactions
On July 15, 2015, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement with its current President
pursuant to which the Company acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to certain intellectual
property from the President in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth of common stock on
that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. As a result, the Company issued 212,765 shares of
common stock to the President. The entire $100,000 of intellectual property was impaired and written-
off as of November 30, 2015.
During the year ended November 30, 2015, the Company paid management fees of $5,000 (2014 –
$10,000) to a former director and $47,000 (2014 – $Nil) to its current President, and converted $33,927
(2014 – $Nil) in debt owed to a former director into common stock resulting in a loss on the settlement
of debt in the amount of $919,422. The Company had $10,781 (2014 – $Nil) in debt forgiven by its
majority shareholder.
As of November 30, 2015, the Company was obligated to a former director for non-interest bearing,
unsecured and with no fixed terms of repayment loans with a balance of $Nil (November 30, 2014 –
$19,146). The Company also owed $Nil to its majority shareholder at November 30, 2015 (November
30, 2014 – $25,663).
F-25
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
8. Promissory Notes
On August 18, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor A for an
aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
August 18, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 500,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with the debt
settlement.
On October 7, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor A for an
aggregate amount of $25,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
October 7, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 250,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $677,500 in connection with the debt
settlement.
On October 22, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor B for an
aggregate amount of $15,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
October 22, 2016. As of November 30, 2015, $15,000 was received and interest accrued of $2,897
($647 as at November 30, 2014).
On November 23, 2014, the Company entered into a promissory note agreement with Investor C for an
aggregate amount of $75,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
November 23, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
750,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $2,032,500 in connection with
the debt settlement.
On December 29, 2014, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $75,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on December 29, 2016. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
750,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $2,032,500 for the debt
settlement.
On January 26, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on January 26, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
500,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with
the debt settlement.
On February 27, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A
for an aggregate amount of $25,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable
on February 27, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of
250,000 shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $677,500 in connection with the
debt settlement.
On March 20, 2015, the Company entered into another promissory note agreement with Investor A for
an aggregate amount of $50,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%, repayable on
March 20, 2017. On April 6, 2015, the promissory note was settled through the issuance of 500,000
shares of common stock. The Company recognized a loss of $1,355,000 in connection with the debt
settlement.
F-26
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
8. Promissory Notes – Continued
During the year ended November 30, 2015, the Company entered into multiple promissory note
agreements with an Investor D for an aggregate amount of $102,500. The promissory notes mature
two years from the date of the inception of the notes and bear simple interest at an annual interest rate
of 15%. The notes are secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture,
fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by Company on the date of the note or hereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof.
The following are the notes outstanding as at November 30, 2015:
Note 1 on October 22, 2014
Principal   Accrued Interest
15,000
2,897
Note 1 on October 22, 2014
Due October 22, 2016
Note 2 on July 30, 2015
Due July 30, 2017
Note 3 on September 2, 2015
Due September 2, 2017
Note 4 on October 2, 2015
Due October 2, 2017
Note 5 on October 21, 2015
Due October 21, 2017
Note 6 on October 29, 2015
Due October 29, 2017
Note 7 on November 17, 2015
Due November 17, 2017
$15,000   $ 2,897
$20,000   $ 1,011
$7,500
$ 274
$10,000   $ 242
$15,000   $ 247
$25,000   $ 329
$25,000   $ 134
$117,500  $ 5,134
9. Provision for Income Taxes
The Company recognizes the tax effects of transactions in the year in which such transactions enter
into the determination of net income, regardless of when reported for tax purposes. Deferred taxes are
provided in the consolidated financial statements under FASC 718-740-20 to give effect to the
resulting temporary differences which may arise from differences in the bases of fixed assets,
depreciation methods, allowances, and start-up costs based on the income taxes expected to be
payable in future years.
Deferred tax assets arising as a result of net operating loss carryforwards have been offset completely
by a valuation allowance due to the uncertainty of their utilization in future periods. Operating loss
carryforwards generated during the period from August 26, 2011 (date of inception) through November
30, 2015 of $656,178 will begin to expire in 2031. Accordingly, deferred tax assets of approximately
$229,662 were offset by the valuation allowance.
The Company follows the provisions of uncertain tax positions as addressed in FASC 740-10-65-1.
The Company recognized approximately no increase in the liability for unrecognized tax benefits.
The Company has no tax position at November 30, 2015 for which the ultimate deductibility is highly
certain but for which there is uncertainty about the timing of such deductibility. The Company
recognizes interest accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in
operating expenses. No such interest or penalties were recognized during the periods presented. The
Company had no accruals for interest and penalties at November 30, 2015. The Company’s utilization
of any net operating loss carry forward may be unlikely as a result of its intended exploration stage
activities. The tax years for November 30, 2015, 2014, 2013, 2012 are still open for examination by the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
F-27
Valmie Resources, Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Stated in US Dollars)
9. Provision for Income Taxes – Continued
Net operating losses (including interest income) $332,136   $ 116,248
 
Valuation allowance
 
Net deferred tax asset (liability)
Tax Effect (35%) 
   
 
 
 
)
2015
 Amount
$(332,136)   (116,248
    
 $-
$ -
2014
 
 Amount
 
  
 
 $164,155   $ 57,454
Net operating losses
 
   
    
 
(57,454
 $(164,155)  
Valuation allowance
   
 
 
    
  $ -
Net deferred tax asset (liability) $-
Tax Effect (35%) 
 
   
 
 
)
10. Going Concern and Liquidity Considerations
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue
as a going concern, which contemplates, among other things, the realization of assets and satisfaction
of liabilities in the normal course of business. As at November 30, 2015, the Company had a working
capital deficiency of $55,866 (November 30, 2014 – $115,494) and an accumulated deficit of
$13,937,744 (November 30, 2014 – $324,042). The Company intends to fund operations through
equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund its capital expenditures, working
capital and other cash requirements for the next 12 months.
The ability of the Company to continue in existence is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining
additional financing to continue operations and the operations of Vertitek.
In response to these problems, management intends to raise additional funds through public or private
placement offerings.
These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a
going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result
from the outcome of this uncertainty.
11. Commitments
Pursuant to a Letter of Intent dated July 7, 2015, the Company is obligated to pay one vendor $5,000
for costs incurred to construct a prototype and testing of such prototype. As at November 30, 2015,
$3,000 has been paid in relation to this agreement.
12. Subsequent Events
Subsequent to year end, the Company entered into two additional promissory notes with Investor D
bearing the same terms. One note was entered into on January 4, 2016 for $25,000 and is due on
January 4, 2018. The other note was entered into on January 26, 2016 for $10,000 and is due on
January 26, 2018.
F-28
PART II. INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
ITEM 13. OTHER EXPENSES OF ISSUANCE AND DISTRIBUTION
We will pay for all expenses incurred by this offering. Whether or not all of the offered shares are sold,
these expenses are estimated as follows:
$346
 
SEC registration fee
 $1,654 *
Printing fees
Transfer agent fees
*
 $500
Accounting fees and expenses $2,500 *
Legal fees and expenses
 $10,000*
 $15,000*
TOTAL
* Estimated.
ITEM 14. INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS
Our amended and restated articles of incorporation provide that we will indemnify any person who was
or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the
right of us) by reason of the fact that he/she is or was our director, officer, employee or agent, or is or
was serving at our request as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership,
joint venture, trust or other enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines
and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him/her in connection with such
action, suit or proceeding if he/she acted in good faith and in a manner he/she reasonably believed to
be in or not opposed to our best interests, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had
no reasonable cause to believe his/her conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or
proceeding by judgment, order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its
equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a
manner which he/she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to our best interests, and, with
respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that his/her conduct
was unlawful.
Our amended and restated articles of incorporation also provide that we will indemnify any person
who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed
action, suit or proceeding, by or in the right of us to procure a judgment in our favor by reason of the
fact that he/she is or was our director, officer, employee or agent, or is or was serving at our request as
a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other
enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys’ fees) actually and reasonably incurred by him/her in
connection with the defense or settlement of such action, suit or proceeding if he/she acted in good
faith and in a manner he/she reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to our best interests, except
that no indemnification shall be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such person
shall have been adjudged to be liable for negligence or misconduct in the performance of his/her duty
to us unless and only to the extent that the court in which such action, suit or proceeding was brought
shall determine upon application that, despite the adjudication of liability but in view of all the
circumstances of the case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such
expenses which such other court shall deem proper.
We may pay any expenses incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding in
advance of the final disposition of such action, suit or proceeding as authorized by our Board of
Directors in the specific case upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the director, officer,
employee or agent to repay such amount unless it shall ultimately be determined that he/she is entitled
to be indemnified by us.
The indemnification described above is not exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking
indemnification may be entitled under any statute, bylaw, agreement, vote of shareholders or
disinterested directors or otherwise, both as to action in his/her official capacity and as to action in
another capacity while holding such office, and shall continue as to a person who has ceased to be a
director, officer, employee or agent and shall inure to the benefit of the heirs, executors and
administrators of such a person.
36
Our amended and restated bylaws provide for indemnification of the directors, officers and employees
in most cases for any liability suffered by them or arising out of their activities as our directors, officers,
and employees if they were not engaged in willful misfeasance or malfeasance in the performance of
his or her duties; provided that in the event of a settlement the indemnification will apply only when our
Board of Directors approves such settlement and reimbursement as being for our best interests. Our
bylaws, therefore, limit the liability of directors to the maximum extent permitted by Section 78.751 of
the NRS.
Our officers and directors are accountable to us as fiduciaries, which means they are required to
exercise good faith and fairness in all dealings affecting us. In the event that a shareholder believes
the officers and/or directors have violated their fiduciary duties us, the shareholder may, subject to
applicable rules of civil procedure, be able to bring a class action or derivative suit to enforce the
shareholder’s rights, including rights under certain federal and state securities laws and regulations to
recover damages from and require an accounting by management. Shareholders who have suffered
losses in connection with the purchase or sale of their interest in us in connection with such sale or
purchase, including the misapplication by any such officer or director of the proceeds from the sale of
these securities, may be able to recover such losses from us.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to our
directors, officers and controlling persons pursuant to the provisions above or otherwise, we have
been advised that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed
in the Securities Act, and is, therefore, unenforceable.
ITEM 15. RECENT SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES
During the past three years, we completed the following issuances of unregistered securities:
On January 20, 2015, we entered into the LOI with Vertitek to acquire 100% of the capital stock of that
company in exchange for the issuance of shares of our common stock to the principal shareholder of
Vertitek, contingent upon certain due diligence requirements. On January 27, 2015, we entered into a
share exchange agreement with Vertitek and the sole shareholder of Vertitek, Masamos, on
substantially the same terms as the LOI. On March 31, 2015, the closing of the share exchange
agreement occurred and we issued 1,000,000 shares of our common stock to Masamos in exchange
for 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of Vertitek. As a result, Vertitek became our wholly
owned subsidiary.
The shares of our common stock issued to Masamos in connection with the acquisition were offered
and sold in reliance upon the exemption from registration provided by Rule 903 of Regulation S under
the Securities Act (“Regulation S”). Our reliance on Rule 903 of Regulation S was based on the fact
that the shares were sold in an “offshore transaction”, as defined in Rule 902(h) of Regulation S. We
did not engage in any directed selling efforts in the United States in connection with the sale of the
shares, and Masamos was not a U.S. person and did not acquire the shares for the account or benefit
of any U.S. person.
From our inception to the period ended June 30, 2014, our former sole officer and director, Khurram
Shroff, made certain unsecured non-interest bearing advances to us in the original principal amount of
$33,927. These advances were subsequently assigned to Dome Capital LLC, a non-affiliated third
party (“Dome”). On March 31, 2015, the Company and Dome entered into a debt conversion
agreement pursuant to which the Company issued 339,270 shares of its common stock to Dome in
consideration for the cancellation of the debt.
During the period from August 18, 2014 to March 20, 2015, we entered into a series of promissory
notes with Shield Investments Inc. (“Shield”) in the aggregate principal amount of $275,000 plus
simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%. These notes were secured by all of the assets,
properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money,
documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts, intellectual property rights (including but not limited
to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade
secrets) and other general intangibles, whether owned by Company on the date of the note or
thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof. On March 31, 2015, the Company and Shield entered
into a debt conversion agreement pursuant to which the Company issued 2,750,000 shares of its
common stock to Shield in consideration for the cancellation of the debt. Upon the issuance of such
shares, Shield agreed to waive any then due and payable interest. As a result of the conversion,
Shield released all security interests it previously held in the Company’s assets.
37
On November 24, 2014, we entered into a promissory note with Tuverga in the principal amount of
$75,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest rate of 15%. This note was secured by all of the
assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment, furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money,
documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts, intellectual property rights (including but not limited
to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade
secrets) and other general intangibles, whether owned by Company on the date of the note or
thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof. On March 31, 2015, the Company and Tuverga entered
into a debt conversion agreement pursuant to which the Company issued 750,000 shares of its
common stock to Tuverga in consideration for the cancellation of the debt. Upon the issuance of such
shares, Tuverga agreed to waive any then due and payable interest. As a result of the conversion,
Tuverga released all security interests it previously held in the Company’s assets.
On July 15, 2015, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Gerald B. Hammack, our sole
officer and director, pursuant to which we acquired all of the right, title and interest in and to certain
intellectual property relating to the AIMD platform in consideration for the issuance of $100,000 worth
of our common stock to Mr. Hammack on that date at a deemed price of $0.47 per share. As a result,
Mr. Hammack received 212,765 shares of our common stock.
During the period from July 30, 2015 to April 26, 2016, we entered into a series of promissory notes
with Crystal in the aggregate principal amount of $200,000 plus simple interest at an annual interest
rate of 15%. These notes were secured by all of the assets, properties, goods, inventory, equipment,
furniture, fixtures, leases, supplies, records, money, documents, instruments, chattel paper, accounts,
intellectual property rights (including but not limited to, copyrights, moral rights, patents, patent
applications, trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade secrets) and other general intangibles,
whether owned by Company on the date of the note or thereafter acquired, and all proceeds thereof.
On April 26, 2016, the Company and Crystal entered into a debt conversion agreement pursuant to
which the Company issued 2,000,000 shares of its common stock to Crystal in consideration for the
cancellation of the debt. Upon the issuance of such shares, Crystal agreed to waive any then due and
payable interest. As a result of the conversion, Crystal released all security interests it previously held
in the Company’s assets.
We issued the foregoing shares in reliance upon the exemption from registration provided by Section
4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. Our reliance on Section 4(a)(2) was based on the fact that none of the
issuances involved a “public offering” and each of the debtors provided representations to us that they
acquired the shares for investment purposes and not with a view to the distribution thereof in a
transaction that would violate the Securities Act or the securities laws of any state of the United States
or any other applicable jurisdiction.
38
ITEM 16. EXHIBITS
The following exhibits are filed as part of this registration statement:
Exhibit
No.
 
3(i).1
 
3(i).2
3(i).3
3(i).4
 
3(ii).1
 
3(ii).2
 
5.1
 
10.1
 
10.2
 
21.1
 
23.1
 
23.2
 
23.3
Description
Articles of Incorporation filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on August 25, 2011 (1)
  
 Certificate of Amendment filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on December 4, 2013 (2)
  
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on
 
December 11, 2014 (3)
  
 Certificate of Designation filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on January 15, 2015 (4)
  
 Bylaws (1)
  
 Amended and Restated Bylaws dated December 3, 2013 (2)
  
 Legal Opinion of Bacchus Law Corporation (6)
  
 Asset Purchase Agreement with Gerald Hammack dated July 15, 2015 (5)
  
 Debt Conversion Agreement with Crystal Resource Corp. dated April 26, 2016
  
 Vertitek Inc., a Wyoming corporation
  
 Consent of Anderson Bradshaw PLLC *
  
 Consent of Bacchus Law Corporation (included in Exhibit 5.1)
  
 Consent of Heaton & Company, PLLC *
(1)
(2)
(3)
Incorporated by reference from our registration statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on March
29, 2012.
 
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on December 9,
2013.
 
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on December 12,
2014.
 
Incorporated by reference from our current report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on January 16,
2015.
 
Incorporated by reference from our quarterly report on Form 10-Q filed with the SEC on July 20,
2015.
(4)
(5)
(6)
Incorporated by reference from our registration statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on June
30, 2016.
* Filed herewith
39
ITEM 17. UNDERTAKINGS
The registrant hereby undertakes:
1.
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this
registration statement:
(i)To include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(ii)
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective datle of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration statement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total
dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation
from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of
prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume
and price represent no more than 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in
the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii)
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed
in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the registration
statement;
2.
That for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act, each post-effective amendment
shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof;
3.
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being
registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering; and
4.
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act to any
purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, the registrant undertakes that in a primary
offering of securities of the registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the
underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold
to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the registrant will be a seller to
the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the registrant relating to the offering required to be filed
pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the registrant or used
or referred to by the registrant;
(iii)
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the registrant; and
(iv)Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the registrant to the purchaser.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors,
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the
registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
In the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the
registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the
successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its
counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
Each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering,
other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on
Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is
first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or
prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed
incorporated by reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration
statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or
modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
40
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the registrant certifies that it
has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-1 and has
duly caused this Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly
authorized, in the City of Houston, State of Texas, on August 3 , 2016.
VALMIE RESOURCES, INC.
  
 By:/s/ Gerald B. Hammack
   Gerald B. Hammack
Title: Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal Accounting
Officer, Secretary, Treasurer, Director
In accordance with the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration
Statement on Form S-1 was signed by the following person in the capacities and on the date so
indicated.
Signature
 
/s/ Gerald B. Hammack Chairman, President, Chief Executive Officer,
Title
Date
  
 August 3 , 2016
Gerald B. Hammack
Chief Financial Officer, Principal Accounting Officer,
 
  
Secretary, Treasurer, Director
41