
EX-99.1 3 v446271_ex99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1
Exhibit 99.1
7961 Shaffer Parkway  
 
Suite 5
 
Littleton, CO  80127
 
Phone:  720-981-1185Trading Symbol:  VGZ
Fax:      720-981-1186 Toronto and NYSE MKT Stock Exchanges
________________NEWS_______________
Vista Gold Corp. Completes Previously Announced US$17.3 Million Bought Deal Offering
of Units
Denver, Colorado, August 8, 2016 - Vista Gold Corp. (the “Company,” “we” or “our”) (NYSE
MKT: VGZ) (TSX: VGZ) is pleased to announce that it has closed its previously announced
public offering (the “Offering”) of units (the “Units”) made pursuant to an underwriting agreement
dated August 2, 2016 between the Company and Cantor Fitzgerald Canada Corporation and
Rodman & Renshaw a unit of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, acting as co-lead underwriters and
joint book-running managers and Sprott Private Wealth LP, Roth Capital Partners, LLC and Jet
Capital Advisors, LLC as co-managers (collectively, the “Underwriters”).
Pursuant to the Offering, the Company sold an aggregate of 12,362,500 Units at a price of
US1.40 per Unit for gross proceeds of US$17,307,500. The Units sold include 1,612,500 Units
sold pursuant to the exercise, in full, of the over-allotment option that was granted to the
Underwriters. Each Unit consists of one common share in the capital of the Company (a “Share”)
and one-half of one common share purchase warrant (each whole warrant, a “Warrant”). Each
Warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one Share at the exercise price of US$1.92 per
Share, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances, for a period of 36 months after the closing
of the Offering.
The Company intends to allocate the net proceeds from the Offering to pursue completion of the
permitting and to perform selected technical studies that the Company believes will further de-
risk the Mt Todd gold project, enhance the Mt Todd project economics and prepare the project for
development if and when economic conditions warrant. Remaining proceeds will be used for
working capital requirements and/or for other general corporate purposes which include ongoing
regulatory, legal and accounting expenses, management and administrative expenses, and other
corporate initiatives.
The Offering was completed by way of a prospectus supplement and an accompanying short
form base shelf prospectus in all of the provinces of Canada, other than Québec, and was offered
in the United States pursuant to a prospectus supplement to the Company’s effective shelf
registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission.
This press release shall not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy, nor shall
there be any sale of, Units, Warrants or Shares in any state or province in which such offer,
solicitation or sale would be unlawful, prior to registration or qualification under the securities
laws of any such state, province, or other jurisdiction.
About Vista Gold Corp.
The Company is a well-funded gold project developer. Our principal asset is our flagship Mt
Todd gold project in Northern Territory, Australia where we continue to work to identify
opportunities to improve project economics with the goal of advancing the project toward
development. We also hold approximately 4.4% of the outstanding common shares of Midas
Gold Corp., non-core projects in Mexico and the United States and royalty interests in Indonesia.
For more information about our projects, including technical studies and resource estimates,
please visit our website at www.vistagold.com.
This press release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the U.S. Securities
Act of 1933, as amended, and U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and forward-
looking information within the meaning of Canadian securities laws. All statements, other than
statements of historical facts, included in this press release that address activities, events or
developments that we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future, including such things
as, statements with respect to the expected closing date of the Offering and the use of proceeds
from the Offering are forward-looking statements and forward-looking information; and other such
matters are forward-looking statements and forward-looking information. The material factors and
assumptions used to develop the forward-looking statements and forward-looking information
contained in this press release include the following: our understanding and belief of the current
market conditions, approved business plans, exploration and assay results, mineral resource and
reserve estimates and results of preliminary economic assessments, pre-feasibility studies and
feasibility studies on our projects, if any, our experience with regulators, and positive changes to
current economic conditions and the price of gold. When used in this press release, the words
“optimistic,” “potential,” “indicate,” “expect,” “intend,” “hopes,” “believe,” “may,” “will,” “if,”
“anticipate,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements and
forward-looking information. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties
and other factors which may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of the
Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements
expressed or implied by such statements. Such factors include, among others, the use the
proceeds from the Offering as expected, uncertainty of resource and reserve estimates,
uncertainty as to the Company’s future operating costs and ability to raise capital; risks relating to
cost increases for capital and operating costs; risks of shortages and fluctuating costs of
equipment or supplies; risks relating to fluctuations in the price of gold; the inherently hazardous
nature of mining-related activities; potential effects on our operations of environmental
regulations in the countries in which it operates; risks due to legal proceedings; risks relating to
political and economic instability in certain countries in which it operates; as well as those factors
discussed under the headings “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors”
in the Company’s latest Annual Report on Form 10-K as filed on February 26, 2016 and other
documents filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and Canadian securities
regulatory authorities. Although we have attempted to identify important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those described in forward-looking statements and forward-
looking information, there may be other factors that cause results not to be as anticipated,
estimated or intended. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to publicly update
any forward-looking statements or forward-looking information; whether as a result of new
information, future events or otherwise.
- 2 -