
EX-99 2 ex99.htm NEWS RELEASE Timberline Resources
EXHIBIT 99.1
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Timberline Announces Third Quarter 2016 Financial Results
Coeur  d’Alene,  Idaho  –  August  11,  2016  – Timberline  Resources  Corporation  (OTCQB:
TLRS; TSX-V: TBR) (“Timberline” or the “Company”) today announced consolidated financial
results for its third fiscal year 2016 quarter which ended June 30, 2016.  A summary of selected
financial results is presented in the following table:
($US 000’s, except earnings per share)
Quarter Ended
Consolidated net loss
Consolidated net loss per share,
basic and diluted
Mineral exploration expenses
Working capital
June 30,
2016
$(463)
2015
$(682)
(0.03)
34
741
(0.06)
292
393
Timberline reported a consolidated net loss of $0.5 million for the quarter ended June 30, 2016,
including exploration expenditures of $34 thousand.  The Company’s exploration expenditures
during the quarter continued to be curtailed; however, in June, the Company tripled the original
amount of our non-brokered private placement and closed a $1.5 million equity financing which
allowed us to initiate a metallurgical and geotechnical test program at Talapoosa in July 2016.
  The  test  program  was  designed  to  assess  the  potential  to  improve  heap  permeability  and
enhance  gold  and  silver  leach  efficiency  for  the  processing  of  the  mineralized  material  at  the
Talapoosa gold and silver project in Lyon County, Nevada.
Timberline’s  President  and  CEO,  Steve  Osterberg,  commented,  “We  are  pleased  to  see
continued strength in the gold market and the significant support for our financing in May and
June.    In  July,  we  moved  quickly  to  commence  metallurgical  and  geotechnical  testing  at
Talapoosa  in  order  to  further  advance  the  project.    We  look  forward  to  continuing  the
advancement and development of our assets.”
About Timberline Resources
Timberline Resources Corporation is focused on advancing district-scale gold exploration and
development  projects  in  Nevada,  including  its  Talapoosa  project  in  Lyon  County  where  the
Company  has  completed  and  disclosed  a  positive  preliminary  economic  assessment. 
Timberline also controls the 23 square-mile Eureka project lying on the Battle Mountain-Eureka
gold trend.  At Eureka, the Company continues to advance its Lookout Mountain and Windfall
project areas.  Exploration potential occurs within three separate structural-stratigraphic trends
defined  by  distinct  geochemical  gold  anomalies.    Timberline  also  owns  the  Seven  Troughs
property in northern Nevada, known to be one of the state's highest grade, former producers.
Timberline is listed on the OTCQB where it trades under the symbol "TLRS" and on the TSX
Venture Exchange where it trades under the symbol "TBR".
Forward-looking Statements
Statements contained herein that are not based upon current or historical fact are forward-looking
in  nature  and  constitute  forward-looking  statements  within  the  meaning  of  Section  27A  of  the
Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Such forward-
looking  statements  reflect  the  Company's  expectations  about  its  future  operating  results,
performance and opportunities that involve substantial risks and uncertainties.  These statements
include but are not limited to statements regarding potential to improve heap permeability and
enhance gold and silver leach efficiency, continued strength in the gold market, providing value
to  shareholders,  prudent  financing  and  development  of  assets,  advancement  of  projects,  and
exploration  potential.    When  used  herein,  the  words  "anticipate,"  "believe,"  "estimate,"
“upcoming,”  "plan,"  “target”,  "intend"  and  "expect"  and  similar  expressions,  as  they  relate  to
Timberline Resources Corporation, its subsidiaries, or its management, are intended to identify
such  forward-looking  statements.  These  forward-looking  statements  are  based  on  information
currently available to the Company and are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties, and other
factors that could cause the Company's actual results, performance, prospects, and opportunities
to  differ  materially  from  those  expressed  in,  or  implied  by,  these  forward-looking  statements.
Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, risks
related to changes in the Company’s business resulting in changes in the use of proceeds, and
other such factors, including risk factors discussed in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-
K for the year ended September 30, 2015.  Except as required by law, the Company does not
undertake any obligation to release publicly any revisions to any forward-looking statements.
Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined
in the policies of the TSX Venture Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy
of this release.
For Further Information Please Contact:
Steven A. Osterberg
President and CEO
Tel:   208-664-4859
E-mail:  info@timberline-resources.com
Website:  www.timberline-resources.com
2 | TIMBERLINE RESOURCES