
ANNUAL REPORT
k IX 1 ' - '
© _ - 
_ _ \
Cl) - I}? d
.. In“ 
_ R
S2reSOUrCeS.COm.aU


Corporate Directory
Directors
Jeff Dowling
Non-Executive Chairman
Mark Bennett
Managing Director
Anna Neuling
Executive Director
Grey Egerton-Warburton
Non-Executive Director
Company Secretary
Anna Neuling
Registered Office
North Wing
Level 2, 1 Manning Street
Scarborough WA 6019
Telephone:
+61 8 6166 0240
Facsimile:
+61 8 6270 5410
Share Register
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited
Level 2, 45 St Georges Terrace
Perth WA 6000
Telephone: 1300 787 575
Auditor
BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd
38 Station Street
Subiaco WA 6008
Telephone: 08 6382 4600
Stock Exchange Listing
S2 Resources Ltd’s shares are listed on the Australian 
Securities Exchange (ASX).
ASX code: S2R
Website Address
www.s2resources.com.au
Contents
Chairman’s Letter ......................................................................................................................................................................................2
Managing Director’s Review ................................................................................................................................................................. 3
Operations Review ...................................................................................................................................................................................5
Directors’ Report ......................................................................................................................................................................................61
Auditor’s Independence Declaration ...............................................................................................................................................76
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income 
for the period ended 30 June 2016 .................................................................................................................................................77
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 30 June 2016 .......................................................................................78
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the period ended 30 June 2016 ......................................................79
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the period ended 30 June 2016  ................................................................. 80
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the period ended 30 June 2016 ................................................. 81
Directors’ Declaration ..........................................................................................................................................................................116
Independent Auditor’s Report ........................................................................................................................................................... 117
Additional ASX Information ................................................................................................................................................................119
Competent Persons Statement ........................................................................................................................................................126
1
1
Chairman’s Letter
Dear Shareholder
Following its demerger from Sirius Resources NL in September 2015 and its subsequent listing on 19th 
October 2015, S2 Resources Ltd (“S2”) is well positioned to achieve its objectives, having a portfolio of 
exploration ground which the S2 Board considers to be highly prospective, a pipeline of opportunities, a good 
funding base, a highly successful team of explorers, and a breadth of corporate experience.
S2’s objective is to provide superior investment returns through the discovery and development of high value 
mineral resources, as a result of exploration and the identification of early stage assets with high growth 
potential.
S2 is focused on mainstream commodities such as gold and base metals in politically stable jurisdictions such 
as Australia and Europe.
S2’s market capitalisation has increased substantially from approximately A$37 million on listing to 
approximately A$150 million as at 17 August 2016. During this time, the Company has:
•
in	respect	to	the	Company’s	100%	owned	Polar	Bear	project,	published	a	Mineral	Resource	estimate	for	
the Baloo gold deposit and a Mineral Resource estimate for the Nanook palaeochannel gold deposit, as 
well as, subsequent to year’s end, receiving encouraging exploration results from drilling at the Monsoon 
gold prospect;
•	 purchased	the	remaining	33%	of	its	Scandinavian	projects;
•	 successfully	drilled	to	show	proof	of	concept	in	the	Skellefte	project	in	Sweden;
•	 commenced	the	preliminary	mining	and	engineering	studies	for	Baloo;	and
•	 subsequent	to	year’s	end	the	Company	also	successfully	completed	an	equity	raising	of	approximately	
A$12.2 million which together with cash on hand at 30 June 2016 positions the Company to pursue its 
exploration objectives in Australia and Scandinavia without any financial constraints.
As evidenced in the results achieved in the ten months since listing, the Company’s objective is to conserve its 
cash resources so as to aggressively pursue its exploration activities. As such, the Company has determined 
that the best way to reward and incentivise its board, executive and employees is via the issue of options over 
ordinary	shares	which	have	an	exercise	price	that	requires	the	share	price	to	increase	by	nearly	50%	before	
they crystallise any value to the recipient. This results in the alignment of shareholder and employee interests 
in maximising the Company’s share price. I therefore commend the Company’s remuneration report and the 
option issue in the Notice of Annual General Meeting to shareholders.
On behalf of shareholders, I would like to thank Mark Bennett and his team for their outstanding efforts in 
setting up S2 for success and for the outcomes already achieved in such a short period.
Jeff Dowling
Non-Executive Chairman
2
Managing Director’s Review
Since listing in October 2015, S2 has been busy assembling its team and advancing its exploration projects in 
Australia and Scandinavia.
At its Polar Bear project in Western Australia, exploration drilling has delineated gold mineralisation at several 
prospects on Lake Cowan, leading to the identification of in excess of 200,000 ounces of Indicated and 
Inferred gold resources at the Baloo and Nanook deposits. Subsequent to year’s end, drilling also identified 
high grade gold mineralisation at the Monsoon prospect which further enhances the prospectivity of the area.
Drilling of Monsoon, Baloo, Nanook and other prospects will continue throughout the coming year with the dual 
aim of defining further oxide resources, and defining depth extensions to the already known mineralisation.
In Scandinavia, S2 is prioritising the numerous VTEM anomalies identified in its Skellefte project in Sweden 
and has undertaken an initial drill test of one of these VTEM conductors to prove the validity of the technique 
in this district. This test not only confirmed the validity of the chosen VTEM anomaly but it also identified a zinc-
bearing volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) deposit. We consider it highly encouraging to have intersected 
zinc mineralisation in the first hole in the first anomaly of over sixty, in the first ever VTEM survey in this highly 
endowed polymetallic mineral belt.
Drilling of the top priority VTEM anomalies will resume in earnest as soon as the northern winter freezes the 
ground sufficiently for easy rig access – most likely in October.
During the year S2 appointed Grey Egerton Warburton to the Board as a non-executive director. Grey’s depth 
of corporate and equity markets expertise will further enhance the Company’s capabilities.
At the end of the 2016 financial year the Company still had A$15.8 million cash. Subsequent to year’s end 
and in response to the opportunity afforded by the discovery of high grade gold mineralisation at Monsoon, 
the Company raised A$9.2 million in a heavily oversubscribed private placement and A$3 million via a share 
purchase plan. As a result the Company is strongly positioned with cash of approximately A$27 million to 
vigorously pursue the various exploration opportunities available to it. The cash available and the range of 
compelling targets awaiting testing will ensure that the 2016-2017 financial year will be another busy year for 
the Company.
I would like to make a special point of noting that S2 has begun life with the key members of the former 
Sirius Resources corporate and exploration team, so the company is well placed in terms of having a skilled, 
successful, experienced and committed team to do justice to its projects.
Our group has been augmented with the senior members of our Scandinavian team, who are now also 
shareholders	of	S2	as	a	result	of	S2	purchasing	100%	ownership	of	its	Scandinavian	subsidiary	late	in	2015.
Your company is well funded, has significant strategic ground holdings and prospects, is poised to pursue  
an intensive exploration program, and has an exceptional team of highly motivated and aligned people to 
execute this.
Mark Bennett
Managing Director and CEO
3
3
a

c \

GD

(1) I ‘1‘

E3 ‘ n  W

© ' *1 7:: .h\\ -‘ _._,;_—_i:
CD

L

®

&

ﬂ ‘


Operations Review
Polar Bear Project
The Polar Bear project spans an area of 151 square kilometres, located between Higginsville and Norseman, 
and is surrounded by the major gold camps of Norseman (10 million ounces), St Ives (12 million ounces) and 
Higginsville (2 million ounces). In addition, S2 Resources has over 358 square kilometres of ground adjacent to 
the Polar Bear project.
Most of the area is unexplored or ineffectively explored due to it being largely concealed by the shallow salt 
lake sediments of Lake Cowan and the sand dunes of the Polar Bear peninsula.
The Polar Bear project contains a number of shear zones of the type that host major gold mines elsewhere in 
the district, and also contains southern extensions of the Kambalda and Widgiemooltha ultramafic stratigraphy, 
which hosts a number of significant nickel sulphide mines along strike to the north.
Figure 1. Regional plan showing location of prospective greenstones (green), gold deposits (yellow dots), salt lakes (pale blue)
and S2’s ground holdings (red). S2’s ground is located on a major mineralised gold trend between the St Ives field at Kambalda
and the Norseman field, and covers the unexplored portion beneath Lake Cowan.
5
5
Operations Review
Baloo Gold Deposit
The Baloo deposit is located approximately 15 kilometres east of the Higginsville gold mine, at the northern 
end of the Polar Bear project.
In late 2014, reconnaissance aircore drilling of the Baloo gold target identified gold mineralisation within 
variably weathered rock beneath a thin veneer of salt lake sediment. Subsequent drilling defined a significant 
zone of mineralisation and a maiden Mineral Resource estimate was completed in early 2016.
Gold mineralisation occurs in at least two structures (the Main Zone and Footwall Zone) as well as within a 
number of flat lying supergene layers in the hanging wall (to the east side) of the Main Zone. The Main Zone 
has been defined over a strike length of 450 metres and includes a central “sweet spot” within the oxide zone 
averaging approximately 40 metres thickness, and extending 80 metres along strike and 80 metres down dip. 
The localised thick oxide zone forms a funnel shaped zone of mineralisation starting from a depth of just two 
metres beneath the lake surface, an ideal shape for a potential open pit.
Primary gold mineralisation, associated with quartz-arsenopyrite veining, occurs beneath and to the south of the 
oxide gold zone at Baloo. Drill intercepts in the primary zone have defined a mineralised shoot which plunges 
gently to the south over a strike length of at least 180 metres. Key intercepts, considered approximate true 
width, includes 5 metres @ 6.91 g/t, 8 metres @ 5.14 g/t, 7.6 metres @ 8.35 g/t and 9.8 metres @ 4.97 g/t gold.
Latest drilling has shown that the Baloo mineralised system remains open to the south, as a narrow high grade 
lode, indicating the system is still “live” beyond the current limits of drilling. Key intercepts from this zone 
includes 1 metre @ 43.1 g/t , 1.25 metres @ 9.52 g/t, 0.6 metres @ 14.0 g/t and 2.5 metres @ 10.9 g/t gold.
Figure 2. Cross section of the Baloo gold deposit, showing the wide and near surface disposition of mineralisation.
6
Operations Review
A maiden Mineral Resource estimate for Baloo was announced in March 2016. The Mineral Resource estimate 
for the Baloo gold deposit comprises 2,170,000 tonnes grading 1.8 g/t gold for a contained 123,000 ounces 
of	gold	at	a	lower	cutoff	grade	of	0.8	g/t	gold.	Of	this,	1,150,000	tonnes	(or	53%)	containing	69,000	ounces	
of	gold	(or	56%)	is	classified	as	higher	confidence	Indicated	category	material,	with	the	balance	being	lower	
confidence Inferred category material.
Near	surface	oxide	and	transitional	mineralisation	comprises	approximately	61%	of	the	total	Mineral	
Resource and	81%	of	the	Indicated	Resource,	and	this	extends	south	and	north	from	the	central	zone.	
The remainder of the resource comprises a deeper primary lode, which plunges to the south and remains 
open at depth.
Figure 3. 3D view of the Baloo deposit, showing the extent of drilling. The mineralised lode is open down dip and down plunge and
requires follow up drilling.
7
7
Operations Review
Nanook Gold Deposit
The Nanook prospect is located 10 kilometres south of the Baloo gold deposit, located along the same 
structural corridor. Reconnaissance drilling has confirmed the presence of extensive gold mineralisation within 
quartz gravels at the base of the Nanook palaeochannel, defined over 2 kilometres. Within this, a discrete 
zone of high grade gold mineralisation has been defined with aircore drill intersections including 16 metres @ 
51.3 g/t, 13 metres @ 23.89 g/t, 8 metres @ 2.89 g/t, 6 metres @ 2.71g/t, and 9 metres @ 2.15 g/t gold.
The gold is concentrated in quartz gravels at the base of a broad ancient stream valley, which runs in a 
northeasterly direction. This valley contains a discrete northwesterly trending zone of high grade quartz gravel 
which overlies a quartz veined and altered shale-basalt contact in the subjacent bedrock. The coarseness 
and angularity of the high grade quartz gravel, together with the close proximity and similar orientation of 
mineralisation in the bedrock geology suggest that this quartz gravel hosted gold is largely elluvial, and has 
been derived from erosion from a localised bedrock source.
Drilling also intersected in-situ high grade gold mineralisation in weathered Archaean basement rocks outside 
the palaeochannel, to the northwest along trend of the high grade gravel zone, with drill intersections including 
4 metres @ 50.7 g/t and 2 metres @ 6.42 g/t gold.
A maiden Mineral Resource estimate for the Nanook deposit was announced in May 2016. The Mineral 
Resource estimate for the Nanook paleochannel gold deposit comprises 2,200,000 tonnes grading 1.2 g/t gold 
for a contained 84,000 ounces of gold at a lower cutoff grade of 0.8 g/t gold, classified as Inferred category.
8
Operations Review
Figure 4. Plan showing the Nanook palaeochannel resource (light, medium and dark pink) outline superimposed on subjacent bedrock
gold trends, with key drill intercepts in bedrock.
9
9
Operations Review
Other gold prospects
The Monsoon gold prospect is located along the same prospective trend beneath Lake Cowan midway 
between the Baloo gold deposit and the Nanook palaeochannel deposit. Reconnaissance aircore drilling on 
an 80 metre by 40 metre grid has defined sporadic gold anomalism over a 1 kilometre strike length, associated 
with quartz veining and arsenopyrite alteration within a north-northeast trending shear zone on a mafic – 
shale contact. A number of aircore holes drilled along this contact have not adequately tested it due to them 
being unable to penetrate zones of quartz veining and silica alteration. Two aircore holes that succeeded in 
reaching full depth on this sheared contact intersected 12 metres @ 26.2g/t gold and 32 metres at 2.47g/t gold. 
Subsequent to year’s end, two reverse circulation (RC) drillholes intersected broad downhole widths of high 
grade gold mineralisation comprising 66 metres @ 11.4g/t gold and 38 metres @ 6.41g/t gold. Monsoon is a 
focus for follow up drilling.
The Earlobe prospect is well advanced with drill intersections that include 8m @ 5.56g/t, 4m @ 4.95g/t, 2m @ 
26.6g/t and 4m @ 6.09g/t gold. The known gold mineralisation is split into an upper and lower gold lode with 
individual quartz veins up to 4 metres thick. Both lodes remain open along strike and down dip and as yet the 
limits of this mineralisation have not been defined.
At the Bindy prospect, located approximately 2 kilometres south of the Nanook gold prospect, gold anomalism 
has been defined over a 1.8 kilometre strike length, with aircore drill intersections including 8m @ 3.96g/t gold 
found within the core of the gold anomaly.
Figure 5. Cross section of northernmost of two RC drill sections at Monsoon.
10
Operations Review
Figure 6. Cross section of southernmost RC drill sections at Monsoon, showing relative position of the original aircore holes
(drilled 20 metres south of, and projected onto, this section).
11
11
Operations Review
Figure 7. Map showing location of Baloo, Monsoon and Nanook gold prospects, within the central 10 kilometres of strike of the 30
kilometres of gold trend within S2’s ground at Polar Bear.
12
Operations Review
Taipan nickel prospect
Drilling of prospective ultramafic stratigraphy has defined a zone of high grade nickel-copper-cobalt-platinum-
palladium mineralisation at the Taipan nickel prospect.
Nickel sulphide mineralisation has been defined over a strike extent of 250 metres and down dip over 150 
metres within two zones. Both zones are open along strike. RC and diamond intersections include:
•	 4.10	metres	@	3.8%	nickel,	2.45%	copper,	0.08%	cobalt,	1.6	g/t	palladium	and	0.9	g/t	platinum	from	104.4
metres,	including	2.15	metres	@	5.84%	nickel,	3.73%	copper,	0.12%	cobalt,	1.65	g/t	palladium	and	1.1	g/t	
platinum from 106 metres;
•	 20	metres	@	0.62%	nickel,	0.10%	copper,	0.02%	cobalt,	0.17	g/t	platinum	and	0.39	g/t	palladium	from	113
metres	including	2	metres	@	1.46%	nickel,	0.43%	copper,	0.03%	cobalt,	1.69	g/t	palladium	and	0.67	g/t	
platinum and from 131 metres; and
•	 53	metres	@	0.53%	nickel,	0.05%	copper	and	0.01%	cobalt	from	23	metres.
Taipan North nickel prospect
Disseminated nickel sulphide mineralisation has also been intersected at the base of a thick sequence of 
prospective ultramafic rocks at the Taipan North prospect, located approximately 2 kilometres north of Taipan. 
To date mineralisation has been intersected over a 200 metre strike length and is open along strike and at 
depth.	RC	drill	intercepts	include	40	metres	@	0.47%	nickel,	0.02%	copper	and	0.01%	cobalt	from	99	metres,	
including	5m	@	1.02%	nickel,	0.09%	copper	and	0.02%	cobalt	from	109	metres.
Halls Knoll nickel prospect
The Halls Knoll gossan, located on an island approximately 1.2 kilometres southeast of the Taipan nickel prospect, 
has yielded extremely high levels of nickel, copper and platinum group metals indicative of the presence of 
massive nickel sulphide mineralisation. Initial drilling intersected disseminated nickel sulphides beneath the salt 
lake	surface,	with	individual	metre	values	up	to	2.5%	nickel,	1.5%	copper	and	1-2g/t	palladium	and	platinum.
Eundynie Project
S2	Resources	holds	an	80%	interest	in	six	exploration	licenses,	covering	103	square	kilometres	of	ground	
adjacent	to	the	Polar	Bear	project	(known	as	the	Eundynie	Joint	Venture).	The	remaining	20%	is	held	by	
Shumwari Pty Ltd which is a private company run by a small group of project generation geologists. The 
tenements cover the northern extension of the Baloo trend. In addition the project covers portions of the 
ultramafic stratigraphy considered prospective for nickel sulphide mineralisation.
Norcott Project
The Baloo gold deposit is in an unusual geological setting that is different to most of the known gold 
deposits in the Eastern Goldfields, and together with Gold Fields’ discovery of the Invincible gold deposit 
near Kambalda, has demonstrated a new type of exploration opportunity in areas not previously considered 
prospective for gold.
As a result of this, S2 Resources has expanded its ground holding in the district, having had two licences 
granted covering approximately 256 square kilometres of relatively unexplored ground in a corridor to the east 
of the Polar Bear Project.
13
13
Operations Review
Figure 8. Map showing location of Halls Knoll and Taipan nickel prospects and EM anomalies in the central part of the
Polar Bear project area.
14
Operations Review
Scandinavia
S2 Resources is the largest holder of Exploration Reservations in the Central Lapland Greenstone Belt (LGB) of 
Finland (considered to be prospective for nickel, copper, platinum and gold) and the largest holder of Exploration 
Permits in the core Skellefte Belt of Sweden (considered to be prospective for copper, zinc and gold).
S2’s Scandinavian projects are managed in-country by a small team of explorers who have had extensive 
experience running exploration programs in these countries for companies such as Anglo American plc and 
Lundin Mining Corporation.
Figure 9. Map showing S2 tenure in the Skellefte belt of northern Sweden, with active and closed mines.
Skellefte, Sweden (100% S2)
The Skellefte district of northern Sweden is a prolific mining district that contains numerous major polymetallic 
zinc-copper-gold-silver volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) deposits, including mines such as Kristineberg 
and Renstrom which underpin Boliden’s mining and smelting operations. S2 has approximately 518.7 square 
kilometres of Exploration Permits and is the largest ground holder in the core Skellefte Belt, which it considers 
highly prospective for similar polymetallic VMS mineralisation and also magmatic copper-nickel-PGM, and 
orogenic shear zone hosted lode gold mineralisation.
The district’s first ever versatile time domain electromagnetic (VTEM) airborne survey, undertaken by S2 in the 
northern summer of 2015, identified 64 electromagnetic conductors. Many of these are compelling anomalies 
located in favourable locations in terms of geology and known mineralised trends.
Follow-up reconnaissance exploration of these over the northern winter included the collection of 1412 base of 
till samples over 17 priority VTEM targets, ground electromagnetic surveys over 10 VTEM targets, an induced 
polarisation (IP) survey at the Brannas prospect and various ground magnetic surveys.
15
15
Operations Review
Three diamond holes were drilled on one of these VTEM conductors. The primary aim was to verify the integrity 
of the VTEM survey and the rationale underpinning the Company’s exploration concept. These holes verified 
the VTEM conductor and intersected zinc-bearing VMS mineralisation. Subsequent downhole EM also indicated 
that the main part of the conductor has not yet been drilled. This is now known as the Svan Vit prospect.
Svan Vit VMS prospect
Two of three diamond core holes drilled on a single section to test one of the VTEM anomalies intersected 
sulphide mineralisation, including zinc sulphide mineralisation.
The first hole (SSVA160001) clipped the top of the ground EM conductor model and intersected a narrow zone 
of mixed sulphide mineralisation, comprising:
•	 0.55m	@	1.49	g/t	Au,	45	g/t	Ag	from	25.3m
•
1.05m	@	2.87%	Zn,	5	g/t	Ag	from	88.7m
The second hole (SSVA160002), drilled 90 metres down dip of the first, intersected several zones of mixed 
sulphide mineralisation, comprising:
•	 0.55m	@	2.23%	Zn	from	164m
•	 3.70m	@	1.75%	Zn,	5.3g/t	Ag	from	170.2m
•	 5.05m	@	3.15%	Zn,	6g/t	Ag,	0.2%	Cu	from	184.6m
The mineralised intervals in these two drill holes broadly coincide with the position of an EM conductor 
since redefined in a subsequent downhole EM survey, and they appear to have intersected the northern and 
western edges of a more extensive conductor which is as yet untested.
Downhole EM surveying in the third and deepest hole (SSVA160003) identified a second EM conductor, which 
is modelled as measuring 200m along strike and 255m down dip. This deeper conductor is situated below 
and east of the deepest hole in a position that is broadly co-planar and co-axial with the upper conductor 
intersected by the first two holes. Together, these two modelled plates define a southeasterly plunging 
conductive zone that may reflect single or multiple plunging elongate lenses as is typical of VMS deposits in 
this district.
The outcomes of the downhole EM suggest that the three holes drilled to date have only tested the margins 
of a potentially much more extensive zone. Further drilling will be required to adequately test the Svan Vit 
prospect given that two of these holes intersected low grade zinc and silver bearing VMS-style mineralisation 
on the margin of the upper conductor, and the third missed both conductors.
Drilling will resume as early as possible in the northern winter once the ground re-freezes to enable easy access.
These holes have successfully confirmed that VTEM is a very useful tool for targeting VMS mineralisation in 
this district. The VTEM anomaly that is now the Svan Vit prospect is a new VMS discovery and the first of S2’s 
many VTEM conductors identified on its Skellefte project to be tested. The remainder of the VTEM anomalies 
so far identified will be prioritised with ground EM and base of till sampling (where ground conditions permit) 
over the northern summer ready for systematic drill testing later in the year.
16
Operations Review
Figure 10. Cross section of drilling at the Svan Vit prospect, showing assayed drill intercepts and various EM conductor plate models.
Note that the alteration deepest in SSVA160002 includes chalcopyrite stringers typical of the footwall stockwork zones of VMS systems,
and the alteration zone in SSVA160003 includes barren sulphide intervals that are also typical of the marginal parts of VMS systems.
17
17
Operations Review
Figure 11. Plan of Svan Vit prospect showing initial VTEM anomaly (colour background), original ground EM plate model projected to 
surface (red rectangle), two new down hole EM plate models projected to surface (pale and dark blue), and drillhole pierce points.
18
Operations Review
Figure 12. 3D view looking north of two new EM conductor plates as modelled from downhole EM surveying at Svan Vit prospect.
The first two holes clipped the upper and western edge of the upper conductor and the third hole missed both.
The lower conductor lies southeast and beneath the deepest hole and is broadly coplanar and coaxial with the
upper conductor, defining a southeast plunging conductive target zone.
19
19
Operations Review
Figure 13. Location of Svan Vit prospect (formerly VTEM conductor Svansele 403-C1) and other VTEM conductors
in the Skellefte belt, showing the extent of the 2015 VTEM survey, location of known deposits/mines,
and some of the new S2 tenure not yet covered by VTEM.
Mining in Sweden – overview
The government of Sweden promotes investments and development of mining, rock and mineral industries 
through a body called the Geological Survey of Sweden (GSS), through providing geoscience information and 
low-cost, accessible databases of information that can be used for the purposes of mining and environmental 
permitting. Exploration and mining permits are granted by the Mining Inspectorate of Sweden, a decision 
making body within the GSS.
Tenements are obtained through a claim system where the first applicant of a mining right receives a priority 
over later applications. Applications are tried on a first-come first-serve basis, with no discretion in relation to of 
the applicant or the applicant’s ability to carry out exploration or mining activities.
Mining rights are divided into exploration permits and mining permits. Exploration permits give the holder 
the right to conduct geological surveying and other research necessary for establishing the location, shape, 
orientation and exploitability of a mineral deposit. Before exploration can begin, however, a work plan for 
the exploration activities has to be drawn up and approved by the Mining Inspectorate. The initial term of an 
exploration permit is three years, and it may be extended for up to a total term of 15 years in aggregate. An 
exploration permit does not authorise the exploitation of the deposit. It does, however, provide the holder with 
the ability to apply for a mining permit.
20
Operations Review
Mining permits are required for the establishment of a mine and the undertaking of mining activity. A mining 
permit entitles the holder to exploit the minerals found within the mining permit area. Mining permits have an 
initial term of 25 years which is automatically extended for ten years at a time if mining activities are still being 
conducted at the time of expiration of the permit. For mining permits issued after 1 May 2005, mining royalties 
are	payable	at	a	rate	of	0.2%	of	the	estimated	value	of	the	minerals	covered	by	the	concession	that	have	been	
extracted within the concession area during the year.
All mining operations are subject to the requirements of Swedish environmental legislation and mining is only 
possible if company holding the permit is awarded an environmental permit for its operations.
Finland (100% S2)
S2 owns 1,930 square kilometres of Reservations and 3.95 square kilometres of Exploration Licences in the 
Lapland Greenstone Belt of northern Finland, which is not extensively or effectively explored, yet contains 
a number of significant deposits, including Agnico Eagle’s Kittilä gold mine, Anglo American’s recently 
discovered Sakatti nickel-copper–platinum deposit, and Boliden’s Kevitsa copper-nickel mine.
The Finnish project is at an early reconnaissance stage and work during the year focussed on the assessment 
of previous exploration work undertaken by the GTK (Finnish Geological Survey).
Figure 14. S2’s ground holdings in the Lapland Greenstone Belt of northern Finland, showing known mines, deposits and prospects.
21
21
Operations Review
Mining in Finland – overview
Finland is generally considered to be an attractive investment and operating environment for the exploration 
and mining industry. There is potential for new discoveries because exploration is currently undertaken on a 
small-scale basis or not at all. In contrast to many other countries, Finland also has many high-class geological 
databases available on the internet. The infrastructure and availability of skilled subcontractors and labour 
is generally considered to be good. In addition, the public sector provides many services for the mining and 
exploration industry that would, in other countries, incur large costs.
Reservation, exploration and mining permits are granted by the Mining Authority, being also responsible for 
the supervising and enforcing compliance with the applicable legislation. All mining operations are subject to 
the requirements of Finnish environmental legislation and mining is only possible if the applicant is granted an 
environmental permit.
A reservation is often a preparatory action for obtaining an exploration permit. A reservation right does not 
provide additional rights as compared to the right based on the generally applicable public right of access. 
Holders of reservations will have priority to get an exploration permit (which will be valid for two years, 
following which the reservation must be renewed or will expire. Reservations cannot be transferred, and there 
is no minimum expenditure requirements in respect of reservations (as no exploration may be carried out on 
them). However, a mandatory government fee for the rendering of the reservation is payable.
Exploration permits are granted on a first-to-file basis by the Mining Authority, taking into account that a 
reservation gives priority. The term of the exploration permit is up to four years with three year extensions and a 
total term limited to fifteen years. The permit holder generally has the right to conduct geological surveying and 
other research necessary for establishing the location, shape, orientation and exploitability of a mineral deposit.
Mining permits are also granted on a first-to-file basis by the Mining Authority. However, exploration permit 
holders have priority to the mining tenement. As a general rule, a mining permit is granted until further notice, 
but sometimes for a fixed term. If a mining permit holder does not own the surface rights to the mining area, 
the mining permit holder has to pay an annual excavation (compensation) fee to the landowners.
Polar Bear Mineral Resource Statement
The Polar Bear Mineral Resource estimate includes the Baloo and Nanook resources. This is completed in 
accordance with the guidelines of the JORC Code (2012 edition).
Mineral Resources – Polar Bear Project
Resource
Area
LCOG Tonnes 
(000’s)
Indi cated
g/t Au
Oz
Infer red
g/t Au
Oz
Tonnes 
(000’s)
Tonnes, 
(000’s)
Total
g/t Au
Oz
Baloo
Nanook
Total
0.8
0.8
0.8
1,150
–
1,150
1.9
–
1.9
69,000
1,030
–
2,200
69,000
3,230
1.6
1.2
1.4
54,000
2,170
84,000
2,200
138,000
4,370
1.8
1.2
1.5
123,000
84,000
207,000
Table 1  Mineral Resource estimate at 0.8g/t Au cut-off grade
22
Operations Review
Comparison with previous year’s estimates.
Both Baloo and Nanook are maiden resource estimates.
Use of independent experts
The resource estimates have been externally derived by an independent consultant who has exposure to best 
practice in modelling and estimation techniques. Geology models have been generated by S2R staff and have 
been reviewed by the external resource consultant. The consultant has also carried out reviews of the quality 
and suitability of the data underlying the Mineral Resource estimate. It is has been classified and reported in 
accordance with the JORC Code (2012 Edition).
Summary of information used in the February 2016 Baloo Mineral 
Resource estimate.
The Baloo deposit is defined by Aircore, RC and Diamond drilling. The Mineral Resource area has dimensions 
of 700 m (north) by 350 m (east) and 250 m (elevation).
The primary gold mineralisation at Baloo is related to hydrothermal activity during multiple deformation events. 
Indications are that gold mineralisation is focused on or near to the stratigraphic boundary between the 
Killaloe and Buldania Formation.
The Mineral Resource estimate was generated via multiple indicator kriging (MIK) and indirect lognormal 
change of support to emulate mining selectivity. Additionally, areas of mineralisation of less certain grade 
continuity unsuited to grade estimation via MIK have been estimated by ordinary Kriging. Mineralised domain 
interpretation was completed as described above and approximates a 0.3g/t Au lower cutoff.
A range of lower cut-offs was used to report grades and tonnages, as shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15. Tonnage grade curves for the Baloo February 2016 Mineral Resource estimate.
23
23
Operations Review
Summary of information used in the May 2016 Nanook Mineral Resource 
estimate.
The Nanook deposit is defined by Aircore and RC drilling. The Mineral Resource area has overall dimensions of 
dimensions of 2700 m (north) by 1100 m (east) with a central core of 900m (north) by 400m (east). The deposit 
has approximately 40m of cover.
The mineralisation modelled at Nanook is situated at or close to the Tertiary / Archaean unconformity, primarily 
within unconsolidated quartz rich sands and gravel. The mineralisation is interpreted to be either elluvial or 
alluvial in nature, although a supergene overprint is present.
It may be derived from a nearby basement source. Recent drilling has defined a number of potential gold 
trends to the Northwest associated with sheared mafic and mafic-shale contact as well as to the southwest in 
and adjacent to the Nanook granodiorite body.
The Mineral Resource estimate was generated via ordinary kriging (OK). Mineralised domain interpretation 
was completed as described above and as such does not incorporate a lower cutoff grade. The interpretation 
was coded to the drill hole database and 4m length composites were generated within the mineralisation 
boundary.
A range of lower cut-offs was used to report grades and tonnages, as shown in Figure 16.
Figure 16. Tonnage grade curves for the Nanook May 2016 Mineral Resource estimate.
24
Operations Review
Annexure 1a Baloo Resource
The following Tables are provided to ensure compliance with the JORC code (2012) edition requirements for 
the reporting of exploration results.
SECTION 1 SAMPLING TECHNIQUES AND DATA
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Sampling techniques
Nature and quality of 
sampling (e.g. cut channels, 
random chips, or specific 
specialised industry 
standard measurement tools 
appropriate to the minerals 
under investigation, such as 
down hole gamma sondes, 
or handheld XRF instruments, 
etc). These examples should 
not be taken as limiting the 
broad meaning of sampling.
Include reference to measures 
taken to ensure sample 
representivity and the 
appropriate calibration of any 
measurement tools or systems 
used
In zones of weakly weathered or fresh rock the 
HQ or NQ2 core is cut using a diamond core 
saw with half core sampled for assay. The ore is 
cut along the orientation line, with the same side 
sampled to ensure sample is representative.
In zones of highly weathered core where the 
sample is either highly broken or highly friable 
and a representative split cannot be achieved 
then whole core sample of either the PQ3 or 
HQ3 core is taken.
For RC sampling, a 1 metre split is taken directly 
from a cone splitter mounted beneath the rigs 
cyclone. The cyclone and splitter are cleaned 
regularly to minimise any contamination. A 
second reference split is also taken from each 
metre and stored on site.
Aircore holes are sampled using an aluminium 
scoop to produce a four metre composite 
sample similar to the RC sampling methodology.
Sampling and QAQC procedures is carried out 
using S2 protocols as per industry best practice.
25
25
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Aspects of the determination 
of mineralisation that are 
Material to the Public 
Report. In cases where 
‘industry standard’ work has 
been done this would be 
relatively simple (e.g. ‘reverse 
circulation drilling was used 
to obtain 1 m samples from 
which 3 kg was pulverised to 
produce a 30 g charge for fire 
assay’). In other cases more 
explanation may be required, 
such as where there is 
coarse gold that has inherent 
sampling problems. Unusual 
commodities or mineralisation 
types (e.g. submarine nodules) 
may warrant disclosure of 
detailed information
Drilling techniques
Drill type (e.g. core, reverse 
circulation, open-hole 
hammer, rotary air blast, 
auger, Bangka, sonic, etc) and 
details (e.g. core diameter, 
triple or standard tube, 
depth of diamond tails, face-
sampling bit or other type, 
whether core is oriented and if 
so, by what method, etc).
26
Reconnaissance aircore samples are 
composited at 4 m to produce a bulk 3 kg 
sample. Samples were dried, pulverised (total 
prep), and split to produce a 25 g sub sample 
which is analysed using aqua-regia digestion 
with ICP-MS finish with a 1 ppb detection limit.
A 1m end of hole sample was collected for all 
aircore holes. Sample preparation was the 
same as above and were analysed using a four 
acid digest with an ICP/OES and fire assay. The 
following elements are included in the assay 
suite: Ag, Al, As, Au, Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Co, 
Cr, Cu, Fe, K, La, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, P, Pb, Sb, 
Sc, Sr, Te, Ti, Tl, V, W, Zn.
RC drilling is sampled a 1m “cone” split sample, 
to produce a bulk 3 kg sample. Sample 
preparation was the same as for the aircore 
drilling. A nominal 50gram sub-sample was 
collected and analysed by Samples were to 
produce a sub sample for analysed by fire assay 
with an AA finish.
Diamond core (HQ and NQ2) is half core 
sampled to geological boundaries of no more 
than 1m and no less than 30cm. Samples were 
crushed, dried and pulverised (total prep). 
Analysis is same as for RC.
Oxide PQ3 core is whole core sampled and then 
dried, crushed to – 2mm and then rotary split 
to a 3kg sample for pulverisation and 50g fire 
assay.
Diamond drilling is completed using either NQ2, 
HQ, or PQ3 (through the oxide zone) sized 
coring equipment. All core is orientated (where 
possible) using a Reflex ACT II RD orientation 
tool.
RC drilling is carried out using a face sampling 
hammer with a nominal diameter of 140mm.
Aircore drilling is carried out using a 3 ½ inch 
blade bit. Where necessary a 3 ½ inch face 
sampling hammer is employed to penetrate 
through hard zones.
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Drill sample recovery
Method of recording and 
assessing core and chip 
sample recoveries and results 
assessed
Diamond core recoveries is logged and 
captured in the database. The core length 
recovered is measured for each run and 
recorded which is used to calculate the core 
recovery as a percentage core recovered.
RC and aircore sample recoveries are visually 
estimated qualitatively on a metre basis and are 
recorded in the database.
Measures taken to maximise 
sample recovery and ensure 
representative nature of the 
samples
Measures taken to maximise the core recoveries 
includes using appropriate core diameter and, 
where necessary, restricting drill penetration 
and/or reducing core runs.
Triple tube diamond core through the weathered 
zone is too broken to allow core cutting and 
therefore the core is sampled whole to ensure 
no bias is introduced.
Various drilling additives (including muds and 
foams) have been used to condition RC and 
aircore drill holes to maximise recoveries and 
sample quality. Drill cyclone and sample buckets 
are cleaned between rod-changes and after 
each hole to minimise down hole and/or cross-
hole contamination.
Whether a relationship exists 
between sample recovery and 
grade and whether sample 
bias may have occurred due 
to preferential loss/gain of 
fine/coarse material.
Core drilling has resulted in narrow zones of 
poor to no core recoveries through the oxide 
zone in areas of very soft clays and fault gouge 
within the weathered zones. These are recorded 
as poor or zero recovery and not assigned 
grade.
Aircore drilling samples are occasionally wet 
which may have resulted in sample bias due to 
preferential loss/gain of fine/coarse material.
No sample recovery issues have impacted on 
potential sample bias within coring of fresh rock 
or within RC drilling.
27
27
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Logging
Whether core and 
chip samples have 
been geologically and 
geotechnically logged to 
a level of detail to support 
appropriate Mineral Resource 
estimation, mining studies and 
metallurgical studies.
Whether logging is qualitative 
or quantitative in nature. Core 
(or costean, channel, etc) 
photography.
The total length and 
percentage of the relevant 
intersections logged
Geological logging is completed for all holes to 
a level of detail that would, where sufficient drill 
density is completed, support an appropriate 
Mineral Resource and mining study.
Lithology, alteration, veining, structural and 
geotechnical (diamond core) characteristics 
is recorded directly to a digital format and 
imported into S2 Resources central database.
Logging is both qualitative and quantitative in 
nature depending on the field being captured.
All core is photographed.
All drillholes were logged in full.
Sub-sampling 
techniques and 
sample preparation
If core, whether cut or sawn 
and whether quarter, half or 
all core taken.
If non-core, whether riffled, 
tube sampled, rotary split, etc 
and whether sampled wet or 
dry.
For all sample types, 
the nature, quality and 
appropriateness of the 
sample preparation 
technique.
In zones of highly weathered core where the 
sample is either highly broken or highly friable 
the PQ3 or HQ3 core is sampled whole core. 
Oxide whole core is submitted to the lab in 
samples not exceeding 6kg and then coarse 
crushed to <2mm. Samples are then rotary split 
to provide a 3kg sub sample for pulverisation.
In zones of weakly weathered or fresh rock the 
HQ or NQ2 core is cut using a diamond core 
saw with half core sampled for assay.
RC and aircore samples consist of a 4 metre 
composite RC spoils are sampled by scoop. 
All RC holes are sampled 1 metre samples are 
collected via an on-board cone splitter. Samples 
were collected both wet and dry.
The sample preparation follows industry best 
practice in sample preparation All samples 
are pulverised utilising Essa LM1, LM2 or LM5 
grinding mills determined by the size of the 
sample. Samples are dried, crushed as required 
and pulverized to produce a homogenous 
representative sub-sample for analysis. A grind 
quality	target	of	85%	passing	75μm	has	been	
established and is relative to sample size, type 
and hardness.
28
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Quality control procedures 
adopted for all sub-
sampling stages to maximise 
representivity of samples.
Quality control procedures include submission 
of Certified Reference Materials (CRM’s), blanks 
and duplicate samples with each batch of 
samples. Selected samples are also re-analysed 
to confirm anomalous results.
Measures taken to ensure 
that the sampling is 
representative of the in situ 
material collected, including 
for instance results for 
field duplicate/second-half 
sampling.
Whether sample sizes are 
appropriate to the grain size 
of the material being sampled.
The nature, quality and 
appropriateness of the 
assaying and laboratory 
procedures used and whether 
the technique is considered 
partial or total.
Quality of assay data 
and laboratory tests
Grind size checks are routinely completed to 
ensure samples meet the industry standard of 
85%	passing	through	a	75μm	mesh.
Field duplicates are taken at regular intervals. 
Samples are selected to weigh less than 3kg 
to ensure total preparation at the pulverisation 
stage.
Sample sizes are considered appropriate for 
nickel sulphide and gold mineralisation.
RC and diamond core samples are analysed for 
Au only using a 40g or 50g Lead Collection fire 
Assay with either an ICP/MS or AAS finish.
4m composite samples from AC drilling are 
analysed for Au only using a 25g aqua-regia 
digestion with an ICP/MS finish. The method 
gives a near total digestion of the regolith 
intercepted in aircore drilling and is suitable for 
the reconnaissance style sampling undertaken. 
Infill 1m samples and samples greater than 1 g/t 
are re-assayed using 50 g fire-assay with AAS 
finish which gives total digestion and is more 
appropriate for samples with high levels of gold.
All aircore holes (both gold and nickel 
exploration) have a 1m end-of-hole sample is 
collected for all AC holes. An extensive multi-
element suite (including Ag, Al, As, Ba, Be, 
Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, La, Mg, Mn, 
Mo, Na, Ni, P, Pb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Te, Ti, Tl, V, W, Zn) 
is analysed using a four acid digest with an 
ICP/OES and ICP/MS finish. Au, Pt And Pd is 
analysed for using 25g or 50g Lead Collection 
fire assay with an ICP/MS finish.
29
29
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
No geophysical tools were used to determine 
any element concentrations used in this 
resource estimate.
For geophysical tools, 
spectrometers, handheld 
XRF instruments, etc, 
the parameters used in 
determining the analysis 
including instrument make 
and model, reading times, 
calibrations factors applied 
and their derivation, etc.
Nature of quality control 
procedures adopted (e.g. 
standards, blanks, duplicates, 
external laboratory checks) 
and whether acceptable 
levels of accuracy (i.e. lack of 
bias) and precision have been 
established.
Sample preparation checks for fineness were 
carried out by the laboratory as part of their 
internal procedures to ensure the grind size 
of	85%	passing	75	micron	was	being	attained.	
Laboratory QAQC involves the use of internal 
lab standards using certified reference material, 
blanks, splits and replicates as part of the in 
house procedures.
Verification of 
sampling and 
assaying
The verification of significant 
intersections by either 
independent or alternative 
company personnel.
The use of twinned holes.
The Exploration Manager of S2 has visually 
verified significant intersections.
No twin holes have been drilled on the project 
to date.
Documentation of primary 
data, data entry procedures, 
data verification, data storage 
(physical and electronic) 
protocols.
Primary data was collected using a set of 
standard Excel templates using lookup codes. 
The information was sent to an external 
database consultant for validation and 
compilation into a Perth based SQL database.
Discuss any adjustment to 
assay data.
No adjustments or calibrations were made to 
any assay data reported.
Accuracy and quality of 
surveys used to locate 
drillholes (collar and down-
hole surveys), trenches, mine 
workings and other locations 
used in Mineral Resource 
estimation.
At Baloo all aircore and diamond drilling is 
picked up by an external surveyor using an RTK 
GPS system with an expected accuracy is +/– 
0.05m for easting, northing and elevation.
RC drill sites were laid out by an external 
surveyor using an RTK GPS system or tape and 
compass off surveyed collars. All holes will be 
picked up by the external surveyor prior to any 
resource calculations.
Specification of the grid 
system used.
The grid system used at Polar Bear is GDA94 
(MGA), zone 51.
Location of data 
points
30
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Quality and adequacy of 
topographic control.
Data spacing and 
distribution
Data spacing for reporting of 
Exploration Results.
Whether the data spacing 
and distribution is sufficient 
to establish the degree 
of geological and grade 
continuity appropriate for 
the Mineral Resource and 
Ore Reserve estimation 
procedure(s) and 
classifications applied.
A topographic surface has been created from 
aerial geophysical data, This has been calibrated 
with DGPS survey data. All reconnaissance drill 
holes have been corrected to this surface where 
DGPS pickup is not available.
All resource drilling will be picked up by DGPS to 
within a +/-50mm accuracy.
Data spacing is currently defined by the 
geological criteria regarded appropriate 
to determine the extents of mineralisation. 
Reconnaissance AC drilling is on a nominal 
spacing of between 240m x 40m and 400m x 
40m drill pattern, with infill of resource areas 
closing down to a nominal 40m x 20m drill 
pattern for AC, RC and diamond.
Drilling is currently preliminary in nature had the 
mineralised domains have not yet demonstrated 
sufficient continuity in both geological and grade 
continuity to support the definition of Mineral 
Resource and Reserves, and the classifications 
applied under the 2012 JORC Code.
Whether sample compositing 
has been applied.
No compositing has been applied to the 
exploration results.
Orientation of data in 
relation to geological 
structure
Whether the orientation of 
sampling achieves unbiased 
sampling of possible 
structures and the extent 
to which this is known, 
considering the deposit type.
The drilling is not necessarily drilled 
perpendicular to the orientation of the intersected 
mineralisation. All reported intervals are 
downhole intervals and not calculated true width. 
This will be established with further drilling.
At Baloo the main mineralised structure appears 
to be dipping moderately to the east and hence 
270 azimuth diamond drilling give approximately 
true width intersections. Supergene dispersion 
appears relatively flat lying and hence the vertical 
AC holes also approximate to true thickness.
31
31
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
If the relationship between 
the drilling orientation and the 
orientation of key mineralised 
structures is considered to 
have introduced a sampling 
bias, this should be assessed 
and reported if material.
The measures taken to ensure 
sample security.
Sample security
Audits or reviews
The results of any audits 
or reviews of sampling 
techniques and data.
No orientation based sampling bias has been 
identified in the data at this point.
Chain of custody is managed by S2 Resources. 
Samples are stored on site and either delivered 
by S2 personnel to Perth and then to the assay 
laboratory, or collected from site by Centurion 
Transport and delivered direct to the assay 
laboratory. Whilst in storage, they are kept on a 
locked yard. Tracking sheets have been set up 
to track the progress of batches of samples.
No audits or reviews have been conducted at 
this stage.
SECTION 2 REPORTING OF EXPLORATION RESULTS
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mineral tenement and 
land tenure status
Type, reference name/
number, location and 
ownership including 
agreements or material issues 
with third parties such as 
joint ventures, partnerships, 
overriding royalties, native 
title interests, historical sites, 
wilderness or national park 
and environmental settings.
The Baloo prospect is located within Exploration 
License E15/1298, which is located within 
the Polar	Bear	Project,	100%	owned	by	Polar	
Metals Pty Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of S2 
Resources Ltd.
Polar Metals Pty Ltd has lodged a mining 
lease application (MLA 15/1814) over the Baloo 
prospect, and is currently in the approval 
process.
The Baloo prospect is situated within the Ngadju 
Native Title Claim (WC99/002).
The tenement is in good standing and no 
known impediments exist on tenement actively 
explored.
The security of the tenure held 
at the time of reporting along 
with any known impediments 
to obtaining a licence to 
operate in the area.
32
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Gold Exploration
Plutonic Operations Limited and Homestake 
Gold of Australia Limited conducted 
reconnaissance AC drilling (PBAC prefix) over 
Lake Cowan on predominantly 100 m drillhole 
spacing and 800 m line spacing from 1997-1999. 
Location of these drillholes cannot be verified as 
the collars are now mostly obscured.
AC sampling was done by 4 m composites with 
1 m re-splits on samples greater than 0.1 g/t. 
Samples were assayed by aqua-regia digest 
with AAS finish although this cannot be verified 
as the original laboratory.
The Polar Bear project is situated within the 
Archaean Norseman-Wiluna Belt which locally 
includes basalts, komatiites, metasediments, and 
felsic volcanoclastics.
The primary gold mineralisation is related 
to hydrothermal activity during multiple 
deformation events. Indications are that gold 
mineralisation is focused on or near to the 
stratigraphic boundary between the Killaloe and 
Buldania Formation.
Refer to ASX announcements for information on 
drill holes.
Exploration done by 
other parties
Acknowledgment and 
appraisal of exploration by 
other parties.
Geology
Deposit type, geological 
setting and style of 
mineralisation.
Drill hole Information
A summary of all information 
material to the understanding 
of the exploration results 
including a tabulation of the 
following information for all 
Material drill holes:
•	 easting	and	northing	of	the
drill hole collar
•	 elevation	or	RL	(Reduced
Level – elevation above 
sea level in metres) of the 
drill hole collar
•	 dip	and	azimuth	of	the
hole
•	 down	hole	length	and
interception depth
•	 hole	length.
33
33
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Data aggregation 
methods
In reporting Exploration 
Results, weighting averaging 
techniques, maximum and/or 
minimum grade truncations 
(e.g. cutting of high grades) 
and cut-off grades are usually 
Material and should be stated.
Where aggregate intercepts 
incorporate short lengths of 
high grade results and longer 
lengths of low grade results, 
the procedure used for such 
aggregation should be stated 
and some typical examples of 
such aggregations should be 
shown in detail.
The assumptions used for any 
reporting of metal equivalent 
values should be clearly 
stated.
All reported assays have been length weighted. 
A top-cut of 30 g/t Au has been applied to 
individual assays when reported intervals are 
greater than one metre.
A nominal 0.5 g/t Au lower cut-off is used for RC 
and diamond intersections (unless otherwise 
stated). A nominal 0.1 g/t Au lower cut-off is used 
to report AC intersections.
High grade gold intervals internal to broader 
zones of mineralisation are reported as included 
intervals.
No metal equivalent values are used for 
reporting exploration results.
Relationship between 
mineralisation widths 
and intercept lengths
These relationships are 
particularly important in 
the reporting of Exploration 
Results.
The trend of mineralisation at Baloo appears 
broadly north south and dipping moderately to 
the east with the intervals reported near true 
width.
If the geometry of the 
mineralisation with respect to 
the drill hole angle is known, 
its nature should be reported.
All other prospects, the geometry of the primary 
mineralisation is not known at present due to 
the lack of deeper drilling and the early stage of 
exploration.
Refer to ASX announcements for information on 
drill holes.
If it is not known and only 
the down hole lengths are 
reported, there should be a 
clear statement to this effect 
(e.g. ‘down hole length, true 
width not known’).
34
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Diagram
Balanced reporting
Other substantive 
exploration data
Appropriate maps and 
sections (with scales) and 
tabulations of intercepts 
should be included for any 
significant discovery being 
reported These should 
include, but not be limited to 
a plan view of drill hole collar 
locations and appropriate 
sectional views.
Where comprehensive 
reporting of all Exploration 
Results is not practicable, 
representative reporting of 
both low and high grades and/
or widths should be practiced 
to avoid misleading reporting 
of Exploration Results.
Other exploration data, if 
meaningful and material, 
should be reported including 
(but not limited to): geological 
observations; geophysical 
survey results; geochemical 
survey results; bulk samples – 
size and method of treatment; 
metallurgical test results; 
bulk density, groundwater, 
geotechnical and rock 
characteristics; potential 
deleterious or contaminating 
substances.
Refer to Figures in body of text.
The accompanying document is conserved to 
represent a balanced report with grades and/or 
widths reported in a consistent manner.
Two vertical PQ3 holes have been drilled in the 
core of the weathered mineralisation to allow 
bulk density determination and provide samples 
for metallurgical testwork.
Three geotechnical holes have been drilled in 
the western portion of the deposit to investigate 
geotechnical ground conditions in the footwall of 
a potential open pit.
Groundwater monitoring has been initiated with 
insertion of PVC into selected holes to allow a 
first pass pump test.
35
35
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
At Baloo, further drilling down plunge and 
along strike within the mineralised zone will 
follow. More reconnaissance drilling will also be 
performed along strike to the south at Monsoon.
Further work
The nature and scale of 
planned further work (e.g. 
tests for lateral extensions or 
depth extensions or large-
scale step-out drilling).
Diagrams clearly highlighting 
the areas of possible 
extensions, including the main 
geological interpretations 
and future drilling areas, 
provided this information is 
not commercially sensitive
SECTION 3 ESTIMATION AND REPORTING OF MINERAL RESOURCES
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Database integrity
Measures taken to ensure that 
data has not been corrupted by, for 
example, transcription or keying errors, 
between its initial collection and its 
use for Mineral Resource estimation 
purposes.
Data validation procedures used.
Site visits
Comment on any site visits undertaken 
by the Competent Person and the 
outcome of those visits.
Data templates with lookup tables and 
fixed formatting are used for logging, 
spatial and sampling data. Data 
transfer is electronic via e-mail. Sample 
numbers are unique and pre-numbered 
bags are used. These methods all 
minimise the potential of these types of 
errors.
Data validation checks are run by the 
database management consultant.
Multiple site visits to the Baloo deposit 
by Andy Thompson during diamond 
and RC drilling to verify sampling 
integrity and recovery. Site visit by 
Andy Thompson and Brian Wolfe acting 
as Competent Persons, inspected 
the deposit area, the core logging 
and sampling facility. During this time, 
notes and photos were taken along 
with discussions were held with site 
personnel regarding the available RC 
samples and diamond core. No issues 
were encountered.
If no site visits have been undertaken 
indicate why this is the case.
Not applicable
36
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Geological 
interpretation
Confidence in (or conversely, the 
uncertainty of) the geological 
interpretation of the mineral deposit.
Nature of the data used and of any 
assumptions made.
The effect, if any, of alternative 
interpretations on Mineral Resource 
estimation.
The use of geology in guiding 
and controlling Mineral Resource 
estimation.
The factors affecting continuity both of 
grade and geology.
The extent and variability of the 
Mineral Resource expressed as 
length (along strike or otherwise), plan 
width, and depth below surface to the 
upper and lower limits of the Mineral 
Resource.
Dimensions
The confidence in the geological 
interpretation is considered good. The 
deposit is a mesothermal lode gold 
style typical of the Kalgoorlie Archaean 
terrane.
Petrography has been used to 
assist identification of the rock 
type subdivisions applied in the 
interpretation process.
The deposit is well constrained and 
predictable with clear boundaries 
which define the mineralised domains. 
Infill drilling has supported and 
refined the model and the current 
interpretation is thus considered to be 
robust.
Geological controls and relationships 
were used to define sub-domains. 
Key features are quartz veining in a 
deformed lithological contact zone.
Gold grades are strongly related to 
deformed quartz veining within a 
shearzone formed on the contact of 
basalt, black shale and volcanoclastics.
The Mineral Resource area has 
dimensions of 700 m (north) by 350 m 
(east) and 250 m (elevation).
37
37
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Estimation and 
modelling techniques
The nature and appropriateness of the 
estimation technique(s) applied and 
key assumptions, including treatment 
of extreme grade values, domaining, 
interpolation parameters and maximum 
distance of extrapolation from 
data points. If a computer assisted 
estimation method was chosen include 
a description of computer software and 
parameters used.
The Mineral Resource estimate 
was generated via MIK and indirect 
lognormal change of support to 
emulate mining selectivity. Additionally, 
areas of mineralisation of less 
certain grade continuity unsuited 
to grade estimation via MIK have 
been estimated by ordinary Kriging. 
Mineralised domain interpretation 
was completed as described above 
and approximates a 0.3g/t Au lower 
cutoff. The interpretation was coded to 
the drill hole database and 3m length 
composites were generated within 
the mineralisation boundary. A series 
of indicator transforms were applied 
to the composites as determined by 
statistical evaluation and indicator 
semivariograms were modelled for 
each cut-off. The semivariograms 
were input in preparation for kriging 
of the indicator transformed data. 
Hard boundaries were applied to 
the kriging. A search neighbourhood 
was applied parallel to the strike and 
dip with radii of 50m, 50m and 15m 
in the strike, down dip and across 
strike directions respectively. Sample 
counts for the estimates were set 
at a minimum of 24 and a maximum 
of 36. In the case of the domains 
estimated by OK, an expanded search 
ellipsoid of 100m x 100m x 30m and 
a sample count of 6 were applied. 
Any blocks not estimated in the first 
estimation pass were estimated in a 
second pass with expanded search 
neighbourhoods and relaxed sample 
limits to allow the domains to be fully 
estimated. Extrapolation of the drillhole 
composite data is generally limited to 
approximately 50m down dip. Change 
of support via the indirect lognormal 
method has been applied to the 
indicator kriging results to emulate 
selectivity at the mining stage.
38
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
The availability of check estimates, 
previous estimates and/or mine 
production records and whether the 
Mineral Resource estimate takes 
appropriate account of such data.
The assumptions made regarding 
recovery of by-products.
Estimation of deleterious elements or 
other non-grade variables of economic 
significance (e.g. sulphur for acid mine 
drainage characterisation).
In the case of block model 
interpolation, the block size in relation 
to the average sample spacing and the 
search employed.
Any assumptions behind modelling of 
selective mining units.
This is a maiden Mineral Resource for 
the Baloo deposit and no previous 
mining activity has taken place in 
this area.
No by-products are assumed.
No other elements have been assayed.
The parent block size is 20mN x20mE x 
10mRL, with sub-celling to 5mE x 5mN 
x 2.5mRL for domain volume resolution. 
The parent block size was chosen 
based on estimation methodology and 
relates to a drill section spacing of 40m 
to 20m and an on-section drill spacing 
of approximately 20m. The search 
ellipse was oriented with axes rotated 
parallel to the mineralised bodies as 
previously described.
Search ellipse dimensions were chosen 
to encompass several drillholes up and 
down dip and several lines of drilling 
along strike.
Selective mining unit assumptions 
were based on dimension and spacing 
of drill sampling, geometry of the 
mineralisation, likely method of mining 
(open pit) and equipment used, likely 
grade control and drill and blast 
dimensions. In consideration of the 
parent cell dimension described above, 
an SMU of 5mE x 5mN x 2.5mRL has 
therefore been applied.
Any assumptions about correlation 
between variables.
Not applicable
39
39
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Description of how the geological 
interpretation was used to control the 
resource estimates.
Discussion of basis for using or not 
using grade cutting or capping.
The process of validation, the checking 
process used, the comparison of 
model data to drillhole data, and use of 
reconciliation data if available.
Whether the tonnages are estimated 
on a dry basis or with natural moisture, 
and the method of determination of the 
moisture content.
The basis of the adopted cut-off 
grade(s) or quality parameters applied
Moisture
Cut-off parameters
The geological model domained 
the oxide, transitional and primary 
mineralisation to geological and 
structural zones. These domains were 
used as hard boundaries to select 
sample populations for variography 
and estimation.
Top cutting of grades is not relevant 
in the context of MIK methodology 
and has only been considered in the 
case of the grade variogram used 
to calculate the change of support 
variance reduction coefficient. In the 
case of the OK estimates, grade has 
been capped to either 15g/t Au or 
20g/t Au depending on the domain.
No mining has taken place; therefore 
no reconciliation data is available.
The tonnages are estimated on a dry 
basis.
A 0.8g/t Au cut-off grade was used 
to report the Mineral Resources. This 
cut-off grade is estimated to be the 
minimum grade required for economic 
extraction.
A range of additional cut-off grades 
have been reported up to 1.5g/t Au.
40
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mining of the Baloo deposit will 
by open cut mining methods. The 
geometry of the deposit will make it 
amenable to mining methods currently 
employed in many gold open pits in the 
Kalgoorlie district. It is assumed that 
any pit will be mined on 2.5m benches 
with grade control drilling density 
sufficient to allow selectivity assumed 
in the estimation.
Preliminary metallurgical testwork in 
the primary mineralisation indicates 
that the mineralisation is amenable to 
standard cyanide leach extraction.
Mining factors or 
assumptions
Metallurgical factors 
or assumptions
Assumptions made regarding 
possible mining methods, minimum 
mining dimensions and internal (or, if 
applicable, external) mining dilution. 
It is always necessary as part of the 
process of determining reasonable 
prospects for eventual economic 
extraction to consider potential 
mining methods, but the assumptions 
made regarding mining methods and 
parameters when estimating Mineral 
Resources may not always be rigorous. 
Where this is the case, this should be 
reported with an explanation of the 
basis of the mining assumptions made.
The basis for assumptions or predictions 
regarding metallurgical amenability. It is 
always necessary as part of the process 
of determining reasonable prospects 
for eventual economic extraction 
to consider potential metallurgical 
methods, but the assumptions regarding 
metallurgical treatment processes 
and parameters made when reporting 
Mineral Resources may not always be 
rigorous. Where this is the case, this 
should be reported with an explanation 
of the basis of the metallurgical 
assumptions made.
41
41
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Environmental factors 
or assumptions
Bulk density
Assumptions made regarding possible 
waste and process residue disposal 
options. It is always necessary as 
part of the process of determining 
reasonable prospects for eventual 
economic extraction to consider the 
potential environmental impacts of 
the mining and processing operation. 
While at this stage the determination 
of potential environmental impacts, 
particularly for a greenfields project, 
may not always be well advanced, the 
status of early consideration of these 
potential environmental impacts should 
be reported. Where these aspects 
have not been considered this should 
be reported with an explanation of the 
environmental assumptions made
Whether assumed or determined. 
If assumed, the basis for the 
assumptions. If determined, the method 
used, whether wet or dry, the frequency 
of the measurements, the nature, size 
and representativeness of the samples.
The bulk density for bulk material must 
have been measured by methods 
that adequately account for void 
spaces (vugs, porosity, etc), moisture 
and differences between rock and 
alteration zones within the deposit,
No assumptions have been made and 
these will form part of the scoping 
study commencing in April 2016.
Dry Bulk Densities were determined by 
the Archimedes principle (immersion) 
where possible and also by the direct 
measurement method (caliper) in the 
oxide clay. Samples were measured 
directly from the rig (wet bulk density) 
and then the samples were dried at 
Minanalytical to determine moisture 
content so that Dry Bulk Density (DBD) 
could be calculated.
In total 86 oxide samples, 77 transition 
zone samples and 282 primary 
zone samples were collected from 
mineralised zones.
Bulk density has been estimated 
from density measurements carried 
out on PQ3 core samples using the 
Archimedes method (immersion) of dry 
weight versus weight in water using 
clingwrap to waterproof the core. 
The caliper method was also used in 
saprolitic oxide clay and showed good 
correlation with the immersion method.
42
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Discuss assumptions for bulk density 
estimates used in the evaluation 
process of the different materials.
Classification
The basis for the classification of 
the Mineral Resources into varying 
confidence categories
Whether appropriate account has 
been taken of all relevant factors (i.e. 
relative confidence in tonnage/grade 
estimations, reliability of input data, 
confidence in continuity of geology 
and metal values, quality, quantity and 
distribution of the data).
The bulk density values were assigned 
as an average value to the three 
weathering domains, oxide, transition 
and fresh.
The Mineral Resource classification 
is based on good confidence in the 
geological and grade continuity, along 
with 20 m by 20 m or 20 x 40m spaced 
drillhole density.
The input data is comprehensive in 
its coverage of the mineralisation and 
does not favour or misrepresent in-situ 
mineralisation.
The validation of the block model 
shows good correlation of the input 
data to the estimated grades.
Whether the result appropriately 
reflects the Competent Person’s view of 
the deposit.
The Mineral Resource estimate 
appropriately reflects the view of the 
Competent Persons.
Audits or reviews
The results of any audits or reviews of 
Mineral Resource estimates.
This is the maiden Baloo deposit 
Mineral Resource estimate.
The relative accuracy of the Mineral 
Resource estimate is reflected in the 
reporting of the Mineral Resource as 
per the guidelines of the 2012 JORC 
Code.
Where appropriate a statement of 
the relative accuracy and confidence 
level in the Mineral Resource estimate 
using an approach or procedure 
deemed appropriate by the Competent 
Person. For example, the application of 
statistical or geostatistical procedures 
to quantify the relative accuracy of 
the resource within stated confidence 
limits, or, if such an approach is not 
deemed appropriate, a qualitative 
discussion of the factors that could 
affect the relative accuracy and 
confidence of the estimate
43
43
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
The statement should specify 
whether it relates to global or local 
estimates, and, if local, state the 
relevant tonnages, which should be 
relevant to technical and economic 
evaluation. Documentation should 
include assumptions made and the 
procedures used
These statements of relative accuracy 
and confidence of the estimate should 
be compared with production data, 
where available
The statement relates to global 
estimates of tonnes and grade.
No production data is available.
Annexure 1b Nanook Resource
The following Tables are provided to ensure compliance with the JORC code (2012) edition requirements for 
the reporting of exploration results.
SECTION 1 SAMPLING TECHNIQUES AND DATA
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Sampling techniques
Nature and quality of sampling 
(e.g. cut channels, random chips, or 
specific specialised industry standard 
measurement tools appropriate to 
the minerals under investigation, such 
as down hole gamma sondes, or 
handheld XRF instruments, etc). These 
examples should not be taken as 
limiting the broad meaning of sampling.
Include reference to measures taken 
to ensure sample representivity and 
the appropriate calibration of any 
measurement tools or systems used
44
The mineralised trend at Nanook is 
sampled by RC and aircore drilling on a 
nominal 40 m hole spacing and 100 m 
lines, with local infill to 100m x 20m and 
50m x 20m spacing. All holes drilled to 
refusal.
For RC sampling, a 1 metre split is taken 
directly from a cone splitter mounted 
beneath the rigs cyclone. The cyclone 
and splitter are cleaned regularly to 
minimise any contamination. A second 
reference split is also taken from each 
metre and stored on site.
Aircore holes are sampled using an 
aluminium scoop to produce a four 
metre composite sample.
Sampling and QAQC procedures is 
carried out using S2 protocols as per 
industry best practice.
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Aspects of the determination of 
mineralisation that are Material to the 
Public Report. In cases where ‘industry 
standard’ work has been done this 
would be relatively simple (e.g. ‘reverse 
circulation drilling was used to obtain 
1 m samples from which 3 kg was 
pulverised to produce a 30 g charge 
for fire assay’). In other cases more 
explanation may be required, such as 
where there is coarse gold that has 
inherent sampling problems. Unusual 
commodities or mineralisation types 
(e.g. submarine nodules) may warrant 
disclosure of detailed information
Drilling techniques
Drill sample recovery
Drill type (e.g. core, reverse circulation, 
open-hole hammer, rotary air blast, 
auger, Bangka, sonic, etc) and details 
(e.g. core diameter, triple or standard 
tube, depth of diamond tails, face-
sampling bit or other type, whether 
core is oriented and if so, by what 
method, etc).
Method of recording and assessing 
core and chip sample recoveries and 
results assessed
Aircore samples are composited at 
4 m to produce a bulk 3 kg sample. 
Samples were dried, pulverised (total 
prep), and split to produce a 25 g sub 
sample which is analysed using aqua-
regia digestion with ICP-MS finish with 
a 1 ppb detection limit. High grades 
were repeated using 25g or 50g Lead 
Collection fire assay with an ICP/MS 
finish.
RC drilling is sampled a 1m “cone” split 
sample, to produce a bulk 3 kg sample. 
Sample preparation was the same 
as for the aircore drilling. A nominal 
50gram sub-sample was collected and 
analysed by Samples were to produce 
a sub sample for analysed by fire assay 
with an AA finish.
A 1m end of hole sample was 
collected for all aircore holes. Sample 
preparation was the same as above 
and were analysed using a four acid 
digest with an ICP/OES and fire assay. 
The following elements are included in 
the assay suite: Ag, Al, As, Au, Ba, Be, 
Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, La, Mg, 
Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, P, Pb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Te, Ti, 
Tl, V, W, Zn.
RC drilling is carried out using a face 
sampling hammer with a nominal 
diameter of 140mm.
Aircore drilling is carried out using a 
3 ½ inch blade bit. Where necessary 
a 3 ½ inch face sampling hammer is 
employed to penetrate through hard 
zones.
RC and aircore sample recoveries are 
visually estimated qualitatively on a 
metre basis and are recorded in the 
database.
45
45
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Measures taken to maximise sample 
recovery and ensure representative 
nature of the samples
Sample quality is qualitatively logged 
on a metre basis, recording sample 
condition and contamination.
Whether a relationship exists between 
sample recovery and grade and 
whether sample bias may have 
occurred due to preferential loss/gain 
of fine/coarse material.
Various drilling additives (including 
muds and foams) have been used to 
condition RC and aircore drill holes 
to maximise recoveries and sample 
quality. Drill cyclone and sample 
buckets are cleaned between rod-
changes and after each hole to 
minimise down hole and/or cross-hole 
contamination.
Insufficient drilling and geochemical 
data is available at the present stage to 
evaluate potential sample bias.
Aircore drilling samples are 
occasionally wet which may have 
resulted in sample bias due to 
preferential loss/gain of fine/coarse 
material.
The limited RC drilling with 1m sampling 
through the mineralised gravels shows 
a good correlation with the AC results
Logging
Whether core and chip samples have 
been geologically and geotechnically 
logged to a level of detail to support 
appropriate Mineral Resource 
estimation, mining studies and 
metallurgical studies.
Lithology, alteration and veining is 
recorded directly to a digital format and 
imported into S2 Resources central 
database. The logging is considered 
of sufficient standard to support a 
geological resource.
Whether logging is qualitative or 
quantitative in nature. Core (or costean, 
channel, etc) photography.
The total length and percentage of the 
relevant intersections logged
Logging of aircore and RC records 
lithology, mineralogy, mineralisation, 
weathering, colour and other features 
of the samples, and is qualitative in 
nature.
All drillholes were logged in full.
Sub-sampling 
techniques and 
sample preparation
If core, whether cut or sawn and 
whether quarter, half or all core taken.
Not applicable.
46
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
If non-core, whether riffled, tube 
sampled, rotary split, etc and whether 
sampled wet or dry.
For all sample types, the nature, quality 
and appropriateness of the sample 
preparation technique.
Quality control procedures adopted for 
all sub-sampling stages to maximise 
representivity of samples.
Measures taken to ensure that the 
sampling is representative of the in 
situ material collected, including for 
instance results for field duplicate/
second-half sampling.
Whether sample sizes are appropriate 
to the grain size of the material being 
sampled.
Aircore samples consist of a 4 metre 
composite pled 1 metre samples are 
collected via an on-board cone splitter. 
Samples were collected both wet and 
dry.
The sample preparation follows 
industry best practice in sample 
preparation All samples are pulverised 
utilising Essa LM1, LM2 or LM5 grinding 
mills determined by the size of the 
sample. Samples are dried, crushed 
as required and pulverized to produce 
a homogenous representative sub-
sample for analysis. A grind quality 
target	of	85%	passing	75μm	has	been	
established and is relative to sample 
size, type and hardness.
Quality control procedures include 
submission of Certified Reference 
Materials (CRM’s), blanks and duplicate 
samples with each batch of samples. 
Selected samples are also re-analysed 
to confirm anomalous results.
Grind size checks are routinely 
completed to ensure samples meet 
the	industry	standard	of	85%	passing	
through	a	75μm	mesh.
Field duplicates are taken at regular 
intervals. Samples are selected to 
weigh less than 3kg to ensure total 
preparation at the pulverisation stage.
Sample sizes are considered 
appropriate for gold mineralisation.
47
47
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Quality of assay data 
and laboratory tests
The nature, quality and 
appropriateness of the assaying and 
laboratory procedures used and 
whether the technique is considered 
partial or total.
For geophysical tools, spectrometers, 
handheld XRF instruments, etc, the 
parameters used in determining the 
analysis including instrument make 
and model, reading times, calibrations 
factors applied and their derivation, 
etc.
Nature of quality control procedures 
adopted (e.g. standards, blanks, 
duplicates, external laboratory checks) 
and whether acceptable levels 
of accuracy (i.e. lack of bias) and 
precision have been established.
4m composite samples from AC drilling 
are analysed for Au only using a 25g 
aqua-regia digestion with an ICP/MS 
finish. The method gives a near total 
digestion of the regolith intercepted 
in aircore drilling and is suitable for 
the estimation of palaeochannel gold 
deposits. High grades were repeated 
using 25g or 50g Lead Collection fire 
assay with an ICP/MS finish.
All aircore holes have a 1m end-of-hole 
sample is collected for all AC holes. An 
extensive multi-element suite (including 
Ag, Al, As, Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Co, 
Cr, Cu, Fe, K, La, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Ni, 
P, Pb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Te, Ti, Tl, V, W, Zn) is 
analysed using a four acid digest with 
an ICP/OES and ICP/MS finish. Au, Pt 
And Pd is analysed for using 25g or 
50g Lead Collection fire assay with an 
ICP/MS finish.
No geophysical tools were used to 
determine any element concentrations 
used in this resource estimate.
Sample preparation checks for fineness 
were carried out by the laboratory 
as part of their internal procedures 
to	ensure	the	grind	size	of	85%	
passing 75 micron was being attained. 
Laboratory QAQC involves the use of 
internal lab standards using certified 
reference material, blanks, splits and 
replicates as part of the in house 
procedures.
Verification of 
sampling and 
assaying
The verification of significant 
intersections by either independent or 
alternative company personnel.
The Exploration Manager of S2 
has visually verified significant 
intersections.
The use of twinned holes.
No twin holes have been drilled on the 
project to date.
48
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Location of data 
points
Documentation of primary data, data 
entry procedures, data verification, 
data storage (physical and electronic) 
protocols.
Discuss any adjustment to assay data.
Accuracy and quality of surveys used 
to locate drillholes (collar and down-
hole surveys), trenches, mine workings 
and other locations used in Mineral 
Resource estimation.
Specification of the grid system used.
Quality and adequacy of topographic 
control.
Data spacing and 
distribution
Data spacing for reporting of 
Exploration Results.
Whether the data spacing and 
distribution is sufficient to establish 
the degree of geological and grade 
continuity appropriate for the Mineral 
Resource and Ore Reserve estimation 
procedure(s) and classifications 
applied.
Primary data was collected using a 
set of standard Excel templates using 
lookup codes. The information was 
sent to an external database consultant 
for validation and compilation into a 
Perth based SQL database.
No adjustments or calibrations were 
made to any assay data reported.
Drillhole collars were located GPS with 
an accuracy is +/ – 5m.
The grid system used at Polar Bear is 
GDA94 (MGA), zone 51.
A topographic surface has been 
created from aerial geophysical data, 
This has been calibrated with DGPS 
survey data. All reconnaissance drill 
holes have been corrected to this 
surface where DGPS pickup is not 
available.
Data spacing is currently defined 
by the geological criteria regarded 
appropriate to determine the extents 
of mineralisation. Reconnaissance 
AC drilling is on a nominal spacing of 
between 100m x 40m and 50m x 40m 
drill pattern.
Drilling is considered to be of sufficient 
spacing to allow an inferred mineral 
resource to be estimated.
Whether sample compositing has been 
applied.
No compositing has been applied to 
the exploration results.
49
49
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Orientation of data in 
relation to geological 
structure
Whether the orientation of sampling 
achieves unbiased sampling of 
possible structures and the extent to 
which this is known, considering the 
deposit type.
If the relationship between the drilling 
orientation and the orientation of key 
mineralised structures is considered to 
have introduced a sampling bias, this 
should be assessed and reported if 
material.
The measures taken to ensure sample 
security.
Sample security
The drilling is not necessarily drilled 
perpendicular to the orientation of the 
intersected mineralisation. All reported 
intervals are downhole intervals and 
not calculated true width. This will be 
established with further drilling.
No orientation biased sampling bias 
has been identified in the data at this 
point.
Chain of custody is managed by 
S2 Resources. Samples are stored 
on site and either delivered by S2 
personnel to Perth and then to the 
assay laboratory, or collected from site 
by Centurion Transport and delivered 
direct to the assay laboratory. Whilst 
in storage, they are kept on a locked 
yard. Tracking sheets have been set 
up to track the progress of batches of 
samples.
Audits or reviews
The results of any audits or reviews of 
sampling techniques and data.
No audits or reviews have been 
conducted at this stage.
SECTION 2 REPORTING OF EXPLORATION RESULTS
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mineral tenement and 
land tenure status
Type, reference name/number, location 
and ownership including agreements 
or material issues with third parties 
such as joint ventures, partnerships, 
overriding royalties, native title 
interests, historical sites, wilderness 
or national park and environmental 
settings.
The security of the tenure held at the 
time of reporting along with any known 
impediments to obtaining a licence to 
operate in the area.
The Nanook prospect is located within 
Exploration License E63/1142, which is 
located within the Polar Bear Project, 
100%	owned	by	Polar	Metals	Pty	
Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of S2 
Resources Ltd.
All projects are situated within the 
Ngadju Native Title Claim (WC99/002).
The tenement is in good standing 
and no known impediments exist on 
tenement actively explored.
50
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Exploration done by 
other parties
Acknowledgment and appraisal of 
exploration by other parties.
Gold Exploration
Plutonic Operations Limited and 
Homestake Gold of Australia Limited 
conducted reconnaissance AC drilling 
(PBAC prefix) over Lake Cowan on 
predominantly 100 m drillhole spacing 
and 800 m line spacing from 1997-1999. 
Location of these drillholes cannot be 
verified as the collars are now mostly 
obscured.
AC sampling was done by 4 m 
composites with 1 m re-splits on 
samples greater than 0.1 g/t. Samples 
were assayed by aqua-regia digest 
with AAS finish although this cannot be 
verified as the original laboratory.
51
51
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
The Polar Bear project is situated 
within the Archaean Norseman-Wiluna 
Belt which locally includes basalts, 
komatiites, metasediments, and felsic 
volcanoclastics.
The primary gold mineralisation 
is related to hydrothermal activity 
during multiple deformation events. 
Indications are that gold mineralisation 
is focused on or near to the 
stratigraphic boundary between the 
Killaloe and Buldania Formation.
The mineralisation modelled at Nanook 
is situated at or close to the Tertiary / 
Archaean unconformity, primarily within 
unconsolidated quartz rich sands and 
gravel. The mineralisation is interpreted 
to be either elluvial or alluvial in nature, 
although a supergene overprint is 
present.
It may be derived from a nearby 
basement source. Recent drilling has 
defined a number of potential gold 
trends to the Northwest associated 
with sheared mafic and mafic-shale 
contact as well as to the southwest 
in and adjacent to the Nanook 
granodiorite body.
Refer to ASX announcements for 
information on drill holes.
Geology
Deposit type, geological setting and 
style of mineralisation.
Drill hole Information
A summary of all information material 
to the understanding of the exploration 
results including a tabulation of the 
following information for all Material 
drill holes:
•	 easting	and	northing	of	the	drill	hole
collar
•	 elevation	or	RL	(Reduced	Level	–
elevation above sea level in metres) 
of the drill hole collar
•	 dip	and	azimuth	of	the	hole
•	 down	hole	length	and	interception
depth
•	 hole	length.
52
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Data aggregation 
methods
In reporting Exploration Results, 
weighting averaging techniques, 
maximum and/or minimum grade 
truncations (e.g. cutting of high grades) 
and cut-off grades are usually Material 
and should be stated.
Where aggregate intercepts 
incorporate short lengths of high 
grade results and longer lengths of 
low grade results, the procedure used 
for such aggregation should be stated 
and some typical examples of such 
aggregations should be shown in 
detail.
The assumptions used for any 
reporting of metal equivalent values 
should be clearly stated.
Relationship between 
mineralisation widths 
and intercept lengths
These relationships are particularly 
important in the reporting of 
Exploration Results.
If the geometry of the mineralisation 
with respect to the drill hole angle is 
known, its nature should be reported.
If it is not known and only the down 
hole lengths are reported, there should 
be a clear statement to this effect 
(e.g. ‘down hole length, true width not 
known’).
Appropriate maps and sections (with 
scales) and tabulations of intercepts 
should be included for any significant 
discovery being reported These should 
include, but not be limited to a plan 
view of drill hole collar locations and 
appropriate sectional views.
Diagram
All reported assays have been 
length weighted. A nominal 0.2 g/t 
Au lower cut-off is used to report AC 
intersections.
High grade gold intervals internal to 
broader zones of mineralisation are 
reported as included intervals.
No metal equivalent values are used 
for reporting exploration results.
The bedrock trend of mineralisation at 
Nanook is not known at present due to 
the lack of deeper drilling and the early 
stage of exploration.
Alluvial/elluvial gold has been defined 
within two discrete palaeochannel 
systems trending roughly N-S and NNE.
Downhole thicknesses can be 
regarded as true thickness due to the 
flat orientation of the palaeochannel 
deposit.
Refer to ASX announcements for 
information on drill holes.
Refer to Figures in body of text.
53
53
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
The accompanying document is 
conserved to represent a balanced 
report with grades and/or widths 
reported in a consistent manner.
No other exploration data collected 
to date is considered material or 
meaningful at this stage.
RC follow-up of high grade intercepts 
to establish the controls and geometry 
of mineralisation is proposed.
Balanced reporting
Other substantive 
exploration data
Further work
Where comprehensive reporting of all 
Exploration Results is not practicable, 
representative reporting of both low 
and high grades and/or widths should 
be practiced to avoid misleading 
reporting of Exploration Results.
Other exploration data, if meaningful 
and material, should be reported 
including (but not limited to): geological 
observations; geophysical survey 
results; geochemical survey results; 
bulk samples – size and method 
of treatment; metallurgical test 
results; bulk density, groundwater, 
geotechnical and rock characteristics; 
potential deleterious or contaminating 
substances.
The nature and scale of planned 
further work (e.g. tests for lateral 
extensions or depth extensions or 
large-scale step-out drilling).
Diagrams clearly highlighting the 
areas of possible extensions, including 
the main geological interpretations 
and future drilling areas, provided 
this information is not commercially 
sensitive
SECTION 3 ESTIMATION AND REPORTING OF MINERAL RESOURCES
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Database integrity
Measures taken to ensure that 
data has not been corrupted by, for 
example, transcription or keying errors, 
between its initial collection and its 
use for Mineral Resource estimation 
purposes.
Data validation procedures used.
Data templates with lookup tables and 
fixed formatting are used for logging, 
spatial and sampling data. Data 
transfer is electronic via e-mail. Sample 
numbers are unique and pre-numbered 
bags are used. These methods all 
minimise the potential of these types of 
errors.
Data validation checks are run by the 
database management consultant.
54
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Site visits
Comment on any site visits undertaken 
by the Competent Person and the 
outcome of those visits.
A site visit was made to the Nanook 
deposit by Andy Thompson during AC 
drilling to verify sampling integrity and 
recovery. No issues were encountered. 
Brian Wolfe has not undertaken a site 
visit as of the data of reporting.
If no site visits have been undertaken 
indicate why this is the case.
Not applicable
Geological 
interpretation
Confidence in (or conversely, the 
uncertainty of) the geological 
interpretation of the mineral deposit.
Nature of the data used and of any 
assumptions made.
The effect, if any, of alternative 
interpretations on Mineral Resource 
estimation.
The confidence in the geological 
interpretation is considered good. The 
deposit is a palaeochannel elluvial / 
alluvial gold deposit style typical of the 
Higginsville area.
Geological logging of the Tertiary 
sediments and their contact with 
Archaean basement has been used 
to model the channel fill deposit. The 
assays data consists of dominantly 4m 
composites through the mineralisation.
The deposit is well constrained and 
predictable with clear boundaries 
which define the mineralised domains. 
Infill drilling has supported and refined 
the model and the current geological 
interpretation is thus considered to be 
robust.
The use of geology in guiding 
and controlling Mineral Resource 
estimation.
Key features are quartz rubble and 
sands logged at the Tertiary / Archaean 
unconformity.
The factors affecting continuity both of 
grade and geology.
Geological continuity is strong in the 
interpreted horizon at the current scale 
of the drilling. Grade continuity appears 
good but requires top cutting to reduce 
the impact of extremely high local 
grades. A top cut of 8 g/t was used.
Dimensions
The extent and variability of the 
Mineral Resource expressed as 
length (along strike or otherwise), plan 
width, and depth below surface to the 
upper and lower limits of the Mineral 
Resource.
The Mineral Resource area has overall 
dimensions of dimensions of 2700 m 
(north) by 1100 m (east) with a central 
core of 900m (north) by 400m (east). 
The deposit has approximately 40m of 
cover.
55
55
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Estimation and 
modelling techniques
The nature and appropriateness of the 
estimation technique(s) applied and 
key assumptions, including treatment 
of extreme grade values, domaining, 
interpolation parameters and maximum 
distance of extrapolation from 
data points. If a computer assisted 
estimation method was chosen include 
a description of computer software and 
parameters used.
The availability of check estimates, 
previous estimates and/or mine 
production records and whether the 
Mineral Resource estimate takes 
appropriate account of such data.
The assumptions made regarding 
recovery of by-products.
Estimation of deleterious elements or 
other non-grade variables of economic 
significance (e.g. sulphur for acid mine 
drainage characterisation).
56
The Mineral Resource estimate was 
generated via OK. Mineralised domain 
interpretation was completed as 
described above and as such does 
not incorporate a lower cutoff grade. 
The interpretation was coded to the 
drill hole database and 4m length 
composites were generated within 
the mineralisation boundary. A single 
omni-directional semi-variogram 
was calculated and was input in 
preparation for kriging of the gold 
grade data. Hard boundaries were 
applied to the kriging. A horizontally 
orientated search neighbourhood 
was applied with radii of 150m in the 
horizontal direction and 25m in the 
vertical directions respectively. Sample 
counts for the estimates were set at 
a minimum of 8 and a maximum of 12. 
Any blocks not estimated in the first 
estimation pass were estimated in a 
second pass with an expanded search 
neighbourhood to allow the domains to 
be fully estimated. Extrapolation of the 
drillhole composite data is generally 
limited to approximately 50m to 100m 
beyond the edges of the interpreted 
mineralisation however is commonly 
constrained by drilling on adjacent 
sections. Change of support has not 
been applied to emulate selectivity at 
the mining stage.
This is a maiden Mineral Resource 
for the Nanook Palaeochannel and 
no previous mining activity has taken 
place in this area.
No by-products are assumed.
No other elements have been assayed.
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
In the case of block model 
interpolation, the block size in relation 
to the average sample spacing and the 
search employed.
The parent block size within the 
estimated domain is 25mN x25mE 
x 4mRL, with sub-celling to 5mE x 
5mN x 1.0mRL for domain volume 
resolution. The parent block size 
was chosen based on mineralised 
bodies dimension and orientation, 
estimation methodology and relates 
to a drill section spacing of 100m to 
50m and an on-section drill spacing of 
approximately 40m. The search ellipse 
was horizontally oriented as previously 
described.
Search ellipse dimensions were chosen 
to encompass adjacent drillholes on 
sections and adjacent lines of drilling 
along strike.
Any assumptions behind modelling of 
selective mining units.
No assumption on selective mining 
were made.
Any assumptions about correlation 
between variables.
Not applicable.
Description of how the geological 
interpretation was used to control the 
resource estimates.
Discussion of basis for using or not 
using grade cutting or capping.
Moisture
The process of validation, the checking 
process used, the comparison of 
model data to drillhole data, and use of 
reconciliation data if available.
Whether the tonnages are estimated 
on a dry basis or with natural moisture, 
and the method of determination of the 
moisture content.
The geological model domained the 
mineralised elluvial material which 
is situated at the Tertiary / Archaean 
boundary.
A number of extremely high grade 
composites have been identified which 
are considered true outliers to the data. 
Given the relative lack of numbers of 
very high grade composites and their 
potential impact on the grade estimate, 
these samples have been cut to 8g/t Au.
No mining has taken place; therefore 
no reconciliation data is available.
The tonnages are estimated on a dry 
basis.
57
57
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
A 0.8g/t Au cut-off grade was used 
to report the Mineral Resources. This 
cut-off grade is estimated to be the 
minimum grade required for economic 
extraction.
Additional cut-off grades have been 
reported at 0.5g/t and 1.0g/t Au.
No assumptions have been made as to 
possible mining method.
No metallurgical testwork has been 
performed.
Cut-off parameters
The basis of the adopted cut-off 
grade(s) or quality parameters applied
Mining factors or 
assumptions
Metallurgical factors 
or assumptions
Assumptions made regarding 
possible mining methods, minimum 
mining dimensions and internal (or, if 
applicable, external) mining dilution. 
It is always necessary as part of the 
process of determining reasonable 
prospects for eventual economic 
extraction to consider potential 
mining methods, but the assumptions 
made regarding mining methods and 
parameters when estimating Mineral 
Resources may not always be rigorous. 
Where this is the case, this should be 
reported with an explanation of the 
basis of the mining assumptions made.
The basis for assumptions or predictions 
regarding metallurgical amenability. It is 
always necessary as part of the process 
of determining reasonable prospects 
for eventual economic extraction 
to consider potential metallurgical 
methods, but the assumptions regarding 
metallurgical treatment processes 
and parameters made when reporting 
Mineral Resources may not always be 
rigorous. Where this is the case, this 
should be reported with an explanation 
of the basis of the metallurgical 
assumptions made.
58
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Environmental factors 
or assumptions
Bulk density
Assumptions made regarding possible 
waste and process residue disposal 
options. It is always necessary as 
part of the process of determining 
reasonable prospects for eventual 
economic extraction to consider the 
potential environmental impacts of 
the mining and processing operation. 
While at this stage the determination 
of potential environmental impacts, 
particularly for a greenfields project, 
may not always be well advanced, the 
status of early consideration of these 
potential environmental impacts should 
be reported. Where these aspects 
have not been considered this should 
be reported with an explanation of the 
environmental assumptions made.
Whether assumed or determined. 
If assumed, the basis for the 
assumptions. If determined, the method 
used, whether wet or dry, the frequency 
of the measurements, the nature, size 
and representativeness of the samples.
The bulk density for bulk material must 
have been measured by methods 
that adequately account for void 
spaces (vugs, porosity, etc), moisture 
and differences between rock and 
alteration zones within the deposit,
Discuss assumptions for bulk density 
estimates used in the evaluation 
process of the different materials.
Classification
The basis for the classification of 
the Mineral Resources into varying 
confidence categories.
No assumptions have been made.
Dry Bulk Densities have been 
assumed as 1.8 gm/cm3. No direct 
measurements have been taken.
Dry Bulk Densities have been 
estimated as 1.8 gm/cm3. No direct 
measurements have been taken.
The bulk density values were assigned 
as a single value in the gravels using 
data accepted as typical for such 
deposits.
The Mineral Resource has been entirely 
classified as Inferred. The classification 
is based on good confidence in the 
geological domain countered by high 
nugget values,sampling method of 
4m composites, variable drill spacing 
and no direct Dry Bulk Density 
measurements.
59
59
Operations Review
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Whether appropriate account has 
been taken of all relevant factors (i.e. 
relative confidence in tonnage/grade 
estimations, reliability of input data, 
confidence in continuity of geology 
and metal values, quality, quantity and 
distribution of the data).
The input data is comprehensive in 
its coverage of the mineralisation and 
does not favour or misrepresent in-situ 
mineralisation.
The validation of the block model 
shows good correlation of the input 
data to the estimated grades.
Whether the result appropriately 
reflects the Competent Person’s view of 
the deposit.
The Mineral Resource estimate 
appropriately reflects the view of the 
Competent Persons.
Audits or reviews
The results of any audits or reviews of 
Mineral Resource estimates.
Where appropriate a statement of 
the relative accuracy and confidence 
level in the Mineral Resource estimate 
using an approach or procedure 
deemed appropriate by the Competent 
Person. For example, the application of 
statistical or geostatistical procedures 
to quantify the relative accuracy of 
the resource within stated confidence 
limits, or, if such an approach is not 
deemed appropriate, a qualitative 
discussion of the factors that could 
affect the relative accuracy and 
confidence of the estimate
The statement should specify whether 
it relates to global or local estimates, 
and, if local, state the relevant 
tonnages, which should be relevant 
to technical and economic evaluation. 
Documentation should include 
assumptions made and the procedures 
used
These statements of relative accuracy 
and confidence of the estimate should 
be compared with production data, 
where available
This is the maiden Nanook 
Palaeochannel gold deposit Mineral 
Resource estimate.
The relative accuracy of the Mineral 
Resource estimate is reflected in the 
reporting of the Mineral Resource as 
per the guidelines of the 2012 JORC 
Code.
The statement relates to global 
estimates of tonnes and grade.
No production data is available.
60
Directors’ Report
The Directors of S2 Resources Ltd (“Directors”) present their report on the consolidated entity consisting of S2 
Resources Ltd (“the Company” or “S2”) and the entities it controlled at the end of, or during, the period ended 
30 June 2016 (“Group”).
Directors
The names and details of the Directors in office during the financial period and until the date of this Report are 
as follows. Directors were in office for the entire period unless otherwise stated.
Jeff Dowling – appointed on 29 May 2015
Mark Bennett – appointed on 29 May 2015
Anna Neuling – appointed on 29 May 2015
Grey Egerton-Warburton – appointed on 29 April 2016
Principal Activities
The principal continuing activity of the Group is mineral exploration.
Dividends
No dividends were paid or proposed to be paid to members during the financial period.
Review of Operations
Operating Result
The loss from continuing operations for the period ended 30 June 2016 after providing for income tax 
amounted to $10,823,222.
The loss results from $4,917,968 of exploration expenditure incurred and expensed, $4,039,525 of share-
based payments expenses, $1,791,086 of administration costs, $331,105 of business development costs, 
$114,308 depreciation costs and $370,770 of net income and foreign exchange losses. The exploration 
expenditure incurred and expensed mainly relates to its Scandinavian projects and to the Polar Bear project, 
which contains the Baloo and Nanook gold deposits and the Monsoon gold prospect.
61
61
Directors’ Report
Significant Changes in the State of Affairs
On 29 May 2015, the Company was incorporated and appointed Mr Jeff Dowling, Dr Bennett and Ms Anna 
Neuling as directors.
On 21 September 2015, S2 Resources Ltd and its subsidiaries, demerged from Sirius Resources NL (“Sirius”, 
now a subsidiary of Independence Group (“IGO”)). The demerger transaction comprised S2 receiving cash 
from IGO and acquiring Polar Metals Pty Ltd and Sirius Europa Pty Ltd (“acquired entities”). The following 
transactions occurred for the demerger transaction to complete on 21 September 2015:
•	 On	3	September	2015,	the	shareholders	of	Sirius	Resources	NL	approved	the	demerger	transaction.
•	 On	10	September	2015,	subsequent	to	court	order	approval	of	the	demerger	transaction,	the	Company
received cash of $15,854,974 and a reimbursement for Deferred Tax Assets of $4,145,026 due to exiting the 
Sirius Resources NL tax consolidated group (i.e. total cash received of $20,000,000).
•	 On	21	September	2015,	207,401,278	shares	were	issued	to	S2	shareholders.	The	number	of	shares
determined on completion of the Demerger transaction was based on Sirius Resources NL shareholders 
receiving 1 S2 share for every 2 Sirius ordinary shares.
•	 Also	on	21	September	2015,	the	Company	acquired	Polar	Metals	and	Sirius	Europa	Pty	Ltd.	The	net	assets	
acquired on this date was $9,969,347 and comprised cash which included the reimbursement for Deferred 
Tax Assets due to exiting the Sirius Resources NL tax consolidated group and exploration assets.
On 19 October 2015, S2 listed on the Australian Stock Exchange.
On	inception,	the	Group	held	a	100%	interest	in	Sirius	Europa	Pty	Ltd,	which	in	turn	held	a	67%	interest	in	
Norse	Exploration	Pty	Ltd	(“Norse”),	which	in	turn	held	100%	of	Sakumpu	Exploration	Oy	(“Sakumpu”),	a	Finnish	
registered company that holds exploration assets in Finland and Sweden. The balance of Norse was held by 
the original vendors of Sakumpu. On 30 November 2015, the Group announced its acquisition of the remaining 
33%	interest,	held	by	the	Sakumpu	vendors,	in	Norse	which	became	a	wholly	owned	subsidiary	of	S2.	The	
consideration of $1,260,000 was based on issuing 8,400,000 S2 shares at 15 cents per share.
On 4 March 2016, the Group announced the initial Mineral Resource Estimate for the Baloo gold deposit 
comprising 1,150,000 tonnes of Indicated material at a grade of 1.9g/t gold containing 69,000 ounces and 
1,030,000 tonnes of Inferred material at a grade of 1.6g/t gold containing 54,000 ounces . The total Mineral 
Resource Estimate for the Baloo gold deposit was 2,170,000 tonnes grading 1.8g/t gold for a contained 
123,000 ounces at a cutoff grade of 0.8g/t gold.
On 29 April 2016, the Group appointed Grey Egerton-Warburton as Non-Executive Director.
On 6 May 2016 and in conjunction with the announcement made on 29 June 2016, the Group announced 
the initial Mineral Resource Estimate for the Nanook palaeochannel gold deposit comprising of an estimated 
2,200,000 tonnes Inferred material at a grade of 1.2g/t gold containing 84,000 ounces.
62
Directors’ Report
After Balance Date Events
On 20 July 2016 the Group announced the results of initial metallurgical, engineering, hydrological and 
environmental studies for the Baloo gold deposit on its Polar Bear project.
On 21 July 2016 the Group announced the discovery of significant gold mineralisation at the Monsoon 
prospect, which is part of the Polar Bear project.
On 26 July 2016, the Group announced a capital raising of $9.08 million via the placement of 22.7 million 
shares at 40 cents per share (“Issue Price”). This was completed on 2 August 2016. Also announced on the 
same day was a Share Purchase Plan (“SPP”) where eligible S2 shareholders were invited to subscribe for new 
ordinary shares in S2 at the Issue Price up to a maximum of $15,000 per shareholder. The SPP, to raise up to 
$3 million, closed on 15 August 2016 and was heavily oversubscribed. The shares issued under the SPP are 
anticipated to be allotted on Monday 22 August 2016 and quoted on the ASX on Tuesday 23 August 2016.
Other than the after balance date events stated above, there has been no matter or circumstance that has 
arisen since 30 June 2016 that has significantly affected, or may significantly affect:
•	
•	
•
the	Group’s	operations	in	future	financial	years;	or
the	result	of	those	operations	in	future	financial	years;	or
the	Group’s	state	of	affairs	in	future	financial	years.
Likely Developments and Expected Results of Operations
In relation to the Baloo gold deposit announced on 4 March 2016, various studies have been performed on 
the resource for a potential future mining operation since the period ended 30 June 2016. Further exploration 
drilling has taken place in other areas of the Polar Bear project such as at the Monsoon prospect.
Environmental Regulation
The Group’s operations are subject to the environmental regulation under the laws in Sweden, Finland, the 
Australian Commonwealth and the State of Western Australia. The Board of Directors (“Board”) is of the view 
that all relevant environmental regulation requirements have been met.
Information on Directors
Mark Bennett – Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director
Experience and Expertise
Mark was the managing director and CEO of Sirius from its inception to its merger with Independence Group, 
and was non-executive director of Independence Group following the merger until June 2016.
He is a geologist with 25 years’ experience in gold, nickel and base metal exploration and mining. He holds a 
BSc in Mining Geology from the University of Leicester and a PhD from the University of Leeds and is a Member 
of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, a Fellow of the Geological Society of London, a Fellow of 
the Australian Institute of Geoscientists and a Member of the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
He has worked in Australia, West Africa, Canada and Europe, predominantly for LionOre Mining International 
Limited and WMC Resources Limited at locations such as Kalgoorlie, Kambalda, St. Ives, LionOre’s nickel 
and gold mines throughout Western Australia, Wiluna and most recently Nova, the Fraser Range and Polar 
Bear. Positions held include various technical, operational, executive and board positions including Managing 
Director, Chief Executive Officer, Executive Director, Exploration Manager and Chief Geologist.
63
63
Directors’ Report
Mark is a two times winner of the Association of Mining and Exploration Companies “Prospector Award” for his 
discoveries which include the Thunderbox Gold Mine, the Waterloo nickel mine and most recently the world 
class Nova-Bollinger nickel-copper mine.
In addition to his technical expertise, Mark is very experienced in corporate affairs, equity capital markets, 
investor relations and community engagement and has led Sirius from prior to the discovery of Nova all 
the way through feasibility, financing, permitting and construction, and latterly through the schemes of 
arrangement to merge with Independence and to demerge S2.
Other Directorships
Dr Bennett has no other directorships of any other public listed company.
Former Directorships in the Last Three Years
CEO and Managing Director of Sirius Resources NL from 31 August 2009 to 21 September 2015.
Non-Executive Director of Independence Group from 21 September 2015 to 1 June 2016.
Number of interests in shares and options held in S2 Resources Ltd
Options
Shares
12,500,000
4,595,001
Jeff Dowling – Non-Executive Chairman
Experience and Expertise
Mr Dowling was recently Sirius’ Non-Executive Chairman and is a highly experienced corporate leader with 36 
years’ experience in professional services with Ernst & Young. Mr Dowling has held numerous leadership roles 
within Ernst & Young which focused on the mining, oil and gas and other industries.
His professional expertise centres around audit, risk and financial management derived from acting as lead 
partner on large public company audits, capital raisings and corporate transactions. Mr Dowling’s career with 
Ernst & Young culminated in his appointment as Managing Partner of the Ernst & Young Western Region for a 
period of 5 years. He also led Ernst & Young’s Oceania China Business Group, responsible for building Ernst & 
Young’s Oceania relationships with Chinese Corporations.
Mr Dowling has a Bachelor of Commerce from the University of Western Australia and is a fellow of the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants, the Australian Institute of Company Directors and the Financial Services Institute of 
Australasia.
Mr Dowling is a member of the Group’s Audit & Risk Committee and Chairman of the Remuneration & 
Nomination Committee which was formed on 19 July 2016.
Other Directorships
Non-Executive Director of NRW Holdings Ltd since 22 August 2013.
64
Directors’ Report
Former Directorships in the Last Three Years
Non-Executive Director of Atlas Iron Ltd from 8 November 2011 to 6 May 2016.
Non-Executive Director of Neptune Marine Services Ltd from 1 December 2011 to 25 June 2013.
Non-Executive Chairman of Sirius Resources NL from 28 February 2013 to 22 September 2015.
Non-Executive Chairman of Pura Vida Energy from 13 January 2014 to 17 May 2016.
Number of interests in shares and options held in S2 Resources Ltd
Options
Shares
2,500,000
500,000
Anna Neuling – Executive Director
Experience and Expertise
Ms Neuling was the Company Secretary and CFO of Sirius Resources Ltd from the company’s inception 
in 2009 and was Sirius’ Executive Director – Corporate and Commercial until its recent merger with 
Independence Group.
Ms Neuling worked at Deloitte in London and Perth prior to joining LionOre Mining International Limited in 2005, 
until its takeover by Norilsk Nickel. She holds a degree in mathematics from the University of Newcastle (UK).
She is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and has held a number of 
senior executive positions in the resources industry, including CFO and Company Secretarial roles at several 
listed companies.
She is responsible for the corporate affairs of the company, the company secretarial function, human 
resources, public and investor relations functions, and general commercial matters.
Ms Neuling is a member of the Group’s Audit & Risk Committee and Remuneration & Nomination Committee 
which was formed on 19 July 2016.
Other Directorships
Ms Neuling has no other directorships of any other public listed company.
Former Directorships in the Last Three Years
Ms Neuling was formerly a Non-Executive Director (28 September 2012 to 22 September 2013) and Executive 
Director (23 September 2013 to 21 September 2015) of Sirius.
Number of interests in shares and options held in S2 Resources Ltd
Options
Shares
8,750,000
350,000
65
65
Directors’ Report
Grey Egerton-Warburton – Non-Executive Director
Experience and Expertise
Mr Egerton-Warburton is a very experienced corporate financier, with a strong background in natural 
resources, having spent 16 years with Hartleys Limited, including most recently as head of corporate 
finance. He has extensive experience in equity capital markets, acquisitions, divestments and domestic and 
international change of control transactions, having led a substantial number of capital raisings, takeovers 
and mergers for many ASX listed companies, across many sectors. Prior to a career in corporate finance, Mr 
Egerton-Warburton practiced at a tier one national law firm.
Grey currently serves as Deputy Chair of the Womens and Infants Research Foundation (WIRF), the charitable 
arm of King Edward Memorial Hospital in Perth, Western Australia.
While at Hartleys, Grey worked closely with Sirius Resources NL as its corporate advisor from mid-2012 until 
the completion of the merger between Sirius and Independence Group.
Mr Egerton-Warburton is the Chairman of the Group’s Audit & Risk Committee and a member of the 
Remuneration & Nomination Committee which was formed on 19 July 2016.
Other Directorships
Mr Egerton-Warburton has no other directorships of any public listed company.
Former Directorships in the Last Three Years
Mr Egerton-Warburton had no directorships of any public listed company in the last three years.
Number of interests in shares and options held in S2 Resources Ltd
Options
Shares
1,000,000*
200,400
*Subject to shareholder approval. Please see page 73 of the Directors’ report.
Company Secretary
The Company Secretary is Anna Neuling.
66
Directors’ Report
Meetings of Directors
The number of meetings of the Board and of each Board Committee held during the period ended 30 June 
2016 and the number of meetings attended by each Director were:
Directors’ Meetings
Audit & Risk 
Committee
Remun eration 
& Nomination
Committee
Name
Mark Bennett
Anna Neuling
Jeff Dowling
Grey Egerton-Warburton
A
11
11
11
1
B
11
11
11
1
A
–
0
0
0
B
–
0
0
0
A
–
0
0
0
B
–
0
0
0
A   Number of meetings attended (including circular resolutions)
B   Number of meetings held during the time the Director held office during the period and that he/she was
able to attend (including circular resolutions)
–  Not a member of the relevant Committee
The Audit & Risk Committee and Remuneration & Nomination Committee were formed on 19 July 2016 where 
Grey Egerton-Warburton, Jeff Dowling and Anna Neuling were appointed on both committees. As these 
committees were formed after the reporting period, no meetings were held for the period during 30 June 2016.
Indemnifying of Officers or Auditor
During the period the Group paid a premium in respect of insuring Directors and Officers of the Group against 
liabilities incurred as a Director or Officer. The insurer shall pay on behalf of the Group or each Director or 
Officer all losses for which the Director or Officer is not indemnified by the Group arising from a claim against a 
Director or Officer individually or collectively.
The Group had not, during or since the financial period, indemnified or agreed to indemnify the auditor of the 
Group against a liability incurred as an auditor.
67
67
Directors’ Report
Options & Rights
Unissued ordinary shares of the Company under options or rights at the date of this Report are as follows:
Options
Number
29,250,000
50,000
400,000
400,000
800,000
Grant Date
14/09/2015
09/10/2015
23/10/2015
28/11/2015
18/04/2016
Expiry Date
Exercise Price $
14/09/2019
09/10/2019
23/10/2019
28/11/2019
17/04/2020
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
There were no shares issued since the end of the financial period on the exercise of options.
No person entitled to exercise an option had or has any rights by virtue of the option to participate in any share 
issue of any other body corporate.
Remuneration Report (audited)
This Remuneration Report, which has been audited, outlines the Key Management Personnel (as defined in 
AASB 124 Related Party Disclosures) (“KMP”) remuneration arrangements for the Group, in accordance with the 
requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 and its Regulations.
The KMP covered in this remuneration report are:
•	 Mark	Bennett	–	CEO	and	Managing	Director
•	 Anna	Neuling	–	Executive	Director
•	 Jeff	Dowling	–	Non-Executive	Chairman
•	 Grey	Egerton-Warburton	–	Non-Executive	Director
•	 Su-Mei	Chan	–	Chief	Financial	Officer
The principles adopted have been approved by the Board and have been set out in this Remuneration Report. 
This audited Remuneration Report is set out under the following main headings:
1.  Principles used to determine the nature and amount of remuneration
2.  Details of remuneration
3.  Service agreements
4.  Share-based compensation
The information provided under headings 1 to 4 above includes remuneration disclosures that are required 
under Accounting Standard AASB 124, Related Party Disclosures.
68
Directors’ Report
1. Principles used to determine the nature and amount of remuneration
The objective of the Group’s executive reward framework is to ensure reward for performance is competitive 
and appropriate for the results delivered. The framework which has been set out in detail under the 
remuneration structure in this Remuneration Report aligns executive reward with achievement of strategic 
objectives and the creation of value for shareholders, and conforms to market best practice for delivery 
of reward. The Board ensures that executive reward satisfies the following key criteria for good reward 
governance practices:
•	 competitiveness	and	reasonableness;
•	 aligns	shareholders	and	executive	interests;
•	 performance	based	and	aligned	to	the	successful	achievement	of	strategic	and	tactical	business
objectives; and
•
transparency.
Executive Directors
Remuneration to Executive Directors reflect the demands which are made on, and the responsibilities of the 
Executive Directors. Executive Directors’ remuneration is reviewed annually to ensure it is appropriate and in 
line with the market. There are no retirement allowances or other benefits paid to Executive Directors other 
than superannuation guarantee amounts as required.
The executive remuneration and reward framework has three components:
•	 base	pay;
•	 share-based	payments;	and
•	 other	remuneration	such	as	superannuation	and	long	service	leave.
The combination of these comprises the Executive Director’s total remuneration.
Fixed remuneration, consisting of base salary and superannuation will be reviewed annually by the 
Remuneration & Nomination Committee, based on individual contribution to corporate performance and the 
overall relative position of the Group to its market peers.
Non-Executive Directors
Remuneration to Non-Executive Directors reflect the demands which are made on, and the responsibilities 
of, the Non-Executive Directors. Non-Executive Directors’ remuneration is reviewed annually. For the period 
ended 30 June 2016, exclusive of superannuation guarantee the annual remuneration for the Non-Executive 
Director was $45,000 per annum with the Chairman receiving $75,000 per annum.
Company Performance
As an exploration company the Board does not consider the operating loss after tax as one of the 
performance indicators when implementing an incentive based remuneration policy. The Board considers 
that the success of exploration and feasibility programs, safety and environmental performance, the securing 
of funding arrangements and responsible management of cash resources and the Company’s other assets 
are more appropriate performance indicators to assess the performance of management at this stage of the 
company’s development.
69
69
Directors’ Report
Short-term incentives
To align the remuneration of employees with the company aim of responsible management of cash resources, 
there were no short-term incentives paid or proposed to be paid for the period ended 30 June 2016. The 
company’s approach in regards to the use of short term cash incentives will be assessed by the Remuneration 
& Nomination Committee on an ongoing basis as the company evolves.
Long-term incentives
To align with market practices of peer companies and to provide a competitive total remuneration package, 
the Board introduced a long-term incentive (“LTI”) plan to motivate and reward executives and non-executive 
directors. The LTI is provided as options over ordinary shares of the Company under the rules of the Employee 
Share Option Plan and the Directors Option Plan as approved in September 2015.
The quantum offered under the LTI is determined by the Remuneration & Nomination Committee using a 
comparison to a peer group of companies similar to S2 Resources Ltd in terms of market capitalisation and 
sector. The peer group were companies in the Materials sector of the ASX with a market capitalisation of $50-
$100 million that issued options in relation to the FY 2015.
2. Details of Remuneration
Period Ended 30 June 2016
The amount of remuneration paid to KMP is set out below.
CASH REMUNER ATION
2016
Short term 
payments
$
Annual 
leave
$
Directors
M Bennett
A Neuling
J Dowling
G Egerton-Warburton
Other Key Management 
Personnel
245,000
67,497
57,981
7,673
18,845
5,192
–
–
Post –
employment
benefits
(super-
annuation)
$
15,193
6,412
5,508
729
Total cash 
payments
$
279,038
79,101
63,489
8,402
S Chan
71,347
5,488
6,778
83,613
449,498
29,525
34,620
513,643
70
Directors’ Report
Directors
M Bennett
A Neuling
J Dowling
G Egerton-Warburton (i)
Other Key Management 
Personnel
2016 TOTAL REMUNERA TION
Total cash 
payments
$
Appointment
Options
$
279,038
1,678,275
79,101
63,489
8,402
1,174,792
335,655
162,455
Total
$
1,957,313
1,253,893
399,144
170,857
LTI
% of
remuneration
86%
94%
84%
95%
S Chan
83,613
107,410
191,023
56%
513,643
3,458,587
3,972,230
(i)
Mr Egerton-Warburton’s options were approved by the Board of Directors on 29 April 2016 but are subject to shareholder approval 
at the Annual General Meeting.
As the Company was incorporated on 29 May 2015, remuneration comparatives have not been disclosed.
There were nil non-monetary benefits paid to the Directors or KMP for the period ended 30 June 2016.
Other than those disclosed above, there were no transactions with related parties to the KMP for the period 
ended 30 June 2016.
3. Service Agreements
For the period ended 30 June 2016, the following service agreements were entered into for the Directors and 
key management personnel of S2:
On 4 September 2015, an Executive Services Agreement was entered into between the Company and 
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer Mark Bennett. Under the terms of the Agreement:
•	 Dr	Bennett	was	paid	a	remuneration	package	of	$325,000	per	annum	base	salary	plus	statutory
superannuation.
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	the	Company	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by
giving Dr Bennett twelve months’ notice.
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	Dr	Bennett	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by	giving
the Company three months’ notice.
•	 The	Company	may	terminate	the	Agreement	at	any	time	without	notice	if	serious	misconduct	has	occurred.
On termination with cause, the Executive is not entitled to any payment.
On 10 September 2015, a letter of appointment was entered into between the Company and Non-Executive 
Chairman Jeff Dowling. Under the terms of the Agreement:
71
71
Directors’ Report
•	 Mr	Dowling	was	paid	a	remuneration	package	of	$75,000	per	annum	base	salary	plus	statutory
superannuation.
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	either	party	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by	the
giving of written notice.
On 4 September 2015, an Executive Services Agreement was entered into between the Company and 
Executive Director Anna Neuling. Under the terms of the Agreement:
•	 Ms	Neuling	was	appointed	as	Executive	Director,	encompassing	the	role	of	Company	Secretary;
•	 Ms	Neuling	was	paid	a	remuneration	package	of	$120,000	per	annum	comprising	a	base	salary	plus
statutory superannuation (based on $300,000 full time equivalent).
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	the	Company	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by
giving Ms Neuling twelve months’ notice.
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	Ms	Neuling	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by
giving the Company three months’ notice.
•	 The	Company	may	terminate	the	Agreement	at	any	time	without	notice	if	serious	misconduct	has	occurred.
On termination with cause, the Executive is not entitled to any payment.
On 29 April 2016, a letter of appointment was entered into between the Company and Non-Executive Director 
Grey Egerton-Warburton. Under the terms of the Agreement:
•	 Mr	Egerton-Warburton	was	paid	a	remuneration	package	of	$45,000	per	annum	base	salary	plus	statutory
superannuation.
•	 Under	the	general	termination	of	employment	provision,	either	party	may	terminate	the	Agreement	by	the
giving of written notice.
On 8 September 2015, the Company entered into an employment contract with Su-Mei Chan. Under the terms 
of the Agreement:
•	 Ms	Chan	was	appointed	in	the	capacity	of	Chief	Financial	Officer	and	paid	a	remuneration	package	of
$120,000 per annum base salary plus statutory superannuation (based on $150,000 full time equivalent).
•	 Service	Agreements	(continued)
•	 The	Company	or	Ms	Chan	may	terminate	the	contract	at	any	time	by	giving	the	other	party	12	weeks’	notice.
•	 The	Company	may	terminate	the	Agreement	at	any	time	without	notice	if	serious	misconduct	has	occurred.
On termination with cause, Ms Chan is not entitled to any payment.
72
Directors’ Report
4. Share-Based Compensation
Option holdings
The numbers of options in the Company held during the period ended by each KMP of S2, including their 
related parties, are set out below:
Balance at 
the start of 
the period
Granted 
during the
period
Expired
during the
period
Other
changes
Balance for 
the period
ended
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
12,500,000
8,750,000
2,500,000
1,000,000
24,750,000
–
800,000
–
25,550,000
2016
Director
M Bennett
A Neuling
J Dowling
G Egerton-Warburton (i)
–
–
–
–
–
12,500,000
8,750,000
2,500,000
1,000,000
24,750,000
Other Key Management 
Personnel
S Chan
–
800,000
–
25,550,000
(i)   Mr Egerton-Warburton’s options were approved by the Board of Directors on 29 April 2016 but are subject
to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting.
As at 30 June 2016, the number of options that have vested and exercisable were 23,750,000 and the number 
of options yet to vest and un-exercisable were 800,000. The remaining 1,000,000 options are un-exercisable 
as they are subject to shareholder approval.
The option terms and conditions of each grant of options over ordinary shares affecting remuneration of 
Directors and other KMP in the period ended or future reporting years are as follows:
Options issued
Grant Date
Expiry date
Directors Option Plan
14 Sep 2015
14 Sep 2019
29 Apr 2016
28 Apr 2020
Exercise
price
$
0.31
0.35
Employee Share 
Option Plan
14 Sep 2015
14 Sep 2019
0.31
*Options vest a year after grant date. Please refer to note 15 for more information.
Fair value 
per option
$
0.13
0.16
0.13
Vested
$
100%
100%
0%*
73
73
Directors’ Report
Shareholdings
The numbers of shares in the Company held during the period ended by each KMP of S2, including their 
related parties, are set out below:
2016
Directors
M Bennett
A Neuling
J Dowling
G Egerton-Warburton
Other Key Management Personnel
S Chan
Balance at the
Other changes
start of the
during the
period
period
Balance for
the period
ended
–
–
–
–
–
–
4,595,001
4,595,001
350,000
500,000
200,400
350,000
500,000
200,400
30,000
30,000
5,675,401
5,675,401
There were no shares granted to KMP’s during the reporting period as remuneration.
Use of remuneration consultants
No remuneration consultants were engaged or used for the Group during the period ended 30 June 2016.
Voting and comments made at the Company’s Annual General Meeting
As the Company was incorporated on 29 May 2015, there was no Annual General Meeting held for the period 
ended 30 June 2015.
Share trading policy
The trading of shares issued to participants under any of the Group’s employee equity plans is subject to, and 
conditional upon, compliance with the Group’s employee share trading policy as per the Group’s Corporate 
Governance Policy. Executives are prohibited from entering into any hedging arrangements over unvested 
options under the Group’s employee option plan. The Group would consider a breach of this policy as gross 
misconduct which may lead to disciplinary action and potentially dismissal.
This concludes the Remuneration Report, which has been audited.
74
Directors’ Report
Proceedings on behalf of the Group
No person had applied to the court under section 237 of the Corporations Act 2001 for leave to bring 
proceedings on behalf of the Group, or to intervene in any proceedings to which the Group is a party, for the 
purpose of taking responsibility on behalf of the Group for all or part of those proceedings. No proceedings 
had been brought or intervened in on behalf of the Group with leave of the court under section 237 of the 
Corporations Act 2001.
Auditor
BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd was appointed as auditors for the Group in office in accordance with section 327 of the 
Corporations Act 2001.
Audit Services
During the period ended $34,280 was paid or is payable for audit services provided by the auditors.
Auditor’s Independence Declaration
A copy of the auditor’s independence declaration as required under section 307C of the Corporations Act 
2001 is set out on page 76 of the financial report.
Corporate Governance
The Directors support and adhere to the principles of corporate governance, recognising the need for the 
highest standard of corporate behaviour and accountability.
Signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors.
Mark Bennett
Director
Perth
19 August 2016
75
75
Auditor’s Independence Declaration
76
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income for the period ended 30 June 2016
30 June
2016
$
Notes
Other income
Salaries and wages
Travel expenditure
Consulting and legal fees
Share and company registry
Listing fees
Office rental and variable outgoings
Insurance
Other office related costs
Business development
Depreciation expense
Share-based payments
Other gain/(losses) – net
Exploration expenditure expensed as incurred
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
Loss after income tax for the period
Other comprehensive income
Items that may be classified to profit or loss
Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations
Total comprehensive loss for the period attributable to the 
members of S2 Resources Ltd
Loss per share for loss attributable to the members of S2 
Resources Ltd
386,173
(776,502)
(328,171)
(129,088)
(77,534)
(158,536)
(215,452)
(44,637)
(61,166)
(331,105)
(114,308)
(4,039,525)
(15,403)
(4,917,968)
(10,823,222)
–
(10,823,222)
14,421
(10,808,801)
10
15
9
Basic loss per share
19(c)
(7.12)
The above consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income should be read in 
conjunction with the accompanying notes.
77
77
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
as at 30 June 2016
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Trade and other receivables
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Exploration and evaluation
Property, plant and equipment
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Provisions
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Share capital
Reserves
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
Notes
6
6
7
9
10
11
12
13
14
30 June
2016
$
15,891,260
244,270
194,630
16,330,160
3,335,880
405,318
3,741,198
20,071,358
1,129,154
47,952
1,177,106
1,177,106
18,894,252
40,728,688
(11,011,214)
(10,823,222)
18,894,252
The above consolidated statement of financial position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying 
notes
78
1
2
4
4
1
,
–
–
–
4
2
9
4
,
5
4
3
9
1
,
5
4
3
9
1
,
–
l
a
t
o
T
,
)
1
0
8
8
0
8
0
1
(
,
–
–
-
n
o
N
-
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
g
n
i
l
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
,
)
1
0
8
8
0
8
0
1
(
,
)
,
2
2
2
3
2
8
0
1
(
,
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
l
a
t
o
T
s
e
s
s
o
l
e
v
r
e
s
e
R
e
v
r
e
s
e
R
e
v
r
e
s
e
R
s
e
 v
r
e
s
e
R
l
d
e
t
a
 u
m
u
c
c
A
n
o
i
t
a
 l
s
n
a
r
T
n
o
i
t
i
 s
i
u
q
c
A
r
e
h
t
O
t
n
e
m
i
n
g
e
r
o
F
y
c
n
e
 r
r
u
C
e
r
a
h
S
-
y
a
p
d
e
s
a
b
y
t
i
u
q
E
n
i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C
f
o
 
t
n
e
m
e
t
a
t
S
d
e
t
a
d
i
l
o
s
n
o
C
6
1
0
2
e
n
u
J
 
0
3
d
e
d
n
e
d
o
i
r
e
p
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
–
–
e
r
a
h
S
l
a
t
i
p
a
c
p
u
o
r
G
e
h
t
 
f
o
s
r
a
l
l
o
d
$
n
i
r
o
f
 
s
s
o
l
e
v
i
s
n
e
 h
e
r
p
m
o
c
 
l
a
t
o
T
d
o
i
r
e
p
e
h
t
,
s
r
e
n
w
o
h
t
i
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
 a
s
n
a
r
T
y
t
i
u
q
e
n
i
 
y
l
t
c
e
r
i
d
d
e
d
r
o
c
e
r
d
n
a
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
 b
i
r
t
n
o
C
5
1
0
2
 
y
a
M
9
2
t
a
e
c
n
a
a
B
l
s
r
e
n
w
o
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
i
l
s
r
e
d
o
h
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
o
t
 
e
b
a
t
 u
b
i
r
t
t
l
A
,
2
2
3
4
2
8
5
2
,
5
7
1
,
5
1
9
7
4
1
,
9
0
9
4
2
,
,
5
2
5
9
3
0
4
,
,
0
0
0
0
6
2
,
1
–
–
,
5
2
5
9
3
0
4
,
,
0
0
0
0
6
2
,
1
)
,
4
9
7
0
2
4
,
1
(
)
5
7
1
,
5
1
9
(
)
,
9
1
6
5
0
5
(
–
–
–
–
,
2
5
2
4
9
8
8
1
,
,
2
5
2
4
9
8
8
1
,
–
–
,
2
5
2
4
9
8
8
1
,
)
,
2
2
2
3
2
8
0
1
(
,
,
2
5
2
4
9
8
8
1
,
)
,
2
2
2
3
2
8
0
1
(
,
,
)
1
0
6
4
1
2
5
1
(
,
6
3
1
,
0
5
6
–
,
8
8
6
8
6
4
9
3
,
–
–
–
,
)
1
0
6
4
1
2
5
1
(
,
,
)
1
0
6
4
1
2
5
1
(
,
–
–
)
,
9
1
6
5
0
5
(
–
–
d
n
a
 
y
b
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c
 
l
a
t
o
T
-
n
o
n
h
t
i
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
a
s
n
a
r
T
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
g
n
i
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
,
7
1
5
4
4
1
,
7
1
5
4
4
1
,
5
2
5
9
3
0
4
,
,
8
8
6
8
2
7
0
4
,
s
r
e
n
w
o
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
i
,
5
2
5
9
3
0
4
,
,
8
8
6
8
2
7
0
4
,
6
1
0
2
e
n
u
J
 
0
3
 
t
a
e
c
n
a
a
B
l
–
,
0
0
0
0
6
2
,
1
t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i
%
3
3
d
t
L
	
y
t
P
,
5
2
5
9
3
0
4
,
–
n
o
l
y
n
o
m
m
o
c
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
i
i
s
u
q
c
A
s
e
i
t
i
t
n
e
d
e
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
t
n
e
m
y
a
p
d
e
s
a
b
-
e
r
a
h
S
s
n
o
i
t
c
a
s
n
a
r
t
l
i
t
a
r
o
p
x
E
e
s
r
o
N
f
o
e
s
a
h
c
r
u
P
.
i
t
s
e
o
n
g
n
y
n
a
p
m
o
c
c
a
e
h
t
 
h
t
i
w
n
o
j
i
t
c
n
u
n
o
c
 
n
i
l
d
a
e
r
 
e
b
d
u
o
h
s
 
y
t
i
u
q
e
n
i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
t
t
n
e
m
e
a
t
s
 
d
e
a
d
t
i
l
o
s
n
o
c
 
e
v
o
b
a
e
h
T
79
79
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
for the period ended 30 June 2016
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash paid to suppliers and employees for administration activities
Cash paid to suppliers and employees for exploration activities
Notes
Interest received
Interest and other finance costs paid
Foreign exchange gains/(losses)
Income taxes paid
30 June
2016
$
(1,802,055)
(4,380,719)
356,612
(5,709)
(15,403)
(5,729)
Net cash used in operating activities
18
(5,853,003)
Cash flows from investing activities
Payment of property, plant and equipment
Payment of exploration activities capitalised
Payment for stamp duty on transfer of tenements
Payment for costs related to purchase of Norse Exploration Pty Ltd 
33%	interest
Cash acquired upon acquisition of subsidiaries
Net cash derived from investing activities
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from demerger
Net receipts / (payments) for cash backed guarantees
Net cash from financing activities
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents at 29 May 2015
Cash and cash equivalents at 30 June
(519,626)
(215,776)
(30,669)
(33,694)
2,765,347
1,965,582
20,000,000
(221,320)
19,778,681
15,891,260
–
15,891,260
The above consolidated statement of cash flows should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
80
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
for the period ended 30 June 2016
S2 Resources Ltd (“Company” or “S2”) is a company incorporated in Australia whose shares are publicly traded 
on the Australian Securities Exchange. The consolidated financial statements of the Group as at and for the 
period ended to 30 June 2016 comprise the Company and its subsidiaries (together referred to as the “Group” 
or “consolidated entity” and individually as a “Group entity”).
The separate financial statements of the parent entity, S2 Resources Ltd, have not been presented within this 
financial report as required by the Corporations Act 2001. Summary parent information has been included in 
note 23.
The financial statements were authorised for issue on 19 August 2016 by the Directors of the Company.
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies
(a) Basis of preparation
The financial report is a general purpose financial report that has been prepared in accordance with Australian 
Accounting Standards, Australian Accounting Interpretations, other authoritative pronouncements of the 
Australian Accounting Standards Board (“AASB”) and the Corporations Act 2001.
Australian Accounting Standards set out accounting policies that the AASB has concluded would result in a 
financial report containing relevant and reliable information about transactions, events and conditions to which 
they apply. The financial statements and notes also comply with International Financial Reporting Standards 
as issued by the International Accounting Standard Board (IASB). Material accounting policies adopted in 
the preparation of this financial report are presented below. They have been consistently applied unless 
otherwise stated.
The Group is a for-profit entity for financial reporting purposes under Australian Accounting Standards. The 
consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which contemplates the 
continuity of normal business activities and the realisation of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the 
ordinary course of business.
The Company was incorporated on 29 May 2015 and accordingly the financials for the period ended 30 June 
2016 have not disclosed comparatives.
Historical cost convention
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, except for, where 
applicable, the revaluation of available-for-sale financial assets, financial assets and liabilities at fair value 
through profit or loss, investment properties, certain classes of property, plant and equipment and derivative 
financial instruments.
Critical accounting estimates
The preparation of the financial statements requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates. It also 
requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the consolidated entity’s accounting 
policies. The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity, or areas where assumptions and 
estimates are significant to the financial statements, are disclosed in note 1(a)(iii).
81
81
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(a) Basis of preparation (continued)
(i)  Operating segments
Operating segments are presented using the ‘management approach’, where the information presented is on 
the same basis as the internal reports provided to the Chief Operating Decision Makers (‘CODM’). The CODM 
is responsible for the allocation of resources to operating segments and assessing their performance.
(ii)  Adoption of new and revised Accounting Standards
The Group has adopted all of the new, revised or amending Accounting Standards and Interpretations 
issued by the AASB that are mandatory for the current reporting period. The adoption of these Accounting 
Standards and Interpretations did not have any material impact on the financial performance or position of the 
consolidated entity.
Any new, revised or amending Accounting Standards or Interpretations that are not yet mandatory have not 
been early adopted.
(iii) Use of estimates and judgements
The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and 
assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the financial statements. Management continually evaluates 
its judgements and estimates in relation to assets, liabilities, contingent liabilities, revenue and expenses. 
Management bases its judgements, estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on other 
various factors, including expectations of future events, management believes to be reasonable under the 
circumstances. The resulting accounting judgements and estimates will seldom equal the related actual 
results. The judgements, estimates and assumptions that have a significant risk of causing a material 
adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities (refer to the respective notes) within the next 
financial year are discussed below.
Share-based payment transactions
The Group measures the cost of equity-settled transactions with employees by reference to the fair value of 
the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is determined by using the Black-
Scholes model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the instruments were granted. The 
accounting estimates and assumptions relating to equity-settled share-based payments would have no impact 
on the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next annual reporting period but may impact profit 
or loss and equity. Refer to note 15.
82
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(a) Basis of preparation (continued)
Estimation of useful lives of assets
The Group determines the estimated useful lives and related depreciation and amortisation charges for its 
property, plant and equipment and finite life intangible assets. The useful lives could change significantly as 
a result of technical innovations or some other event. The depreciation and amortisation charge will increase 
where the useful lives are less than previously estimated lives, or technically obsolete or non-strategic assets 
that have been abandoned or sold will be written off or written down.
Exploration and evaluation costs
Exploration and evaluation costs are capitalised in an identifiable area of interest upon announcement of 
a JORC 2012 compliant resource and costs will be amortised in proportion to the depletion of the mineral 
resources at the commencement of production. Key judgements are applied in considering costs to be 
capitalised which includes determining expenditures directly related to these activities and allocating 
overheads between those that are expensed and capitalised. In addition, costs are only capitalised that are 
expected to be recovered either through successful development or sale of the relevant mining interest. 
Factors that could impact the future commercial production at the mine include the level of reserves and 
resources, future technology changes, which could impact the cost of mining, future legal changes and 
changes in commodity prices. To the extent that capitalised costs are determined not to be recoverable in the 
future, they will be written off in the period in which this determination is made.
(iv)
Principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the assets, liabilities and results of entities controlled by S2 
at the end of the reporting period. A controlled entity is any entity over which S2 has the ability and right to 
govern the financial and operating policies so as to obtain benefits from the entity’s activities.
Where controlled entities have entered or left the Group during the year, the financial performance of those 
entities is included only for the period of the year that they were controlled. A list of controlled entities is 
contained in note 24 to the financial statements.
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, all intragroup balances and transactions between entities in 
the consolidated Group have been eliminated in full on consolidation.
Non-controlling interests, being the equity in a subsidiary not attributable, directly or indirectly, to a parent, 
are reported separately within the equity section of the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income. The non-controlling interests 
in the net assets comprise their interests at the date of the original business combination and their share of 
changes in equity since that date.
83
83
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(b)
Foreign currency translation
(i) Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements of each of the Group’s entities are measured using the currency of 
the primary economic environment in which the entity operates (“the functional currency”). The consolidated 
financial statements are presented in the Australian dollar ($), which is the Company’s functional and 
presentation currency.
(ii) Transactions and balances
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates at the dates 
of the transactions. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and 
from the translation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at year end exchange 
rates are generally recognised in profit or loss. They are deferred in equity if they relate to qualifying cash 
flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges or are attributable to part of the net investment in a foreign 
operation.
Foreign exchange gains and losses that relate to borrowings are presented in the statement of profit or loss, 
within finance costs. All other foreign exchange gains and losses are presented in the statement of profit or 
loss on a net basis within other income or other expenses.
Non-monetary items that are measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchanges 
rates at the date when the fair value was determined. Translation differences on assets and liabilities carried 
at fair value are reported as part of the fair value gain or loss. For example, translation difference on non-
monetary assets and liabilities such as equities held at fair value through profit or loss are recognised in 
profit or loss as part of the fair value gain or loss and translation differences on non-monetary assets such as 
equities classified as available-for-sale financial assets are recognised in other comprehensive income.
(iii) Group companies
The results and financial position of foreign operations (none of which has the currency of a hyperinflationary 
economy) that have a functional currency different from the presentation currency are translated into the 
presentation currency as follows:
•	 assets	and	liabilities	for	each	statement	of	financial	position	presented	are	translated	at	the	closing	rate	at
the date of that statement of financial position,
•
income	and	expenses	for	each	statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	statement	of	comprehensive	income	are	
translated at average exchange rates (unless this is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect 
of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates, in which case income and expenses are translated at the 
dates of the transactions), and
•	 all	resulting	exchange	differences	are	recognised	in	other	comprehensive	income.
84
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(b) Foreign currency translation (continued)
On consolidation, exchange differences arising from the translation of any net investment in foreign entities, 
and of borrowings and other financial instruments designated as hedges of such investments, are recognised 
in other comprehensive income. When a foreign operation is sold or any borrowings forming part of the net 
investment are repaid, the associated exchange differences are reclassified to profit or loss, as part of the gain 
or loss on sale.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation are treated as assets and 
liabilities of the foreign operation and translated at the closing rate.
(c) Revenue Recognition
Interest income is recognised on a time proportion basis using the effective interest method.
(d) Income Tax
The income tax expense or revenue for the period is the tax payable on the current period’s taxable income 
based on the national income tax rate for each jurisdiction adjusted by changes in deferred tax assets and 
liabilities attributable to temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying 
amounts in the financial statements, and to unused tax losses.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised for temporary differences at the tax rates expected to 
apply when the assets are recovered or liabilities are settled, based on those tax rates which are enacted or 
substantively enacted for each jurisdiction.
The relevant tax rates are applied to the cumulative amounts of deductible and taxable temporary differences 
to measure the deferred tax asset or liability. An exception is made for certain temporary differences arising 
from the initial recognition of an asset or a liability. No deferred tax asset or liability is recognised in relation to 
these temporary differences if they arose in a transaction, other than a business combination, that at the time 
of the transaction did not affect either accounting profit or taxable profit or loss.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for deductible temporary differences and unused tax losses only if it is 
probable that future taxable amounts will be available to utilise those temporary differences and losses.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets 
and liabilities and when the deferred tax balances relate to the same taxation authority. Current tax assets and 
tax liabilities are offset where the entity has a legally enforceable right to offset and intends either to settle on 
a net basis, or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Current and deferred tax balances attributable to amounts recognised directly in equity are also recognised 
directly in equity.
85
85
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(e) Acquisition of entities under common control
The Group adopts the pooling of interest method to account for acquisition of entities under common control.
The pooling of interest method involves the following:
The assets and liabilities of the combining entities are reflected at their carrying amounts prior to the 
combination;
No adjustments are made to reflect fair values, or recognise any new assets or liabilities, that would other be 
done under the acquisition method. The only adjustments that are made are to harmonise accounting policies;
No ‘new’ goodwill is recognised as a result of the combination; and
The only goodwill that is recognised is any existing goodwill relating to either of the combining entities. Any 
difference between the consideration paid/transferred (including liabilities assumed) and the entity ‘acquired’ 
is reflected within equity.
The Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income reflects the result of the 
combining entities from the date that the combination occurred. Financial information for the periods prior to 
the date the combination occurred is not restated.
(f) Impairment of Assets
At each reporting date, the Group reviews the carrying values of its tangible assets to determine whether there 
is any indication that those assets have been impaired. If such an indication exists, the recoverable amount of 
the asset being the higher of the asset’s fair value less costs to sell and value in use, is compared to the asset’s 
carrying value.
Any excess of the asset’s carrying value over its recoverable amount is expensed to the Consolidated 
Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income. Where it is not possible to estimate the 
recoverable amount of an individual asset, the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cash generating 
unit to which the asset belongs.
(g) Cash and Cash Equivalents
For the statement of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents includes cash on hand, deposits held at call with 
financial institutions, other shortterm, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts 
of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
(h) Trade and Other Receivables
A provision for doubtful receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will 
not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of receivables. The amount of the 
provision is the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the present value of estimated future 
cash flows, discounted at the original effective interest rate. Cash flows relating to shortterm receivables are 
not discounted if the effect of discounting is immaterial. The amount of any provision is recognised in the 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income.
86
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(i) Trade and Other Payables
These amounts represent liabilities for goods and services provided to the Group prior to the end of the 
financial year which are unpaid. The amounts are unsecured and are usually paid within 30 days of recognition.
(j) Exploration and Evaluation
Exploration and evaluation assets acquired
Exploration and evaluation assets comprise of acquisition of mineral rights (such as joint ventures) and fair 
value (at acquisition date) of exploration and expenditure assets from other entities. As the assets are not yet 
ready for use they are not depreciated. Exploration and evaluation assets are assessed for impairment if:
•	 sufficient	data	exists	to	determine	technical	feasibility	and	commercial	viability;	or
•	 other	facts	and	circumstances	suggest	that	the	carrying	amount	exceeds	the	recoverable	amount.
Once the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the assets are demonstrable, exploration and 
evaluation assets are first tested for impairment and then reclassified to mine properties as development 
assets.
Exploration and evaluation expenditure
Exploration and evaluation expenditure incurred is expensed in respect of each identifiable area of interest 
until such a time where a JORC 2012 compliant resource is announced in relation to the identifiable area of 
interest. These costs are only carried forward to the extent that they are expected to be recouped through the 
successful development of the area or where activities in the area have not yet reached a stage which permits 
reasonable assessment of the existence of economically recoverable reserves.
When the technical feasibility and commercial viability of extracting a mineral resource have been 
demonstrated then any capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is reclassified as capitalised mine 
development.
Prior to reclassification, capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is assessed for impairment annually 
in accordance with AASB 6. Where impairment indicators exist, recoverable amounts of these assets will be 
estimated based on discounted cash flows from their associated cash generating units.
The Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income will recognise expenses arising from excess 
of the carrying values of exploration and evaluation assets over the recoverable amounts of these assets.
In the event that an area of interest is abandoned or if the Directors consider the expenditure to be of reduced 
value, accumulated costs carried forward are written off in the period in which that assessment is made. Each 
area of interest is reviewed at the end of each accounting period and accumulated costs are written off to the 
extent that they will not be recoverable in the future.
87
87
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(k) Property, plant and equipment
(i) Recognition and measurement
Items of property, plant and equipment are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated 
impairment losses.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset. The cost of self-
constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour, any other costs directly attributable to 
bringing the assets to a working condition for their intended use, the costs of dismantling and removing the 
items and restoring the site on which they are located and capitalised borrowing costs.
Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that 
equipment. When parts of an item of property, plant and equipment have different useful lives, they are 
accounted for as separate items (major components) of property, plant and equipment.
Gains and losses on disposal of an item of property, plant and equipment are determined by comparing the 
proceeds from disposal with the carrying amount of property, plant and equipment and are recognised net 
within other income in profit or loss. When revalued assets are sold, the amounts included in the revaluation 
reserve are transferred to retained earnings.
(ii) Subsequent costs
The cost of replacing a part of an item of property, plant and equipment is recognised in the carrying amount 
of the item if it is probable that the future economic benefits embodied within the part will flow to the Group, 
and its cost can be measured reliably. The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognised. The costs of 
the day-to-day servicing of property, plant and equipment are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
(iii) Depreciation
Depreciation is calculated over the depreciable amount, which is the cost of an asset, or other amount 
substituted for cost, less its residual value.
Depreciation is recognised in the profit or loss on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of each 
part of an item of property, plant and equipment, since this most closely reflects the expected pattern of 
consumption of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset. Leased assets are depreciated over the 
shorter of the lease term or their useful lives unless it is reasonably certain that the Group will obtain ownership 
by the end of the lease term.
The depreciation rates used for each class of asset are:
•	 buildings	
•	 fixtures	and	fittings	
•	
•	 plant	and	equipment	
•	 motor	vehicles
16.67%
22.5%	–	40%
20%
22.5%	–	40%
20%
leasehold	improvements
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each financial year-end and adjusted if 
appropriate.
88
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(l) Leases
The determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease is based on the substance of the 
arrangement and requires an assessment of whether the fulfilment of the arrangement is dependent on the 
use of a specific asset or assets and the arrangement conveys a right to use the asset.
A distinction is made between finance leases, which effectively transfer from the lessor to the lessee 
substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of leased assets, and operating leases, under 
which the lessor effectively retains substantially all such risks and benefits.
Finance leases are capitalised. A lease asset and liability are established at the fair value of the leased assets, 
or if lower, the present value of minimum lease payments. Lease payments are allocated between the principal 
component of the lease liability and the finance costs, so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the 
remaining balance of the liability.
Leased assets acquired under a finance lease are depreciated over the asset’s useful life or over the shorter 
of the asset’s useful life and the lease term if there is no reasonable certainty that the consolidated entity will 
obtain ownership at the end of the lease term.
Operating lease payments, net of any incentives received from the lessor, are charged to profit or loss on a 
straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
(m) Interest in Joint Ventures
The	Group	accounts	for	100%	of	the	assets,	liabilities	and	expenses	of	joint	venture	activity.	These	have	been	
incorporated in the financial statements.
(n) Financial Instruments
Recognition
Financial instruments are initially measured at cost on trade date, which includes transaction costs, when 
the related contractual rights or obligations exist. Subsequent to initial recognition these instruments are 
measured as set out below.
Loans and receivables
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not 
quoted in an active market and are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Financial liabilities
Non-derivative financial liabilities are recognised at amortised cost, comprising original debt less principal 
payments and amortisation.
89
89
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(n) Financial Instruments (continued)
Fair value
Fair value represents the amount for which an asset could be exchanged or a liability settled, between 
knowledgeable, willing parties.
Impairment
At each reporting date, the Group assesses whether there is objective evidence that a financial instrument has 
been impaired.
De-recognition
Financial assets are derecognised where the contractual rights to receipt of cash flows expires or the asset 
is transferred to another party whereby the entity no longer has any significant continuing involvement in the 
risks and benefits associated with the asset. Financial liabilities are derecognised where the related obligations 
are either discharged, cancelled or expired. The difference between the carrying value of the financial liability 
extinguished or transferred to another party and the fair value of consideration paid, including the transfer or 
non-cash assets or liabilities assumed, is recognised in profit or loss.
(o) Provisions
General
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past 
event, it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the 
obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. When the Group expects some 
or all of a provision to be reimbursed the reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset but only when the 
reimbursement is virtually certain. The expense relating to any provision is presented in the Statement of Profit 
or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income net of any reimbursement.
Provisions are measured at the present value of management’s best estimate of the expenditure required 
to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. The discount rate used to determine the present value 
reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability. The 
increase in the provision resulting from the passage of time is recognised in finance costs.
90
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(p) Employee Benefits
(i) Equity Settled Compensation
The Group operates equity-settled share-based payment employee share and option schemes. The fair 
value of the equity to which employees become entitled is measured at grant date and recognised as an 
expense over the vesting period, with a corresponding increase to an equity account. The fair value of shares 
is ascertained as the market bid price. The fair value of options is ascertained using a Black–Scholes pricing 
model which incorporates all market vesting conditions. The number of shares and options expected to vest 
is reviewed and adjusted at each reporting date such that the amount recognised for services received as 
consideration for the equity instruments granted shall be based on the number of equity instruments that 
eventually vest.
(ii) Short-term obligations
Liabilities for wages and salaries, including non-monetary benefits, annual leave and accumulating sick leave 
expected to be settled within 12 months after the end of the period in which the employees render the related 
service are recognised in respect of employees’ services up to the end of the reporting period and are 
measured at the amounts expected to be paid when the liabilities are settled.
The liability for annual leave and accumulating sick leave is recognised in the provision for employee benefits. 
All other short-term employee benefit obligations are presented as payables.
(iii) Other long-term employee benefit obligations
The liability for long service leave and annual leave which is not expected to be settled within 12 months after 
the end of the period in which the employees render the related service is recognised in the provision for 
employee benefits and measured as the present value of expected future payments to be made in respect of 
services provided by employees up to the end of the reporting period using the projected unit credit method. 
Consideration is given to expected future wage and salary levels, experience of employee departures and 
periods of service. Expected future payments are discounted using market yields at the end of the reporting 
period on national government bonds with terms to maturity and currency that match, as closely as possible, 
the estimated future cash outflows.
(iv) Share-based payments
Share-based compensation benefits are provided to employees via the Employee Option Plan.
The fair value of options granted under the Employee Option Plan is recognised as an employee benefits 
expense with a corresponding increase in equity. The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference 
to the fair value of the options granted, which includes any market performance conditions and the impact 
of any non-vesting conditions but excludes the impact of any service and non-market performance vesting 
conditions.
91
91
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(p) Employee Benefits (continued)
(iv) Share-based payments (continued)
Non-market vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected 
to vest. The total expense is recognised over the vesting period, which is the period over which all of the 
specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied. At the end of each period, the entity revises its estimates of 
the number of options that are expected to vest based on the non-market vesting conditions. It recognises the 
impact of the revision to original estimates, if any, in profit or loss, with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
When the options are exercised, the Company transfers the appropriate amount of shares to the employee. 
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited directly to equity.
(v) Termination benefits
Termination benefits are payable when employment is terminated before the normal retirement date, or when 
an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benefits. The Group recognises termination 
benefits when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the employment of current employees 
according to a detailed formal plan without possibility of withdrawal or to providing termination benefits as a 
result of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy.
Benefits falling due more than 12 months after the end of the reporting period are discounted to present value.
(q) Issued Capital
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Costs associated with capital raisings (exclusive of GST) directly 
attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction from the proceeds. If 
the entity reacquires its own equity instruments, e.g. as the result of a share buyback, those instruments are 
deducted from equity and the associated shares are cancelled. No gain or loss is recognised in the profit or 
loss and the consideration paid including any directly attributable costs associated with capital raisings (net of 
income taxes) is recognised directly in equity.
(i) Basic earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit / (loss) attributable to equity holders of the Group, 
excluding any costs of servicing equity other than ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of 
ordinary shares outstanding during the financial year, adjusted for bonus elements in ordinary shares issued 
during the year.
(ii) Diluted earnings per share
Diluted earnings per share adjusts the figures used in the determination of basic earnings per share to 
take into account the after income tax effect of interest and other financing costs associated with dilutive 
potential ordinary shares and the weighted average number of shares assumed to have been issued for no 
consideration in relation to dilutive potential ordinary shares.
92
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(r) Goods and Services Tax
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of associated GST, unless the GST incurred 
is not recoverable from the taxation authority. In this case it is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of 
the asset or as part of the expense.
Receivables and payables are stated inclusive of the amount of GST receivable or payable. The net amount of 
GST recoverable from, or payable to, the taxation authority is included with other receivables or payables in 
the statement of financial position.
Cash flows are presented on a gross basis. The GST components of cash flows arising from investing or 
financing activities which are recoverable from, or payable to the taxation authority, are presented as operating 
cash flow.
(s) New Accounting Standards and Interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted
Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations that have recently been issued or amended but are 
not yet mandatory, have not been early adopted by the consolidated entity for period ended 30 June 2016. 
The consolidated entity’s assessment of the impact of these new or amended Accounting Standards and 
Interpretations, most relevant to the consolidated entity, are set out below.
•	 AASB	2015-1	Amendments	to	Australian	Accounting	Standards	–	Annual	Improvements	to	Australian
Accounting Standards 2012-2014 Cycle, and
•	 AASB	2015-2	Amendments	to	Australian	Accounting	Standards	–	Disclosure	Initiative:	Amendments	to
AASB 101.
As these amendments merely clarify the existing requirements, they do not affect the Group’s accounting 
policies or any of the disclosures.
AASB 9 Financial Instruments
These amendments must be applied for financial years commencing on or after 1 January 2018. Therefore 
application date for the Company will be 30 June 2019. The Company does not currently have any hedging 
arrangements in place.
AASB 9 addresses the classification, measurement and de-recognition of financial assets and financial 
liabilities. Since December 2013, it also sets out new rules for hedge accounting. There will be no impact on 
the Company’s accounting for financial assets and financial liabilities, as the new requirements only effect the 
accounting for available-for-sale financial assets and the accounting for financial liabilities that are designated 
at fair value through profit or loss and the Company does not have any such financial assets or financial 
liabilities. The new hedging rules align hedge accounting more closely with the Company’s risk management 
practices. As a general rule it will be easier to apply hedge accounting going forward. The new standard also 
introduces expanded disclosure requirements and changes in presentation.
93
93
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(s)  New Accounting Standards and Interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted
(continued)
AASB 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers
These amendments must be applied for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018. 
Therefore application date for the Company will be 30 June 2019.
An entity will recognise revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an 
amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods 
or services. This means that revenue will be recognised when control of goods or services is transferred, 
rather than on transfer of risks and rewards as is currently the case under IAS 18 Revenue. Due to the recent 
release of this standard the Company has not yet made an assessment of the impact of this standard.
AASB 16 Leases
IFRS 16 eliminates the operating and finance lease classifications for lessees currently accounted for under 
AASB 117 Leases. It instead requires an entity to bring most leases onto its statement of financial position in a 
similar way to how existing finance leases are treated under AASB 117. An entity will be required to recognise a 
lease liability and a right of use asset in its statement of financial position for most leases.
There are some optional exemptions for leases with a period of 12 months or less and for low value leases. 
The application date of this standard is for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019. Due 
to the recent release of this standard, the group has not yet made a detailed assessment of the impact of this 
standard.
AASB 2014-3 (issued August 2014) – Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards – 
Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations
When an entity acquires an interest in a joint operation whose activities meet the definition of a ‘business’ 
in AASB 3 Business Combinations, to the extent of its share of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses as 
specified in the contractual arrangement, the entity must apply all of the principles for business combination 
accounting in AASB 3, and other IFRSs, to the extent that they do not conflict with AASB 11 Joint Arrangements.
This means that it will expense all acquisition-related costs and recognise its share, according to the 
contractual arrangements, of:
•	 Fair	value	of	identifiable	assets	and	liabilities,	unless	fair	value	exceptions	included	in	AASB	3	or	other
IFRSs, and
•	 Deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	that	arise	from	the	initial	recognition	of	an	asset	or	liability	as	required	by
AASB 3 and AASB 112 Income Taxes.
•	 Goodwill	will	then	be	recognised	as	the	excess	consideration	over	the	fair	value	of	net	identifiable	assets
acquired.
Annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016.
There will be no impact on the financial statements when these amendments are first adopted because they 
apply prospectively to acquisitions of interests in joint operations.
94
Note 1. Statement of significant accounting policies (continued)
(s)  New Accounting Standards and Interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted
(continued)
AASB 2014-3 (issued August 2014) – Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards – Sale 
or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture
Removes the inconsistency between AASB 10 Consolidated Financial Statements and AASB 128 Investments 
in Associates and Joint Ventures in accounting for transactions where a parent loses control over a subsidiary 
that is not a business under AASB 3 Business Combinations, by selling part of its interest to an associate or 
joint venture, or by selling down part of its interest so that the remaining investment becomes an associate or 
joint venture. Requires that:
•	 Gain	or	loss	from	measuring	the	retained	interest	in	the	former	subsidiary	at	fair	value,	as	well	as	gains
or losses to be reclassified from other comprehensive income to profit or loss, only be recognised to the 
extent of the unrelated investor’s interest in that associate or joint venture, and
•	 Remaining	gains	or	losses	to	be	eliminated	against	the	investment	in	associate	or	joint	venture.
Annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016.
There will be no impact on the financial statements when these amendments are first adopted because they 
apply prospectively to sales or contributions of assets occurring after the application date.
Note 2. Financial Risk Management
The Group’s financial instruments consist mainly of deposits with banks and accounts receivable and payable.
The Group’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks; market risk (including fair value interest rate risk 
and price risk), credit risk, liquidity risk and cash flow interest rate risk. The Group’s overall risk management 
program focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects 
on the financial performance of the Group. Risk management is carried out by the Board of Directors under 
policies approved by the Board. The Board identifies and evaluates financial risks and provides written 
principles for overall risk management.
The main risks the Group is exposed to through its financial instruments are interest rate risk, foreign currency 
risk, liquidity risk, credit risk and price risk.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of financial instruments will fluctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Group’s exposure to the risk of changes in market interest rates relates 
primarily to the Group’s Australian Dollar current and non-current debt obligations with floating interest rates. 
The Group is also exposed to interest rate risk on its cash and short term deposits.
95
95
Note 2. Financial Risk Management (continued)
Interest Rate Risk (continued)
Fixed
interest
rate
Floating 
interest
maturing 
in 1 year or
rate
$
less
$
Fixed
interest
rate
maturing 
between 1 
and 2 years
$
Non-
interest 
bearing
$
Total
$
Weighted 
average 
effective 
interest
rate
%
–
–
–
–
–
–
3,429,672
15,891,260
33,304
244,270
194,630
194,630
2.68
2.22
–
3,657,606
16,330,160
1,129,154
1,129,154
–
1,129,154
1,129,154
2016
Financial 
Instruments
(i) Financial assets
Available cash on 
hand
2,461,588
10,000,000
Restricted cash
210,966
Other receivables
–
–
–
Total financial 
assets
(ii) Financial 
liabilities
Trade and other 
payables
Total financial 
liabilities
Net Fair Values
2,672,554
10,000,000
–
–
–
–
The net fair value of financial assets and liabilities approximate carrying values due to their short term nature.
96
Note 2. Financial Risk Management (continued)
Sensitivity Analysis – Interest Rate Risk
The Group has performed a sensitivity analysis relating to its exposure to interest rate risk at the reporting 
date. This sensitivity analysis demonstrates the effect on the current period results and equity which could 
result from a change in interest rates.
Change in loss:
Increase	by	1%
Decrease	by	1%
Change in equity:
Increase	by	1%
Decrease	by	1%
Foreign exchange risk
Exposure
30 June
2016
$
(108,232)
108,232
(188,943)
188,943
The group’s exposure to foreign currency risk at the end of the reporting period, expressed in Australian dollar, 
was as follows:
Period ended 30 June 2016
Cash on hand
Restricted cash
Other receivables
Trade payables
EUR
$
USD
$
3,353,773
75,399
33,304
39,912
(174,068)
3,252,921
–
–
–
75,399
97
97
Note 2. Financial Risk Management (continued)
Sensitivity Analysis – Interest Rate Risk (continued)
Amounts recognised in profit or loss and other comprehensive income
During the period ended, the following foreign-exchange related amounts were recognised in profit or loss 
and other comprehensive income:
Amounts recognised in profit or loss
Net foreign exchange gain/(loss) included in other income/other expenses
Total net foreign exchange (losses) recognised in loss before income tax for the period
Net gains/(losses) recognised in other comprehensive income
Translation of foreign operations
Sensitivity
2016
$
(15,403)
(15,403)
14,421
As shown in the table above, the Group is primarily exposed to changes in EUR/$exchange rates. The 
sensitivity of profit or loss to changes in the exchange rates arises mainly from EUR-dollar denominated 
financial instruments and the impact on other components of equity arises from translation of foreign 
operations.
EUR/$	exchange	rate	–	increase	10%*
EUR/$	exchange	rate	–	decrease	(10%)*
*Holding all other variables constant
Impact on post
tax loss
$
Impact on other 
components of
equity
$
(1,540)
1,540
(1,934)
1,934
The Group’s exposure to the USD dollar exchange rate is not disclosed in the table above because it is not 
material.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk arises from the possibility that the Group might encounter difficulty in settling its debts or 
otherwise meeting its obligations related to financial liabilities. Management monitors rolling forecasts of the 
Group’s cash reserves on the basis of expected development, exploration and corporate cash flows. This 
ensures that the Group complies with prudent liquidity risk management by maintaining sufficient cash and 
marketable securities and the availability of funding through the equity markets to meet obligations when due. 
For the period ended 30 June 2016, the Group has no contractual financial liabilities.
98
Note 2. Financial Risk Management (continued)
Credit Risk
Credit risk arises from the financial assets of the Group, which comprise cash and cash equivalents and other 
receivables. The Group’s exposure to credit risk arises from potential default of the counter party, with a 
maximum exposure equal to the carrying amount of these instruments. The cash and cash equivalents are 
held with bank and financial institution counterparties, which are rated AA – based on Standard and Poor’s 
rating agency.
The credit risk on other receivables is limited as it is comprised of prepayments and GST recoverable from the 
Australian Taxation Office and tax authorities in Scandinavia. The credit risk on liquid funds is limited because 
the counter party is a bank with high credit rating. There are no receivable balances which are past due or 
impaired.
Price risk
The Group is not currently exposed to commodity price risk.
Note 3. Segment Information
For management purposes, the Group has three reportable segments as follows:
•	 Scandinavian	exploration	activities,	which	includes	exploration	and	evaluation	of	mineral	tenements	in
Finland and Sweden.
•	 Australian	exploration	activities,	which	includes	exploration	and	evaluation	of	mineral	tenements	in
Australia.
•	 Unallocated,	which	includes	all	other	expenses	that	cannot	be	directly	attributed	to	either	segments	above.
Segment information that is evaluated by the CODM is prepared in conformity with the accounting policies 
adopted for preparing the financial statements of the Group.
99
99
Note 3. Segment Information (continued)
Segment Results
Statement of profit or loss for the period ended 
30 June 2016
$
Scandinavian 
exploration
activities
Australia
exploration
activities
Other income
Administrative expenses
Depreciation expense
Share-based payments
Other gain/(losses) – net
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Exploration expenditure expensed as incurred
(1,907,826)
(3,010,142)
Unallocated
386,173
(2,122,191)
(114,308)
(4,039,525)
(15,403)
–
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
(1,907,826)
(3,010,142)
(5,905,254)
–
–
–
Loss after income tax for the period
(1,907,826)
(3,010,142)
(5,905,254)
Segment assets
The Group’s assets are mostly attributable to the unallocated segment therefore assets attributable to 
exploration in Scandinavia and Australia is immaterial for disclosure.
Note 4. Other income
Interest received
30 June
2016
$
386,173
100
Note 5. Income Tax
Recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
Current tax
Deferred tax
Under (over) provided in prior years
Total income tax expense per Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
Numerical reconciliation between tax expense and pre-tax net loss
Net loss before tax
Income	tax	benefit	at	30%
Income tax expense for overseas entities
Increase in income tax due to:
Non-deductible expenses
Current year tax losses not recognised
Decrease in income tax due to:
Movement in unrecognised temporary differences
Unrecognised deferred tax assets
Deferred tax assets have not been recognised in respect of the following:
Deductible temporary differences
Tax revenue losses
Tax capital losses
30 June
2016
$
–
–
–
–
(10,823,222)
(2,659,328)
(418,312)
1,213,570
1,864,894
(824)
–
200,385
1,664,509
–
1,864,894
Net deferred tax assets have not been brought to account as it is not probable that within the immediate future 
tax profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences and tax losses can be utilised.
101
101
Note 6. Cash and Cash Equivalents
Current
Cash at bank and in hand
Restricted cash
Note 7. Other Receivables
GST refund due
Accrued interest
Prepayment
Other
30 June
2016
$
15,891,260
244,270
16,135,530
30 June
2016
$
87,554
29,562
73,791
3,723
194,630
The Group has no impairments to other receivables or have receivables that are past due but not impaired. 
Refer to note 2 for detail on the risk exposure and management of the Group’s other receivables.
Note 8. Acquisition of commonly controlled entities
On 21 September 2015, S2 Resources Ltd and its subsidiaries, demerged from Sirius Resources NL (now a 
subsidiary of Independence Group (“IGO”)). The demerger transaction comprised of S2 receiving cash from 
IGO and acquiring the carrying value of Polar Metals Pty Ltd and Sirius Europa Pty Ltd (“acquired entities”). The 
following transactions occurred for the demerger transaction to complete on 21 September 2015:
•	 On	3	September	2015,	the	shareholders	of	Sirius	Resources	NL	approved	the	demerger	transaction.
•	 On	10	September	2015,	subsequent	to	court	order	approval	of	the	demerger	transaction,	the	Company
received cash of $15,854,974 and a reimbursement for Deferred Tax Assets of $4,145,026 due to exiting the 
Sirius Resources NL tax consolidated group (i.e. total cash received of $20,000,000).
•	 On	21	September	2015,	207,401,278	shares	were	issued	to	S2	shareholders.	The	number	of	shares
determined on completion of the Demerger transaction was based on Sirius Resources NL shareholders 
receiving 1 S2 share for every 2 Sirius ordinary shares.
•	 Also	on	21	September	2015,	the	Company	acquired	the	carrying	value	of	Polar	Metals	and	Sirius	Europa
Pty Ltd. The net assets acquired on this date was $9,969,347 and comprised cash which included the 
reimbursement for Deferred Tax Assets due to exiting the Sirius Resources NL tax consolidated group and 
exploration assets.
102
Note 8. Acquisition of commonly controlled entities (continued)
As a result of the transactions described above, the summarised financial information as at 21 September 2015 
for the acquired entities is provided below:
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Trade receivables
Other receivables
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Exploration and evaluation
Property, plant and equipment
TOTAL  NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL  ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Provisions
TOTAL  CURRENT LIABILTIES
TOTAL  LIABILTIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Share capital
Reserves
Foreign Currency Translation Reserve
Non-controlling interest
Acquisition Reserve
TOTAL EQUITY
21 September
2015
$
2,765,346
74,949
12,570
4,156,026
7,008,891
3,062,848
73,878
3,136,726
10,145,617
172,070
4,200
176,270
176,270
9,969,347
23,613,713
650,136
4,924
915,175
(15,214,601)
9,969,347
103
103
Note 9. Exploration and Evaluation
Exploration costs
Movement during the period
Balance at beginning of the period
Exploration expenditure incurred during the period (i)
Exploration expenditure incurred during the period and expensed (i)
Exploration expenditure relating to acquisitions (ii)
Balance at end of the period
30 June
2016
$
3,335,880
–
5,160,331
(4,917,968)
3,093,517
3,335,880
(i)  During the period ended 30 June 2016 the exploration expenditure incurred pertains to the following:
Baloo Project
Exploration expenditure incurred for the Baloo project was $1,777,320 with $1,543,764 expensed and 
$233,556 capitalised in respect of the resource announcement on 4 March 2016.
Nanook Project
Exploration expenditure incurred for the Nanook project was $8,807 and this amount was capitalised in 
respect of the resource announcement on 6 May 2016.
Polar Bear Project
Exploration expenditure incurred and expensed for the Polar Bear Project was $1,372,481.
Eundynie JV Project (80% interest)
Exploration expenditure incurred and expensed for the Eundynie JV was $71,610.
Norcott Project
Exploration expenditure incurred and expensed for the Norcott was $22,287.
Scandinavian Project
Exploration expenditure incurred and expensed for Scandinavia was $1,907,826.
(ii)   As a result of the Demerger transaction on 21 September 2015, the Group acquired exploration assets in 
the Scandinavian Project valued at $2,000,000, Polar Bear Project valued at $400,000 and Eundynie JV 
Project valued at $662,848. During the period ended 30 June 2016, a purchase was made for transfer of 
tenements for the Eundynie JV of $30,669.
104
Note 10. Property, Plant and Equipment
Property,
Plant and 
Equipment
$
Motor 
Vehicles
$
Computer 
Software
$
Fixtures and
fittings
$
Total
$
2016
Cost or deemed cost
Balance at 29 May 2015
–
–
–
–
–
Additions
Disposals
Transfers
Exchange differences
Balance at 30 June 2016
Depreciation
290,737
37,263
101,397
86,850
516,247
–
–
2,426
293,163
–
–
–
–
–
208
–
–
–
37,263
101,605
86,850
–
–
2,634
518,881
Balance at 29 May 2015
–
–
–
–
–
Depreciation for the 
period – expensed
Exchange differences
Disposals
71,520
4,968
22,276
15,544
114,308
(689)
–
–
–
(56)
–
–
–
(745)
–
Balance at 30 June 2016
70,831
4,968
22,220
15,544
113,563
Carrying amounts
at 29 May 2015
at 30 June 2016
–
–
–
–
–
222,332
32,295
79,385
71,306
405,318
Note 11. Trade and Other Payables
Trade and other payables (i)
30 June
2016
$
1,129,154
(i)   These amounts generally arise from the usual operating activities of the Group and are expected to be
settled within 12 months. Collateral is not normally obtained.
105
105
Note 12. Provisions
Current
Employee benefits
Carrying amount at start of the period
Provisions made during the period
Carrying amount at end of the period
30 June
2016
$
47,952
–
47,952
47,952
Employee benefits are provided for all employees of the Group in line with their employment contracts and the 
balance for the period ended 30 June 2016 is expected to be settled within 12 months. The measurement and 
recognition criteria relating to employee benefits have been included in note 1 to this financial report.
Note 13. Share Capital
Ordinary shares fully paid
Movement in Share Capital
Ordinary shares fully paid
Balance at beginning of period
Shares issued at $0.1903 per share at the completion of the 
Demerger on 21 September 2015.
Shares issued at $0.15 per share (i)
Balance at period end
30 June
2016
No. of Shares
30 June
2016
$
215,801,278
40,728,688
–
–
207,401,278
39,468,688
8,400,000
1,260,000
215,801,278
40,728,688
(i)	 On	30	November	2015,	the	Group	announced	its	acquisition	of	the	33%	interest,	held	by	the	Sakumpu
vendors, in Norse Exploration Pty Ltd and becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of S2.
Ordinary shares entitle the holder to participate in dividends and the proceeds on winding up of the Group 
in proportion to the number of and amounts paid on the shares held. On a show of hands every holder of 
ordinary shares present at a meeting in person or by proxy, is entitled to one vote, and upon a poll each share 
is entitled to one vote.
106
Note 14. Reserves
Share-based payments reserve (i)
Other reserve (ii)
Foreign currency translation reserve (iii)
Acquisition reserve (iv)
30 June
2016
$
4,039,525
144,517
19,345
(15,214,601)
(11,011,214)
(i)  The share-based payments reserve recognises the fair value of the options issued to Directors, employees
and service providers.
Each share option converts into one ordinary share of the Company on exercise. No amounts are paid or 
payable by the recipient on receipt of the option. The options carry neither rights to dividends or voting 
rights. Options may be exercised at any time from the date of vesting to the date of their expiry.
(ii)	 The	other	reserve	recognises	the	remaining	non-controlling	interest	(33%)	that	was	purchased	from	the
Sakumpu vendors on 30 November 2015. Sakumpu Exploration Oy is a registered entity in Finland.
(iii) Exchange differences arising on translation of the foreign controlled entity are recognised in other
comprehensive income and accumulated in a separate reserve within equity. The cumulative amount is 
reclassified to profit or loss when the net investment is disposed of.
(iv) This acquisition reserve arises from the interest pooling method accounting policy for the purchase of Polar
Metals Pty Ltd and Sirius Europa Pty Ltd as described in note 8 of these financials.
107
107
Note 15. Share-based Payments
The following share-based payments arrangements were in existence during the current reporting period:
Options
Options Series
Number
Grant Date
Expiry Date
Exercise 
Price $
Fair value at 
Grant Date $
(1) Issued at 14 September 2015
29,250,000
14/09/2015
14/09/2019
(2) Issued at 9 October 2015
50,000
09/10/2015
09/10/2019
(3) Issued at 23 October 2015
400,000
23/10/2015
23/10/2019
(4) Issued at 29 November 2015
400,000
29/11/2015
28/11/2019
(5) Issued at 18 April 2016
800,000
18/04/2016
19/04/2020
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
(6) Issued at 28 April 2016
1,000,000
28/04/2016
29/04/2020
0.35
0.13
0.13
0.12
0.08
0.14
0.16
(1)  The 29,250,000 options in series 1 comprised 23,750,000 options issued to the Directors of the Group
which vested immediately, 3,600,000 options issued to employees under the Employee Share Option Plan 
which vest one year from grant date and 1,900,000 options issued to service providers which vest one 
year from grant date. For the service provider options, the value of services received was unable to be 
measured reliably and therefore the value of services received was measured by reference to the fair value 
of options issued.
(2)  The 50,000 options in series 2 which vests one year from grant date was issued to employees under the
Employee Share Option Plan.
(3)  The 400,000 options in series 3 which vests one year from grant date was issued to employees under the
Employee Share Option Plan.
(4)  The 400,000 options in series 4 which vests one year from grant date was issued to employees under the
Employee Share Option Plan.
(5)  The 800,000 options in series 5 comprised of 400,000 options were issued to employees under the
Employee Share Option Plan which vests one year from grant date, and 400,000 options issued to service 
providers which vests one year from grant date. For the service provider options, the value of services 
received was unable to be measured reliably and therefore the value of services received was measured 
by reference to the fair value of options issued
(6)  The 1,000,000 options in series 6 which vested immediately were issued to a Director of the Group. These
options are subject to shareholder approval.
The weighted average fair value of the share options granted during the period is $0.13.
108
Note 15. Share-based Payments (continued)
The total expense of the share based payments for the period was:
Options issued under Directors Option Plan
Options issued under Employee Share Plan
Options issued under Service Provider Plan
30 June
2016
$
3,351,176
409,782
278,567
4,039,525
The weighted average contractual life for options outstanding at the end of the year was 4 years.
Options were priced using a Black-Scholes option pricing model using the inputs below:
Series 1
Series 2
Series 3
Series 4
Series 5
Grant date share price
Exercise price
0.21
0.31
0.19
0.31
0.19
0.31
0.14
0.31
0.22
0.31
Expected volatility
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
100.00%
Option life
Dividend yield
Interest rate
Grant date share price
Exercise price
Expected volatility
Option life
Dividend yield
Interest rate
4 years
4 years
4 years
4 years
4 years
0.00%
3.10%
0.00%
3.10%
0.00%
3.35%
0.00%
3.26%
0.00%
3.10%
Series 6
0.25
0.35
100%
4 years
0.00%
3.35%
109
109
Note 15. Share-based Payments (continued)
The following reconciles the outstanding share options granted in the period ended 30 June 2016:
Balance at the beginning of the period
Granted during the period
Exercised during the period
Expired during the period (i)
Balance at the end of the period
Un-exercisable at the end of the period
Exercisable at end of the period
30 June
2016
No. of Options
30 June
2016
Weighted 
average
exercise price
$
–
31,900,000
–
–
31,900,000
8,150,000
23,750,000
–
0.31
–
–
0.31
0.31
0.31
(i) Options expired or cancelled during the period
For the period ended 30 June 2016 no options expired or were cancelled.
No amounts are unpaid on any of the shares. No person entitled to exercise an option had or has any rights by 
virtue of the option to participate in any share issue of any other body corporate.
Note 16. Dividends
There were no dividends recommended or paid during the period ended 30 June 2016.
110
Note 17. Key Management Personnel Disclosures
Short term employee benefits
Post-employment benefits
Long-term benefits
Non-monetary benefits
Share-based payment
30 June
2016
$
449,498
34,620
29,525
–
3,458,587
3,972,230
Detailed remuneration disclosures are provided in the Remuneration Report.
Note 18. Reconciliation of Profit After Income Tax to Net Cash used in 
Operating Activities
Loss for the period
Depreciation
Equity Settled share-based payment transaction
Increase in trade and other payables
Increase in provisions
(Increase) in receivables
Net cash outflow from operating activities
30 June
2016
$
(10,823,222)
114,308
4,039,525
1,129,154
47,952
(360,720)
(5,853,003)
111
111
Note 19. Basic Loss per share
30 June
2016
$
(a) Reconciliation of loss used in calculating loss per share
Basic loss per share
Loss attributable to the ordinary equity holders used in calculating basic loss per share
(10,823,222)
(b) Weighted average number of shares used as the Denominator
30 June
2016
Number
Ordinary shares used as the denominator in calculating basic loss per share
215,801,278
(c) Basic loss per share
Basic loss per share
Where loss per share is non-dilutive, it is not disclosed.
Note 20. Commitments
Cents
(7.12)
The Group must meet the following operating lease and tenement expenditure commitments to maintain 
them in good standing until they are joint ventured, sold, reduced, relinquished, exemptions from expenditure 
are applied or are otherwise disposed of. These commitments, net of farm outs, are not provided for in the 
financial statements and are:
30 June
2016
$
766,580
1,437,225
1,982,220
660,740
4,846,765
Not later than one year
After one year but less than two years
After two years but less than five years
After five years*
* Per annum
112
Note 21. Related Party Transactions
Other than the Directors and key management personnel salaries and options described in the Remuneration 
Report, there were no related party transactions for the period ended 30 June 2016.
Note 22. Joint Ventures
The Group has interests in the following joint venture operations:
Tenement Area
Eundynie
Activities
Gold
Note 23. Parent entity disclosures
Financial position
Assets
Current assets
Non-current assets
Total assets
Liabilities
Current liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Total liabilities
Net assets
Equity
Issued capital
Share-based payments reserve
Accumulated losses
Total equity
2016
80%
30 June
2016
$
15,518,868
24,403,244
39,922,112
1,000,944
–
1,000,944
38,921,168
40,728,688
4,039,525
(5,847,045)
38,921,168
113
113
Note 23. Parent entity disclosures (continued)
Financial performance
Profit/(loss) for the period
Other comprehensive income
Total comprehensive income
30 June
2016
$
(5,847,045)
–
(5,847,045)
The parent entity has entered into an office lease agreement where the following commitments must be met:
Not later than one year
After one year but less than two years
* Per Annum
Note 24. Subsidiaries
Name of entity
Polar Metals Pty Ltd
Sirius Europa Pty Ltd
Norse Exploration Pty Ltd
Sakumpu Exploration Oy
S2 Exploration Quebec Inc.
30 June
2016
$
125,840
115,745
241,585
Country of 
incorporation
Class of Shares
Australia
Australia
Australia
Finland
Canada
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
2016
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
114
Note 25. Events Occurring After the Reporting Period
On 20 July 2016 the Group announced the results of initial metallurgical, engineering, hydrological and 
environmental studies for the Baloo gold deposit on its Polar Bear project.
On 21 July 2016 the Group announced the discovery of significant gold mineralisation at the Monsoon 
prospect, which is part of the Polar Bear project.
On 26 July 2016, the Group announced a capital raising of $9.08 million via the placement of 22.7 million 
shares at 40 cents per share (“Issue Price”). This was completed on 2 August 2016. Also announced on the 
same day was a Share Purchase Plan (“SPP”) where eligible S2 shareholders were invited to subscribe for new 
ordinary shares in S2 at the Issue Price up to a maximum of $15,000 per shareholder. The SPP, to raise up to 
$3 million, closed on 15 August 2016 and was heavily oversubscribed. The shares issued under the SPP are 
anticipated to be allotted on Monday 22 August 2016 and quoted on the ASX on Tuesday 23 August 2016.
Other than the after balance date events stated above, there has been no matter or circumstance that has 
arisen since 30 June 2016 that has significantly affected, or may significantly affect:
•
•
•
the	Group’s	operations	in	future	financial	years;	or
the	result	of	those	operations	in	future	financial	years;	or
the	Group’s	state	of	affairs	in	future	financial	years.
Note 26. Remuneration of Auditors
During the period the following fees were paid or payable for services provided by the 
auditor of the Group:
Audit services
Total remuneration for audit services
30 June
2016
$
34,280
34,280
115
115
Directors’ Declaration
Directors’ Declaration
The Directors of the Group declare that:
1.  The financial statements and notes as set out on pages 77 to 115 are in accordance with the Corporations
Act 2001, and
(a)  comply with Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001 and other mandatory
professional reporting requirements; and
(b)  give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group as at 30 June 2016 and of its performance
for the period ended on that date.
2.  The financial report also complies with International Financial Reporting Standards as disclosed in note 1 to
the financial statements.
3.  The Director acting in the capacity of Chief Executive Officer has declared that:
(a)  the financial records of the Company for the financial period have been properly maintained in
accordance with section 286 of the Corporations Act 2001;
(b)  the financial statements and notes for the financial period comply with the accounting standards; and
(c)  the financial statements and notes for the financial period give a true and fair view.
4.  In the opinion of the Directors there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Group will be able to pay its
debts as and when they become due and payable.
5.  The remuneration disclosures that are contained in the Remuneration Report in the Directors’ Report
comply with Australian Accounting Standards AASB 124 Related Party Disclosures, the Corporations Act 
2001 and the Corporations Regulations 2001.
This declaration is made in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors.
Mark Bennett
Director
Perth
19 August 2016
116
Independent Auditor’s Report
Independent Auditor’s Report
117
117
Independent Auditor’s Report
118
Additional ASX Information
Additional ASX Information
The shareholder information set out below was applicable as at the dates specified.
Unlisted Securities
Options (Current as at 8 August 2016)
Number on
Number of
issue
holders
Options expiring 14 September 2019 at an exercise price of $0.31
29,250,000
Options expiring 9 October 2019 at an exercise price of $0.31
Options expiring 23 October 2019 at an exercise price of $0.31
Options expiring 28 November 2019 at an exercise price of $0.31
Options expiring 17 April 2020 at an exercise price of $0.31
50,000
400,000
400,000
800,000
18
1
1
1
4
Holders of over 20% of unlisted securities
There	are	the	following	holders	of	more	than	20%	of	unlisted	securities	as	at	8	August	2016:
Mark Bennett
Anna Neuling
Distribution of Equity Securities (Current as at 8 August 2016)
Analysis of numbers of ordinary shareholders by size of holding:
1
1,001
5,001
10,001
–
–
–
–
1,000
5,000
10,000
100,000
100,001
and over
Number held
12,500,000
8,750,000
Number of 
Shareholders
2,488
1,436
457
909
215
5,505
There are 2,150 holders holding less than a marketable parcel of ordinary shares based on the closing market 
price as at 8 August 2016.
119
119
Additional ASX Information
Substantial Holders (Current as at 8 August 2016)
Substantial holders of equity securities in the Company are set out below:
Ordinary Shares
Name
Mark Gareth Creasy, Yandal Investments Pty Ltd, Ponton Minerals 
Pty Ltd, Lake Rivers Gold Pty Ltd and Free CI Pty Ltd
Ordinary Shares subject to voluntary escrow (Current as at 8 August 2016)
Number held
Percentage of 
issued shares
73,146,151
30.67%
There are 8,400,00 of ordinary shares subject to voluntary escrow which will end on 18 November 2016.
Equity Security Holders (Current as at 8 August 2016)
The names of the twenty largest holders of quoted equity securities (ordinary shares) are listed below:
Rank
Name
Units
% of Units
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
YANDAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD <INVESTEC A/C>
J P MORGAN NOMINEES AUSTRALIA LIMITED
PONTON MINERALS PTY LTD
FREE CI PTY LTD
LAKE RIVERS GOLD PTY LTD
HSBC CUSTODY NOMINEES (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
BT PORTFOLIO SERVICES LIMITED <WARRELL HOLDINGS 
S/F A/C>
DR MARK ANTHONY BENNETT
NATIONAL NOMINEES LIMITED
CITICORP NOMINEES PTY LIMITED
YANDAL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
SOUTHERN CROSS CAPITAL PTY LTD
PERTH SELECT SEAFOODS PTY LTD
BELLARINE GOLD PTY LTD <RIBBLESDALE SUPER FUND 
A/C>
UBS NOMINEES PTY LTD
CS FOURTH NOMINEES PTY LIMITED <HSBC CUST NOM 
AU LTD 11 A/C>
MR ANDREW JOHN THOMPSON + MRS DELWYN SHIREE 
THOMPSON <ADJEL THOMPSON FAMILY A/C>
42,126,761
12,883,247
8,306,464
8,306,463
8,306,463
7,433,833
5,000,000
4,095,000
3,841,601
3,695,882
3,500,000
3,475,000
3,250,000
3,220,000
3,136,392
3,118,320
17.66
5.40
3.48
3.48
3.48
3.12
2.10
1.72
1.61
1.55
1.47
1.46
1.36
1.35
1.32
1.31
2,150,000
0.90
120
Additional ASX Information
Equity Security Holders (Current as at 8 August 2016) (continued)
Name
Units
% of Units
Rank
18.
19.
MR GRAHAM BROWN
MR ALAIN CHEVALIER
20.
MR JAMES COPPARD
Total of Top 20
Total Remaining Holders Balance
Voting Rights
2,100,000
2,100,000
2,100,000
132,145,426
106,355,852
0.88
0.88
0.88
55.41
44.59
The voting rights attaching to each class of equity securities are set out below:
(a)  Ordinary Shares: On a show of hands every member present at a meeting in person or by proxy shall have
one vote and upon a poll each share shall have one vote.
(b)  Options: These securities have no voting rights.
On-Market Buy-Back
There is no current on-market buy-back.
Information required for Listing Rule 4.10.9
The Group has used cash and assets in a form readily convertible to cash that it has at the time of admission in 
a way consistent with its business objectives from listing until 30 June 2016.
121
121
Additional ASX Information
Tenement Schedule
Polar Bear
Tenement
E15/1298
E15/1461
E63/1142
E63/1712
E63/1725
E63/1756
E63/1757
E63/1791
M15/651
M15/710
M15/1814
M63/230
M63/255
M63/269
M63/279
P15/5167
P15/5168
P15/5171
P15/5638
P15/5639
P15/5640
P15/5958
P15/5959
P63/1587
P63/1588
P63/1589
P63/1590
P63/1591
P63/1592
P63/1593
P63/1594
E15/1541
122
Status
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Application
Granted
Granted
Application
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
When	granted	–	100%
100%
100%
When	granted	–	100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Application
When	granted	–	100%
Additional ASX Information
Tenement Schedule (continued)
Eundynie JV
Tenement
E15/1458
E15/1459
E15/1464
E63/1726
E63/1727
E63/1738
Norcott
Tenement
E15/1487
E63/1728
Sweden
Tenement
Rengård nr 401
Svansele nr 401
Gallejaur nr 401
Svansele nr 402
Brännäs nr 401
Laxselmyran nr 401
Svansele nr 403
Båtfors nr 401
Holmtjärn nr 401
Tjålmträsk nr 401
Laxselmyran nr 402
Laxselmyran nr 403
Hästskomyran nr 401
Rengård nr 402
Udden nr 401
Udden nr 402
Vallen nr 401
Status
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Status
Granted
Granted
Status
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
123
123
Additional ASX Information
Tenement Schedule (continued)
Sweden
Tenement
Lindbacka nr 401
Brännäs nr 402
Petikträsk nr 401
Näsvattnet nr 401
Laxselmyran nr 404
Svansele nr 404
Malånäset nr 401
Malånäset nr 404
Malånäset nr 402
Malånäset nr 403
Laxselmyran nr 405
Vargfors nr 401
Malånäset nr 405
Finland
Reservation
Kuivasalmi
Kaarestunturi
Paana
Torvinen
Selkä
Siila
Silmä
Pahka
Sisnakka
Majava
Jänes
124
Status
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Application
100%	when	granted
Status
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Granted
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Application
100%	when	granted
Additional ASX Information
Tenement Schedule (continued)
Finland
Exploration License
Mantovaara
Kerjonen
Lammasvuoma
Utsamo
Nuokkio
Kuusi
Kerjonen
Status
Granted
Granted
Application
Application
Application
Application
Application
Ownership Interest
100%
100%
100%	when	granted
100%	when	granted
100%	when	granted
100%	when	granted
100%
125
125
Competent Persons Statement
Competent Persons Statement
The information in this report that relates to Australian Exploration Results is based on information compiled 
by John Bartlett who is an employee of the company. Mr Bartlett is a member of the Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy. Mr Bartlett has sufficient experience of relevance to the style of mineralisation and the 
types of deposits under consideration, and to the activities undertaken, to qualify as Competent Persons as 
defined in the 2012 Edition of the Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC) Australasian Code for Reporting of 
Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. Mr Bartlett consents to the inclusion in this report of 
the matters based on information in the form and context in which it appears.
The information in this report that relates to Scandinavian Exploration Results is based on information compiled 
by James Coppard who is a consultant to the company. Mr Coppard is a Chartered Geologist, European 
Geologist and Fellow of the Geological Society of London. Mr Coppard has sufficient experience of relevance 
to the style of mineralisation and the types of deposits under consideration, and to the activities undertaken, 
to qualify as Competent Persons as defined in the 2012 Edition of the Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC) 
Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. Mr Coppard 
consents to the inclusion in this report of the matters based on information in the form and context in which 
it appears.
The information in this report that relates to Mineral Resource estimation is based on information compiled 
by Mr Brian Wolfe, Principal Consultant Geologist – IRS Pty Ltd and Mr Andrew Thompson, an employee 
and shareholder of the Company. Mr Wolfe and Mr Thompson are members of the Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy and have sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of mineralisation and 
type of deposit under consideration to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the 
“Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves” (JORC Code). 
Mr Wolfe and Mr Thompson consent to the inclusion in this report of the matters based on their information in 
the form and context in which they appear.
126