
mainbody.htm
10-K/A 1 mainbody.htm MAINBODY
Page 1 of 81
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C.  20549
Form 10-K/A  
(Amendment No. 1)
(cid:58)    ANNUAL REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009
(cid:133)    TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from             to _______.
Commission file number:  000-51203
Amazon Goldsands Ltd.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
Nevada
98-0425310
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
Jiron Caracas 2226, Jesús María, Lima, Peru
(Address of principal executive offices)         (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone, including area code:     +(51 1) 989 184706
Securities registered under Section 12(b) of the Exchange Act:  None.
Securities registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act:
Common Stock, $0.00001 par value
(Title of class)
Not Applicable
(Name of each exchange on which registered)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes  (cid:133)  No (cid:58) 
  
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.  Yes  (cid:133)  No (cid:58) 
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 during the past 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) 
has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.  Yes  (cid:58)  No (cid:133) 
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate web site, if any, every Interactive 
Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 
12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).   Yes  (cid:58)  No (cid:133) 
  
Indicate  by  check  mark  if  disclosure  of  delinquent  filers  pursuant  to  Item  405  of  Regulation  S-K  (229.405  of  this  chapter)  is  no
contained herein, and will be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated
by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K.   (cid:58) 
  
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  a  non-accelerated  filer,  or  a  smalle
reporting company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 o
the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer (cid:133)                                                                                                   Accelerated filer (cid:133) 
Non-accelerated filer   (cid:133) (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)                 Smaller reporting company (cid:58)
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes  (cid:133)  No (cid:58) 
  
As of June 30, 2009, the aggregate market value of the Company’s common equity held by non-affiliates computed by reference to th
closing price $0.11 was:  $1,165,845 
  
The number of shares of our common stock outstanding as of April 7, 2010 was: 36,853,585
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 2 of 81
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Page 3 of 81
EXPLANATORY NOTE
This Amendment No. 1 on Form 10-K/A (this “Amendment”) to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2098 (the “Original Annual Report”) of Amazon Goldsands Ltd. (the “Company”) is being filed to include the audit repor
of I Vellmer Inc., Chartered Accountant.  In addition, the Company is including as exhibits to this Amendment the certifications required
pursuant to Sections 302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Except as described above, this Amendment does not attempt to modify or update any other disclosures set forth in the
Company’s Amended Annual Report. Accordingly, the remainder of the Company’s Amended Annual Report remains unchanged. This 
Amendment continues to speak as of April 14, 2009, the date of our initial filing of the Original Annual Report, and unless otherwise 
indicated herein, does not reflect information obtained after that date.
- 2 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Page 4 of 81
FORM 10-K
AMAZON GOLDSANDS LTD.
DECEMBER 31, 2009
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I 
  
  
Item 1.           Business.  
Item 1A.        Risk Factors.  
Item 1B.        Unresolved Staff Comments.  
Item 2.            Properties.  
Item 3.            Legal Proceedings.  
Item 4.            Reserved.  
  
PART II  
  
Item 5.           Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities. 
Item 6.           Selected Financial Data.  
Item 7.           Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of  Operations.  
Item 7A.        Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk. 
Item 8.           Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. 
Item 9.           Changes In and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.  
Item 9A.       Controls and Procedures.  
Item 9B.         Other Information.  
  
PART III  
  
Item 10.          Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance. 
Item 11.          Executive Compensation.  
Item 12.          Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management    and Related Stockholder Matters. 
Item 13.          Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence. 
Item 14.          Principal Accounting Fees and Services. 
  
PART IV  
  
Item 15.         Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules. 
  
Glossary  
Signature Page  
Exhibit Index
Page
6
9
16
16
24
24
24
26
26
33
33
33
33
34
35
37
39
40
40
42
- 3 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
Page 5 of 81
This annual report contains forward-looking statements as that term is defined in Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.  In some cases, you can identify forward-looking 
statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential,” 
“continue,” “intends,” and other variations of these words or comparable words.  In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, 
projections or other characterizations of events, circumstances or trends and that do not relate to historical matters are forward-looking 
statements.  These forward-looking statements are based largely on our expectations or forecasts of future events, can be affected by 
inaccurate assumptions, and are subject to various business risks and known and unknown uncertainties, a number of which are beyond 
our control.  Therefore, actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this document, and 
readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.  These statements are only predictions and 
involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, including the risks in the section entitled “Risk Factors” that may 
cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future 
results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Important factors that may cause the actual results to differ from the forward-looking statements, projections or other expectations
include, but are not limited to, the following:
•  risk that we fail to meet the requirements of the agreements under which we acquired our options, including any payments or 
any exploration obligations that we have regarding these properties, which could result in the loss of our right to exercise the 
options to acquire certain mining and mineral rights underlying these properties;
•  risk that we cannot attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel, particularly employees, consultants and contractors for our
operations in Peru;
•   risks and uncertainties relating to the interpretation of drill results, the geology, grade and continuity of mineral deposits;
•  results  of  initial  feasibility,  pre-feasibility  and  feasibility  studies,  and  the  possibility  that  future  exploration,  development  or
mining results will not be consistent with our expectations;
•  mining and development risks, including risks related to accidents, equipment breakdowns, labor disputes or other unanticipated
difficulties with or interruptions in production;
•  the potential for delays in exploration or development activities or the completion of feasibility studies;
•  risks related to the inherent uncertainty of production and cost estimates and the potential for unexpected costs and expenses;
•  risks related to commodity price fluctuations;
•  the uncertainty of profitability based upon our history of losses;
•  risks related to failure to obtain adequate financing on a timely basis and on acceptable terms for our planned exploration and
development projects;
•  risks related to environmental regulation and liability;
•  risks  that  the  amounts  reserved  or  allocated  for  environmental  compliance,  reclamation,  post-closure  control  measures,
monitoring and on-going maintenance may not be sufficient to cover such costs;
•  risks related to tax assessments;
•  political and regulatory risks associated with mining development and exploration; and
•  other risks and uncertainties related to our prospects, properties and business strategy.
- 4 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 6 of 81
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee
future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements.  You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking 
statements, which speak only as of the date of this report.  Except as required by law, we do not undertake to update or revise any of the 
forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results, whether as a result of new information, future events or 
otherwise.
As used in this annual report, “Amazon,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to Amazon Goldsands Ltd., unless
If you are not familiar with the mineral exploration terms used in this report, please refer to the definitions of these terms under
the caption “Glossary” at the end of Item 15 of this report.
Table of Contents
otherwise indicated.
- 5 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
ITEM 1.      Business. 
  
Corporate History
Page 7 of 81
PART I
We were incorporated in the state of Nevada under the name Gondwana Energy, Ltd. on September 5, 1997, and previously
operated under the name FinMetal Mining Ltd.  We were previously focused on the acquisition and development of our interests in the 
mineral rights on properties located in Finland.
In September 2008, we reorganized our operations and our current focus is on the acquisition and development of our interests 
in the mineral rights on properties located in northeastern Peru.  Effective June 6, 2008, we merged with our wholly-owned subsidiary, 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd., pursuant to Articles of Merger that we filed with the Nevada Secretary of State.  We decided to change our 
name to "Amazon Goldsands Ltd." to better reflect our current focus on the acquisition and development of certain mining and mineral 
rights underlying properties located in South America.
We allowed our options to acquire properties located in Finland to lapse and revert back to the optionors so that we can pursue
the development of our interests in the mining and mineral rights to properties located in northeastern Peru.   
  
Exploration Stage Company
We are considered an exploration or exploratory stage company because we are involved in the examination and investigation 
of land that we believe may contain valuable minerals, for the purpose of discovering the presence of ore, if any, and its extent. There is 
no assurance that a commercially viable mineral deposit exists on any of the properties underlying our mineral property interests, and a 
great deal of further exploration will be required before a final evaluation as to the economic and legal feasibility for our future 
exploration is determined. We have no known reserves of any type of mineral. To date, we have not discovered an economically viable 
mineral deposit on any of the properties underlying our mineral property interests, and there is no assurance that we will discover 
one.  If we cannot acquire or locate mineral deposits, or if it is not economical to recover any mineral deposits that we do find, our 
business and operations will be materially and adversely affected. 
  
Summary of our Mineral Property Interests
A description of each of our options to acquire the mineral and mining rights underlying properties located in Peru and the
conditions that we must meet in order to exercise these options is set forth in Item 2 of this annual report. 
  
Effect of Governmental Regulation on Our Business
We will be required to comply with all regulations, rules and directives of governmental authorities and agencies applicable to 
the exploration of minerals in Peru.  The discussion that follows is a summary of the most significant government regulations which we 
anticipate will impact our operations.
Peru is located on the western coast of South America and has a population of approximately 28 million people.  It covers a
geographic area of approximately 1.3 million square kilometres and is bordered by Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador.  Lima 
is the capital of Peru and its principal city with a population of approximately 7 million people.
Peru has become a leading country for mining activities.  No special taxes or registration requirements are imposed on foreign-
owned companies and foreign investment is treated as equal to domestic capital.  Peruvian law allows for full repatriation of capital and 
profits and the country’s mining legislation provides access to mining concessions under an efficient registration system.
- 6 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 8 of 81
Table of Contents
 
Peruvian Mining Law
Under Peru’s Uniform Text of Mining Law (“UTM”), the right to explore for and exploit minerals is granted by the government 
by way of concessions.  A Peruvian mining concession is a property right, independent from the ownership of surface land on which it 
is located.  There are no restrictions or special requirements applicable to foreign companies or individuals regarding the holding of 
mining concessions in Peru unless the concessions are within 50 kilometres of Peru's borders.  The rights granted by a mining 
concession can be transferred, or sold and, in general, may be the subject of any transaction or contract.  Mining concessions may be 
privately owned and no state participation is required.
The application for a mining concession involves the filing of documents before the mining administrative authority.  The
mining concession boundaries are specified in the application documents, with no requirement to mark the concession boundaries in the 
field since the boundaries are fixed by UTM coordinates.  In order to conduct exploration or mining activities, the holder of a mining 
concession must purchase the surface land required for the project or reach agreement with the owner for its temporary use.  If any of 
this is not possible, a legal easement may be requested from the mining authorities, although these easements have been rarely granted.
Mining concessions are irrevocable as long as their holders pay an annual fee of US $3 per hectare and reach minimum
production levels within the terms set forth by law or otherwise pay penalties, as applicable.  Non-compliance with any of these mining 
obligations for two consecutive years will result in the cancellation of the mining concession.
Pursuant to the original legal framework, in force since 1992, holders of mining concessions are obliged to achieve a minimum
production of US $100 per hectare per year within six years following the year in which the respective mining concession title is 
granted. If this minimum production is not reached, as of the first six months of the seventh year, the holder of the concession shall pay 
a US $6 penalty per hectare per year until such production is reached and penalties increase to US $20 in the twelfth year. Likewise, it 
is possible to avoid payment of the penalty if evidence is submitted to the mining authorities that an amount ten times the applicable 
penalty or more had been invested.
However, this regime has been recently and partially amended providing for, among other matters, increased minimum
production levels, new terms for obtaining such minimum production, increased penalties in case such minimum production is not 
reached, and even the cancellation of mining concessions if minimum production is not reached within certain terms.  Pursuant to this 
new regime, the holder of the mining concession should achieve a minimum production of at least one tax unit (S/. 3,500, 
approximately US $1,100) per hectare per year, within a ten-year term following the year in which the mining concession title is 
granted.  If such minimum production is not reached within the referred term, the holder of the concession shall pay penalties 
equivalent to 10% of the tax unit.
If the minimum production is not reached within a fifteen-year term following the granting of the concession title, the mining
concession shall be cancelled by the mining authority, unless (i) a qualified force majeure event is evidenced to and approved by the 
mining authority, or (ii) by paying the applicable penalties and concurrently evidencing minimum investments of at least ten times the 
amount of the applicable penalties; in which cases the concession may not be cancelled up to a maximum term of five additional 
years.  If minimum production is not reached within a twenty-year term following the granting of the concession title, the concession 
shall inevitably be cancelled.
This amended regime is currently applicable to all new mining concessions granted since October 11, 2008.  Regarding those 
mining concessions existing prior to such date, the new term for obtaining the increased minimum production level or otherwise being 
required to pay the increased penalties pursuant to the amended regime shall be counted as from the first business day of 
2009.  Nevertheless, until such new term for obtaining the increased minimum production level does not expire, the minimum 
production level, the term for obtaining such minimum production, the amount of the penalties and the causes for cancellation of the 
mining concessions shall continue to be those provided in the original legal framework existing since 1992.
The amended regime shall not be applicable to those concessions handed by the Peruvian State through private investment
promotion procedures, which shall maintain the production and investment obligations contained in their respective agreements, or to 
titleholders of concessions with mining stability agreements in force.
- 7 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 9 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Environmental Laws
The Peruvian Ministry of Energy and Mines ("MEM") regulates environmental affairs in the mining sector, including 
establishing environmental protection regulations; while the Office for Supervising Investment in Energy and Mining verifies 
environmental compliance and imposes administrative sanctions, although it is likely that in the near future these functions be assumed 
by the recently created Ministry of Environment.
Each stage of exploration or mining requires some type of authorization or permit, beginning with an application for an
environmental permit for initial exploration and continuing with an Environmental Impact Assessment ("EIA") for mining, which 
includes public hearings.
For permitting purposes, exploration activities in Peru are classified in two categories:
•  Category I projects: Mining exploration activities that comprise any of the following:  (i) a maximum of twenty
drilling platforms; (ii) a disturbed area of less than ten hectares considering drilling platforms, trenches, auxiliary
facilities  and  access  means;  and,  (iii)  the  construction  of  tunnels  with  a  total  maximum  length  of  fifty
meters.  Holders of these projects must submit an Environmental Impact Statement (“EIS”) before the MEM, which 
in  principle,  is  subject  to automatic  approval  upon  its  filing,  and  subject  to  subsequent  (ex  post)  review  by  the
latter.  Nevertheless, in any of the following cases, the project shall not be subject to automatic approval and shall
necessarily obtain an express prior approval by MEM, which should be granted, in principle, within a term of two
months since filing the EIS: (i) the project is located in a protected natural area or its buffer zone; (ii) the project is
oriented to determining the existence of radioactive minerals; (iii) the platforms, drill holes, trenches, tunnels or
other  components  would  be  located  within  certain  specially  environmental  sensitive  areas  specified  in  the
applicable  regulations  (e.g.,  glaciers,  springs,  water  wells,  groundwater  wells,  protection  lands,  primary  woods,
etc.); (iv) the project covers areas where mining environmental contingencies or non-environmental rehabilitated 
previous mining works, already exist.
•  Category  II  projects:  Mining  exploration  activities  that  comprise  any  of  the  following:  (i)  more  than  twenty
drilling  platforms;  (ii)  a  disturbed  area  of  more  than  ten  hectares  considering  drilling  plants,  trenches,  auxiliary
facilities and access means; and, (iii) the construction of tunnels over a total length of fifty meters.  These projects
require an authorization that are typically granted once the semi-detailed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
is approved by the MEM.  In general, such authorization should be able to be completed within approximately four
months.
Before initiating construction or exploitation activities and before the expansion of existing operations, an EIA approval
should be obtained.  This process of authorization involves public hearings in the place where the project is located and, in general, 
should conclude within a term of 120 calendar days, although such process can require between eight months and one year.
Holders of mining activities performing mining exploration are required to conduct remediation works of disturbed areas, as 
part of the progressive closure of the project.  Likewise, they are required to undertake the final closure and post closure actions as set 
forth in the terms and conditions in the approved environmental instrument.
If the holder carries out mining exploration activities involving the removal of more than 10,000 tonnes of material, or more
than 1,000 tonnes of material with a potential neutralization (“PN”) over potential acidity (“PA”) relation lower than 3 (PN/PA<3), then 
they shall be required to file a Mine Closure Plan, along with the corresponding environmental instrument, as well as to establish a 
financial guarantee to secure compliance with such Mine Closure Plan.
Holders of mining exploitation activities must file a Mine Closure Plan with the MEM within one year of the approval of their
EIA.  The Mine Closure Plan must be implemented from the beginning of the mining operation.  Semi-annual reports must be filed 
evidencing compliance with the Mine Closure Plan.  An environmental guarantee covering the Mine Closure Plan’s estimated costs is 
also required to be granted.
- 8 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 10 of 81
Table of Contents
 
Mining Royalties
Employees
Subsidiaries
Peruvian law requires that concession holders pay a mining royalty as consideration for the extraction of mineral resources.  The
mining royalty is payable monthly on a variable cumulative rate of 1% to 3% of the value of the ore concentrate or equivalent, 
calculated in accordance with price quotations in international markets, subject to certain deductions such as indirect taxes, insurance, 
freight and other specified expenses.  The mining royalty payable is determined based on the following schedule: (i) under US $60 
million of annual sales of concentrates: 1% royalty; (ii) in excess of US $60 million and up to US $120 million of annual sales: 2% 
royalty; and (iii) in excess of US $120 million of annual sales: 3% royalty. 
  
Competition
We are an exploration stage mineral resource exploration company that competes with other mineral resource exploration
companies for financing and for the acquisition of new mineral properties.  Many of the mineral resource exploration companies with 
whom we compete have greater financial and technical resources than those available to us.  Accordingly, these competitors may be 
able to spend greater amounts on acquisitions of mineral properties of merit, on exploration of their mineral properties and on 
development of their mineral properties.  In addition, they may be able to afford more geological expertise in the targeting and 
exploration of mineral properties.  This competition could result in competitors having mineral properties of greater quality and interest 
to prospective investors who may finance additional exploration and development.  This competition could adversely impact on our 
ability to achieve the financing necessary for us to conduct further exploration of our mineral properties.  We will also compete with 
other mineral exploration companies for financing from a limited number of investors that are prepared to make investments in mineral 
exploration companies.  The presence of competing mineral exploration companies may impact on our ability to raise additional capital 
in order to fund our exploration programs if investors are of the view that investments in competitors are more attractive based on the 
merit of the mineral properties under investigation and the price of the investment offered to investors.  We will also compete with 
other mineral companies for available resources, including, but not limited to, professional geologists, camp staff, mineral exploration 
supplies and drill rigs. 
  
Intellectual Property
We do not own, either legally or beneficially, any patent or trademark.
We have no full-time employees at the present time.   Our sole executive officer does not devote his services full time to our
operations.  We engage contractors from time to time to consult with us on specific corporate affairs or to perform specific tasks in 
connection with our exploration programs.  As of December 31, 2009, we engaged two contractors that provided work to us on a 
recurring basis. 
  
Research and Development Expenditures
We have not incurred any research or development expenditures since our incorporation.
Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2009, we acquired a 50% interest in the issued and outstanding stock of
Beardmore Holdings, Inc. ("Beardmore"), a corporation incorporated under the laws of Panama.  The remaining 50% interest in the 
issued and outstanding stock of Beardmore is owned by Temasek Investments Inc., a company incorporated under the laws of 
Panama.  Beardmore indirectly owns the mineral rights to certain properties located in Peru held by its subsidiary, Rio Santiago 
Minerales S.A.C. 
  
ITEM 1A.     Risk Factors.
You should carefully consider the following risk factors in evaluating our business and us.  The factors listed below represent
certain important factors that we believe could cause our business results to differ.  These factors are not intended to represent a 
complete list of the general or specific risks that may affect us.  It should be recognized that other risks may be significant, presently or 
in the future, and the risks set forth below may affect us to a greater extent than indicated.  If any of the following risks occur, our 
business, financial condition or results of operations could be materially and adversely affected.  You should also consider the other 
information included in this Annual Report and subsequent quarterly reports filed with the SEC.
- 9 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 11 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Risk Factors 
  
Risks Associated With Our Business 
  
Our accountants have raised substantial doubt with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern.
As noted in our financial statements, we have incurred a net loss of $9,714,204 for the period from inception on September 5,
1997 to December 31, 2009 and have presently no source of revenue.  At December 31, 2009, we had a working capital deficit of 
$808,681.  As of December 31, 2009, we had cash and cash equivalents in the amount of US $4,214.  We will have to raise additional 
funds to meet our currently budgeted operating requirements for the next twelve months.
The audit report of James Stafford, Chartered Accountants for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009 contained a paragraph
that emphasizes the substantial doubt as to our continuance as a going concern.  This is a significant risk that we may not be able to 
generate or raise enough capital to remain operational for an indefinite period of time. 
  
We own the options to acquire certain mining and mineral rights underlying certain properties and if we fail to perform the 
obligations necessary to exercise these options, we will lose our options and cease operations.
We hold options to acquire certain mining and mineral rights underlying properties located in northeastern Peru, subject to
certain conditions.  If we fail to meet the requirements of the agreement under which we acquired such options, including any payments 
or any exploration obligations that we have regarding these properties, we may lose our right to exercise the options to acquire certain 
mining and mineral rights underlying these properties located in northeastern Peru.  If we do not fulfill these conditions, then our ability 
to commence or continue operations could be materially limited.  Accordingly, any adverse circumstances that affect the areas covered 
by these options and our rights thereto would affect us and your entire investment in shares of our common stock.  If any of these 
situations were to arise, we would need to consider alternatives, both in terms of our prospective operations and for the financing of our 
activities.  Management cannot provide assurance that we will ultimately achieve profitable operations or become cash-flow positive, or 
raise additional debt and/or equity capital.  If we are unable to raise additional capital in the near future, we will experience liquidity 
problems and management expects that we will need to curtail operations, liquidate assets, seek additional capital on less favorable 
terms and/or pursue other remedial measures, including ceasing operations. 
  
We have a limited operating history and have incurred losses that we expect to continue into the future.
We have not yet located any mineral reserve and we have never had any revenues from our operations. In addition, we have a
very limited operating history upon which an evaluation of our future success or failure can be made.  We have only recently taken 
steps in a plan to engage in the acquisition of interests in exploration and development properties in Peru, and it is too early to 
determine whether such steps will prove successful.  Our business plan is in its early stages and faces numerous regulatory, practical, 
legal and other obstacles.  At this early stage of our operation, we also expect to face the risks, uncertainties, expenses and difficulties 
frequently encountered by companies at the start-up stage of their business development. We cannot be sure that we will be successful 
in addressing these risks and uncertainties, and our failure to do so could have a materially adverse effect on our financial condition.
No assurance can be given that we will be able to successfully complete the purchase of mining rights to any properties,
including the ones for which we currently hold options.  Our ability to achieve and maintain profitability and positive cash flow over 
time will be dependent upon, among other things, our ability to (i) identify and acquire gold mining properties or interests therein that 
ultimately have probable or proven gold reserves, (ii) sell such gold mining properties or interests to strategic partners or third parties or 
commence mining of gold, (iii) produce and sell gold at profitable margins, and (iv) raise the necessary capital to operate during this 
possible extended period of time.  At this stage in our development, it cannot be predicted how much financing will be required to 
accomplish these objectives.
- 10 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 12 of 81
Table of Contents
  
We have no known reserves and we may not find any mineral resources or, if we find mineral resources, the deposits may be 
uneconomic or production from those deposits may not be profitable.
Our due diligence activities have been limited, and to a great extent, have relied upon information provided to us by third
parties.  We have not established that any of the properties for which we hold options contain adequate amounts of gold or other 
mineral reserves to make mining any of the properties economically feasible to recover that gold or other mineral reserves, or to make a 
profit in doing so.  If we do not, our business will fail.  If we cannot find economic mineral resources or if it is not economic to recover 
the mineral resources, we will have to cease operations. 
  
We may not have access to all of the supplies and materials we need to begin exploration that could cause us to delay or suspend 
operations.
Competition and unforeseen limited sources of supplies in the industry could result in occasional spot shortages of supplies,
such as explosives, and certain equipment, such as bulldozers and excavators, that we might need to conduct exploration.  We have not 
attempted to locate or negotiate with any suppliers of products, equipment or materials.  We will attempt to locate products, equipment 
and materials.  If we cannot find the products and equipment we need, we will have to suspend our exploration plans until we do find 
the products and equipment we need. 
  
We do not have enough money to complete our exploration and consequently may have to cease or suspend our operations 
unless we are able to raise additional financing.
We presently do not have sufficient capital to exercise our options to acquire interests in property located in Peru.  Although
management believes that sources of financing are available to complete the acquisition of these property interests, no assurance can be 
given that these financing sources will ultimately be sufficient.  Other forms of financing, if available, may be on terms that are 
unfavorable to our stockholders.
As we cannot assure a lender that we will be able to successfully explore and develop our mineral properties, we will probably 
find it difficult to raise debt financing from traditional lending sources.  We have traditionally raised our operating capital from sales of 
equity and debt securities, but there can be no assurance that we will continue to be able to do so. If we cannot raise the money that we 
need to continue exploration of our mineral properties, we may be forced to delay, scale back, or eliminate our exploration activities. If 
any of these were to occur, there is a substantial risk that our business would fail. 
  
Our success is dependent upon a limited number of people.
The ability to identify, negotiate and consummate transactions that will benefit us is dependent upon the efforts of our
management team.  The loss of the services of any member of our management could have a material adverse effect on us. 
  
Our business will be harmed if we are unable to manage growth.
Our business may experience periods of rapid growth that will place significant demands on our managerial, operational and 
financial resources.  In order to manage this possible growth, we must continue to improve and expand our management, operational 
and financial systems and controls, particularly those related to subsidiaries that will be doing business in Peru.  We will need to 
expand, train and manage our employee base.  We must carefully manage our mining exploration activities.  No assurance can be given 
that we will be able to timely and effectively meet such demands. 
  
We may not be able to attract and retain qualified personnel necessary for the implementation of its business strategy and gold 
exploration programs.
Our future success depends largely upon the continued service of board members, executive officers and other key
personnel.  Our success also depends on our ability to continue to attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel, particularly 
employees, consultants and contractors for our operations in Peru.  Personnel represents a significant asset, and the competition for such 
personnel is intense in the gold exploration industry.  We may have particular difficulty attracting and retaining key personnel in the 
initial phases of our operations, particularly in Peru.
- 11 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 13 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Our officers and sole director may have conflicts of interest and do not devote full time to our operations.
Our officers and sole director may have conflicts of interest in that they are and may become affiliated with other mining 
companies.  In addition, our officers do not devote their full time to our operations.  Until such time that we can afford executive 
compensation commensurate with that being paid in the marketplace, our officers will not devote their full time and attention to our 
operations.  No assurance can be given as to when we will be financially able to engage our officers on a full-time basis or engage 
additional officers. 
  
Because our officers and sole director are located outside of the United States, you may have no effective recourse against us or 
our management for misconduct and may not be able to enforce judgment and civil liabilities against our officers, director, 
experts and agents.
Our sole director and officers are nationals and/or residents of countries other than the United States, and all or a substantial 
portion of such persons' assets are located outside the United States. As a result, it may be difficult for investors to enforce within the 
United States any judgments obtained against our officers or our sole director, including judgments predicated upon the civil liability 
provisions of the securities laws of the United States or any state thereof. 
  
Risks Associated With Mining 
  
All of our properties are in the exploration stage.  There is no assurance that we can establish the existence of any mineral 
resource on any of our properties in commercially exploitable quantities. Until we can do so, we cannot earn any revenues from 
operations and if we do not do so we will lose all of the funds that we expend on exploration. If we do not discover any mineral 
resource in a commercially exploitable quantity, our business will fail.
We have not established that any of our properties contain any commercially exploitable mineral reserve, nor can there be any 
assurance that we will be able to do so. If we do not, our business will fail.  A mineral reserve is defined by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission in its Industry Guide 7 (which can be viewed over the Internet at 
http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/forms/industry.htm#secguide7) as that part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and 
legally extracted or produced at the time of the reserve determination. The probability of an individual prospect ever having a “reserve” 
that meets the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Industry Guide 7 is extremely remote; in all probability our 
mineral resource property does not contain any ‘reserve’ and any funds that we spend on exploration will probably be lost.
Even if we do eventually discover a mineral reserve on one or more of our properties, there can be no assurance that we will be
able to develop our properties into producing mines and extract those resources. Both mineral exploration and development involve a 
high degree of risk and few properties that are explored are ultimately developed into producing mines.  If we do discover mineral 
resources in commercially exploitable quantities on any of our properties, we will be required to expend substantial sums of money to 
establish the extent of the resource, develop processes to extract it and develop extraction and processing facilities and infrastructure.
The commercial viability of an established mineral deposit will depend on a number of factors including, by way of example, 
the size, grade and other attributes of the mineral deposit, the proximity of the resource to infrastructure such as a smelter, roads and a 
point for shipping, government regulation and market prices. Most of these factors will be beyond our control, and any of them could 
increase costs and make extraction of any identified mineral resource unprofitable. 
  
Mineral operations are subject to applicable law and government regulation. Even if we discover a mineral resource in a 
commercially exploitable quantity, these laws and regulations could restrict or prohibit the exploitation of that mineral 
resource.  If we cannot exploit any mineral resource that we might discover on our properties, our business may fail.
Both mineral exploration and extraction require permits from various foreign, federal, state, provincial and local governmental
authorities and are governed by laws and regulations, including those with respect to prospecting, mine development, mineral 
production, transport, export, taxation, labor standards, occupational health, waste disposal, toxic substances, land use, environmental 
protection, mine safety and other matters.  There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or maintain any of the permits 
required for the continued exploration of our mineral properties or for the construction and operation of a mine on our properties at 
economically viable costs.  If we cannot accomplish these objectives, our business could fail.
- 12 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 14 of 81
Table of Contents
We believe that we are in compliance with all material laws and regulations that currently apply to our activities but there can
be no assurance that we can continue to do so.  Current laws and regulations could be amended and we might not be able to comply 
with them, as amended.  Further, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or maintain all permits necessary for our 
future operations, or that we will be able to obtain them on reasonable terms.  To the extent such approvals are required and are not 
obtained, we may be delayed or prohibited from proceeding with planned exploration or development of our mineral properties. 
  
If we establish the existence of a mineral reserve on any of our properties, we will require additional capital in order to develop 
the property into a producing mine. If we cannot raise this additional capital, we will not be able to exploit the reserve and our 
business could fail.
If we do discover a mineral reserve on any of our properties, we will be required to expend substantial sums of money to
establish the extent of the reserve, develop processes to extract it and develop extraction and processing facilities and 
infrastructure.  Although we may derive substantial benefits from the discovery of a reserve, there can be no assurance that it will be 
large enough to justify commercial operations, nor can there be any assurance that we will be able to raise the funds required for 
development on a timely basis.  If we cannot raise the necessary capital or complete the necessary facilities and infrastructure, our 
business may fail. 
  
Because our property interest and exploration activities in Peru are subject to political, economic and other uncertainties, 
situations may arise that could have a significantly adverse material impact on us.
Our activities in Peru are subject to political, economic and other uncertainties, including the risk of expropriation,
nationalization, renegotiation or nullification of existing contracts, mining licenses and permits or other agreements, changes in laws or 
taxation policies, currency exchange restrictions, changing political conditions and international monetary fluctuations.  Future 
government actions concerning the economy, taxation, or the operation and regulation of nationally important facilities such as mines 
could have a significant effect on our plans and on our ability to operate.  No assurance can be given that our plans and operations will 
not be adversely affected by future developments in Peru. 
  
Because we presently do not carry title insurance and do not plan to secure any in the future, we are vulnerable to loss of title.
We do not maintain insurance against title.  Title on mineral properties and mining rights involves certain inherent risks due to 
the difficulties of determining the validity of certain claims as well as the potential for problems arising from the frequently ambiguous 
conveyance history characteristic of many mining properties.  Disputes over land ownership are common, especially in the context of 
resource developments.  We cannot give any assurance that title to such properties will not be challenged or impugned and cannot be 
certain that we will have or acquire valid title to these mining properties.  The possibility also exists that title to existing properties or 
future prospective properties may be lost due to an omission in the claim of title.  As a result, any claims against us may result in 
liabilities we will not be able to afford, resulting in the failure of our business. 
  
Because we are subject to various governmental regulations and environmental risks, we may incur substantial costs to remain 
in compliance.
Our activities in Peru are subject to Peruvian and local laws and regulations regarding environmental matters, the abstraction 
of water, and the discharge of mining wastes and materials.  Any significant mining operations will have some environmental impact, 
including land and habitat impact, arising from the use of land for mining and related activities, and certain impact on water resources 
near the project sites, resulting from water use, rock disposal and drainage run-off.  No assurance can be given that such environmental 
issues will not cause our operations in the future to fail.
The Peruvian and/or local government could require us to remedy any negative environmental impact.  The costs of such
remediation could cause us to fail.  Future environmental laws and regulations could impose increased capital or operating costs on us 
and could restrict the development or operation of any gold mines.
- 13 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 15 of 81
Table of Contents
We have, and will in the future, engage consultants to assist us with respect to our operations in Peru.  We are beginning to
address the various regulatory and governmental agencies, and the rules and regulations of such agencies, in connection with the 
options for the properties in Peru.  No assurances can be given that we will be successful in our efforts.  Further, in order for us to 
operate and grow our business in Peru, we need to continually conform to the laws, rules and regulations of such country and local 
jurisdiction.  It is possible that the legal and regulatory environment pertaining to the exploration and development of gold mining 
properties will change.  Uncertainty and new regulations and rules could dramatically increase our cost of doing business, or prevent us 
from conducting its business; both situations could cause us to fail. 
  
Mineral exploration and development is subject to extraordinary operating risks. We do not currently insure against these 
risks. In the event of a cave-in or similar occurrence, our liabilities may exceed our resources, which could cause our business to 
fail.
Mineral exploration, development and production involves many risks which even a combination of experience, knowledge
and careful evaluation may not be able to overcome.  Our operations will be subject to all the hazards and risks inherent in the 
exploration, development and production of resources, including liability for pollution, cave-ins or similar hazards against which we 
cannot insure or against which we may elect not to insure. Any such event could result in work stoppages and damage to property, 
including damage to the environment.  We do not currently maintain any insurance coverage against these operating hazards.  The 
payment of any liabilities that arise from any such occurrence could cause us to fail. 
  
Mineral prices are subject to dramatic and unpredictable fluctuations.
We expect to derive revenues, if any, from the extraction and sale of precious and base metals such as gold and silver.  The 
price of those commodities has fluctuated widely in recent years, and is affected by numerous factors beyond our control including 
international, economic and political trends, expectations of inflation, currency exchange fluctuations, interest rates, global or regional 
consumptive patterns, speculative activities and increased production due to new extraction developments and improved extraction and 
production methods.  The effect of these factors on the price of base and precious metals, and, therefore, the economic viability of any 
of our exploration projects, cannot accurately be predicted. 
  
The mining industry is highly competitive and there is no assurance that we will continue to be successful in acquiring property 
interests. If we cannot continue to acquire interests in properties to explore for mineral resources, we may be required to 
reduce or cease operations.
The mineral exploration, development, and production industry is largely unintegrated.  We compete with other exploration 
companies looking for mineral resource properties.  While we compete with other exploration companies in the effort to locate and 
license mineral resource properties, we will not compete with them for the removal or sales of mineral products from our properties if 
we should eventually discover the presence of them in quantities sufficient to make production economically feasible.  Readily 
available markets exist worldwide for the sale of gold and other mineral products.  Therefore, we will likely be able to sell any gold or 
mineral products that we identify and produce.
We compete with many companies possessing greater financial resources and technical facilities. This competition could
adversely affect our ability to acquire suitable prospects for exploration in the future as well as our ability to recruit and retain qualified 
personnel. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that we will acquire any interest in additional mineral resource properties that might 
yield reserves or result in commercial mining operations.  
  
Risks Relating to our Common Stock 
  
Trading on the over-the-counter bulletin board may be volatile and sporadic, which could depress the market price of our 
common stock and make it difficult for our stockholders to resell their shares.
Our common stock is quoted on the over-the-counter bulletin board service of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (the 
“OTCBB”).  Trading in stock quoted on the OTCBB is often thin and characterized by wide fluctuations in trading prices, due to many 
factors that may have little to do with our operations or business prospects.  This volatility could depress the market price of our 
common stock for reasons unrelated to operating performance.  Moreover, the OTCBB is not a stock exchange, and trading of securities 
on the OTCBB is often more sporadic than the trading of securities listed on a quotation system like Nasdaq or a stock exchange like 
Amex.  Accordingly, shareholders may have difficulty reselling any of the shares.
- 14 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 16 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Because our common stock is quoted and traded on the OTCBB, short selling could increase the volatility of our stock price.
Short selling occurs when a person sells shares of stock which the person does not yet own and promises to buy stock in the 
future to cover the sale.  The general objective of the person selling the shares short is to make a profit by buying the shares later, at a 
lower price, to cover the sale.  Significant amounts of short selling, or the perception that a significant amount of short sales could 
occur, could depress the market price of our common stock. In contrast, purchases to cover a short position may have the effect of 
preventing or retarding a decline in the market price of our common stock, and together with the imposition of the penalty bid, may 
stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the market price of our common stock.  As a result, the price of our common stock may be higher 
than the price that otherwise might exist in the open market.  If these activities are commenced, they may be discontinued at any 
time.  These transactions may be effected on the OTCBB or any other available markets or exchanges.  Such short selling if it were to 
occur could impact the value of our stock in an extreme and volatile manner to the detriment of our shareholders. 
  
We have never paid dividends and have no plans to in the future.
Holders of shares of our common stock are entitled to receive such dividends as may be declared by our board of directors.  To 
date, we have paid no cash dividends on our shares of common stock and we do not expect to pay cash dividends on our common stock 
in the foreseeable future.  We intend to retain future earnings, if any, to provide funds for operation of our business.  Therefore, any 
return investors in our common stock will have to be in the form of appreciation, if any, in the market value of their shares of common 
stock. 
  
We have additional securities available for issuance, which, if issued, could adversely affect the rights of the holders of our 
common stock.
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize the issuance of 200,000,000 shares of our common stock and 200,000,000 shares of
blank check preferred stock.  The common stock or blank check preferred stock can be issued by our board of directors, without 
stockholder approval.  Any future issuances of our common stock would further dilute the percentage ownership of our common stock 
held by public shareholders. 
  
If we issue shares of blank check preferred stock with superior rights than our common stock, it could result in the decrease in 
the value of our common stock and delay or prevent a change in control of us.
Our board of directors is authorized to issue up to 200,000,000 shares of blank check preferred stock. Our board of directors 
has the power to establish the dividend rates, liquidation preferences, voting rights, redemption and conversion terms and privileges 
with respect to any series of blank check preferred stock. The issuance of any shares of blank check preferred stock having rights 
superior to those of the common stock may result in a decrease in the value or market price of the common stock.  Holders of blank 
check preferred stock may have the right to receive dividends, certain preferences in liquidation and conversion rights.  The issuance of 
blank check preferred stock could, under certain circumstances, have the effect of delaying, deferring or preventing a change in control 
of us without further vote or action by the shareholders and may adversely affect the voting and other rights of the holders of common 
stock. 
  
Because the SEC imposes additional sales practice requirements on brokers who deal in our shares that are penny stocks, some 
brokers may be unwilling to trade them. This means that you may have difficulty in reselling your shares and may cause the 
price of the shares to decline.
Our stock is a penny stock.  The Securities and Exchange Commission has adopted Rule 15g-9 which generally defines
“penny stock” to be any equity security that has a market price (as defined) less than $5.00 per share or an exercise price of less than 
$5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. Our securities are covered by the penny stock rules, which impose additional sales 
practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell to persons other than established customers and “accredited investors”.  The term 
“accredited investor” refers generally to institutions with assets in excess of $5,000,000 or individuals with a net worth in excess of 
$1,000,000 or annual income exceeding $200,000 or $300,000 jointly with their spouse.  The penny stock rules require a broker-dealer, 
prior to a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from the rules, to deliver a standardized risk disclosure document in a form 
prepared by the SEC which provides information about penny stocks and the nature and level of risks in the penny stock market.  The 
broker-dealer also must provide the customer with current bid and offer quotations for the penny
- 15 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 17 of 81
Table of Contents
stock, the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction and monthly account statements showing the market 
value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account.  The bid and offer quotations and the broker-dealer and salesperson 
compensation information must be given to the customer orally or in writing prior to effecting the transaction and must be given to the 
customer in writing before or with the customer’s confirmation.  In addition, the penny stock rules require that prior to a transaction in a 
penny stock not otherwise exempt from these rules, the broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock is 
a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive the purchaser’s written agreement to the transaction.  These disclosure requirements 
may have the effect of reducing the level of trading activity in the secondary market for the stock that is subject to these penny stock 
rules.  Consequently, these penny stock rules may affect the ability of broker-dealers to trade our securities. We believe that the penny 
stock rules discourage investor interest in, and limit the marketability of, our common stock.
In addition to the “penny stock” rules promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, FINRA has adopted rules that
require that in recommending an investment to a customer, a broker-dealer must have reasonable grounds for believing that the 
investment is suitable for that customer.  Prior to recommending speculative, low-priced securities to their non-institutional customers, 
broker-dealers must make reasonable efforts to obtain information about the customer’s financial status, tax status, investment 
objectives and other information.  Under interpretations of these rules, FINRA believes that there is a high probability that speculative 
low-priced securities will not be suitable for at least some customers.  The FINRA requirements make it more difficult for broker-
dealers to recommend that their customers buy our common stock, which may limit your ability to buy and sell our stock. 
  
Indemnification of officers and directors.
Our Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws contain broad indemnification and liability limiting provisions regarding our 
officers, directors and employees, including the limitation of liability for certain violations of fiduciary duties.  Our shareholders 
therefore will have only limited recourse against the individuals. 
  
  
ITEM 1B.       Unresolved Staff Comments.
None.
ITEM 2.          Properties. 
  
Description of our Mineral Property Interests
Our properties are located in northeastern Peru and are in the exploration stage.  These properties are without known reserves
and the proposed plan of exploration detailed below is exploratory in nature.  These properties are described below. 
  
Peru Property
Our property interests located in Peru are in the exploration state.  These properties are without known reserves and the
proposed plan of exploration detailed below is exploratory in nature.  These properties are described below.
- 16 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
Name 
Bianka 1 
Bianka 2 
Bianka 3 
Bianka 4 
Bianka 6 
Bianka 7 
Dalma 1 
Dalma 2 
Dalma 3 
Dalma 4 
Dalma 5 
Dorotea 1 
Dorotea 2 
Dorotea 3 
Dorotea 4 
Dorotea 5 
Dorotea 6 
Dorotea 7
Area (ha) 
1000 
1000 
900 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
1000 
800 
500 
1000 
900 
1000 
800 
1000 
1000 
1000
Code 
01-03905-08
01-03878-08
01-03879-08
01-03883-08
01-03881-08
01-03888-08
01-03859-08
01-03863-08
01-03857-08
01-03865-08
01-03866-08
01-03909-08
01-03906-08
01-03904-08
01-03908-08
01-03910-08
01-03901-08
01-03899-08
Title Nº
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
00074599
Owner
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C.
mainbody.htm
Page 18 of 81
Table of Contents
We entered into a Mineral Right Option Agreement with Temasek Investments Inc. (“Temasek”), a company incorporated under 
the laws of Panama, on September 18, 2008 (the “Effective Date”), as amended and supplemented by Amendment No. 1 dated May 12, 
2009 (“Amendment No. 1”) and Amendment No. 2 dated February 3, 2010 (“Amendment No. 2”) (collectively, the “Option 
Agreement”), in order to acquire four separate options from Temasek, each providing for the acquisition of a twenty-five percent 
interest in certain mineral rights (the “Mineral Rights”) in certain properties in Peru, potentially resulting in our acquisition of one 
hundred percent of the Mineral Rights.  The Mineral Rights are currently owned by Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C. ("Rio 
Santiago").  Beardmore Holdings, Inc. ("Beardmore") owns 999 shares of the 1,000 shares of Rio Santiago that are issued and 
outstanding.  Temasek owns the single remaining share of Rio Santiago.  Our acquisition of each twenty-five percent interest in the 
Mineral Rights is structured to occur through the transfer to us of twenty-five percent of the outstanding shares of Beardmore upon the 
exercise of each of the four options.
A description of the Mineral Rights is set forth below:
We exercised the initial twenty-five percent option, which provided for the acquisition of a twenty-five percent interest in the
Mineral Rights, by paying Temasek a total of $500,000 and issuing 2,500,000 shares of our common stock to Temasek on or about 
January 12, 2009 in accordance with the terms of the Option Agreement.
We exercised the second twenty-five percent option, which resulted in our acquisition of an aggregate fifty percent interest in 
the Mineral Rights, by paying Temasek a total of $750,000 and issuing 3,500,000 shares of our common stock to Temasek on or about 
March 22, 2010 in accordance with the terms of the Option Agreement.
- 17 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 19 of 81
Table of Contents
Under the terms of the Option Agreement, as amended, we could have exercised the third, twenty-five percent option, resulting
in our acquisition of a seventy-five percent interest in the Mineral Rights, after fulfilling the following conditions:
•  Complete the exercise of the second, twenty-five percent option, resulting in our acquisition of a fifty percent interest in
the Mineral Rights;
•  Issuance of 5,000,000 shares of our common stock to Temasek, or whoever persons Temasek indicates, by March 5,
2010, which is within 30 days of the effective date of Amendment No. 2 (which shares were issued on March 9, 2010);
•  Payment  of  $250,000  to  the  order  and  the  direction  of  Temasek  by  March  5,  2010,  which  is  within  30  days  of  the
effective date of Amendment No. 2 (which payment was made on March 22, 2010); and
•  Payment of $1,000,000 to the order and the direction of Temasek on or before March 18, 2010, which is within eighteen
months of the Effective Date.
We could have exercised the fourth, twenty-five percent option, resulting in our acquisition of a one hundred percent interest
in the Mineral Rights, after fulfilling the following conditions by March 18, 2010, which is within eighteen months of the Effective 
Date:
•  Exercise and complete the initial, second, and third, twenty-five percent options;
•  Payment of an additional amount $2,500,000 to Temasek; and
•  Issuance of 5,500,000 additional shares of common stock to Temasek.
As of the end of the first quarter of 2010, we did not have sufficient financing to be able to make the required cash payments to
exercise  the  third  and  fourth  twenty-five  percent  options  within  the  time  period  set  forth  in  the  Option  Agreement.  We  are  in
negotiations with Temasek to enter into another amendment to the Option Agreement in order to revise the terms required for us to
exercise the third and fourth twenty-five percent options.  There can be no assurance that we will be successful in amending the Option
Agreement or securing the necessary funding to exercise the third or fourth twenty-five percent options.  In the event that we are unable 
to enter into another amendment to the Option Agreement, our ownership interest in the Mineral Rights would be limited to our fifty
percent interest, we would lose our ability to acquire the third and fourth twenty-five percent options to acquire an aggregate seventy-
five  and  one  hundred  percent  interest  in  the  Mineral  Rights,  respectively,  and  not  be  entitled  to  recover  the  $250,000  paid  and
5,000,000 shares of our common stock issued as partial consideration for the exercise of the third twenty-five percent option.
- 18 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 20 of 81
Table of Contents
If we are able to complete the acquisition of a one hundred percent interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek will hold its single
share of Rio Santiago in trust for our sole benefit and hold the share strictly in accordance with our instructions.
If we are able to complete the acquisition of a one hundred percent interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek will be entitled to
an annual 2.5% net returns royalty.  However, if we pay Temasek $2,000,000 within ninety days of our acquisition of a one hundred 
percent interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek will only be entitled to an annual 1.5% net returns royalty.
If we exercise the second, twenty-five percent option, resulting in our acquisition of a fifty percent interest in the Mineral
Rights, but fail to acquire a one hundred percent interest in the Mineral Rights, the Option Agreement provides that we and Temasek 
will form a joint venture for the purpose of placing the Peru Property into commercial production.  In the event that this condition is 
satisfied and we enter into a joint venture with Temasek, out responsibilities under the joint venture would include developing a feasible 
mining project and all necessary facilities, and Temasek shall retain a carried free interest in the mining rights.  If we enter into a joint 
venture with Temasek, but do not develop a feasible mining project within three years of the Effective Date (or by September 18, 
2011), we will be required to pay Temasek an advance minimum mining royalty of $500,000 per year, which will be deducted from 
Temasek's net return royalty. 
  
Planned Exploration Program
An exploration base is being set up in the town of Saramiriza, which is located in the center of the Manseriche alluvial camp
on the western bank of the Marañón.
Provided we are successful in securing additional financing, we intend to conduct a seismic survey along selected lines across 
the Marañón gravels in order to define the gravel-bedrock contact.  This information is needed to plan a drilling program and to assist 
with locating drill collar positions.  The selection of seismic lines will be made on the basis of interpretation of aerial photos and 
satellite images, as well as from reconnaissance-scale mapping of sedimentary features.  Scout drilling utilizing churn drills will be 
undertaken on favorable areas, and anomalous zones will be followed up with reverse circulation drilling (Becker) in order to fully 
develop resources and reserves.
Provided we are successful in securing additional financing and before implementing the drilling plan, we intend to identify
the landowners of the plots on which the mines are located so as to determine who the legal owners or current occupants are and/or the 
kind of tenancy or tenancy claim over the surface of the land, as well as the location of Native or Creole communities within the 
project’s area of influence.  This process has commenced, but cannot be completed without securing additional financing.
An Environmental Impact Report will also be required to be drafted so as to obtain the Environmental Impact Declaration
from the Peruvian Mining Authorities, which is an essential requirement for any kind of exploration in Peru.
We intend to collect by backhoe and excavator a number of bulk samples for metallurgical testing, and to confirm drill
results.  At the same time, mine development planning, process design, and other engineering studies will be conducted with a view to 
completing a feasibility study within an eighteen month period.  Permitting work will be initiated as early in the exploration and 
development cycle as possible, so that trial or pilot dredging can be started as soon as feasibility has been established.  If we are able to 
secure sufficient additional financing, we anticipate that we will commence shortly thereafter the mapping and geophysics with the 
initial drilling to follow.
Our current cash on hand is insufficient to complete any of the activities set forth in our planned exploration program.  If we 
are unable to secure additional financing in the near future, we will be forced to postpone the commencement of our exploration and 
development program.  Provided we are able to secure additional financing through private equity offerings, we anticipate that we will 
incur the following costs for the next twelve months:
- 19 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Page 21 of 81
Activity 
MINERAL PROPERTY COSTS:
Annual Fee 
Surface Rights Access 
EXPLORATION 
Mapping 
Geophysics – Seismic 
DRILLING 
Churn Drilling 
TECHNICAL SERVICES
Consultants 
Personnel 
CAMP AND FIELD EXPENSES
Camp 
Field 
TRANSPORT AND LOGISTICS
Air Transport 
Water Transport 
Ground Transport 
EQUIPMENT & PERMITTING
COMMUNITY OUTREACH
ADMINISTRATION 
NEW BUSINESS 
TOTAL
USD 000s
50
  15
25
  50
200
90
  100
100 
  75
90
  40
  25
  55
  25
75
  1,015
We also, as part of new business activities, intend to focus on seeking additional mining opportunities, some of which may be
mineral deposits that are fully defined and have already completed the feasibility stage of development and are ready to produce.  In 
other cases, the mineral deposits we may seek to acquire may have a significant amount of proven and probable resources with what we 
believe to be excellent potential for expansion.  We may also seek to acquire other drill-ready exploration projects that contain little or 
no proven resources, as with the options we currently hold to acquire existing mining projects in Peru, but that are strategically 
positioned to offer what we perceive as exceptional potential at a comparatively minimal expense.  In order to acquire any additional 
mining properties or exploration projects, we will need to secure additional financing.  We have not made any progress in indentifying 
any such properties due to our current financial position and require additional financing to perform the requisite due diligence and 
complete the acquisition of any property interest.
Due to the extensive and expensive development programs required to prove mineral resources and reserves, as is typical in
the mining business, companies such as ours sometimes are able to acquire deposits at significant discounts of the known in-the-ground 
value of the gold, silver, or other minerals.   In the event that we do locate a commercially exploitable mineral deposits, we may 
determine that it is commercially advantageous to sell our property interests rather than enter into production of any commercially 
mineral deposits on the property ourselves. 
  
Location and Access
The Mineral Rights are located in the Manseriche and Condercanqui gold camps along the Rio Marañón in northeastern
Peru.  These areas lie near the Manseriche gorge which cuts through the last ridge of hills that marks the interface between the Andean 
highlands and the Amazon foreland basin.  These camps straddle the boundary of the Loreto (eastern) and Amazonas (western) 
departments of northeastern Peru approximately 350km from the regional center of Iquitos which lies on the Amazon River.
Both Iquitos to the east as well as Tarapoto to the south are served with daily flights from Lima.  The project area can be
reached from either of these towns by charter flights while supplies and heavy equipment can be barged in from either Yurimaguas (on 
the Rio Huallaga) or Iquitos, or trucked in from Bagua on a fair weather road to the village of Saramiriza located in the center of the 
Manseriche gold camp along the southwestern bank of the Rio Marañón.
- 20 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 22 of 81
Table of Contents
The general location of the Mineral Rights within Peru is indentified on the map below:
- 21 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 23 of 81
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 24 of 81
Table of Contents
The specific location of the Mineral Rights is indentified on the map below:
Previous Exploration History
According to reports publicly available, the first record of gold production from the Manseriche camp was in the 1940’s, when a 
German-owned company operated a dragline on the Rio Marañón river.  Since then, Canadian, Brazilian, Swiss and Peruvian interests 
have operated various types of equipment on the Rio Marañón river with various degrees of success.
The most notable operation was that of a Peruvian company, Monica de Iquitos, who completed approximately 500 drill holes
and established a considerable resource south of the town of Saramiriza.  This work was verified and confirmed by a Russian 
government consulting company, Sojuzkarta, which twinned some holes and took bulk samples by backhoe.  Their drill results as well 
as those from the collection of bulk samples were used to estimate a grade of 295mg/m3 based on a finess of 850 for correction to pure 
gold.
Subsequent studies have indicated that grades tended to increase with depth, and that much of the gold tends to be
considerably fine in size, indicating the possibility of increased recovery, and therefore grade, with appropriate recovery techniques, 
e.g., jigs and bowl concentrators. 
  
Geology and Mineralization
The Alegría, Condorcanqui, and Manseriche gold camps form part of the Marañón-Santiago Alluvial District (see Marañón-
Santiago River Basin Map), one of four major alluvial gold fields in Peru (the others are, Iquitos, Ucayali, and Madre de Dios-Pando).
- 22 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 25 of 81
Table of Contents
Such large-scale alluvial gold fields tend to form in environments associated with convergent plate boundaries, particularly at 
the interface between fold belts and foreland basins.  An essential requirement for the development of such gold deposits is a gold-rich 
hinterland and a river system that can transfer gold from the zone of production in the upper reaches of the drainage basin, along the 
main trunk of the river system to the zone of deposition, usually where the river profile flattens-out at the limit between the highlands 
and alluvial plains.  The Manseriche camp is indeed located exactly at such a juncture.
The Maranon-Santiago drainage basin covers an area of some 120,000 km2 and contains a number of gold deposits as well as 
some of the largest gold deposits and gold mining operations in the world, including Newmont’s Yanacocha (40m oz Au), Goldfield’s 
Cerro Corona (which currently produce 350 000 oz Au per annum), and Kinross’/ Aurelian’s Fruta del Norte deposit (14m oz Au).
The age of most of the gold mineralization in the highlands of the Marañón-Santiago river system is tertiary, and specifically 
Miocene.  However, Eocene-aged tectonism resulted in the formation of the eastern foothills of the Andes ,which effectively formed a 
barrier directing all erosion from the hinterland towards a basin on the western side of the Manseriche Gorge.  Glacial erosion of the 
gold deposits in the hinterland resulted in tills and moraines, which were subsequently concentrated in glacio-fluvial deposits by 
melting ice and intense rains in interglacial periods of which a number have been identified in Peru.  These sediments were retained by 
the eastern fold belt of anticlines.  The Pajacuse thrust event during the Pliocene then led to the breaching of the closed basin and the 
subsequent formation of the Manseriche Gorge.  This released the gold-rich glacio-fluvial sediments to be reconcentrated and deposited 
in the Rio Marañón flood plain east of the Gorge.
All the gold that is eroded form the primary deposits in this drainage basin has only one exit point, and that is through the
Manseriche gorge.  Moreover, it is also at this focus point that the fast-running waters from the highlands are slowed down to a languid 
pace resulting in the deposition of the high-energy sedimentary load and its golden cargo.  It is the sequence of constant erosion, glacio-
fluvial concentration, fluvial transport, collection in an intermediate (or series of intermediate) basin(s), and final alluvial concentration 
in the Rio Marañón flood plain, that provided the mixing and concentration which accounts for the regular gold values in the sands and 
gravels as indicated by all the work carried out to date.
A map below detailing the geology in the approximately area of the Mineral Rights is set forth below:
- 23 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 26 of 81
Table of Contents
  
ITEM 3.    Legal Proceedings.
None.
ITEM 4.    Removed.
PART II
ITEM 5.    Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities. 
  
Market Prices
Our common stock is currently quoted on the OTCBB under the symbol “AZNG.”  Prior to June 9, 2008, when we operated
under the name FinMetal Mining Ltd., we were quoted on the OTCBB under the symbol “FNMM.”
The following table sets forth the range of high and low bid quotations for our common stock for each of the periods indicated 
as reported by the OTCBB.  These quotations below reflect inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission and 
may not necessarily represent actual transactions.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2009
Fiscal Quarter Ended:
March 31, 2009 
June 30, 2009 
September 30, 2009
December 31, 2009
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2008
Fiscal Quarter Ended:
March 31, 2008 
June 30, 2008 
September 30, 2008
December 31, 2008
High Bid
$0.199
$0.95
$0.70
$0.55
High Bid
$0.40
$0.18
$0.27
$0.26
Low Bid
$0.11
$0.06
$0.11
$0.13
Low Bid
$0.041
$0.045
$0.20
$0.15
Holders of Common Stock
shareholders hold shares in street name. 
  
Dividend Policy
As of December 31, 2009, we had approximately ninety-nine (99) holders of record of our common stock.  Several other
To date, we have not declared or paid cash dividends on our shares of common stock.  The holders of our common stock will
be entitled to non-cumulative dividends on the shares of common stock, when and as declared by our board of directors, in its 
discretion.  We intend to retain all future earnings, if any, for our business and do not anticipate paying cash dividends in the 
foreseeable future.
Any future determination to pay cash dividends will be at the discretion of our board of directors and will be dependent upon 
our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, general business conditions and such other factors as our board of 
directors may deem relevant.
- 24 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 27 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans
Our board of directors adopted the 2007 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Stock Incentive Plan”) in April 2007.  The number of
shares of common stock issuable under the Stock Incentive Plan was reduced from 10,000,000 shares to 500,000 shares resulting from 
the one share-for-twenty shares reverse stock split of our Common Stock (“reverse split”) which became effective at the close of 
business on June 6, 2008.  As of December 31, 2009, there were no outstanding awards granted under the Stock Incentive Plan.  After 
an adjustment to give effect to the reverse split, 500,000 shares remain available under the Stock Incentive Plan for future equity grants 
as of December 31, 2009.
The Stock Incentive Plan authorizes us to grant awards in the form of shares of common stock, including unrestricted shares of
common stock; options to purchase shares of common stock; stock appreciation rights or similar rights with a fixed or variable price 
related to the fair market value of the shares of common stock and with an exercise or conversion privilege related to the passage of 
time, the occurrence of one or more events, or the satisfaction of performance criteria or other conditions; any other security with the 
value derived from the value of the shares of common stock, such as restricted stock and restricted stock units; deferred stock units; 
dividend equivalent rights; or any combination of the foregoing.
The Stock Incentive Plan allows for the grant of incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options and restricted stock
awards.  The exercise price of any option shall be determined at the time the option is granted by the board of directors. However, the 
exercise price may generally not be less than 100 percent of the fair market value of the shares of common stock on the date of the 
grant. Each option expires on the date determined by the board of directors, but not later than ten years after the grant date. The board 
of directors may determine in its discretion whether any option shall be subject to vesting and the terms and conditions of any such 
vesting.  The Stock Incentive Plan also provides for the immediate vesting of options, as well as authorizes the board of directors, or 
any committee thereof, to cancel outstanding options or to make adjustments to the transfer restrictions on those options in the event of 
certain changes in corporate control of the company.  Awards, including options, made under the Stock Incentive Plan are not 
assignable and also subject to any restrictions and conditions imposed by the board of directors, or any committee thereof.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the Stock Incentive Plan as of December 31, 2009:
1  The Stock Incentive Plan was approved by our board of directors in April 2007 and 500,000 shares remain available for future
awards under the Stock Incentive Plan as of December 31, 2009.
- 25 -
Number of securities
to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
(a)
-
- 
-
Weighted-average 
exercise price of
outstanding options, 
warrants and rights
(b)
-
-
-
Number of securities 
remaining available for 
future issuance under
equity compensation plans
(excluding securities 
reflected in column (a))
(c)
-
500,000
500,000
Plan category 
Equity compensation plans
approved by stockholders
Equity compensation plans
not approved by 
stockholders 1
Total
_______________________
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 28 of 81
Table of Contents
 
Recent Issuances of Unregistered Securities
There were no issuances of securities without registration under the Securities Act of 1933 during the reporting period which
were not previously included in a Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q or Current Report on Form 8-K. 
  
ITEM 6.       Selected Financial Data.
Not applicable.
ITEM 7.        Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related
notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our 
current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or 
financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking 
statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note 
Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
  
Recent Developments for the Company 
  
Overview
We were incorporated in the state of Nevada under the name Gondwana Energy, Ltd. on September 5, 1997, and previously
operated under the name FinMetal Mining Ltd.  We are an exploration stage company engaged in the assessment, acquisition and 
exploration of mineral properties.  We were previously focused on the acquisition and development of our interests in the mineral rights 
on properties located in Finland.
In September 2008, we reorganized our operations and our current focus is on the acquisition and development of our interests
in the mineral rights on properties located in Peru.  We no longer have any interest in any properties located in Finland and have 
allowed our options on these properties to lapse in order to pursue the development of our interests in the mineral rights on properties 
located in Peru.  Effective June 6, 2008, we merged with our wholly-owned subsidiary, Amazon Goldsands Ltd., pursuant to Articles of 
Merger that we filed with the Nevada Secretary of State.  We decided to change our name to "Amazon Goldsands Ltd." to better reflect 
our current focus on the acquisition and development of the mineral rights on properties located in South America.  We are an 
exploration-stage company and there is no assurance that commercially exploitable reserves of gold exists on any of our property 
interests.  In the event that commercially exploitable reserves of gold exist on any of our property interests, we cannot guarantee that we 
will make a profit.  If we cannot acquire or locate gold deposits, or if it is not economical to recover the gold deposits, our business and 
operations will be materially and adversely affected.   
  
For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 
  
Revenues
We have not generated any revenues from our operations in either of the past two fiscal years.
Operating Expenses
We reported operating expenses in the amount of $829,031 for the year ended December 31, 2009, compared to a credit
balance of operating expenses of $964,069 for the year ended December 31, 2008.  Operating expenses were significantly lower for the 
year ended December 31, 2008, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2009, as a result of stock-based compensation being 
credited back to operations in the amount of $2,048,882 for the year ended December 31, 2008 attributable the cancellation of stock 
options during the reporting period.  Excluding consulting and management fees, which include stock-based compensation, operating 
expenses for the year ended December 31, 2009 decreased to $458,315 from $1,084,813 for the year ended December 31, 2008.
- 26 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 29 of 81
Table of Contents
This decrease in reported expenses was primarily attributable to a decrease in mineral property exploration expenditures and
expenses associated with investor communication and promotion activities.  We incurred property exploration expenditures of 
$191,937, for the year ended December 31, 2009, compared to $380,685 for the year ended December 31, 2008.  The decrease in 
mineral property exploration expenditures is attributable to management’s decision not to proceed with the exercise of options to 
acquire certain mineral property interests located in Finland.  Our expenditures were also lower as a result of our limited resources 
during the reporting period. We incurred investor communication and promotion expenditures of $61,347, for the year ended December 
31, 2009, compared to $251,304 for the year ended December 31, 2008.  The decrease in investor communication and promotion 
expenditures is attributable to management curtailing these expenditures due to our limited resources. 
  
Other Items
We  reported  other  loss of  $8,597  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2009  and  other  income  of  $18,996  for  the  year  ended
December 31, 2008.  Other income during the year ended December 31, 2008 consisted of interest income, forgiveness of debt and the
expense for the write-down of assets.     
  
Net (Income) Loss
We had net income of $1,482,243 for the year ended December 31, 2009, as compared to net income of $983,065 for the year
ended December 31, 2008.  We had a future income tax recovery of $2,319,871 as a result of applying previously unrecognized future
income tax assets against the future income tax liability from the acquisition of Beardmore Holdings, Inc. 
  
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2009, we had cash and cash equivalents of $4,214, compared to $492,903 at December 31, 2008, and a
working capital deficit of $808,681, compared to working capital of $186,455 at December 31, 2008.  Our proposed plan of exploration 
anticipates that we will incur exploration related expenditures of $1,015,000 over the next twelve months.  We will be required to make 
a payment of at least $1,000,000 if we are able to increase our ownership interest in the Mineral Rights from a fifty percent interest to a 
seventy-five percent interest and a payment of at least $2,500,000 if we are able to further increase our interest in the Mineral Rights 
from a seventy-five percent interest to a one hundred percent interest.  We anticipate spending approximately $70,000 in ongoing 
general and administrative expenses per month for the next twelve months, for a total anticipated expenditure of $840,000 over the next 
twelve months.  The general and administrative expenses for the year will consist primarily of professional fees for the audit and legal 
work relating to our regulatory filings throughout the year, as well as transfer agent fees and general office expenses.  Our current cash 
on hand is insufficient to be able to make our planned exploration expenditures and to pay for our general administrative expenses over 
the next twelve months.  Accordingly, we must obtain additional financing in order to continue our plan of operations during and 
beyond the next twelve months. We believe that debt financing will not be an alternative for funding additional phases of exploration as 
we have limited tangible assets to secure any debt financing. We anticipate that additional funding will be in the form of equity 
financing from the sale of our common stock.  We are currently seeking additional funding in the form of equity financing from the sale 
of our common stock, but cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of 
our common stock to fund our complete exploration program. In the absence of such financing, we will not be able to pursue our 
exploration program and maintain our mineral property interests in good standing.  If we do not fulfill the terms of any of these option 
agreements according to our business plan, then our ability to commence or continue operations could be materially limited.  We also 
may be forced to abandon our mineral property interests.   If we are unable to raise additional capital in the near future, we will 
experience liquidity problems and management expects that we will need to curtail operations, liquidate assets, seek additional capital 
on less favorable terms and/or pursue other remedial measures.
We may consider entering into a joint venture arrangement to provide the required funding to explore the properties 
underlying our mineral property interests. We have not undertaken any efforts to locate a joint venture participant. Even if we 
determine to pursue a joint venture participant, there is no assurance that any third party would enter into a joint venture agreement with 
us in order to fund exploration of the properties underlying our mineral property interests. If we enter into a joint venture arrangement, 
we would likely have to assign a percentage of our interest in our mineral property interests to the joint venture participant.
- 27 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 30 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Operating  activities  in  the  year  ended  December  31,  2009  and  2008  used  cash  of  $307,740  and  $1,790,069,  respectively,
which reflect our recurring operating losses.  General and administrative expenses, including mineral property exploration expenditures,
for year ended December 31, 2009 was the primary reason for our negative operating cash flow. 
  
Cash Used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2009, we used $298,031 in investing activities, as compared to $288,467 used in investing
activities during the year ended December 31, 2008.  For the year ended December 31, 2009, we expended $249,422 for the acquisition 
of mineral rights and $48,609 on mineral property exploration, as compared to $8,467 for purchase of equipment, $30,000 for website 
development costs and $250,000 for the acquisition of mineral rights for the year ended December 31, 2008. 
  
Cash from Financing Activities
As we have had no revenues since inception, we have financed our operations primarily by using existing capital reserves and 
through private placements of our stock.  Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2009 was 
$117,082, all of which was from received from subscriptions for shares of our common stock.  Net cash flows provided by financing 
activities for the year ended December 31, 2008 was $613,583, all of which was from proceeds from the issuance of common stock. 
  
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet debt nor did we have any transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent 
obligations) or other relationships with any unconsolidated entities or other persons that may have material current or future effect on 
financial conditions, changes in the financial conditions, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, capital resources, or 
significant components of revenue or expenses. 
  
Going Concern
We have incurred net losses for the period from inception on September 5, 1997 to December 31, 2009 of $9,714,204 and have
no source of revenue.  The continuity of our future operations is dependent on our ability to obtain financing and upon future 
acquisition, exploration and development of profitable operations from our mineral properties.  These conditions raise substantial doubt 
about our ability to continue as a going concern. 
  
Critical Accounting Policies
In December 2001, the SEC requested that all registrants list their most “critical accounting polices” in the Management
Discussion and Analysis.  The SEC indicated that a “critical accounting policy” is one which is both important to the portrayal of a 
company’s financial condition and results, and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result 
of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.  We believe the following critical accounting 
estimates affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements: 
  
Cash and cash equivalents
We consider all highly liquid instruments with a maturity of three months or less at the time of issuance to be cash
equivalents.  As at December 31, 2009, the Company has cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $4,214 (December 31, 2008 – 
$492,903). 
  
Website and software development costs
We recognize the costs incurred in the development of our website in accordance with ASC 350-50, “Website Development
Costs”.  Accordingly, direct costs incurred during the application stage of development are capitalized and amortized over the estimated 
useful life of three years on a straight line basis.  Fees incurred for website hosting are expensed over the period of the benefit.  Costs of 
operating a website are expensed as incurred.
- 28 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 31 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Property and equipment
estimated useful lives as follows:
estimated future benefits to the Company. 
  
Mineral property costs
Furniture, computer equipment, office equipment and computer software are carried at cost and are amortized over their
Furniture, computer and office equipment             30% 
Computer software                                                   100% 
  
The property and equipment is written down to its net realizable value if it is determined that its carrying value exceeds
Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized as tangible assets when purchased.  At the end of each fiscal quarter
end, we assess the carrying costs for impairment.  If proven and probable reserves are established for a property and it has been 
determined that a mineral property can be economically developed, costs will be amortized using the units-of-production method over 
the estimated life of the probable reserve.
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred.
Estimated future removal and site restoration costs, when determinable are provided over the life of proven reserves on a units-
of-production basis.  Costs, which include production equipment removal and environmental remediation, are estimated each period by 
management based on current regulations, actual expenses incurred, and technology and industry standards.  Any charge is included in 
exploration expense or the provision for depletion and depreciation during the period and the actual restoration expenditures are 
charged to the accumulated provision amounts as incurred.
As of the date of these consolidated financial statements, we have not established any proven or probable reserves on our
mineral properties and incurred only acquisition and exploration costs.
Although we have taken steps to verify title to mineral properties in which it has an interest, according to the usual industry 
standards for the stage of exploration of such properties, these procedures do not guarantee the Company’s title.  Such properties may 
be subject to prior agreements or transfers and title may be affected by undetected defects. 
  
Environmental costs
Environmental expenditures that are related to current operations are charged to operations or capitalized as
appropriate.  Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations, and which do not contribute to current or future 
revenue generation, are charged to operations.  Liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments and/or remedial efforts are 
probable, and the cost can be reasonably estimated.  Generally, the timing of these accruals coincides with the earlier of completion of a 
feasibility study or our commitments to a plan of action based on the then known facts.
- 29 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 32 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Comprehensive loss
ASC 220, “Comprehensive Income”, establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive loss and its
components in the financial statements.  As at December 31, 2009 and 2008, we have no items that represent a comprehensive loss and, 
therefore, has not included a schedule of comprehensive loss in the consolidated financial statements. 
  
Foreign currency translation
Our functional and reporting currency is U.S. dollars.  The consolidated financial statements of the Company are translated to
U.S. dollars in accordance with ASC 830, “Foreign Currency Matters.”  Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies are translated using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date.  Gains and losses arising on translation or 
settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income.  The Company has 
not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency 
fluctuations. 
  
Stock-based compensation
Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted the provisions of ASC 718, “Compensation – Stock Compensation”, which establishes 
accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services.  Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation cost 
is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense over the employees’ 
requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant).  We adopted ASC 718 using the modified prospective 
method, which requires us to record compensation expense over the vesting period for all awards granted after the date of adoption, and 
for the unvested portion of previously granted awards that remain outstanding at the date of adoption.  Accordingly, financial 
statements for the periods prior to January 1, 2006 have not been restated to reflect the fair value method of expensing share-based 
compensation.   Adoption of ASC 718 does not change the way we account for share-based payments to non-employees, with guidance 
provided by ASC 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-Employees”. 
  
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per share
We compute net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”.  ASC 260 requires presentation
of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement.  Basic EPS is computed by dividing net 
income (loss) available to common shareholders (numerator) by the weighted average number of shares outstanding (denominator) 
during the period.  Diluted EPS gives effect to all dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury 
stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method.  In computing diluted EPS, the average stock price for the 
period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the exercise of stock options or warrants.  Diluted 
EPS excluded all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive. 
  
Income taxes
Deferred income taxes are reported for timing differences between items of income or expense reported in the financial
statements and those reported for income tax purposes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”, which requires the use of the 
asset/liability method of accounting for income taxes.  Deferred income taxes and tax benefits are recognized for the future tax 
consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their 
respective tax bases, and for tax losses and credit carry-forwards.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax 
rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.  We 
provide for deferred taxes for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carry-forwards when realization 
is more likely than not. 
  
Long-lived assets impairment
Long-term assets of the Company are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying 
amount of assets may not be recoverable, pursuant to guidance established in ASC 360-10-35-15, “Impairment or Disposal of Long-
Lived Assets”.  Management considers assets to be impaired if the carrying value exceeds the future projected cash flows from related 
operations (undiscounted and without interest charges).  If impairment is deemed to exist, the assets will be written down to fair 
value.  Fair value is generally determined using a discounted cash flow analysis.
- 30 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 33 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Asset retirement obligations
We have adopted ASC 410, “Assets Retirement and Environmental Obligations”, which requires that the fair value of a
liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in which it is incurred.  ASC 410 requires us to record a liability 
for the present value of the estimated site restoration costs with corresponding increase to the carrying amount of the related long-lived 
assets.  The liability will be accreted and the asset will be depreciated over the life of the related assets.  Adjustments for changes 
resulting from the passage of time and changes to either the timing or amount of the original present value estimate underlying the 
obligation will be made.  As at December 31, 2009 and 2008, the Company does not have any asset retirement obligations. 
  
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial 
statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results may differ from those estimates. 
  
Financial instruments
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents and accounts payable approximates their fair value because of the short
maturity of these instruments.  Our operations are in Peru and Canada and virtually all of our assets and liabilities are giving rise to 
significant exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates.  Our financial risk is the risk that arises from fluctuations in 
foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates.  Currently, we do not use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure 
to foreign currency risk. 
  
International Financial Reporting Standards
In November 2008, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) issued for comment a proposed roadmap regarding
potential use of financial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board.  Under the proposed roadmap, we would be required to prepare financial statements in 
accordance with IFRS in fiscal year 2014, including comparative information also prepared under IFRS for fiscal 2013 and 2012.  We 
are currently assessing the potential impact of IFRS on our consolidated financial statements and will continue to follow the proposed 
roadmap for future developments. 
  
Changes in Accounting Policies
In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
(“SFAS”) No. 168, “The FASB Accounting Standards Codification and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principle – a 
replacement of FASB Statement No. 162”.  The Codification reorganized existing U.S. accounting and reporting standards issued by the 
FASB and other related private sector standard setter into a single source of authoritative accounting principles arranged by topic.  The 
Codification supersedes all existing U.S. accounting standards; all other accounting literature not included in the Codification (other 
than Securities and Exchange Commission guidance for publicly-traded companies) is considered non-authoritative.  The Codification 
was effective on a prospective basis for interim and annual reporting periods ending after September 15, 2009.  The adoption of the 
Codification changed our references to GAAP accounting standards but did not impact our results of operations, financial position or 
liquidity.
In May 2009, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for subsequent events.  The new guidance, which is now part of 
ASC 855, “Subsequent Events” is intended to establish general standards of accounting for and disclosure of events that occur after the 
balance sheet date, but before financial statements are issued or are available to be issued.  It requires the disclosure of the date through 
which an entity has evaluated subsequent events and the basis for that date.  This disclosure should alert all users of financial statements 
that an entity has not evaluated subsequent events after that date in the set of financial statements being presented.  The new guidance 
was effective on a prospective basis for interim or annual reporting periods ending after June 15, 2009.  The adoption of this guidance 
did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
- 31 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 34 of 81
Table of Contents
In May 2008, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash.  The
new guidance, which is now part of ASC 470-20, “Debt with Conversion and Other Options” requires the liability and equity 
components to be separately accounted for in a manner that will reflect the entity’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate.  We will 
allocate a portion of the proceeds received from the issuance of convertible notes between a liability and equity component by 
determining the fair value of the liability component using the Company’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate.  The difference between 
the proceeds of the notes and the fair value of the liability component will be recorded as a discount on the debt with a corresponding 
offset to paid-in capital.  The resulting discount will be accreted by recording additional non-cash interest expense over the expected 
life of the convertible notes using the effective interest rate method.  The new guidance was to be applied retrospectively to all periods 
presented upon those fiscal years.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial 
statements.
In April 2008, the FASB issued new guidance for determining the useful life of an intangible assets.  The new guidance, which 
is now part of ASC 350, “Intangibles – Goodwill and Other”.  In determining the useful life of intangible assets, ASC 350 removes the 
requirement to consider whether an intangible asset can be renewed without substantial cost of material modifications to the existing 
terms and conditions and, instead, requires an entity to consider its own historical experience in renewing similar arrangements.  ASC 
350 also requires expanded disclosure related to the determination of intangible asset useful lives.  The new guidance was effective for 
financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a material 
impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In March 2008, the FASB issued new guidance on the disclosure of derivative instruments and hedging activities.  The new 
guidance, which is now part of ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities” requires qualitative disclosures about objectives and 
strategies for using derivatives, quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of, and gains and losses on, derivative instruments, 
and disclosures about credit-risk-related contingent features in derivative agreements.  The new guidance was effective prospectively 
for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008, with early application encouraged.  The adoption of 
this guidance did not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2007, the FASB issued revised guidance for accounting for business combinations.  The revised guidance, which
is now part of ASC 805, “Business Combinations” requires the fair value measurement of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any 
noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, at the acquisition date with limited exceptions.  Previously, a cost allocation approach was used 
to allocate the cost of the acquisition based on the estimated fair value of the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed.  The 
cost allocation approach treated acquisition-related costs and restructuring costs that the acquirer expected to incur as a liability on the 
acquisition date, as part of the cost of the acquisition.  Under the revised guidance, those costs are recognized in the consolidated 
statement of income separately from the business combination.  The revised guidance applies to business combinations for which the 
acquisition date is on or after the beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or after December 15, 2008.    The 
adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2007, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for noncontrolling interests.  The new guidance, which is 
now part of ASC 810, “Consolidation” establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by 
parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent’s 
ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated.  The new 
guidance also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguishes between the interests of the parent and the 
interests of the noncontrolling owners.  The new guidance was effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008.  The 
adoption of this guidance did not have a material effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 
  
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2009, the FASB issued SFAS No. 167, “Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R)”.  SFAS No. 167, which
amends ASC 810-10, “Consolidation”, prescribes a qualitative model for identifying whether a company has a controlling financial 
interest in a variable interest entity (“VIE”) and eliminates the quantitative model.  The new model identifies two primary 
characteristics of a controlling financial interest: (1) provides a company with the power to direct significant activities of the VIE, and 
(2) obligates a company to absorb losses of and/or provides rights to receive benefits from the VIE.  SFAS No. 167 requires a company 
to reassess on an ongoing basis whether it holds a controlling financial interest in a VIE.  A company that holds a controlling financial 
interest is deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the VIE and is required to consolidate the VIE.  SFAS No. 167, which is referenced 
in ASC 105-10-65, has not yet been adopted into the Codification and remains authoritative.  SFAS No. 167 is effective January 1, 
2010. We do not expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 167 will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
- 32 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 35 of 81
Table of Contents
In June 2009, the FASB issued SFAS No. 166, “Accounting for Transfer of Financial Assets – an amendment of FASB
Statement”.  SFAS No. 166 removes the concept of a qualifying special-purpose entity from ASC 860-10, “Transfers and Servicing”, 
and removes the exception from applying ASC 810-10, “Consolidation”. This statements also clarifies the requirements for isolation 
and limitations on portions of financial assets that are eligible for sale acconting.  SFAS No. 166, which is referenced in ASC 105-10-
65, has not yet been adopted into the Codification and remains authoritative.  This statement is effective January 1, 2010.  We do not 
expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 166 will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2009, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2009-05, “Fair Value Measurement and
Disclosure (Topic 820) – Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value”, which provides valuation techniques to measure fair value in 
circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liability is not available.  The guidance provided in this 
update is effective January 1, 2010.  We do not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact on our 
consolidated financial statements.
Other ASUs that have been issued or proposed by the FASB ASC that do not require adoption until a future date are not
expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements upon adoption. 
  
ITEM 7A.       Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.
Not applicable.
ITEM 8.         Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The financial statements are listed in Part IV Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are incorporated by reference in
this Item 8. 
  
ITEM 9.        Changes In and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
ITEM 9A.      Controls and Procedures. 
  
Conclusion Regarding the Effectiveness of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer, we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures, 
as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  Based on their evaluation as of December 31, 
2009, the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our principal executive officer and principal financial officer 
concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective at a reasonable assurance level to ensure that the information 
required to be disclosed in reports filed or submitted under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including this Annual Report, were 
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and was accumulated and 
communicated to management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely 
decisions regarding required disclosure.
- 33 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 36 of 81
Table of Contents
  
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.  Our
internal control over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and 
the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and includes 
those policies and procedures that:
•  Pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that  in  reasonable  detail  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and
dispositions of the assets of the Company;
•  Provide reasonable assurance that the transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being
made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and
•  Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of
the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
All internal control systems, no matter how well designed, have inherent limitations.  Therefore, even those systems
determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement preparation and 
presentation.  Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect 
misstatements.  Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become 
inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In connection with the filing of our Annual Report on Form 10-K, our management assessed the effectiveness of our internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2009.  In making this assessment, our management used the criteria set forth by 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal Control—Integrated Framework.  Based on our 
assessment using those criteria, management believes that, as of December 31, 2009, our internal control over financial reporting is 
effective based on those criteria.
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our Company's registered public accounting firm regarding internal
control over financial reporting.  Management's report was not subject to attestation by our registered public accounting firm pursuant
to temporary rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission that permit us to provide only management's report in this annual report.
  
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal controls over financial reporting during the quarter ended December 31, 2009, that
have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal controls over financial reporting. 
  
ITEM 9B.        Other Information.
None.
- 34 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
Page 37 of 81
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
positions.
Name 
Kenneth Phillippe 
John Keenan 
Robert Van Tassell
ITEM 10.      Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
PART III
The following information sets forth the names of our current director and executive officers, their ages and their present
Age 
58  Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary & Treasurer 
61  Vice President of Exploration
74  Director
Position
Served 
Since
2009
2008
2006
Kenneth Phillippe.  Mr. Phillippe previously served as our Secretary, Treasurer, Chief Financial Officer and Principal
Accounting Officer from October 2006 to September 2008. Mr. Phillippe is a Chartered Accountant with over 25 years experience 
working with public companies in the capacities of director, officer, financial advisor or consultant. Mr. Phillippe obtained a Bachelor 
of Commerce degree from the University of British Columbia in 1976. He articled with Thorne Riddell (now KPMG) and obtained his 
professional accounting designation in 1981. In 1982, Mr. Phillippe established his own accounting practice. Between February 2000 
and August 2005 he served in various positions including director, officer and chair of the audit committee of MDX Medical Inc., a 
Vancouver-based medical device company. Between January and December 2006, Mr. Phillippe served as chief financial officer of 
Columbia Goldfields Ltd., a junior gold mining company that is a reporting company under the Exchange Act. Since March 2006, Mr. 
Phillippe has served as Chief Financial Officer of Exchequer Resource Corp. (TSX-V (NEX)). Since October 2006, Mr. Phillippe has 
served as Chief Financial Officer and Secretary of Bold Ventures Inc., which was listed on the TSX-V on October 29, 2007. In 
addition, Mr. Phillippe has served as the Secretary, Treasurer, Chief Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer of Constitution 
Mining Corp. since May 14, 2009 and previously held these positions from December 13, 2007 to August 20, 2008.
John Keenan.  Mr. Keenan has served as our Vice President of Exploration since October 3, 2008.  Mr. Keenan has
approximately 39 years experience working as a geologist.  Mr. Keenan obtained a Bachelor of Science degree in Geology from the 
University of London in 1969 and a Master of Science in Mineral exploration from the Imperial College Royal School of Mines in 
London in 1971.  Since May 2008, Mr. Keenan has also served as the Papua New Guinea representative for Tasman Goldfields Ltd. 
and is responsible for directing its exploration activities.  Since February 2006, Mr. Keenan has served as an Exploration Manager for 
Buffalo Gold Ltd. in Papua New Guinea and is responsible for supervising and directing exploration activities.  From August 2003 to 
January 2006, Mr. Keenan served as a contract geologist for Triumph Gold Corporation where his responsibilities included directing 
exploration programs for properties located in Venezuela.  Between August 2003 and July 2004, Mr. Keenan worked as an independent 
geological and geotechnical consultant for various gold exploration projects in South America and geotechnical investigations in the 
Caribbean islands. 
  
                 Robert Van Tassell.  Mr. Van Tassell has served on our Board of Directors since December 2006. Mr. Van Tassell has been 
involved in the Canadian mining industry for over fifty years. Before retiring from full-time ventures in 1998, he spent the prior sixteen 
years (1982-1998) as Vice President of Exploration for the precious metals venture Goldcorp Inc., formerly known as Dickenson 
Mines. Exploration teams led by Mr. Van Tassell are credited with such significant discoveries as the Husky Mine, the Minto copper 
deposit currently being mined by Captstone Mining , and more recently, Goldcorp's High Grade Zone. From 1984 through 1993, Mr. 
Van Tassell served as a board member of the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada (PDAC), including as Chairman of the 
PDAC's Program and Environmental Committees. Mr. Van Tassell also served as a director of the Yukon Chamber of mines for eleven 
years, two of them as President. He served four terms on the board of the Northern Resource Conferences, two of them as Chairman, 
and has taught introductory and advanced prospecting courses for the Chamber of Mines. He is a Life Member of the CIM and a 
member of the Geological Association of Canada.
Mr. Van Tassell has been credited with leading the discovery of several mines in Canada and has served as Vice President of
Exploration with a world leading mining company.  Mr. Van Tassell brings to our Board a depth of understanding as to our company’s 
business, history and organization and the various challenges we face in the current economic environment.
- 35 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 38 of 81
Table of Contents
Our Directors are elected annually and hold office until the next annual meeting of our stockholders or until their successors
are elected and qualified. Officers are elected annually and serve at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Board vacancies are filled
by a majority vote of the Board.   
  
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between or among the directors, executive officers or persons nominated or chosen by us to
become directors or executive officers. 
  
Audit Committee
We do not have a separately-designated standing audit committee.  The Board of Directors performs the functions of an audit 
committee, but no written charter governs the actions of the Board when performing the functions of that would generally be performed 
by an audit committee.  The Board approves the selection of our independent accountants and meets and interacts with the independent 
accountants to discuss issues related to financial reporting.  In addition, the Board reviews the scope and results of the audit with the 
independent accountants, reviews with management and the independent accountants our annual operating results, considers the 
adequacy of our internal accounting procedures and considers other auditing and accounting matters including fees to be paid to the 
independent auditor and the performance of the independent auditor.
For the fiscal year ending December 31, 2009, the Board:
•  Reviewed and discussed the audited consolidated financial statements with management, and
•  Reviewed and discussed the written disclosures and the letter from our independent auditors on the matters relating to the
auditor's independence.
Based upon the Board’s review and discussion of the matters above, the Board authorized inclusion of the audited
consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2009 to be included in the Annual Report on Form 10-K and filed 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Our Board of Directors examined the Commission's definition of "audit committee financial expert" and concluded that we do 
not currently have a person that qualifies as such an expert.  Currently, there is only one director serving on our Board, and we are not 
in a position at this time to attract, retain and compensate additional directors in order to acquire a director who qualifies as an "audit 
committee financial expert," but we intend to retain an additional director who will qualify as such an expert, as soon as reasonably 
practicable.  While our current director does not meet the qualifications of an "audit committee financial expert," he has, by virtue of his 
past employment experience, knowledge of financial statements, finance, and accounting, and has significant employment experience 
involving financial oversight responsibilities. Accordingly, we believe that our current director capably fulfills his duties and 
responsibilities in the absence of such an expert. 
  
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting
Section 16(a) of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, requires our executive officers and directors, and persons who own 
more than ten percent (10%) of our common stock, to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission reports of ownership of, and 
transactions in, our securities and to provide us with copies of those filings.  To our knowledge, based solely on our review of the 
copies of such forms received by us, or written representations from certain reporting persons, we believe that during the year ended 
December 31, 2009, all filing requirements applicable to our officers, directors and greater than ten percent beneficial owners were 
complied with, with the following exceptions: Mr. Phillippe failed to file his initial report on Form 3 in a timely fashion during fiscal 
2009. 
  
Code of Ethics and Conduct
Our Board of Directors has adopted a Code of Ethics and Conduct that is applicable to all of our employees, officers and
directors.  Our Code of Ethics and Conduct is intended to ensure that our employees act in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards.  The Code of Ethics and Conduct was filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for the fiscal year ended 
December 31, 2005.
- 36 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 39 of 81
Table of Contents
  
ITEM 11.     Executive Compensation.
The following table presents information concerning the total compensation of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, Chief
Financial Officer and the other most highly compensated officers during the last fiscal year (the “Named Executive Officers”) for 
services rendered to the Company in all capacities for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008:
Summary Compensation Table
Name (a) 
Hector Ponte  
Former CEO, Former President (3) 
Carlos Stocker 
Former CFO, Former Secretary, Former 
Treasurer (4) 
John Keenan  
Vice President of Exploration 
Gustavo Janeiro 
Former CFO, Former Secretary, Former 
Treasurer (5) 
Kenneth Phillippe  
CEO, CFO, Secretary, Treasurer (6)
Year 
2009 
2008 
2009 
2008
2009 
2008 
2009 
2008
Salary 
($) (1)
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
Bonus 
($) (1)
- 
-
- 
-
Stock 
Awards
($)
- 
-
- 
-
Option 
Awards
($) 
- 
- 
- 
-
All Other
Compensation
($) (2)
58,435
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
2009 
2008
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
37,800 
37,830
Total 
($)
58,435
-
- 
-
- 
-
- 
-
37,800 
37,830
___________ 
(1)  No executive officers received any salary or bonus during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2009 or 2008.
(2)  The amounts listed under the Column entitled “All Other Compensation” in the “Summary Compensation Table” related
to consulting fees paid during 2008.
(3)  Mr. Ponte served as our Chief Executive Officer from July 24, 2008 until his resignation on November 9, 2009.
(4)  Mr. Stocker served as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary, and Treasurer from September 18, 2008 until his resignation
on June 3, 2009.
(5)  Mr. Janeiro served as our Chief Financial Officer, Secretary, and Treasurer from July 2, 2009 until his resignation from
this position on November 9, 2009.
(6)  Mr. Phillippe served as our Treasurer, Chief Financial Officer and Secretary from October 25, 2006 until his resignation
on  September  18,  2008.  On  November  17,  2009,  he  was  appointed  as  our  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Chief  Financial
Officer, Principal Executive Officer, President, Secretary, and Treasurer.
Compensation Components
Base Salary.  At this time, we do not compensate our executive officers by the payment of salaries.
Bonuses.  At this time, we do not compensate our executive officers by the payment of bonus compensation.
Stock Options.  Stock option awards are determined by the Board of Directors based on numerous factors, some of which
include responsibilities incumbent with the role of each executive to the Company and tenure with the Company.  We did not grant any 
stock options to our executive officers during 2009.
At no time during the last fiscal year was any outstanding option repriced or otherwise modified. There was no tandem feature, 
reload feature, or tax-reimbursement feature associated with any of the stock options we granted to our executive officers or otherwise.
Other. At this time, we have no profit sharing plan in place.
- 37 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 40 of 81
Table of Contents
  
  
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year-End
Stock Option Plans
There were no outstanding equity awards issued to any of our named executive officers at December 31, 2009.
In 2007, our Board adopted the 2007 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Stock Incentive Plan”). The Stock Incentive Plan authorizes us
to reserve shares for future grants under it, of which 500,000 shares remain available for issuance.
The Stock Incentive Plan authorizes us to grant (i) to the key employees incentive stock options to purchase shares of common
stock and non-qualified stock options to purchase shares of common stock and restricted stock awards, and (ii) to non-employee 
directors and consultants’ non-qualified stock options and restricted stock. The Plan Administrator will administer the Plan by making 
recommendations to the board or determinations regarding the persons to whom options or restricted stock should be granted and the 
amount, terms, conditions and restrictions of the awards.
Incentive stock options granted under the Stock Incentive Plan must have an exercise price at least equal to 100% of the fair 
market value of the common stock as of the date of grant. Incentive stock options granted to any person who owns, immediately after 
the grant, stock possessing more than 10% of the combined voting power of all classes of our stock, or of any parent or subsidiary 
corporation, must have an exercise price at least equal to 110% of the fair market value of the common stock on the date of grant. Non-
statutory stock options may have exercise prices as determined by the Plan Administrator.
The Plan Administrator is also authorized to grant restricted stock awards under the Stock Incentive Plan. A restricted stock 
award is a grant of shares of the common stock that is subject to restrictions on transferability, risk of forfeiture and other restrictions 
and that may be forfeited in the event of certain terminations of employment or service prior to the end of a restricted period specified 
by the Plan Administrator.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
as of December 31, 2009
Plan category 
Equity compensation plans approved by security holders
Equity compensation plans not approved by security holders
Total
Number of securities
to be issued
upon exercise of 
outstanding options,
warrants and rights
(a)
Weighted-average 
exercise price of 
outstanding options,
warrants and rights 
 
-  
-  
-
(b)
- $
- $
- $
Number of securities 
remaining available for 
future issuance under
equity compensation plans
(excluding securities 
reflected in column (a))
(c)
-
500,000
500,000
Compensation of Directors 
  
           Our directors did not receive any compensation for their service during the year ended December 31, 2009.  No options were
granted or exercised in 2009. 
  
Employment Contracts; Termination of Employment and Change-in-Control Arrangements
We do not have any employment agreements with any of our executive officers.
- 38 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 41 of 81
Table of Contents
 
ITEM 12.      Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The following table sets forth, as of April 7, 2010, the number and percentage of outstanding shares of common stock
beneficially owned by (a) each person known by us to beneficially own more than five percent of such stock, (b) each director of the 
Company, (c) each named officer of the Company, and (d) all our directors and executive officers as a group. We have no other class of 
capital stock outstanding.
*
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner (1) 
Directors and Executive Officers
Kenneth Phillippe 
John Keenan 
Robert Van Tassell
Temasek Investments Inc. 
Suite 1-A, #5 
Calle Eusebio A. Morales 
El Cangrejo, Panama City 
Panama
Represents less than 1% of the class.
Amount and Nature of Beneficial
Ownership
Options
Exercisable 
Within 60 
Days (3)
Shares
Owned (2)
Percent of
Class
0   
0   
5,000   
5,000
2,500,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
* 
*
6.8%
All current directors and executive officers as a group (three persons)
More Than 5% Beneficial Owners
(1)  Unless otherwise provided, the address of each person is c/o Jiron Caracas 2226, Jesús María, Lima 11, Perú
  
(2)  Except as otherwise indicated, all shares shown in the table are owned with sole voting and investment power.
  
(3)  This column represents shares not included in “Shares Owned” that may be acquired by the exercise of options within 60 days of
March 10, 2010.
The above beneficial ownership information is based on information furnished by the specified persons and is determined in 
accordance with Rule 13d-3 under the Exchange Act, as required for purposes of this annual report; accordingly, it includes shares of 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. common stock that are issuable upon the exercise of stock options exercisable within 60 days of April 7, 2010. 
Such information is not necessarily to be construed as an admission of beneficial ownership for other purposes.
- 39 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 42 of 81
Table of Contents
  
ITEM 13.     Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
Except as set forth below, none of our directors or executive officers, nor any proposed nominee for election as a director, nor
any person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares carrying more than 5% of the voting rights attached to all of our 
outstanding shares, nor any members of the immediate family (including spouse, parents, children, siblings, and in-laws) of any of the 
foregoing persons has any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction since the beginning of our last fiscal year on January 1, 
2009 or in any presently proposed transaction which, in either case, has or will materially affect us.
As described above in Item 2 of this annual report, we entered into a Mineral Right Option Agreement with Temasek
Investments Inc. (“Temasek”), a company incorporated under the laws of Panama, on September 18, 2008 (the “Effective Date”), as 
amended and supplemented by Amendment No. 1 dated May 12, 2009 (“Amendment No. 1”) and Amendment No. 2 dated February 3, 
2010 (“Amendment No. 2”) (collectively, the “Option Agreement”).  Pursuant to the Option Agreement, we acquired four separate 
options from Temasek, each providing for the acquisition of a twenty-five percent interest in certain mineral rights (the "Mineral 
Rights") in certain properties in Peru (the “Peru Property”) potentially resulting in our acquisition of one hundred percent of the Mineral 
Rights.  We exercised the initial option to acquire a twenty-five percent interest in the Mineral Rights by paying to Temasek a total of 
$500,000 and issuing to Temasek 2,500,000 shares of our common stock, which resulted in Temasek owning more than 5% of our 
common stock.  On June 23, 2009, we issued 3,500,000 shares of our common stock to Temasek and its designees as partial 
consideration for the exercise of the second twenty-five percent option to acquire an aggregate fifty percent interest in the Mineral 
Rights.  On March 9, 2010 we issued 5,000,000 shares of our common stock to Temesak and its designees and paid Temasek 
$1,000,000 on March 22, 2010.  In order to acquire one hundred percent of the Mineral Rights, we will be required to pay Temasek an 
aggregate of an additional $3,500,000 in cash and 5,500,000 shares of our common stock. 
  
ITEM 14.     Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
The following table is a summary of the fees billed to us by James Stafford, Chartered Accountants and by I Vellmer Inc.,
Chartered Accountants for professional services for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2009 and for professional services for the fiscal 
year ended December 31, 2008:
Fee Category 
Audit Fees
Audit-Related Fees
Tax Fees
All Other Fees
Total Fees
$
   
   
   
   
  $
Fiscal 
2009 Fees
Fiscal 
2008 Fees
$
34,214
-
-
-
46,467
-
-
-
34,214    $
46,467
Audit Fees. Consists of fees billed for professional services rendered for the audit of our consolidated financial statements and
review of the interim consolidated financial statements included in quarterly reports and services that are normally provided by our 
independent registered public accounting firms in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
Audit-Related Fees. Consists of fees billed for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to the performance of 
the audit or review of our consolidated financial statements and are not reported under “Audit Fees.” These services include employee 
benefit plan audits, accounting consultations in connection with acquisitions, attest services that are not required by statute or 
regulation, and consultations concerning financial accounting and reporting standards.
- 40 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 43 of 81
Table of Contents
Tax Fees. Consists of fees billed for professional services for tax compliance, tax advice and tax planning. These services
include assistance regarding federal, state and international tax compliance, tax audit defense, customs and duties, mergers and 
acquisitions, and international tax planning.
All Other Fees. Consists of fees for products and services other than the services reported above. In fiscal 2009 and 2008,
Our practice is to consider and approve in advance all proposed audit and non-audit services to be provided by our
these services included administrative services.
independent registered public accounting firm.
The audit report of James Stafford, Chartered Accountants on the consolidated financial statements of the Company for the 
year ended December 31, 2009 did not contain an adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion, and was not qualified or modified as to 
uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principles, except that the audit reports on the consolidated financial statements of the Company 
for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2009 and December 31, 2008 contained an uncertainty about the Company’s ability to continue 
as a going concern.
During our fiscal year ended December 31, 2009, there were no disagreements with James Stafford, Chartered Accountants, on 
any matter of accounting principles or practices, financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedures, which disagreements if 
not resolved to James Stafford, Chartered Accountants’ satisfaction would have caused it to make reference to the subject matter of 
such disagreements in connection with its reports on the consolidated financial statements for such period.  During our fiscal year ended 
December 31, 2008, there were no disagreements with I Vellmer Inc., Chartered Accountants on any matter of accounting principles or 
practices, financial statement disclosure, or auditing scope or procedures, which disagreements if not resolved to I Vellmer Inc., 
Chartered Accountants’ satisfaction would have caused it to make reference to the subject matter of such disagreements in connection 
with its report on the consolidated financial statements for such periods.
During our fiscal years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, there were no reportable events (as described in Item 304(a)(1)(v)
of Regulation S-K).
- 41 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
ITEM 15.      Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules. 
  
(a)(1)
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PART IV
Consolidated Balance Sheets - December 31, 2009 and 2008
  
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 and from
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
  
Financial Statements:
Inception on September 5, 1997 to December 31, 2009
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 and from 
Inception on September 5, 1997 to December 31, 2009
  
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity from Inception on September 5, 1997 to
December 31, 2009
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Page 44 of 81
Page (s)
F-1
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
- 42 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 45 of 81
Table of Contents
JAMES STAFFORD
James Stafford, Inc. 
Chartered Accountants 
Suite 350 – 1111 Melville Street 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Canada V6E 3V6 
Telephone +1 604 669 0711 
Facsimile +1 604 669 0754
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
 
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Amazon Goldsands Ltd. (An Exploration Stage Company) (the 
“Company”) as at 31 December 2009, and the related consolidated statements of operations, cash flows and changes in stockholders’ 
equity for the year then ended.  These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our 
responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audit. The consolidated financial 
statements of the Company as of 31 December 2008 and 2007 were audited by other auditors whose reports dated 31 March 2009 and 4 
April 2008, respectively, expressed an unqualified opinion on those statements. 
  
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States of 
America).  Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial 
statements are free of material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and 
disclosures in the financial statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made 
by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  We believe that our audit provides a reasonable 
basis for our opinion. 
  
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of 
the Company as of 31 December 2009 and the results of its operations, its cash flows and its changes in stockholders’ equity for the 
year then ended in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. 
 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going 
concern.  As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, conditions exist which raise substantial doubt about the 
Company’s ability to continue as a going concern unless it is able to generate sufficient cash flows to meet its obligations and sustain its 
operations.  Management’s plans regarding those matters are also described in Note 1. The consolidated financial statements do not 
include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
/s/ James Stafford                                        
Chartered Accountants
Vancouver, Canada 
  
15 March 2010, except for Note 14, as to which the date is 29 March 2010.
F - 1
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 46 of 81
Table of Contents
I. Vellmer Inc.  
Chartered Accountant*
721 – 602 W. Hastings Street  
Vancouver, B.C., V6B 1P2
Tel:
Fax:
E-mail:
604-687-3773 
604-687-3778  
vellmer@i-
vellmer.ca
*denotes an incorporated professional
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders of Amazon Goldsands Ltd.  
(Formerly Finmetal Mining Ltd.)  
(An Exploration Stage Company)  
 
I have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of Amazon Goldsands Ltd. (an exploration stage company) as at December
31, 2008 and the consolidated statements of operations, stockholders’ equity and cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2008 and
2007.  These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management.  My responsibility is to express an opinion on
these financial statements based on my audits.  
 
I conducted my audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).  Those
standards require that I plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement.  An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial
statements.  An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as
evaluating the overall financial statement presentation.  I believe that my audits provide a reasonable basis for my opinion.  
 
In my opinion, these financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Amazon Goldsands Ltd. as at
December 31, 2008 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.  
 
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern.  As discussed in
Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company’s business is in the exploration stage and has not generated any revenue to date.  The
Company will likely require new financing, either through issuing shares or debt, to continue in its business of acquiring, exploring and
developing  mineral  properties.  These  factors  together  raise  substantial  doubt  about  its  ability  to  continue  as  a  going  concern.
Management’s plans in regards to these matters are also discussed in Note 1. The financial statements do not include any adjustment
that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.  
 
 
Vancouver,  Canada                                                                                                                                                                                  “I 
Vellmer Inc.”  
March 31, 2009                                                                                                                                                                             
           Chartered Accountants
F - 2
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
  
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Page 47 of 81
As at
31 
December
2009
$
As at
31 
December
2008
$
4,214
7,361,401
25,964
24,167
17,125
10,833
499,259
875,000
7,393,573
4,214
-
-
492,903
4,394
1,962
Assets 
  
Current 
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 2) 
Taxes recoverable 
Prepaid expenses and deposit 
  
  
  
Mineral property interests (Note 4)
  
Property and equipment (Note 5) 
  
Website development cost (Note 6) 
  
  
  
Liabilities 
  
Current 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 3) 
  
Due to related parties (Note 8) 
  
  
  
Stockholders’ equity 
Common stock (Note 7) 
Authorized 
200,000,000 common shares, par value $0.00001 and
200,000,000 blank check preferred shares, par value $0.001
Issued and outstanding 
31 December 2009 – 13,103,585 common shares, par value $0.00001
31 December 2008 – 4,191,252 common shares, par value $0.00001
Share subscriptions received in advance (Note 7) 
Additional paid in capital 
Deficit, accumulated during the exploration stage 
  
  
  
Non-controlling interest (Note 13) 
  
  
  
  
1,424,390 
Nature, Basis of Presentation and Continuance of Operations (Note 1), Commitments (Note 9) and Subsequent Events (Note 14)
131
  
  
-
   12,809,984
42
613,583
11,694,408
(9,714,204)   (11,196,447)
1,424,390
1,111,586
3,095,911
1,111,586
3,375,000
812,895
109,767
922,662
6,470,911
7,393,573
312,804
-
312,804
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F - 3
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Operations 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Expenses 
Amortization – property and equipment 
Amortization – website development cost 
Bank charges and interest 
Consulting and management fees (recovery) (Note 8)
Foreign exchange (gain) loss 
Investor communication and promotion 
Office and administrative (recovery) 
Professional fees 
Rent 
Telephone 
Transfer agent and filing fees 
Travel and accommodation 
Website maintenance 
Mineral property exploration expenditures 
  
Net operating income (loss) before other items 
  
Other items 
Forgiveness of debt 
Gain on sale of oil and gas property 
Interest income 
Recovery of expenses 
Write-down of incorporation cost 
Write-down of assets 
  
Net operating income (loss) before income taxes 
  
Future income tax recovery 
  
Net operating income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss) for 
the period 
  
Basic and diluted income (loss) per common share 
  
Weighted average number of common shares 
 used in per share calculations
Page 48 of 81
For the
year ended
31 
December
2008
$
13,777
11,667
2,838
(2,048,882)
(2,412)
251,304
47,665
211,165
18,806
19,257
4,984
105,077
20,000
380,685
For the
year ended
31 
December
2007
$
9,004
3,334
2,246
6,282,962
(1,235)
262,776
43,032
161,509
15,438
30,598
10,778
172,533
18,000
2,583,124
964,069
(9,594,099)
15,000
-
9,510
-
-
(5,514)
-
-
82,642
-
-
-
983,065
(9,511,457)
-
983,065
0.39
-
(9,511,457)
(5.40)
1,762,782
For the 
period 
from the 
date 
of inception 
on 5 
September 
1997 to
31 
December
2009
(Unaudited)
$
32,484
29,168
9,597
4,931,292
20,831
618,571
116,335
576,211
54,416
54,659
42,290
377,754
66,000
5,235,144
(12,164,752)
39,000
10,745
102,561
4,982
(12,500)
(14,111)
(12,034,075)
2,319,871
(9,714,204)
For the
year ended
31 
December
 
2009 
$ 
  
      
  
8,839 
  
13,334 
  
1,516 
  
370,716 
  
4,485 
  
61,347 
(6,512)   
  
139,927 
  
12,000 
  
276 
5,048 
  
  
1,118 
  
25,000 
  
191,937 
      
(829,031)   
      
      
  
- 
- 
  
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
(8,597)   
      
(837,628)
2,319,871
1,482,243
0.15
10,110,386
2,537,534
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F - 4
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
  
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Cash flows used in operating activities 
Net income (loss) for the period
Adjustments to reconcile income (loss) to net cash used by 
operating activities
Amortization 
Consulting fees 
Forgiveness of debt 
Future income tax recovery 
Gain on sale of oil and gas property 
Mineral property acquisition 
Stock-based compensation (recovery) 
Write-down of assets
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
(Increase) decrease in taxes recoverable 
(Increase) decrease in exploration program advances
Decrease in prepaid expenses and deposits 
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Increase (decrease) in due to related parties
Cash flows from financing activities 
Shares subscriptions received in advance 
Cost of repurchase of common stock 
Proceeds from issuance of common stock, net of share issue costs 
  
  
Cash flows used in investing activities 
Proceeds from sale of oil and gas property 
Oil and gas property acquisitions 
Oil and gas exploration 
Mineral property exploration 
Business acquisition, net of cash received 
Purchase of equipment 
Website development cost 
  
  
  
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of period 
  
Cash and cash equivalents, end of period
Page 49 of 81
For the
year ended
31 
December 
 
2009 
$
1,482,243
For the
year ended
31 
December 
2008
$
For the
year ended
31 
December 
2007
$
983,065
(9,511,457)
22,173 
- 
-
4,394 
- 
1,962 
450,294 
51,065
(2,319,871)   
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
- 
  
      
  
  
  
  
  
      
(307,740)   
      
      
(613,583)   
  
  
      
  
      
  
- 
  
- 
  
- 
(48,609)   
(249,422)   
  
- 
- 
  
      
(298,031)   
      
(488,689)
- 
730,665
117,082
492,903
4,214
25,444
-
-
-
-
3,940
(2,519,736)
-
12,338
-
-
-
-
536,000
5,960,016
14,832
87,600
3,761
(334,610)
(54,365)
(4,981)
(87,600)
58,187
590,723
(39,198)
(1,790,069)
(2,485,972)
613,583
-
-
613,583
-
-
-
-
(250,000)
(8,467)
(30,000)
-
-
2,832,550
2,832,550
-
-
-
-
-
(37,536)
-
(288,467)
(37,536)
(1,464,953)
309,042
1,957,856
492,903
1,648,814
1,957,856
For the 
period 
from the 
date 
of inception 
on 5 
September 
1997
to 31 
December
 2009
(Unaudited)
$
(9,714,204)
61,652
40,200
(24,000)
(2,319,871)
(10,745)
1,816,000
3,587,000
3,940
-
-
-
763,098
51,065
(5,745,865)
-
(1,000)
6,371,915
6,370,915
46,200
(2,846)
(22,609)
(48,609)
(499,422)
(53,550)
(40,000)
(620,836)
4,214
-
4,214
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 50 of 81
Supplemental Disclosures with Respect to Cash Flows (Note 11)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F - 5
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 51 of 81
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity (Deficiency) 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Number 
of shares 
 
issued
Common 
stock 
$
Additional 
paid-in
capital
$
Deferred
stock-based 
compensation
$
Share 
subscriptions 
received in 
 
advance 
$
Deficit, 
accumulated 
during the 
exploration 
stage
$
Total 
stockholders’
equity 
(deficiency)
$
-
4,000
-
4,000
400
4,000
-
8,400
4,000
-
1
-
1
-
1
-
2
1
(4,000)
(1)
-
8,400
-
8,400
-
8,400
-
-
2
-
2
-
2
-
-
999
-
999
10,000
999
-
11,998
99,999
(999)
-
110,998
-
110,998
-
110,998
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(2,522)
-
1,000
(2,522)
(2,522)
(1,522)
-
-
(1,246)
10,000
1,000
(1,246)
(3,768)
8,232
100,000
-
(9,569)
(1,000)
(9,569)
(13,337)
97,663
(34,290)
(34,290)
(47,627)
63,373
(14,296)
(14,296)
(61,923)
10,954
49,077
10,954
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Balance at 5 
September 1997 
(inception)
Common shares 
issued for cash 
($0.25 per share) 
Net loss for the 
period
Balance at 30 
September 1997 
Common shares 
issued for 
acquisition of oil 
and gas properties 
($25 per share) 
Common shares 
issued for cash 
($0.25 per share) 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 1998 
Common shares 
issued for cash 
($25 per share) 
Common shares 
repurchased for 
cash ($0.25 per 
share) 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 1999 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 2000 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 2001
Net income for the 
year
Balance at 30
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
8,400
-
8,400
8,569 
-
-
16,969 
-
-
16,969
(4,000)
-
-
2
-
2
1 
-
-
3 
-
-
3
(1)
-
-
2
110,998
-
110,998
62,699
5,000
-
178,697
3,000
-
181,697
(999)
8,200
-
188,898
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Page 52 of 81
(50,969)
2,387
60,031
2,387
(48,582)
62,418
-
-
62,700
5,000
(64,175)
(64,175)
(112,757)
-
(7,750)
65,943
3,000
(7,750)
(120,507)
61,193
-
-
(1,000)
8,200
(40,652)
(40,652)
(161,159)
27,741
-
-
-
- 
-
-
- 
-
-
-
- 
-
-
-
mainbody.htm
September 2002
Net income for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 2003 
Common shares 
issued for cash 
($1.50 per share) 
and for services 
($6 per share) 
Donated capital 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 30 
September 2004 
Donated capital 
Net loss for the 
period
Balance at 31 
December 2004
Common shares 
repurchased ($0.25 
per share) 
Donated capital 
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 31 
December 2005
12,969
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F - 6
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity (Deficiency) 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Page 53 of 81
Number of 
shares 
issued
Common 
stock  
$
Additional 
paid-in
capital
$
Deferred
stock-based 
compensation
$
Share 
subscriptions 
received in 
advance
$
Deficit, 
accumulated 
during the 
exploration 
stage  
$
Non-
controlling 
interest
$
Total 
stockholders’
equity 
(deficiency)
$
Balance at 31 
December 2005
12,969
shares 
for  cash
(8,467)
Common 
issued 
($0.125 per share)     1,200,000   
Common shares 
cancelled 
Common shares 
issued for 
purchase of 
Finmetal OY 
(deemed at $25.60 
per share) 
Common shares 
issued as stock-
based 
compensation 
(deemed at $24.80 
per share) 
Common 
issued 
($10 per share) 
Share issue costs 
Net loss for the 
year
shares 
for  cash
279,950
50,000
97,500
-
Balance at 31 
December 2006
1,631,952
2
188,898
12
149,988
(1)
1
1    1,279,999
-
-
-
-
1    2,417,999
(2,321,280)
2    2,799,498
-   
(254,500)
-
-
-
-
-
17    6,581,883
(2,321,280)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(161,159)
-
-
-
-
-   
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27,741
150,000
-
1,280,000
96,720
2,799,500
(254,500)
-
(2,506,896)
-
(2,506,896)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(2,668,055)
-   
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,592,565
2,944,579
(212,450)
100,421
-
536,000
5,960,016
-
Common shares 
issued for cash ($25
per unit) (Note 7)    
Share issue costs 
  
Warrants issued 
(Note 7) 
Common shares 
issued as stock-
based 
compensation 
(deemed at $29 per 
share) (Note 7) 
  
Common shares 
issued for finder’s 
fee for mineral 
interests (deemed 
at $26.80)  per 
share (Notes 4, 7 
and 11) 
Stock-based 
compensation 
Stock awards 
cancelled
121,800   
-
1    2,944,578
(212,450)
-
-
-
100,421
-
-
-
46,250
1    1,341,249
(1,341,250)
20,000
1
535,999
-
-
-    3,023,282
2,936,734
(97,500)
(1)
1
-
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 54 of 81
-
-
-
-
-
(9,511,457)
-
(9,511,457)
1,722,502
18   14,314,963
(725,796)
-
-
-
-
-
613,583
(12,179,512)
-
-
-
-
-
983,065
613,583
(11,196,447)
-   
-
-
(613,583)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,409,674
725,796
-
(3,245,532)
625,000
613,583
-
983,065
-
-
-
-
1,111,586
198,267
(81,185)
385,000
-    3,375,000
3,375,000
1,482,243
-
1,482,243
Net loss for the 
year
Balance at 31 
December 2007 
    Stock-based  
    compensation 
(Note 7) 
    Stock awards  
    cancelled (Note 7)
-
(31,250)
Balance at 31 
December 2008
-
Stock options  
forfeited (Note 7)    
Common shares 
issued for 
acquisition of 
mineral rights 
($0.25 per share) 
(Notes 4, 7 and 11)    2,500,000   
Share 
subscriptions 
in 
received 
advance 
  
Net income for the 
  
year
-
-
4,191,252
5,412,333   
  
-
Common shares 
issued for cash 
($0.15 per unit) 
(Note 7) 
Share issue costs 
Common shares 
issued for 
acquisition of 
mineral rights 
($0.11 per share) 
(Notes 4, 7 and 11)    3,500,000   
Business 
acquisition 
  
Net income for the 
  
year
-
-
Balance at 31 
December 2009
-
(1)
-
1
-    (3,245,532)
25
624,975
-
-
-
-
42   11,694,408
54   
-
811,796
(81,185)
35
384,965
-
-
-
-
725,796
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13,103,585
131   12,809,984
-
(9,714,204)   3,375,000
6,470,911
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
F - 7
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
  
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 55 of 81
1.
Nature, Basis of Presentation and Continuance of Operations
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. (the “Company”) was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada, U.S.A. under the name
“Gondwana Energy, Ltd.” on 5 September 1997.  On 27 November 2006, the Company completed the acquisition of 100% of
the shares of Finmetal Mining OY (“Finmetal OY”), a company incorporated under the laws of Finland.  During the fiscal year
ended  31  December  2006,  the  Company  changed  its  operational  focus  from  development  of  oil  and  gas  properties,  to
acquisition of, exploration for and development of mineral properties in Finland.  On 23 January 2007, the Company changed
its name to “FinMetal Mining Ltd.”.  On 22 May 2008, the Company changed its name to “Amazon Goldsands Ltd.” and on 
18  September  2008,  the  Company  entered  into  a  Mineral  Rights  Option  Agreement  and  concurrently  re-focused  on  the 
acquisition  of,  exploration  for  and  development  of  mineral  properties  located  in  Peru.  The  Company  is  currently  in  the
exploration stage.
The  Company  is  an  exploration  stage  enterprise,  as  defined  in  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (the  “Codification”  or 
“ASC”) 915-10, “Development Stage Entities”. The Company is devoting all of its present efforts in securing and establishing
a  new  business,  and  its  planned  principle  operations  have  not  commenced,  and,  accordingly,  no  revenue  has  been  derived
during the organization period.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, 
Finmetal OY, a company incorporated under the laws of Finland, since its date of acquisition on 27 November 2006.  The
Company also follows ASC 810-10 “Consolidation” and fully consolidates the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of
Beardmore  Holdings,  Inc.  (“Beardmore”),  a  company  incorporated  under  the  law  of  Panama.  The  Company  owns  a  25%
interest in Beardmore.  It recognizes the other owner’s equity under the heading non-controlling interest (Note 13).
The consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America  (“GAAP”)  applicable  to  exploration  stage  enterprises,  and  are  expressed  in  U.S.
dollars.  The Company’s fiscal year end is 31 December.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements as at 31 December 2009 and for the year then ended have been prepared on
a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the
normal course of business.  The Company had income of $1,482,243 for the year ended 31 December 2009 (31 December
2008 – $983,065) and has a working capital deficit of $808,681 at 31 December 2009 (31 December 2008 – working capital of 
$186,455).
Management cannot provide assurance that the Company will ultimately achieve profitable operations or become cash flow 
positive, or raise additional debt and/or equity capital.  As at 31 December 2009, the Company’s assets only consisted of cash 
and cash equivalents in the amount of $4,214. Management believes that the Company’s capital resources are not adequate to 
continue operating and maintaining its business strategy for the fiscal year ending 31 December 2010.  Because the Company 
does not have any assets or revenue from operations, it does not believe it will be able to raise capital from traditional lending 
sources.  Although the Company has historically raised capital from sales of equity, there is no assurance that it will be able to 
continue to do so.  If the Company is unable to raise additional capital in the near future, due to the Company’s liquidity 
problems, management expects that the Company will need to curtail or cease operations. These consolidated financial 
statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and 
classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
F - 8
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
  
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 56 of 81
2.
Significant Accounting Policies
The  following  is  a  summary  of  significant  accounting  policies  used  in  the  preparation  of  these  consolidated  financial
statements.
Principles of consolidation
All inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated in these consolidated financial statements.
Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments with a maturity of three months or less at the time of issuance to be cash
equivalents. As at 31 December 2009, the Company has cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $4,214 (31 December
2008 – $492,903).
Website and software development costs
The Company recognizes the costs incurred in the development of the Company’s website in accordance with ASC 350-50, 
“Website Development Costs”.  Accordingly, direct costs incurred during the application stage of development are capitalized
and  amortized  over  the  estimated  useful  life  of  three  years  on  a  straight  line  basis.  Fees  incurred  for  website  hosting  are
expensed over the period of the benefit.  Costs of operating a website are expensed as incurred.
Property and equipment
Furniture,  computer  equipment,  office  equipment  and  computer  software  are  carried  at  cost  and  are  amortized  over  their
estimated useful lives at rates as follows:
Furniture, computer and office equipment
Computer software
30%
100%
The  property  and  equipment  is  written  down  to  its  net  realizable  value  if  it  is  determined  that  its  carrying  value  exceeds
estimated future benefits to the Company.
Segments of an enterprise and related information
ASC  280,  “Segment  Reporting”  establishes  guidance  for  the  way  that  public  companies  report  information  about  operating
segments  in  annual  financial  statements  and  requires  reporting  of  selected  information  about  operating  segments  in  interim
financial statements issued to the public.  It also establishes standards for disclosures regarding products and services, geographic
areas and major customers.  ASC 280 defines operating segments as components of a company about which separate financial
information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources
and in assessing performance.  The Company has evaluated this Codification and does not believe it is applicable at this time.
F - 9
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 57 of 81
Mineral property costs
Mineral property acquisition costs are initially capitalized as tangible assets when purchased.  At the end of each fiscal quarter
end, the Company assesses the carrying costs for impairment.  If proven and probable reserves are established for a property and
it  has  been  determined  that  a  mineral  property  can  be  economically  developed,  costs  will  be  amortized  using  the  units-of-
production method over the estimated life of the probable reserve.
Mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred.
Estimated future removal and site restoration costs, when determinable are provided over the life of proven reserves on a units-
of-production  basis.  Costs,  which  include  production  equipment  removal  and  environmental  remediation,  are  estimated  each
period  by  management  based  on  current  regulations,  actual  expenses  incurred,  and  technology  and  industry  standards.  Any
charge  is  included  in  exploration  expense  or  the  provision  for  depletion  and  depreciation  during  the  period  and  the  actual
restoration expenditures are charged to the accumulated provision amounts as incurred.
As of the date of these consolidated financial statements, the Company has not established any proven or probable reserves on its
mineral properties and incurred only acquisition and exploration costs.
Although the Company has taken steps to verify title to mineral properties in which it has an interest, according to the usual
industry standards for the stage of exploration of such properties, these procedures do not guarantee the Company’s title.  Such 
properties may be subject to prior agreements or transfers and title may be affected by undetected defects.
Environmental costs
that  are  related
Environmental  expenditures 
to  operations  or  capitalized  as
appropriate.  Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by past operations, and which do not contribute to current
or  future  revenue  generation,  are  charged  to  operations.  Liabilities  are  recorded  when  environmental  assessments  and/or 
remedial efforts are probable, and the cost can be reasonably estimated.  Generally, the timing of these accruals coincides with
the earlier of completion of a feasibility study or the Company’s commitments to a plan of action based on the then known facts.
to  current  operations  are  charged
Comprehensive loss
ASC  220,  “Comprehensive  Income”,  establishes  standards  for  the  reporting  and  display  of  comprehensive  loss  and  its
components  in  the  financial  statements.  As  at  31  December  2009  and  2008,  the  Company  has  no  items  that  represent  a
comprehensive loss and, therefore, has not included a schedule of comprehensive loss in the consolidated financial statements.
F - 10
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 58 of 81
Foreign currency translation
The Company’s functional and reporting currency is U.S. dollars.  The consolidated financial statements of the Company are
translated  to  U.S.  dollars  in  accordance  with  ASC  830,  “Foreign  Currency  Matters.”  Monetary  assets  and  liabilities
denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date.  Gains and losses
arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of
income.  The  Company  has  not,  to  the  date  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements,  entered  into  derivative  instruments  to
offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Stock-based compensation
Effective  1  January  2006,  the  Company  adopted  the  provisions  of  ASC  718,  “Compensation  –  Stock  Compensation”,  which 
establishes accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based 
compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense
over the employees’ requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant). The Company adopted ASC 718
using the modified prospective method, which requires the Company to record compensation expense over the vesting period for
all awards granted after the date of adoption, and for the unvested portion of previously granted awards that remain outstanding
at the date of adoption.  Accordingly, financial statements for the periods prior to 1 January 2006 have not been restated to reflect
the fair value method of expensing share-based compensation.  Adoption of ASC 718 does not change the way the Company
accounts for share-based payments to non-employees, with guidance provided by ASC 505-50, “Equity-Based Payments to Non-
Employees”.
Basic and diluted net income (loss) per share
The Company computes net income (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share”.  ASC 260 requires 
presentation of both basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) on the face of the income statement.  Basic EPS is computed
by  dividing  net  income  (loss)  available  to  common  shareholders  (numerator)  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares
outstanding  (denominator)  during  the  period.  Diluted  EPS  gives  effect  to  all  dilutive  potential  common  shares  outstanding
during the period using the treasury stock method and convertible preferred stock using the if-converted method.  In computing
diluted EPS, the average stock price for the period is used in determining the number of shares assumed to be purchased from the
exercise of stock options or warrants.  Diluted EPS excluded all dilutive potential shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Income taxes
Deferred  income  taxes  are  reported  for  timing  differences  between  items  of  income  or  expense  reported  in  the  financial
statements and those reported for income tax purposes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”, which requires the use of 
the asset/liability method of accounting for income taxes.  Deferred income taxes and tax benefits are recognized for the future
tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities
and their respective tax bases, and for tax losses and credit carry-forwards.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using
enacted  tax  rates  expected  to  apply  to  taxable  income  in  the  years  in  which  those  temporary  differences  are  expected  to  be
recovered  or  settled.  The  Company  provides  for  deferred  taxes  for  the  estimated  future  tax  effects  attributable  to  temporary
differences and carry-forwards when realization is more likely than not.
F - 11
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 59 of 81
Table of Contents
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Long-lived assets impairment
Long-term  assets  of  the  Company  are  reviewed  for  impairment  whenever  events  or  circumstances  indicate  that  the  carrying
amount of assets may not be recoverable, pursuant to guidance established in ASC 360-10-35-15, “Impairment or Disposal of 
Long-Lived Assets”.
Management considers assets to be impaired if the carrying value exceeds the future projected cash flows from related operations
(undiscounted and without interest charges). If impairment is deemed to exist, the assets will be written down to fair value. Fair
value is generally determined using a discounted cash flow analysis.
Asset retirement obligations
The Company has adopted ASC 410, “Assets Retirement and Environmental Obligations”, which requires that the fair value of a 
liability for an asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in which it is incurred. ASC 410 requires the Company to
record a liability for the present value of the estimated site restoration costs with corresponding increase to the carrying amount
of the related long-lived assets. The liability will be accreted and the asset will be depreciated over the life of the related assets.
Adjustments for changes resulting from the passage of time and changes to either the timing or amount of the original present
value estimate underlying the obligation will be made. As at 31 December 2009 and 2008, the Company does not have any asset
retirement obligations.
Use of estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Financial instruments
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents and accounts payable approximates their fair value because of the short maturity
of these instruments.  The Company’s operations are in Peru and Canada and virtually all of its assets and liabilities are giving
rise to significant exposure to market risks from changes in foreign currency rates.  The Company’s financial risk is the risk that 
arises from fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and the degree of volatility of these rates.  Currently, the Company does not
use derivative instruments to reduce its exposure to foreign currency risk.
F - 12
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 60 of 81
Comparative figures
Certain comparative figures have been adjusted to conform to the current year’s presentation.
International Financial Reporting Standards
In  November  2008,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (“SEC”)  issued  for  comment  a  proposed  roadmap  regarding 
potential  use  of  financial  statements  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  as 
issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.  Under the proposed roadmap, the Company would be required to
prepare financial statements in accordance with IFRS in fiscal year 2014, including comparative information also prepared
under IFRS for fiscal 2013 and 2012.  The Company is currently assessing the potential impact of IFRS on its consolidated
financial statements and will continue to follow the proposed roadmap for future developments.
Changes in accounting policies
In  June  2009,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting  Standards 
(“SFAS”)  No.  168,  “The  FASB  Accounting  Standards  Codification  and  the  Hierarchy  of  Generally  Accepted  Accounting
Principle – a replacement of FASB Statement No. 162”.  The Codification reorganized existing U.S. accounting and reporting
standards issued by the FASB and other related private sector standard setter into a single source of authoritative accounting
principles  arranged  by  topic.  The  Codification  supersedes  all  existing  U.S.  accounting  standards;  all  other  accounting
literature  not  included  in  the  Codification  (other  than  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  guidance  for  publicly-traded 
companies)  is  considered  non-authoritative.  The  Codification  was  effective  on  a  prospective  basis  for  interim  and  annual
reporting periods ending after 15 September 2009.  The adoption of the Codification changed the Company’s references to 
GAAP accounting standards but did not impact the Company’s results of operations, financial position or liquidity.
In May 2009, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for subsequent events.  The new guidance, which is now part of
ASC 855, “Subsequent Events” is intended to establish general standards of accounting for and disclosure of events that occur
after the balance sheet date, but before financial statements are issued or are available to be issued.  It requires the disclosure of
the date through which an entity has evaluated subsequent events and the basis for that date.  This disclosure should alert all
users of financial statements that an entity has not evaluated subsequent events after that date in the set of financial statements
being presented.  The new guidance was effective on a prospective basis for interim or annual reporting periods ending after
15  June  2009.  The  adoption  of  this  guidance  did  not  have  a  material  impact  on  the  Company’s  consolidated  financial 
statements.
F - 13
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 61 of 81
In May 2008, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash.  The
new guidance, which is now part of ASC 470-20, “Debt with Conversion and Other Options” requires the liability and equity
components to be separately accounted for in a manner that will reflect the entity’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate.  The 
Company will allocate a portion of the proceeds received from the issuance of convertible notes between a liability and equity
component  by  determining  the  fair  value  of  the  liability  component  using  the  Company’s  nonconvertible  debt  borrowing
rate.  The  difference  between  the  proceeds of  the  notes  and  the  fair  value  of  the  liability  component  will  be  recorded  as  a
discount  on  the  debt  with  a  corresponding  offset  to  paid-in  capital.  The  resulting  discount  will  be  accreted  by  recording
additional  non-cash  interest  expense  over  the  expected  life  of  the  convertible  notes  using  the  effective  interest  rate
method.  The new guidance was to be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon those fiscal years.  The adoption of
this guidance did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In April 2008, the FASB issued new guidance for determining the useful life of an intangible assets.  The new guidance, which
is now part of ASC 350, “Intangibles – Goodwill and Other”.  In determining the useful life of intangible assets, ASC 350 
removes  the  requirement  to  consider  whether  an  intangible  asset  can  be  renewed  without  substantial  cost  of  material
modifications to the existing terms and conditions and, instead, requires an entity to consider its own historical experience in
renewing similar arrangements.  ASC 350 also requires expanded disclosure related to the determination of intangible asset
useful  lives.  The  new  guidance  was  effective  for  financial  statements  issued  for  fiscal  years  beginning  after  15  December
2008.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In March 2008, the FASB issued new guidance on the disclosure of derivative instruments and hedging activities.  The new
guidance,  which  is  now  part  of  ASC  815,  “Derivatives  and  Hedging  Activities”  requires  qualitative  disclosures  about 
objectives and strategies for using derivatives, quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts of, and gains and losses on,
derivative  instruments,  and  disclosures  about  credit-risk-related  contingent  features  in  derivative  agreements.  The  new
guidance was effective prospectively for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after 15 November 2008, with
early application encouraged.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated 
financial statements.
F - 14
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 62 of 81
In December 2007, the FASB issued revised guidance for accounting for business combinations.  The revised guidance, which
is now part of ASC 805, “Business Combinations” requires the fair value measurement of assets acquired, liabilities assumed
and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, at the acquisition date with limited exceptions.  Previously, a cost allocation
approach was used to allocate the cost of the acquisition based on the estimated fair value of the individual assets acquired and
liabilities  assumed.  The  cost  allocation  approach  treated  acquisition-related  costs  and  restructuring  costs  that  the  acquirer 
expected to incur as a liability on the acquisition date, as part of the cost of the acquisition.  Under the revised guidance, those
costs are recognized in the consolidated statement of income separately from the business combination.  The revised guidance
applies to business combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after the beginning of the first annual reporting period
beginning on or after 15 December 2008.    The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on the Company’s 
consolidated financial statements.
In December 2007, the FASB issued new guidance for accounting for noncontrolling interests.  The new guidance, which is
now part of ASC 810, “Consolidation” establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries
held by parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable and to the noncontrolling interest,
changes in a parent’s ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is 
deconsolidated.  The new guidance also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguishes between the
interests  of  the  parent  and  the  interests  of  the  noncontrolling  owners.  The  new  guidance  was  effective  for  fiscal  years
beginning after 15 December 2008.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a material effect on the Company’s results of 
operations, financial position or cash flows.
Recent accounting pronouncements
In  June  2009,  the  FASB  issued  SFAS  No.  167,  “Amendments  to  FASB  Interpretation  No.  46(R)”.  SFAS  No.  167,  which 
amends  ASC  810-10,  “Consolidation”,  prescribes  a  qualitative  model  for  identifying  whether  a  company  has  a  controlling
financial interest in a variable interest entity (“VIE”) and eliminates the quantitative model.  The new model identifies two
primary characteristics of a controlling financial interest: (1) provides a company with the power to direct significant activities
of the VIE, and (2) obligates a company to absorb losses of and/or provides rights to receive benefits from the VIE.  SFAS No.
167 requires a company to reassess on an ongoing basis whether it holds a controlling financial interest in a VIE.  A company
that holds a controlling financial interest is deemed to be the primary beneficiary of the VIE and is required to consolidate the
VIE.  SFAS  No.  167,  which  is  referenced  in  ASC  105-10-65,  has  not  yet  been  adopted  into  the  Codification  and  remains 
authoritative.  SFAS No. 167 is effective 1 January 2010.  The Company does not expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 167
will have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
F - 15
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 63 of 81
3.
4.
In  June  2009,  the  FASB  issued  SFAS  No.  166,  “Accounting  for  Transfer  of  Financial  Assets  –  an  amendment  of  FASB 
Statement”.  SFAS  No.  166  removes  the  concept  of  a  qualifying  special-purpose  entity  from  ASC  860-10,  “Transfers  and 
Servicing”,  and  removes  the  exception  from  applying  ASC  810-10,  “Consolidation”.  This  statement  also  clarifies  the
requirements for isolation and limitations on portions of financial assets that are eligible for sale accounting.  SFAS No. 166,
which  is  referenced  in  ASC  105-10-65,  has  not  yet  been  adopted  into  the  Codification  and  remains  authoritative.  This
statement is effective 1 January 2010.  The Company does not expect that the adoption of SFAS No. 166 will have a material
impact on its consolidated financial statements.
In  August  2009,  the  FASB  issued  Accounting  Standards  Update  (“ASU”)  No.  2009-05,  “Fair  Value  Measurement  and 
Disclosure (Topic 820) – Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value”, which provides valuation techniques to measure fair value in
circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liability is not available.  The guidance provided in
this update is effective 1 January 2010.  The Company does not expect that the adoption of this guidance will have a material
impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Other  ASUs that  have  been issued  or  proposed  by  the FASB  ASC  that do  not  require  adoption  until a future  date  are  not
expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities
Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities as at 31 December  2009 are amounts due to a director and to an officer of
the Company of $42,224 (31 December 2008 – $Nil).  The amounts are non-interest bearing, unsecured and due on demand.
Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities as at 31 December 2009 is an amount due to a Company with directors
and officers in common with the Company of $88,435 (31 December 2008 – $30,000).  The amount is non-interest bearing, 
unsecured and due on demand.
Included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities as at 31 December 2009 is an advance received from a former officer of
the Company of $28,084 (31 December 2008 – $28,084).  The amount is non-interest bearing, unsecured and has no fixed 
terms of repayment.
Mineral Property Interests
The Temasek Properties
Effective  18  September  2008  (the  “Effective  Date”),  the  Company  entered  into  a  Mineral  Right  Option  Agreement  with
Temasek Investments Inc. (“Temasek”), a company incorporated under the laws of Panama  (the “Temasek Agreement”).
F - 16
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 64 of 81
Pursuant  to  the  Temasek  Agreement,  the  Company  acquired  four  separate  options  from  Temasek,  each  providing  for  the
acquisition of a 25% interest in certain mineral rights in Peru potentially resulting in the acquisition of 100% of the mineral
rights (the “Mineral Rights”).  The Mineral Rights are owned by Rio Santiago Minerales S.A.C. (“Rio Santiago”).  Beardmore, a 
wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Temasek,  owns  999  shares  of  the  1,000  shares  of  Rio  Santiago  that  are  issued  and
outstanding.  Temasek owns the single remaining share of Rio Santiago.  The acquisition of each 25% interest in the Mineral
Rights will occur through the transfer to the Company of 25% of the outstanding shares of Beardmore (Note 13).
The Company may exercise the initial 25% option to acquire a 25% interest in the Mineral Rights after fulfilling the following 
conditions:
•  Pay $250,000 (paid) to Temasek on the date the Agreement is executed; 
•  Issue 2,500,000 common shares (issued) of the Company to Temasek within five business days from the Effective Date
(Notes 7 and 11); and
•  Pay an additional $250,000 (paid) to Temasek within ninety days of the Effective Date.
The Company entered into an amending agreement dated 12 May 2009 with Temasek related to the Temasek Properties, further
amended pursuant to an agreement dated 3 February 2010 (the “Second Amending Temasek Agreement”).  Under the Second 
Amending Temasek Agreement, the Company may now exercise the second 25% option resulting in the acquision of a 50%
interest  in  the Mineral Rights  by  fulfilling  the  following conditions  as  set  out in  the Second  Amending  Temasek Agreement
within 30 days from the Effective Date:
•  Exercise and complete the initial 25% option (completed); 
•  Issue 3,500,000 additional common shares of the Company to Temasek (issued) (Notes 7 and 11); and 
•  Pay an additional $750,000 to Temasek by 5 March 2010 (not paid) (Note 14).
The  Company  may  exercise  the  third  25%  option  resulting  in  the  acquisition  of  a  75%  interest  in  the  Mineral  Rights  after
fulfilling the following conditions by 5 March 2010:
•  Exercise and complete the initial and second 25% options (not completed) (Note 14); 
•  Pay an additional $250,000 to Temasek by 5 March 2010 (not paid) (Note 14); and 
•  Issue 5,000,000 additional common shares of the Company to Temasek by 5 March 2010 (not issued) (Note 14); 
•  Pay an additional $1,000,000 to Temasek by 18 March 2010 (not paid) (Note 9).
F - 17
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 65 of 81
The Company may exercise the fourth and final 25% option resulting in the acquisition of a 100% interest in the Mineral Rights
after fulfilling the following conditions by 18 March 2010 (Note 9):
•  Exercise and complete the initial, second and third 25% options (not completed); 
•  Pay an additional $2,500,000 to Temasek (not paid); and 
•  Issue 5,500,000 additional common shares of the Company to Temasek (not issued).
Upon the acquisition of a 100% interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek will hold its single share of Rio Santiago in trust for the
Company’s  sole  benefit  and  hold  the  share  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  Company’s  instructions.  Upon  the  Company’s 
acquisition of a 100% interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek is entitled to an annual 2.5% net returns royalty.  However, if the
Company pays Temasek $2,000,000 within ninety days of the acquisition of a 100% interest in the Mineral Rights, Temasek will
only be entitled to an annual 1% net returns royalty.
If the Company exercises the second 25% option, resulting in the Company’s acquisition of a 50% interest in the Mineral Rights, 
and fails to acquire a 100% interest in the Mineral Rights, the Company and Temasek will form a joint venture in which the
Company  will  be  wholly  responsible  for  developing  a  feasible  mining  project and  all  necessary  facilities  and  Temasek  shall
retain a carried free interest in the mining rights.  If the Company does not develop a feasible mining project within three years
from the Effective Date, the Company will be responsible to pay Temasek an advance minimum mining royalty of $500,000 per
year, which will be deducted from Temasek’s net returns royalty.
Temasek became a significant shareholder of the Company through the issuance of the 2,500,000 common shares on exercise of
the option to acquire the initial 25% interest in the Mineral Rights and an additional 3,500,000 common shares on exercise of the
partial payment toward the exercise of the option to acquire the second 25% interest (Note 7).
The Apofas Properties
Pursuant  to  an  agreement  dated  22  January  2007,  the  Company  had  the  option  to  acquire  a  100%  interest  in  five  mineral
concessions, known as the Poronmannikko and Sarkiahonkangas projects, located in Finland (the “Apofas Agreement”). Under 
the  terms  of  the  Apofas  Agreement,  the  Company  had  the  right  to  acquire  a  100%  interest  in  two  projects  by  making  cash
payments totalling €1,000,000:
• Initial payment of €150,000 due on or before 1 April 2007 (paid); 
• Second payment of €150,000 due on or before 1 April 2008 (extended by agreement to 30 April 2008); 
• Third payment of €300,000 due on or before 1 April 2009; and 
• Final payment of €400,000 due on or before 1 April 2010.
Concurrent with ratification of the Apofas Agreement on 4 May 2007, the Company issued 20,000 common shares as a finder’s 
fee. The mineral concessions were subject to a 2% gross proceeds royalty.  The Apofas Agreement was signed with a company
controlled by a former president of the Company. During the year ended 31 December 2008, the Company determined not to
proceed with the option to acquire these projects.
F - 18
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 66 of 81
The Magnus Properties
Pursuant to an agreement dated 6 October 2006 with Magnus Minerals Oy (“Magnus”), a company in which the Company’s 
former president has an ownership interest, the Company had the option to acquire a 100% interest in four different mineral
properties (Petrovaara, Poskijarvi-Kokka, Rautavaara and Tainiovaara) by paying option payments for a total of €1,000,000 in 
cash for each property over a period of four years (the “Magnus Agreement”).  The option payments were to be paid annually at 
the beginning of each year as follows:
•  First year of €100,000 (paid); 
•  Second year of €100,000; 
•  Third year of €300,000; and 
•  Fourth year of €500,000 per property for a total of €4,000,000 if all four properties are acquired fully; and by making a work
commitment of €1,000,000 on each property, of which 25% must be conducted annually.
All properties were subject to a 2% net smelter return.
The  first  year  payments  for  all  four  properties  totaling  $523,400  (€400,000)  were  paid  during  the  year  ended  31  December 
2006.  The due date of the second option payment of €100,000 with respect to the Rautavaara Property was extended pursuant to
an amendment agreement to 30 April 2008 in consideration of a €10,000 extension payment (paid) and payment of applicable 
government  and  landowner  payments  according  to  Finnish  law  (paid).  The  due  date  for  the  first  year  work  commitment  of
€250,000  with  respect  to  the  Rautavaara  Property  was  extended  to  31  August  2008  and  the  first  year  work  commitment  of
€250,000 with respect to the Tainiovarra.  The Property was extended to 31 May 2008.
On 11 June 2007, the Company entered into an Option Agreement with Magnus (the “Option Agreement”), pursuant to which 
the Company entered into a joint venture to explore the “Enonkoski area” in Finland primarily for nickel-copper-platinum group 
elements.
Under the terms of the Option Agreement, the Company had the right to acquire ownership from Magnus of up to a 51% interest
in certain claim reservations, and pending claims comprising the Property as more particularly set forth in the Option Agreement.
It was intended that the Company be the operator of the joint venture and can earn a 51% interest in the Property by fulfilling
$10,000,000 in work commitments and €3,000,000 in option payments.
In order to exercise the option, the Company was required to spend $10,000,000 in work commitments with minimum 
expenditures as follows:
•  $1,800,000 by 30 November 2008; 
•  $2,200,000 by 30 November 2009; 
•  $2,800,000 by 30 November 2010; and 
•  $3,200,000 by 30 November 2011.
F - 19
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 67 of 81
5.
6.
In addition, the Company was required to make a total of €3,000,000 in option payments to Magnus over four years as 
follows:
•  €30,000 by 22 May 2007 (paid); 
•  €270,000 upon execution of the Option Agreement (paid); 
•  €600,000 by 30 November 2008; 
•  €900,000 by 30 November 2009; and 
•  €1,200,000 by 30 November 2010.
During the year ended 31 December 2008, the Company decided not to exercise the option with respect to this Property.
Property and Equipment
Furniture, computer and office equipment
Computer software
Accumulated
amortization
$
Cost
$
38,505
8,928
47,433
21,380
8,928
30,308
Net Book Value
31 
December 
2009  
$   
    
17,125   
-   
    
17,125
31 
December 
2008
$
24,464
1,500
25,964
During the year ended 31 December 2009, total additions to property and equipment were $Nil (31 December  2008 - $8,467).
Website Development Cost
Website development
Accumulated
amortization
$
Cost
$
40,000
29,167
Net Book Value
31 
December 
2009  
$   
    
10,833
31 
December 
2008
$
24,167
During the year ended 31 December 2009, total additions to website development were $Nil (31 December 2008 - $30,000).
F - 20
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 68 of 81
7.
Common Stock
Authorized
The total authorized capital consists of
•  200,000,000 common shares with par value of $0.00001 
•  200,000,000 blank check preferred shares with par value of $0.001
Issued and outstanding
As at 31 December 2009, the total issued and outstanding capital stock is 13,103,585 common shares with a par value of 
$0.00001 per share.
On 23 June 2009, the Company issued 3,500,000 common shares valued at a $385,000 ($0.11 per common share) pursuant to
the Temasek Agreement (Notes 4 and 11).  The fair value is equal to the market price of the Company’s stock on the date of 
the transaction.
On 8 May 2009, the Company issued 140,000 common shares for total proceeds of $18,900 ($0.15 per common share), net of
share issue costs of $2,100.
On 31 March 2009, the Company issued 5,272,333 common shares for total proceeds of $711,765 ($0.15 per common share),
net of share issue costs of $79,085.
During the year ended 31 December 2008, a total of 167,500 stock options expired.
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2008,  the  Company  issued  2,500,000  common  shares  valued  at  $625,000  ($0.25  per
common  share)  pursuant  to  the  Temasek  Agreement  (Notes  4  and  11).  The  fair  value  is  equal  to  the  market  price  of  the
Company’s stock on the date of the transaction.
During the year ended 31 December 2008, the Company completed a one new for twenty old share reverse stock split.  The
Company’s share transactions, including the weighted average number of common shares outstanding calculation for purposes
of determining earnings per share, have been restated retroactively to reflect all of the above corporate capital transactions in
these consolidated financial statements.
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2007,  the  Company  issued  121,800  units  at  a  price  of  $25  per  share  for  proceeds  of
$2,832,550, net of share issue costs of $212,450.  Each unit consists of one share of common stock with par value $0.00001
and one-half share purchase warrant. Each full share purchase warrant entitles the holder to purchase one common share at a 
price of $35 up to 17 April 2008.  As at 31 December 2007, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series remain
outstanding.  During the year ended 31 December  2008, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series expired.
F - 21
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
  
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 69 of 81
During the year ended 31 December 2007, the Company granted 37,500 restricted shares at a deemed price of $29 per share to
officers and directors of the Company.  The deemed price is equal to the market price of the Company’s stock on the date of the 
transaction.  During the year ended 31 December 2008, 30,000 restricted shares were cancelled and returned to treasury.  Fifty
percent of the remaining 7,500 shares vested during the year ended 31 December 2008 and the balance have been deemed to
have vested.  The related stock-based compensation of $705,365 has been recorded in the consolidated statement of operations
during the year ended 31 December 2008.
During the year ended 31 December 2007, the Company granted 8,750 restricted shares at a deemed price of $3.60 per share to
consultants  of  the  Company.  The  deemed  price  is  equal  to  the  market  price  of  the  Company’s  stock  as  of  31  December 
2007.  During the year ended 31 December 2008, 1,250 restricted shares were cancelled and returned to treasury.  Fifty percent
of the remaining shares vested during the year ended 31 December 2008 and the balance have been deemed to have vested.  The
related  stock-based  compensation  of  $20,431  has  been  recorded  in  the  consolidated  statement  of  operations  during  the  year
ended 31 December 2008.
Stock options
As at 31 December 2009, there are Nil incentive stock options outstanding (31 December 2008 – Nil).
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2007,  the  Company  granted  167,500  incentive  stock  options  to  officers,  directors  and
consultants of the Company to purchase common stock of the Company at a price of $25 per common share on or before 17
April 2017 and vesting as to one-quarter of the common shares under the stock option on 17 April 2007 and one-quarter every 
six months thereafter in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Company’s Stock Incentive Plan (the “Plan”).  As at 31 
December 2007, all of the related stock options in this series remain outstanding.
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2007,  the  Company  adopted  the  Plan,  which  provides  for  the  grant  of  incentive  stock
options, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, performance shares and performance units, and
stock awards to officers, directors or employees of, as well as advisers and consultants to, the Company.
All stock options and rights are to vest over a period determined by the Board of Directors and expire not more than ten years
from the date granted.  Pursuant to the Plan, the maximum aggregate number of shares that may be issued for awards is 500,000
and the maximum aggregate number of shares that may be issued for incentive stock options is 500,000.
During the year ended 31 December 2008, all of the related stock options in this series were forfeited.
F - 22
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 70 of 81
The following is a summary of option activities during the years ended 31 December 2009 and 2008:
Outstanding and exercisable at 1 January 2009
  
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
  
Outstanding and exercisable at 31 December 2009 
  
Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year
Outstanding and exercisable at 1 January 2008
  
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
  
Outstanding and exercisable at 31 December 2008 
  
Weighted average fair value of options granted during the year
Weighted 
average 
exercise 
price
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
Number 
of options    
    
     
-    
      
-    
-    
-    
      
-
167,500    
      
-    
-    
(167,500)   
      
-
25.00
-
-
(25.00)
-
-
Warrants
As at 31 December 2009, there are Nil warrants outstanding (31 December 2008 – Nil).
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2007,  as  part  of  the  121,800  unit  private  placement,  the  Company  issued  60,900  share
purchase warrants.  Each share purchase warrant entitles the holder to purchase one common share at a price of $35 up to 17
April 2008.  As at 31 December 2007, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series remain outstanding.  During the
year ended 31 December 2008, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series expired.
During the year ended 31 December 2007, the Company issued 8,358 agent compensation warrants for services rendered by a
private  placement  agent.  Each  warrant  entitles  the  holder  to  purchase  one  common  share  at  a  price  of  $35  up  to  17  April
2008.  As at 31 December 2007, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series remain outstanding.  During the year
ended 31 December 2008, all of the related share purchase warrants in this series expired.
F - 23
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 71 of 81
8.
The following is a summary of warrant activities during the years ended 31 December 2009 and 2008:
Outstanding and exercisable at 1 January 2009
  
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
  
Outstanding and exercisable at 31 December 2009 
  
Weighted average fair value of warrants granted during the year
Outstanding and exercisable at 1 January 2008
  
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
  
Outstanding and exercisable at 31 December 2008 
  
Weighted average fair value of warrants granted during the year
Number 
of 
warrants   
    
     
-    
      
-    
-    
-    
      
-
69,258    
      
-    
-    
(69,258)   
      
-
Weighted 
average 
exercise 
price
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
35.00
-
-
(35.00)
-
-
Related Party Transactions
As at 31 December 2009, the amount due to related parties consists of $109,767 (31 December 2008 - $Nil) payable to 
companies controlled by shareholders and/or directors of Rio Santiago.
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2009,  the  Company  paid  or  accrued  $58,435  (31  December  2008  –  $253,702)  for 
consulting and management fees to former officers and directors of the Company.
During the year ended 31 December 2009, the Company paid or accrued $37,800 (31 December 2008 – $37,830) to a current 
officer of the Company.
During the year ended 31 December 2009, the Company paid or accrued $8,595 (31 December 2008 – $11,731) consulting 
fees to a current director of the Company.
During the year ended 31 December 2009, the Company paid or accrued $Nil (31 December 2008 – $25,486) for consulting 
fees included in mineral property exploration expenditures, to a company controlled by a former officer of the Company.
F - 24
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 72 of 81
9.
10.
Commitments
a.  During  the  year  ended  31  December  2008,  the  Company  entered  into  a  one-year  contract  for  consulting  services, 
commencing 1 October 2008, with a party to provide investor relation services for a monthly payment of $10,000.  This
contract was terminated effective 31 May 2009.
b.  During  the  year  ended  31  December  2008,  the  Company  entered  into  a  one-year  contract  for  consulting  services, 
commencing  1  June  2008,  with  a  party  to  provide  investor  relations  services  for  a  monthly  payment  of  $10,000.  This
contract was terminated effective 30 June 2009.
c.  The Company is subject to certain outstanding and future commitments related to the Temasek Agreement (Note 4). The
Company is in the process of renegotiating the terms of the Temasek Agreement.
Geographic Areas
Prior to the operations of acquisition and exploration of mineral properties, the Company’s areas of operations were primarily
in Canada.  Since the commencement of acquisition and exploration of mineral properties, during the year ended 31 December
2006, the Company’s principal mineral property activities have been in Finland.  During the year ended 31 December 2008,
the Company re-focused its acquisition and exploration of mineral properties operations to Peru. As at 31 December 2009, the
Company does not have any material assets outside of South America.
F - 25
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 73 of 81
11.
Supplemental Disclosures with Respect to Cash Flows
Supplemental cash flows information
Interest expense 
Foreign exchange (gain) loss
Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and 
financing
Common shares issued for oil and gas property ($25 
per share) 
Common shares issued for services ($6 per share)
Donated consulting services 
Common shares cancelled and returned
Common shares issued for equity acquisition of 
Finmetal ($25.60 per share) 
Restricted shares issued ($24.80 per share)
Common shares issued for finder’s fee ($10 per unit)
Warrants issued 
Common shares issued for finder’s fee for mineral 
property interests ($26.80 per share) 
Common shares issued for acquisition of mineral 
rights (deemed at $0.25 per share) 
Common shares issued for acquisition of mineral 
rights (deemed at $0.11 per share)
For the 
period from 
the date of 
inception 
on 5 
September 
1997 to
31 
December 
2009
(Unaudited)
$
For
year 
ended
31 
December
2009
$
1,906
20,832
-
4,486
10,000
50,000
16,200
(2)
1,280,000
2,418,000
254,500
100,421
536,000
625,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
For
 year 
ended
31 
December
For the
year 
ended
31 
December
2007
$
2008   
$    
    
    
-    
(2,412)
-    
-    
-    
-
-
(1,235)
-
-
-
-
-
-    
-
-    
-    
-
-     100,421
-     536,000
385,000
385,000
-
625,000
-
-
During the year ended 31 December 2009, the Company accrued interest expense of $Nil (31 December 2008 – $Nil) related 
to unpaid amount of the Temasek option payment (Note 4).
F - 26
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 74 of 81
Table of Contents
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Income Taxes
The Company has losses carried forward for income tax purposes to 31 December 2009.  The Company has fully reserved for
any benefits of these losses.  The deferred tax consequences of temporary differences in reporting items for financial statement
and income tax purposes are recognized, as appropriate. Realization of the future tax benefits related to the deferred tax assets
is dependent on many factors, including the Company’s ability to generate taxable income within the net operating loss carry-
forward period.  Management has considered these factors in reaching its conclusion as to the valuation allowance for financial
reporting purposes.
The provision for refundable federal income tax consists of the following:
Refundable federal tax asset (liability) attributable to:
Current operations 
Contributions to capital by related parties
Less: Change in valuation allowance 
  
Future income tax recovery
For the
year 
ended
31 
December 
2008
$
For the
 year 
ended
31 
December 
2009   
$
(283,923)    (554,106)
-
  (2,035,948)    554,106
-
2,319,871
-
The composition of the Company’s deferred tax assets as at 31 December 2009 and 2008 are as follows:
12.
Net income tax operating loss carryforward 
  
Statutory federal income tax rate 
  
Future income tax assets (liabilities) 
Less: Valuation allowance 
  
Future income tax assets (liabilities)
As at
31 
December 
2009 
$ 
  
  5,305,056
As at
31 
December 
2008
$
4,467,428
26% - 34%   26% - 34%
470,644 
   2,506,592
(470,644)   (2,506,592)
-
-
F - 27
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 75 of 81
13.
Interest in Variable Interest Entity
In January 2009, the Company acquired a 25% interest in Beardmore, the registered owner of 999 shares of the 1,000 shares of
Rio Santiago that are issued and outstanding.  Rio Santiago is the beneficial owner of 100% interest in certain mineral rights in
Peru.  The  aggregate  purchase  price  was  $1,125,000,  in  which  the  Company  paid  $500,000  in  cash  and  issued  2,500,000
common shares valued at $625,000 (Note 7). The acquisition of Beardmore expands the Company’s business of acquiring and 
exploring  mineral  properties.  The  Company  also  has  the  exclusive  right  to  purchase  the  remaining  75%  share  interest  in
Beardmore, upon certain terms and conditions (Note 4).
The  Company  follows  ASC  810-10  and  fully  consolidates  the  assets,  liabilities,  revenues  and  expenses  of  Beardmore.  A
valuation  of  certain  assets  was  completed  and  the  Company  internally  determined  the  fair  value  of  others  assets  and
liabilities.  In  determining  the  fair  value  of  acquired  assets,  standard  valuation  techniques  were  used  including  market  and
income approach.
The purchase price allocation has been determined as follows:
Assets purchased:
Cash and cash equivalents 
Mineral property interests
Total assets acquired
Liabilities assumed:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Due to related parties 
Future income tax liabilities
Total liabilities assumed
Non-controlling interest: 
  
Purchase price
578
  $
    6,927,792 
   
  $6,928,370 
   
   
49,797
  $
   
58,702
   2,319,871 
   
  $2,428,370 
   
  $3,375,000 
   
  $1,125,000
F - 28
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
 
Amazon Goldsands Ltd. 
(An Exploration Stage Company) 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars) 
31 December 2009
Page 76 of 81
14.
Pro forma information
The  following  unaudited  consolidated  pro  forma  financial  information  presents  the  combined  results  of  operations  of  the
Company and Beardmore for the years ended 31 December 2009 and 2008 as if the acquisition had occurred at 1 January
2008:
Revenue 
Net income (loss) 
Basic and diluted income (loss) per common share
Unaudited
Consolidated Pro
Forma
For the year ended
31 
December 
2008
$
31 
December 
2009   
$    
      
-
-
1,482,243     982,496
0.39
0.15
The amounts of revenue and net loss of Beardmore since the acquisition date included in the consolidated income statement
for the year ended 31 December 2009 are $Nil and $2,611, respectively.
The unaudited consolidated pro forma financial information does not include adjustments to remove certain private company
expenses, which may not be incurred in future periods.  Similarly, the unaudited consolidated pro forma financial information
does  not  include  adjustments  for  additional  expenses,  such  as  rent,  insurance,  and  other  expenses  that  would  have  been
incurred subsequent to the acquisition date.  The unaudited consolidated pro forma financial information does not necessarily
reflect the results of operations that would have been occurred had the Company and Beardmore been a single entity during
these periods.
Subsequent Events
The following events occurred during the period from the year ended 31 December 2009 to the date the consolidated financial
statements were available to be issued on 29 March 2010:
On 3 February 2010, the Company amended the terms related to its mineral property agreements (Note 4).
On 9 March 2010, the Company issued a total of 5,000,000 shares of common stock to Temasek and its designees as partial
consideration for the exercise of the third 25% option to acquire an aggregate 75% interest in the Mineral Rights (Note 4).
On 22 March 2010, the Company paid $1,000,000 to Temasek to exercise the second 25% option resulting in the acquisition
of a 50% interest in the Mineral Rights and partial consideration for the third 25% option (Note 4).
On 25 March 2010, the Company completed a private equity offering of 18,750,000 units at $0.10 per unit (the “Units”).  Each 
Unit consisted of one share of common stock, par value $0.00001, and one common stock purchase warrant (the “Warrant”) to 
purchase one share of the Company’s common stock, exercisable commencing six months from the closing date of the offering
and terminating one year from the closing date of the offering.  As a result, the Company issued a total of 18,750,000 shares of
common stock and Warrants to purchase 18,750,000 shares of common stock.  The exercise price of the Warrant is $0.10 per
share.  The gross proceeds the Company received from this private equity offering was $1,875,000.
F - 29
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 77 of 81
Table of Contents
  
 
(a)(2)           Not Applicable. 
  
(a)(3)           Exhibits. 
 
See (b) below. 
 
(b)            Exhibits. 
 
See the Exhibit Index following the signature page of this report, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
 
 (c)            Financial Statements Excluded From Annual Report to Shareholders 
  
Not Applicable.
- 42 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
Convergent plate boundaries -  The point at which the seismic plates of the earth’s crust are destroyed and recycled back into the
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Bowl concentrators - 
Churn drills -
Drill-collar positions -
Eocene-aged tectonism - 
Fluvial transport - 
Fold-belt of anticlines - 
Glacio-fluvial -
Gravel-bedrock contact - 
Jig -
Metallurgical - 
Mineral -
Mineral Reserve -
Miocene -
Moraine -
Pliocene - 
  
Reverse circulation drilling 
(Becker) 
Scout drilling 
Sedimentary features 
Tertiary 
Tills
zone of deposition
Page 78 of 81
Glossary of Certain Mining Terms
A device for removing gold from black sand concentrates.
A large drilling machine that bores large diameter holes in the ground. In mining, churn drills are 
used to drill into the soft carbonate rocks of lead and zinc hosted regions to extract bulk samples of 
the ore.
interior of the earth as one plate dives under another.
Points at which the drill collar is tightened or loosened to control the amount of force applied to the 
bit, used to carefully monitor the surface weight measured while the bit is just off the bottom of the 
wellbore. 
Movement of the seismic plates of the Earth during the Eocene period. 
The movement of sediment and minerals by water.
A fold or wrinkle in the earth’s surface that is convex up and has its oldest beds at its core.
Pertaining to streams fed by melting glaciers, or to the deposits and landforms produced by such 
streams. 
Contact with the layer of earth’s surface defined as where gravel gives way to bedrock.
A piece of milling equipment used to concentrate ore on a screen submerged in water, either by the 
reciprocating motion of the screen or by the pulsation of water through it. 
Extraction of metal from ore.
A naturally occurring homogeneous substance having definite physical properties and chemical 
composition and, if formed under favorable conditions, a definite crystal form. 
That part of a mineral deposit which could be economically and legally extracted or produced at the 
time of the reserve determination.
A geological epoch of the Neogene period and extends from about 23.03 to 5.33 million years before 
the present 
Any glacially formed accumulation of unconsolidated glacial debris (soil and rock) which can occur 
in currently glaciated and formerly glaciated regions, such as those areas acted upon by a past ice age.
A period in the geologic timescale that extends from 5.332 million to 1.806 million years before 
present. 
Heavy duty percussive drill used for drilling in alluvial and glacial terrains. 
Used to find and delineate targets for more defined drilling.
Features that were part of the sediments when they were deposited 
A geologic period 65 million to 1.8 million years ago
Areas of unstratified soil deposited by a glacier; consisting of sand and clay and gravel and boulders 
mixed together within a matrix of a fine powdery material.
The area at the end of a glacier or river where deposits of sediment occur.
- 43 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
Page 79 of 81
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this
report on Form 10-K/A to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, this 15th day of April, 2010.
AMAZON GOLDSANDS LTD., 
a Nevada corporation
By:           /s/ KENNETH PHILLIPPE
Kenneth Phillippe 
President, Chief Executive Officer  
& Chief Financial Officer
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended,  this  report  has  been  signed  below  by
following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated. 
  
Signature and Title 
  
/s/ KENNETH PHILLIPPE                                                                     
Kenneth Phillippe, Chief Executive Officer,  
Chief Financial Officer, President, Secretary,  
and Treasurer (Principal Executive Officer,  
Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer)
  
/s/ ROBERT VAN TASSELL                                                                  
Robert Van Tassell, Director
Date
April 15, 2010
April 15, 2010
- 44 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Table of Contents
Page 80 of 81
AMAZON GOLDSANDS LTD.
EXHIBIT INDEX
TO
2009 ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K
Exhibit 
Number 
2.1
2.2
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.8
Description 
Articles of Merger 
  
Agreement and Plan of Merger 
  
Articles of Incorporation 
  
Certificate of Amendment to Articles of Incorporation, 
evidencing name change to "FinMetal Mining Ltd."
Certificate of Change Pursuant to NRS 78.209
Amended and Restated By-laws of the Company
Mineral Right Option Agreement between the Company and 
Temasek Investments Inc. 
Amendment to Mineral Right Option Agreement between 
the Company and Temasek Investments, Inc.
Second Amendment to Mineral Right Option Agreement, 
dated February 3, 2010 
2007 Stock Incentive Plan.
14.1
Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct.
21.1 
31.1
31.2
32.1
Subsidiaries of Amazon Goldsands Ltd.*
Certificate of Kenneth Phillippe, Chief Executive Officer, 
pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certificate of Kenneth Phillippe, Chief Financial Officer, 
pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
Certificate of Kenneth Phillipppe, Chief Executive Officer 
and Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to Section 906 of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
*  Previously filed
Incorporated by Reference to: 
Exhibit 2.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed May 27, 2008 
Exhibit 2.2 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed May 27, 2008 
Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Form 10 
Registration Statement (SEC File No. 000-51203)
Exhibit 3.3 to the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form 10-KSB for the fiscal year ended December 
31, 2007.
Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed May 27, 2008 
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed September 2, 2008 
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed September 22, 2008 
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Quarterly Report 
on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended May 20, 2009.
Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed February 3, 2010 
Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form 10KSB for the Year ending December 31, 
2007.
Exhibit 14.1 to the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form 10KSB for the Year ending December 31, 
2005.
Filed  
Herewith
X
X
X
- 45 -
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010
mainbody.htm
Page 81 of 81
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1045929/000111776810000116/mainbody.htm
10/27/2010