
COUNTY INTERNATIONAL LIMITED 
ABN 40 149 136 783 
ASX Preliminary final report – 30 June 2016
This  preliminary  yearly  report  is  for  the  twelve  months  ended  30  June  2016.  The  previous 
corresponding period is the year to 30th June 2015.
The information in this report should be read in conjunction  with the most recent annual 
financial report.
Contents
Results for announcement to the Market
Preliminary consolidated statement of profit or loss
Preliminary consolidated statement of comprehensive income
Preliminary consolidated statement of financial position
Preliminary consolidated statement of changes in equity
Preliminary consolidated statement of cash flows
Notes to the accounts
1
5
6
7
8
9
10 - 19
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
COUNTY INTERNATIONAL LIMITED 
YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016 
RESULTS FOR ANNOUNCEMENT TO THE MARKET
Revenue from 
ordinary activities
Loss from ordinary 
activities before tax 
attributable to 
members 
Loss from ordinary 
activities after tax 
attributable to 
members 
Loss for the period 
attributable to 
members
Increase/(Decrease)
2016
2015
($12,231)
(83%)
($10,149,439)
(93%)
to
to
$2,497
$14,728
($747,225)
($10,896,664)
($10,149,439)
(93%)
to
($747,225)
($10,896,664)
($10,149,439)
(93%)
to
($747,225)
($10,896,664)
Additional dividend/distribution information  
Details of dividends/distributions declared or paid during or subsequent to the year ended 30 June 2016 are 
as follows:
Dividends/distributions
Final dividend 
Interim dividend
Amount per security
Franked amount per
security
Nil 
Nil
Nil 
Nil
The Board has resolved that no dividend will be paid for the year ended 30 June 2016.
Record date for determining entitlements to the dividend
N/A
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
COMMENTARY
The  last  twelve  months  have  seen  a  continuation  of  the  difficult  environment  for  the  world  coal  industry 
caused by a combination of oversupply from projects established during the high demand years and reduced 
demand  brought  about  by  the  strategic  move  by  long-established  thermal  coal  users  towards  renewable 
energy sources. However, while coal-fired generation is facing the headwinds of oversupply and increased 
competition,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  it  is  still  and  for  the  foreseeable  future  will  remain,  a  key 
ingredient in the fuel mix for power generation. This is underscored by recent commentary, where it has been 
stated  that  Japan  is  building  new,  modern  coal  fired  generators  to  replace  its  ageing  nuclear  generation 
capacity.  Power  generation  using  unreliable,  fluctuating,  renewable  sources  cannot  stand  alone  (a  fact 
realised recently by the South Australian government) meaning that traditional sources are still needed.
During the recent “boom” years of coal demand, export opportunities from the US North West coast were 
inhibited  by  a  lack  of  port capacity,  prompting  the  expansion  of  some  existing  facilities  and  the  proposed 
construction of a number of coal ports in Washington and Oregon with a total additional export capacity of 
over 75mtpa, all of which was spoken for by large, established US coal mining companies. The slow-down in 
global demand had two outcomes. First, it relieved the pressure to the point where existing ports went from 
over to under-utilised and are now operating at less than full capacity and second, it saw the proposed new 
ports, which were well down the approval path, continue the process with the view that demand would return 
and the capacity would be needed. Had this situation remained and the loaders been ultimately constructed, 
the new capacity brought on by these facilities would have serviced the market for many years to come.
However,  in  FY2016  the  industry  saw  the  demise  of  two  of  the  port  projects  that  made  up  part  of  the 
75mtpa+ of proposed new capacity. These were the Gateway Pacific coal loader, the largest and only deep 
water  (Capesize  vessel  capable)  project  at  over  45mtpa  located  at  Cherry  Point,  north  of  Seattle, 
Washington and the Port of Morrow project, a relatively small barge-to-ship trans-loading facility proposed for 
the  Columbia  River  in  Oregon.  The  proposals  both  failed  due  to  an  inability  to  secure  a  permit  from  the 
regulatory authorities. County has maintained close contact with coal producers in the US north west who 
have lost domestic markets through the US program to phase out coal-fired power generation, as well as 
potash  producers  in  the  region.  Management  believes  there  is  strong  demand  for  access  to  north  west 
Pacific coast bulk loading facilities to provide access to export opportunities for those businesses.
County management believes that:
a) There is a market imperative for a bulk ship-loading port on the US North West coast:
• The US focus on phasing out coal-fired power generation has led to a glut in availability of export
quality domestic coal in Western USA resulting in an increasing demand for supply routes into the
Asian export markets.
• Albeit  at  a  slower  rate  than  the  past,  Asia  is  still  building  coal  fired  power  stations  to  service
growth.
• The supply risk associated with Asia’s existing suppliers, Indonesia and Australia, has increased
and has caused buyers to look for opportunities to diversify.
b) There is capacity in the market for a bulk ship-loading port on the US North West coast:
• The failure of some of the proposed US West Coast ports to secure the necessary approvals has
significantly enhanced the economic viability of any port that can be approved.
• The Wyoming government has passed legislation to financially support any port project that can
provide access for Powder River Valley (PRB) coal to the Asian markets.
c)
If  environmental  impact  in  the  port  region  can  be  minimised  it  improves  the  likelihood  that  a  port
project can be approved:
• County’s port project is not exposed to some of the issues faced by other port proponents where
approval has been denied.
d) A bulk loading facility should be capable of handling any bulk product:
• County has talked to producers and is proposing a facility capable of handling coal, potash and
timber products.
• While no specific contact has been made, County believes an efficient west coast port will attract
other potential users such as grain.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
BULK EXPORT FACILITY
PRB coal is appealing from a coal quality perspective, due to its low sulphur content and it, together with 
coals from other western US states, provides a diversified energy source for Asian buyers to mitigate the 
increasing risk of long-term reliance on Australia and Indonesia.  The nature of the resources (shallow, thick 
seams amenable to open cut mining technology) coupled with the relatively low labour and materials costs, 
allows PRB coal to be competitive into Asia, in spite of the relatively large mine-to-port transport distance.
Looking  at  these  issues,  County  International  has  determined  the  strategy  for  a  successful,  profitable  US 
based bulk materials export business lies in:
a) Limiting expenditure on our previously identified resources in the PRB;
b) Developing a bulk ship-loading facility capable of efficiently loading 20mtpa of coal into Panamax sized
vessels or larger;
c) Having access to third party coal that can ensure a fully utilized, economic port facility to service Asian
markets; and
d) Having port loading capacity for other bulk products, both to offset the cyclic nature of the export coal
business and to ensure maximum utilization of the infrastructure required for the port.
In early 2015, County commenced an in-depth focus on a particular site in North West USA that it believes 
provides an excellent opportunity for the construction of a major, multi-product bulk ship-loading facility.  The 
area identified for this terminal is on a brownfields industrial site and while the water depth is not sufficient for 
Panamax  sized  vessels  (60,000  DWT),  County  believes  the  technology  is  available  to  provide  efficient, 
environmentally safe, ship loading capacity for this sized ship and potentially even larger ships without the 
need for major dredging.  This technology will considerably limit the potential for any adverse environmental 
impact from the proposed facility, while bringing positive economic activity to the region where the facility will 
be located.
The Company, through a corporate entity established specifically for the purpose, is pursuing the approvals 
for  the  construction  of  a  port  facility  to  export  bulk  products  to  Asia.    County  currently  holds  30%  of  this 
vehicle  but  subject  to  a  number  of  milestones  being  achieved  and  through  a  series  of  steps,  including 
incremental funding, County has the opportunity to own an 85% share in the project.
After identifying the opportunity, County International engaged two international engineering companies, the 
first to examine the feasibility of constructing and operating a large, multi-product bulk ship-loading port on 
the identified site and the second to advise on the state of demand and supply for bulk products such as 
grain, potash, LNG and timber products sourced from within an economic distance of the North American 
west coast.
The preliminary  report on the feasibility of construction  was  generally  positive, stating that  the rail access 
plan  was  sound,  the  site  was  well  located  and  excellent  for  the  purpose  proposed  but  the  arrangements 
planned at that time for the shipping itself could be a challenge due to seasonal tidal issues and dredging 
requirements.  Rather than spend time and effort trying to improve the existing shipping method, County took 
the decision to mitigate the issues of tide and dredging by adopting an alternative innovative technological 
approach.    As  a  result,  County  now  holds  an  exclusive  right  with  a  barge  manufacturer  to  use  their 
technology  on  the  US  North  West  coast.    This  technology,  which  uses  shallow  draft,  fully  covered,  self-
docking barges for port side loading and trans-shipment to large ships off the coast, could potentially remove 
many of the environmental issues, which may otherwise arise.  It would also allow for the utilization of Cape- 
sized  vessels  where,  even  with  dredging,  the  maximum  dock-loaded  vessel  size  would  be  Panamax.    It 
should be noted that the barge system, while adopting fairly new technology has already been in operation in 
a number of locations.  In particular, it is innovative with respect to its efficiency and environmental focus.
County considered becoming a rail operator with the capability of delivering product to the port in order to 
assist in the port approval and development process. This has led the Company to pursue a number of rail 
ownership opportunities during F2016 but after an extensive search, County’s management considered that 
all potential opportunities to secure a rail business had been exhausted. A new direction has now been taken 
to bring an existing rail operator into the business as a partner.  Discussions with possible candidates has 
commenced with positive initial results.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
FINANCIAL POSITION
As detailed above, the world coal industry continues to be difficult. In light of this fact, the Board believes it is 
prudent  to  regularly  reassess  the  value  of  the  Company’s  coal  rights,  freehold  property  and  capitalised 
exploration  and  evaluation  expenditure.  To  this  end,  the  Board  further  impaired  these  assets  by  $67,530 
during the year ended 30th June 2016. It is noted that coal prices have recovered recently.
During the financial year the Company raised $0.47 million through a rights issue and sold a non-core land 
asset to provide additional working capital.
The Company has sufficient cash reserves to continue executing the early phases of its business strategy. 
The  Board,  including  the  Managing  Director  and  a  number  of  the  Company’s  key  advisors,  continue  to 
receive no remuneration.
No further work is planned on County International’s coal projects in the PRB in the immediate future. County 
International has  previously  announced some 730 million tonnes of JORC coal  resource in  its exploration 
areas in Wyoming’s PRB.
COAL RESOURCE SUMMARY  
A summary of County International’s current Coal Resources are contained in the following table.
Prospect
Shell Creek Coal Project
JORC 
Inferred Coal 
Resource 
59 Mt
JORC 
Indicated Coal 
Resource 
17 Mt
JORC 
Measured Coal 
Resource 
344 Mt
Miller Coal Project
-
Total JORC Coal Resource
59 Mt
-
17 Mt
310 Mt
654 Mt
Total JORC 
Coal 
Resource
420 Mt
310 Mt
730 Mt
Notes: (a) The information in the table "JORC-Compliant Coal Resources" is based on Independent Geologist’s Report, Aqua 
Terra  Consultants  Inc.,  October  2012.  The  information  in  this  table  that  relates  to  Geology,  Exploration  results  and  Mineral 
resources is based on information compiled by Steven J Stresky, who is a member of the American Institute of Professional 
Geologists,  and  a  full  time  employee  of  Aqua  Terra  Consultants  Inc.  (the  geology  consultants  to  County  International).  Mr 
Stresky  has  sufficient  experience  which  is  relevant  to  the  style  of  deposit  under  consideration  and  to  the  activity  he  is 
undertaking  to  qualify  as  a  “Competent  Person”  as  defined  in  the  2004  Edition  of  the  “Australasian  Code  for  Reporting  of 
Exploration Results, Mineral Resource and Ore  Reserves”. Mr Stresky consents to the inclusion in the report of the matters 
based on the information in the form and context in which it appears. This information was prepared and first disclosed under 
the JORC Code 2004. It has not been updated since to comply with the JORC Code 2012 on the basis that the information has 
not materially changed since it was last reported.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
PRELIMINARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Interest revenue 
Realised loss on sale of freehold property 
Fair value decrement on assets held for resale 
Impairment of coal rights and freehold property  
Administration, development and corporate expenses 
Interest paid
Loss before income tax expense 
Income tax expense 
Loss for the period
Basic earnings per share (cents per share)  
Diluted earnings per share (cents per share)
2016 
  $ 
2,497 
(177,354) 
(143,152) 
(67,530) 
(360,938) 
(748) 
(747,225) 
- 
(747,225)
(0.40) 
(0.40)
2015 
  $ 
14,728 
- 
- 
(9,871,376) 
(1,039,967) 
(49) 
(10,896,664) 
- 
(10,896,664)
(11.57) 
(11.57)
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
PRELIMINARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Loss  
Items that may be classified subsequently to the income statement 
Other comprehensive income: 
Foreign exchange translation difference for foreign operations 
Other comprehensive income for the period 
Total comprehensive loss attributable to members of the parent entity
2016 
$ 
(747,225)
2015 
$ 
(10,896,664)
88,406 
88,406 
(658,819)
1,517,170 
1,517,170 
(9,379,494)
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
PRELIMINARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 30 JUNE 2016
2016
$
2015 
 $
625,246 
5,476 
511,787 
1,142,509
245,114 
41,714 
1,168,418 
1,455,246
593,080
637,200
530,165 
97 
1,123,342 
2,265,851
431,907 
650 
1,069,757 
2,525,003
25,516 
25,516
86,951 
86,951
- 
- 
25,516 
2,240,335
- 
- 
86,951 
2,438,052
16,515,212 
2,925,967 
(17,200,844) 
2,240,335
16,054,410 
2,837,261 
(16,453,619) 
2,438,052
Assets 
Current Assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Assets held for resale 
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets 
Coal rights and capitalised exploration and evaluation 
expenditure 
Interest in joint venture 
Property, plant and equipment 
Total Non-Current Assets 
Total Assets
Liabilities 
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Total Non-Current Liabilities 
Total Liabilities 
Net Assets
Equity 
Issued Capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Total Equity
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
PRELIMINARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Issued 
Capital
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
Reserve
$
16,054,410 
- 
-
$
840,091 
- 
-
Share 
Option 
Reserve
$
320,000 
- 
160,000
Accumulated 
Losses
Total
$
$
(5,556,955) 
(10,896,664) 
-
11,657,546 
(10,896,664) 
160,000
-
1,517,170
-
-
1,517,170
16,054,410
2,357,261
480,000
(16,453,619)
2,438,052
16,054,410 
460,802
2,357,261 
-
480,000 
-
(16,453,619) 
-
-
- 
-
-
- 
88,406
300
- 
-
-
(747,225) 
-
2,438,052 
460,802
300
(747,225) 
88,406
Balance at 1 July 2014 
Loss attributable to members 
Share option reserve on recognition of 
remuneration options 
Total other comprehensive income for 
the year 
Balance at 30 June 2015
Balance at 1 July 2015 
Issue of shares (net of issue costs) 
Share option reserve on recognition of 
remuneration options 
Loss attributable to members 
Total other comprehensive income for 
the year
Balance at 30 June 2016
16,515,212
2,445,667
480,300
(17,200,844)
2,240,335
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
PRELIMINARY CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
Cash flows from operating activities 
Receipts from customers 
Payments to suppliers and employees (inclusive of GST) 
Interest received 
Coal bond released 
Interest paid 
Net cash used in operating activities
Cash flows from investing/financing activities 
Funds received from rights issue (net of issue costs) 
Funds advanced to joint venture 
Acquisition of coal rights, freehold property and exploration 
and evaluation expenditure 
Sale of freehold property 
Net cash provided/(used) by investing/financing activities
Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents held 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of reporting period
2016 
$
- 
(357,782) 
2,497 
39,234 
(748) 
(316,799)
460,802 
(152,796)
-
388,925 
696,931
380,132 
245,114 
625,246
2015 
$
- 
(745,878) 
16,704 
- 
(49) 
(729,223)
- 
(377,369)
(212,459)
- 
(589,828)
(1,319,051) 
1,564,165 
245,114
The accompanying notes form part of these financial statements
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
1. REPORTING ENTITY
County  International  Limited  is  a  company  domiciled  in  Australia.  The  consolidated  financial  statements  of  the 
Company  as  at  and  for  the  year  ended  30  June  2016  comprise  the  Company  and  its  controlled  entities  (together 
referred to as the Consolidated Entity). The Consolidated Entity is involved in coal exploration and development in the 
USA.
2. BASIS OF PREPARATION
a. Statement of compliance
The preliminary financial report is a general purpose financial report which has been prepared in accordance with 
Australian  Accounting  Standards  (AASBs)  (including  Australian  Interpretations)  adopted  by  the  Australian 
Accounting Standards Board and the Corporations Act 2001. The preliminary financial report of the Consolidated 
Entity  and  the  financial  report  of  the  Company  comply  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  and 
Interpretations adopted by the International Accounting Standards Board. The preliminary financial report does not 
include all the notes of the type normally included in an annual financial report. Accordingly, this report should be 
read  with  the latest annual  report  for the  year ended  30 June  2015  and  any  public announcement  made by  the 
Consolidated Entity during the year in accordance with the continuous disclosure requirement of the Corporations 
Act 2001.
b. Basis of measurement
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
c. Functional and presentation currency
These  consolidated  financial  statements  are  presented  in  Australian  dollars,  which  is  the  Company’s  functional 
currency.
d. Use of judgments and estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that 
affect  the  application  of  accounting  policies  and  reported  amounts  of  assets,  liabilities,  income  and  expenses. 
Actual results may differ from these estimates. Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing 
basis. Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and in any 
future  periods  affected.  In  particular,  information  about  significant  areas  of  estimation,  uncertainty  and  critical 
judgments in applying accounting policies that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the 
financial statements is described in the following areas:  Impairment and Financial instruments.
3. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these consolidated 
financial statements and have been applied consistently by all entities in the Consolidated Entity.
a. Basis of Consolidation
Controlled entities
Controlled entities are entities controlled by the Company. Control exists when the Company has power, directly or
indirectly, to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities. In 
assessing control, potential voting rights that presently are exercisable or convertible are taken into account. The 
financial statements of controlled entities are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that 
control commences until the date that control ceases. Investments in controlled entities are carried at their cost of 
acquisition in the Company’s financial statements.
Transactions eliminated on consolidation
Intra-group  balances  and  any  recognised  gains  and  losses  or  income  and  expenses  arising  from  intra-group 
transactions, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
b. Income Recognition
Revenue  is  recognised  to  the  extent  that  it  is  probable  that  the  economic  benefits  will  flow  to  the  entity  and  the 
revenue can be reliably measured.
The following specific recognition criteria must also be met before revenue is recognised:
Interest
Control of the right to receive the interest payment.
c. Goods and Services Tax
Revenues,  expenses  and  assets  are  recognised  net  of  the  amount  of  GST,  except  where  the  amount  of  GST
incurred is not recoverable from the taxation authority. In these circumstances, the GST is recognised as part of the 
cost of acquisition of the asset or as part of the expense. Receivables and payables are stated with the amount of 
GST included. The net amount of GST recoverable from, or payable to, the relevant taxation authority is included as 
a current asset or liability in the balance sheet. Cash flows are included in the statement of cash flows on a gross 
basis.  The  GST  components  of  cash  flows  arising  from  investing  and  financing  activities,  which  are  recoverable 
from, or payable to, the relevant taxation authority are classified as operating cash flows.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
d. Foreign Currency
Foreign currency transactions
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated to the respective functional currencies of controlled entities at the 
foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies at the reporting date are translated to the functional currency at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that 
date. Non-monetary transactions denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at historical cost are translated 
using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction. Non-monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies that are stated at fair value are translated to the functional currency at the foreign exchange rates ruling 
at the date the fair value was determined. Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the 
income statement.
Financial statements of foreign operations 
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations, including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on acquisition, 
generally  are  translated  to  the  functional  currency  at  foreign  exchange  rates  ruling  at  the  reporting  date.  The 
revenues and expenses of foreign operations are translated to the functional currency at rates approximating the 
foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates of transactions. Foreign currency differences arising from translation of 
controlled entities with a different functional currency to that of the Consolidated Entity are recognised in the foreign 
currency translation reserve (FCTR). When a foreign operation is disposed of, in part or in full, the relevant amount 
of its FCTR is transferred to profit or loss.  
Foreign exchange gains and losses arising from a monetary item receivable from or payable to a foreign operation, 
the settlement of which is neither planned nor likely in the foreseeable future, are considered to form part of a net 
investment in a foreign operation and are recognised directly in equity in the FCTR.
e. Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and call deposits with an original maturity of three months or 
less.
f. Provisions
A  provision  is  recognised  in  the  balance  sheet  when  the  Consolidated  Entity  has  a  present  legal  or constructive 
obligation as a result of a past event that can be measured reliably, and it is probable that an outflow of economic 
benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
g. Impairment
The carrying amounts of the Consolidated Entity’s assets are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether 
there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists, the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated (see 
below).  An  impairment  loss  is  recognised  whenever  the  carrying  amount  of  an  asset  or  its  cash-generating  unit 
exceeds its recoverable amount. Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement unless the asset has 
previously  been  revalued,  in  which  case  the  impairment  loss  is  recognised  as  a  reversal  to  the  extent  of  that 
previous revaluation with any excess recognised through the income statement. Impairment losses recognised in 
respect of cash generating units are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the 
cash generating unit or a group of units and then, to reduce the carrying amount of the other assets in the unit or a 
group of units on a pro-rata basis.
Calculation of recoverable amount
Receivables
The  recoverable  amount  of  the  Consolidated  Entity’s  investments  in  receivables  carried  at  amortised  cost  is 
calculated as the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at the original effective interest rate (i.e. 
the effective interest rate computed at initial recognition of these financial assets). Receivables with a short duration 
are  not  discounted.  Impairment  of  receivables  is  not  recognised  until  objective  evidence  is  available  that  a  loss 
event  has  occurred.  Significant  receivables  are  individually  assessed  for  impairment.  Impairment  testing  of 
significant receivables that are not assessed as impaired individually is performed by placing them into portfolios of 
significant  receivables  with  similar  risk  profiles  and  undertaking  a  collective  assessment  of  impairment.  Non-
significant  receivables  are  not  individually  assessed.  Instead,  impairment  testing  is  performed  by  placing  non-
significant receivables in portfolios of similar risk profiles, based on objective evidence from historical experience 
adjusted for any effects of conditions existing at each balance date. The allowance for impairment is calculated with 
reference to the profile of debtors in the Consolidated Entity’s sales and marketing regions.
Other Assets
The  recoverable  amount  of  other  assets  is  the  greater  of  their  fair  value  less  costs  to  sell,  and  value  in  use.  In 
assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a discount rate 
that  reflects  current  market  assessments  of  the  time  value  of  money  and  the  risks  specific  to  the  asset.  For  the 
purpose of impairment testing, assets are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generate cash 
flows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets or groups of assets (cash 
generating  units).  The  goodwill  acquired  in  a  business  combination,  for  the  purpose  of  impairment  testing  is 
allocated to the cash generating units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination. For an 
asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows, the recoverable amount is determined for the cash-
generating unit to which the asset belongs.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
g. Impairment (continued)
Reversals of Impairment
An impairment loss in respect of a receivable carried at amortised cost is reversed if the subsequent increase in 
recoverable amount can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised. An 
impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed. In respect of other assets, an impairment loss is reversed 
when  there  is  an  indication  that  the  impairment  loss  may  no  longer  exist  and  there  has  been  a  change  in  the 
estimates  used  to determine the  recoverable  amount.  An  impairment  loss  is  reversed  only  to  the  extent  that  the 
asset’s carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation 
or recognised, if no impairment loss had been recognised.
h. Property, Plant and Equipment
Owned assets
Items of property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation (see below) and impairment
losses (see accounting policy (g)). An asset’s cost is determined as the consideration provided plus incidental costs 
directly  attributable  to  the  acquisition.  Subsequent  costs  in  relation  to  replacing  a  part  of  property,  plant  and 
equipment are recognised in the carrying amount of the item if it is probable that future economic benefits embodied 
within  the  part  will  flow  to  the  Consolidated  Entity  and  its  cost  can  be  measured  reliably.  All  other  costs  are 
recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Leased assets – Operating leases
Payments made under operating leases are expensed on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease, except
where an alternative basis is more representative of the pattern of benefits to be derived from the leased property. 
Minimum lease payments include fixed rate increases.
Depreciation
Depreciation is recognised in the income statement on a straight-line basis. Items of property, plant and equipment, 
including leasehold assets, are depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, taking 
into  account  estimated  residual  values.  Assets  are  depreciated  from  the  date  of  acquisition  or,  in  respect  of 
internally constructed assets, from the time an asset is completed and held ready for use. Depreciation rates and 
methods,  useful  lives  and  residual  values  are  reviewed  at  each  balance  sheet  date.  When  changes  are  made, 
adjustments are reflected prospectively in current and future financial periods only. The estimated useful lives in the 
current and comparative periods are as follows:
Plant & equipment                           3 – 10 years
i. Exploration, Evaluation and Development Expenditure
Exploration, evaluation and development expenditure incurred is accumulated in respect of each identifiable area of 
interest.    These  costs  are  carried  forward  only  if  they  relate  to  an  area  of  interest  for  which  rights  of  tenure  are 
current  and  in  respect  of  which  such  costs  are  expected  to  be  recouped  through  successful  development  and 
exploitation or from sale of the area; or exploration and evaluation activities in the area have not, at balance date, 
resulted  in  booking  economically  recoverable  reserves,  and  active  operations  in,  or  relating  to,  this  area  are 
continuing.
Accumulated costs in respect of areas of interest which are abandoned are written off in full against profit in the 
period in which the decision to abandon the area is made.
A  regular  review  is  undertaken  of  each  area  of  interest  to  determine  the  appropriateness  of  continuing  to  carry
forward costs in relation to that area of interest.
Amortisation  is  charged  against  individual  deposits  currently  based  on  reserve  estimates.    Amortisation  is  not 
charged  on  costs  carried  forward  in  respect  of  areas  of  interest  in  the  development  phase  until  production 
commences.
j. Restoration
Provisions  for  future  environmental  restoration  are  recognised  where  there  is  a  present  obligation  as  a  result  of 
exploration, development, production, transportation or storage activities having been undertaken, and it is probable 
that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation. The estimated future obligations include 
the costs of removing facilities, abandoning mines and restoring the affected areas.
The provision for future restoration costs is the best estimate of the present value of the expenditure required to 
settle the restoration obligation at the reporting date, based on current legal requirements and technology. Future 
restoration costs are reviewed annually and any changes in the estimate are reflected in the present value of the 
restoration provision at the end of the balance sheet date, with a corresponding change in the cost of the associated 
asset.
The amount of the provision for future restoration costs relating to exploration, development and production facilities 
is capitalized and depleted as a component of the cost of those activities.
The unwinding of the effect of discounting on the provision is recognised as a finance cost.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016 
k. Employee Benefits
Wages, salaries and annual leave
Liabilities  for  employee  benefits  for  wages,  salaries and annual leave  expected  to settle within  12 months  of  the 
period  end  represent  present  obligations  resulting  from  employees’  services  provided  up  to  reporting  date, 
calculated  at  undiscounted  amounts  based  on  remuneration  wage  and  salary  rates  that  the  Consolidated  Entity 
expects to pay as at reporting date including related on-costs, such as workers’ compensation insurance and payroll 
tax.
l. Receivables
Trade and other receivables are stated at amortised cost less impairment losses (see accounting policy (g)).
m. Associates
Associates are entities over which the consolidated entity has significant influence but not control or joint control.
Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method. Under the equity method, the share of the 
profits  or  losses  of  the  associate  is  recognised  in  profit  or  loss  and  the  share  of  the  movements  in  equity  is 
recognised  in  other  comprehensive  income.  Investments  in  associates  are  carried  in  the  statement  of  financial 
position  at  cost  plus  post-acquisition  changes  in  the  consolidated  entity's  share  of  net  assets  of  the  associate. 
Goodwill relating to the associate is included in the carrying amount of the investment and is neither amortised nor 
individually tested for impairment. Dividends received or receivable from associates reduce the carrying amount of 
the investment.
When  the  consolidated  entity's  share  of  losses  in  an  associate  equals  or  exceeds  its  interest  in  the  associate, 
including any unsecured long-term receivables, the consolidated entity does not recognise further losses, unless it 
has incurred obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate.
The consolidated entity discontinues the use of the equity method upon the loss of significant influence over the 
associate and recognises any retained investment at its fair value. Any difference between the associate's carrying 
amount, fair value of the retained investment and proceeds from disposal is recognised in profit or loss.
n. Taxation
Income tax expense in the income statement for the periods presented comprises current and deferred tax. Income 
tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity, in 
which case it is recognised in equity. Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period, 
using tax rates enacted or substantially enacted at reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of 
previous periods.
Deferred tax is calculated using the balance sheet method, providing for temporary differences between the carrying 
amounts  of  assets  and  liabilities  for  financial  reporting  purposes  and  the  amounts  used  for  taxation  purposes. 
Temporary  differences  are  not  provided  for  the  initial  recognition  of  goodwill  and  other  assets  or  liabilities  in  a 
transaction that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit, or differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to 
the extent that it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to be applied to the temporary differences when they 
reverse, based upon the laws that have been enacted at reporting date. A deferred tax asset is recognised only to 
the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be recognised. 
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that 
the  related  tax  benefit  will  be  recognised.  Additional  income  taxes  that  arise  from  distribution  of  dividends  are 
recognised at the same time as liability to pay the related dividend is recognised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities and 
assets, and they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same taxable entity or on a different 
tax entity but they intend to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or their tax assets and liabilities will 
be recognised simultaneously.
o.  Payables
Trade and other payables are stated at amortised cost.
p.  Finance income and expense
Interest income is recognised as it accrues in the income statement using the effective interest method.
q. Earnings per share
The Consolidated Entity presents basic and diluted earnings/(loss) per share (EPS) for its ordinary shares. Basic 
EPS is calculated by dividing the net profit/(loss) attributable to equity holders of the parent for the financial period, 
after  excluding  any  costs  of  servicing  equity  (other  than  ordinary  shares)  by  the  weighted  average  number  of 
ordinary shares of the Company, adjusted for any bonus issue.
Diluted EPS is calculated using the basic EPS earnings/(loss) as the numerator. The weighted average number of 
shares  used  as  the  denominator  is  adjusted  by  the  after-tax  effect  of financing  costs  associated  with  the  dilutive 
potential ordinary shares and the effect on revenues and expenses of conversion to ordinary shares associated with 
dilutive potential ordinary shares adjusted for any bonus issue.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
r. Ordinary shares
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary shares and 
share options are recognised as a deduction from equity, net of any income tax benefit.
s. New standards and interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted
Australian  Accounting  Standards  and  Interpretations  that  have  recently  been  issued  or amended  but  are  not  yet 
mandatory, have not been early adopted by the consolidated entity for the annual reporting period ended 30 June 
2016.  The  consolidated  entity's  assessment  of  the  impact  of  these  new  or  amended  Accounting  Standards  and 
Interpretations, most relevant to the consolidated entity, are set out below.
AASB 9 Financial Instruments
This standard is applicable to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018. The standard replaces 
all previous versions of AASB 9 and completes the project to replace IAS 39 'Financial Instruments: Recognition and 
Measurement'.  AASB  9  introduces  new  classification  and  measurement  models  for  financial  assets.  A  financial 
asset shall be measured at amortised cost, if it is held within a business model whose objective is to hold assets in 
order  to collect contractual cash  flows,  which  arise  on  specified dates  and solely  principal  and  interest.  All  other 
financial instrument assets are to be classified and measured at fair value through profit or loss unless the entity 
makes an irrevocable election on initial recognition to present gains and losses on equity instruments (that are not 
held-for-trading) in other comprehensive income ('OCI'). For financial liabilities, the standard requires the portion of 
the change in fair value that relates to the entity's own credit risk to be presented in OCI (unless it would create an 
accounting  mismatch).  New  simpler  hedge  accounting  requirements  are  intended  to  more  closely  align  the 
accounting  treatment  with  the  risk  management  activities of  the  entity.  New  impairment requirements  will use an 
'expected credit loss' ('ECL') model to recognise an allowance. Impairment will be measured under a 12-month ECL 
method unless the credit risk on a financial instrument has increased significantly since initial recognition in which 
case  the  lifetime  ECL  method  is  adopted.  The  standard  introduces  additional  new  disclosures.  The  consolidated 
entity  will  adopt  this  standard  from  1  July  2018  but  the  impact  of  its  adoption  is  yet  to  be  assessed  by  the 
consolidated entity.
AASB 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers
This standard is applicable to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017. The standard provides 
a single standard for revenue recognition. The core principle of the standard is that an entity will recognise revenue 
to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to 
which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard will require: contracts 
(either  written,  verbal  or  implied)  to  be  identified,  together  with  the  separate  performance  obligations  within  the 
contract; determine the transaction price, adjusted for the time value of money excluding credit risk; allocation of the 
transaction price  to  the  separate  performance  obligations  on  a  basis  of  relative stand-alone selling  price of  each 
distinct  good  or service,  or estimation approach  if  no  distinct observable  prices exist;  and  recognition  of  revenue 
when each performance obligation is satisfied. Credit risk will be presented separately as an expense rather than 
adjusted to revenue. For goods, the performance obligation would be satisfied when the customer obtains control of 
the goods. For services, the performance obligation is satisfied when the service has been provided, typically for 
promises to transfer services to customers. For performance obligations satisfied over time, an entity would select 
an  appropriate  measure  of  progress  to  determine  how  much  revenue  should  be  recognised  as  the  performance 
obligation is satisfied. Contracts with customers will be presented in an entity's statement of financial position as a 
contract liability, a contract asset, or a receivable, depending on the relationship between the entity's performance 
and  the  customer's  payment.  Sufficient  quantitative  and  qualitative  disclosure  is  required  to  enable  users  to 
understand  the  contracts  with  customers;  the  significant  judgments  made  in  applying  the  guidance  to  those 
contracts; and any assets recognised from the costs to obtain or fulfil a contract with a customer. The consolidated 
entity  will  adopt  this  standard  from  1  July  2017  but  the  impact  of  its  adoption  is  yet  to  be  assessed  by  the 
consolidated entity.
AASB 16 Leases
This standard is applicable to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019. The standard replaces 
AASB 117 'Leases' and for lessees will eliminate the classifications of operating leases and finance leases. Subject 
to exceptions, a 'right-of-use' asset will be capitalised in the statement of financial position, measured as the present 
value of the unavoidable future lease payments to be made over the lease term. The exceptions relate to short-term 
leases of 12 months or less and leases of low-value assets (such as personal computers and small office furniture) 
where an accounting policy choice exists whereby either a 'right-of-use' asset is recognised or lease payments are 
expensed  to  profit  or  loss  as  incurred.  A  liability  corresponding  to  the  capitalised  lease  will  also  be  recognised, 
adjusted for lease prepayments, lease incentives received, initial direct costs incurred and an estimate of any future 
restoration, removal or dismantling costs. Straight-line operating lease expense recognition will be replaced with a 
depreciation charge for the leased asset (included in operating costs) and an interest expense on the recognised 
lease liability (included in finance costs). In the earlier periods of the lease, the expenses associated with the lease 
under AASB 16 will be higher when compared to lease expenses under AASB 117. However EBITDA (Earnings 
Before Interest, Tax, Depreciation and Amortisation) results will be improved as the operating expense is replaced 
by interest expense and depreciation in profit or loss under AASB 16. For classification within the statement of cash 
flows, the lease payments will be separated into both a principal (financing activities) and interest (either operating 
or financing activities) component. For lessor accounting, the standard does not substantially change how a lessor 
accounts for leases. The consolidated entity will adopt this standard from 1 July 2019 but the impact of its adoption 
is yet to be assessed by the consolidated entity.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
t. New, revised or amending Accounting Standards and Interpretations adopted
The  consolidated  entity  has  adopted  all  of  the  new,  revised  or  amending  Accounting  Standards  and
Interpretations issued by the Australian Accounting Standards Board ('AASB') that are mandatory for the current
reporting period.
Any new, revised or amending Accounting Standards or Interpretations that are not yet mandatory have not been
early adopted.
u. Other financial assets
Financial assets in the scope of AASB 139 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement are classified as 
either financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, loans and receivables, held-to-maturity investments, or 
available-for-sale investments, as appropriate. When financial assets are recognised initially, they are measured 
at  fair  value,  plus,  in  the  case  of  investments  not  at  fair  value  through  profit  or  loss,  directly  attributable 
transactions  costs.  The  Group  determines  the  classification  of  its  financial  assets  after  initial  recognition  and, 
when allowed and appropriate, re-evaluates designation at each financial period-end.
All  regular  way  purchases and  sales  of  financial  assets  are  recognised  on  the trade  date  i.e.  the date  that  the 
Group commits to purchase the asset. Regular way purchases or sales are purchases or sales of financial assets 
under  contracts  that  require  delivery  of  the  assets  within  the  period  established  generally  by  regulation  or 
convention in the marketplace.
(i) Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss
Financial assets classified as held for trading are included in the category ‘financial assets at fair value through 
profit or loss’. Financial assets are classified as held for trading if they are acquired for the purpose of selling in the 
near  term.  Derivatives  are  also  classified  as  held  for  trading  unless  they  are  designated  as  effective  hedging 
instruments. Gains or losses on investments held for trading are recognised in profit or loss.
  
(ii) Held-to-maturity investments
Non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments and fixed maturity are classified as held-to-
maturity when the Group has the positive intention and ability to hold to maturity. Investments intended to be held 
for an undefined period are not included in this classification. Investments that are intended to be held-to-maturity, 
such as bonds, are subsequently measured at amortised cost.
This cost is computed as the amount initially recognised minus principal repayments, plus or minus the cumulative 
amortisation using the effective interest method of any difference between the initially recognised amount and the 
maturity amount. This calculation includes all fees and points paid or received between parties to the contract that 
are  an  integral  part  of  the  effective  interest  rate,  transaction  costs  and  all  other  premiums  and  discounts.  For 
investments  carried  at  amortised  cost,  gains  and  losses  are  recognised  in  profit  or  loss  when  investments  are 
derecognised or impaired, as well as through amortisation process.
(iii) Loans and receivables
Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted 
in  an  active  market.  Such  assets  are  carried  at  amortised  cost  using  the  effective  interest  method.  Gains  and 
losses are recognised in profit or loss when the loans and receivables are derecognised or impaired, as well as 
through the amortisation process.
(iv) Available-for-sale investments
Available-for-sale investments are those non-derivative financial assets that are designated as available-for-sale 
or  are  not  classified  as  any  of  the  three  preceding  categories.  After  initial  recognition  available-for  sale 
investments  are  measured  at  fair  value  with  gains  or  losses  being  recognised  as  a  separate  component  of 
equity until the investment is derecognised or until the investment is determined to be impaired, at which time 
the cumulative gain or loss previously reported in equity is recognised in profit or loss.
The fair value of investments that are actively traded in organised financial markets is determined by reference 
to quoted market bid prices at the close of business on the balance sheet date. For investments with no active 
market, fair value is determined using valuation techniques. Such techniques include using recent arm’s length 
market transactions; reference to the current market value of another instrument that is substantially the same; 
discounted cash flow analysis and option pricing models.
4. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Overview 
The Company and Consolidated Entity have exposure to the following risks from the use of financial instruments: 
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
4. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued)
Overview (continued)
This note presents information about the Company's and the Consolidated Entity's exposure to each of the above 
risks, their objectives, policies and processes for measuring and managing risk, and the management of capital. 
Further quantitative disclosures are included throughout these consolidated financial statements. The Board of 
directors  has  overall  responsibility  for  the  establishment  and  oversight  of  the  risk  management  and  monitors 
operational  and  financial  risk  management  throughout  the  Consolidated  Entity.  Monitoring  risk  management 
includes ensuring appropriate policies and procedures are published and adhered to.
The Board aims to manage the impact of short-term fluctuations on the Company's and the Consolidated Entity's 
earnings. Over the longer term, permanent changes in market rates will have an impact on earnings.
The Company and the Consolidated Entity are exposed to risks from movements in exchange rates and interest 
rates  that  affect  revenues,  expenses,  assets,  liabilities  and  forecast  transactions.  Financial  risk  management 
aims to limit these market risks through ongoing operational and finance activities.  
Exposure to credit, foreign exchange and interest rate risks arises in the normal course of the Company's and the 
Consolidated Entity's business. Derivative financial instruments are not used to hedge exposure to fluctuations in 
foreign exchange rates.
Credit Risk 
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Company or the Consolidated Entity if a customer, controlled entity or 
counterparty  to  a  financial  instrument  fails  to  meet  its  contractual  obligations  and  arises  principally  from  the 
Company's and the Consolidated Entity's receivables from customers.
Trade and other receivables 
The  Company's  and  Consolidated  Entity's  exposure  to  credit  risk  is  influenced  mainly  by  the  geographical 
location  and  characteristics  of  individual  customers.  The  Consolidated  Entity  does  not  have  a  significant 
concentration of credit risk with a single customer.
Policies and procedures of credit management and administration of receivables are established and executed at 
a regional level. Individual regions deliver reports to management and the Board on debtor ageing and collection 
activities on a monthly basis.
In monitoring customer credit risk, the ageing profile of total receivables balances is reviewed by management by 
geographic region on a monthly basis. Regional management is responsible for identifying high risk customers 
and placing restrictions on future trading, including suspending future shipments and administering dispatches on 
a prepayment basis.
The Company and the Consolidated Entity have established an allowance for impairment that represents their 
estimate of incurred losses in respect of trade and other receivables.
Liquidity Risk 
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Consolidated Entity will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall 
due. The Consolidated Entity's approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will always 
have  sufficient  liquidity  to  meet  its  liabilities  when  due,  under  both  normal  and  stressed  conditions,  without 
incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Consolidated Entity's reputation.
The Consolidated Entity monitors cash flow requirements and produces cash flow projections for the short and 
long term with a view to optimising return on investments. Typically, the Consolidated Entity ensures that it has 
sufficient cash on demand to meet expected operational net cash flows for a period of at least 30 days, including 
the  servicing  of  financial  obligations.  This  excludes  the  potential  impact  of  extreme  circumstances  that  cannot 
reasonably be predicted, such as natural disasters.
Market Risk 
Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates, interest rates and equity 
prices  will affect  the  Company's  and  the  Consolidated  Entity's  net  loss  or the  value of  its  holdings  of  financial 
instruments.  The  objective  of market  risk management  is  to  manage  and  control  market  risk exposures  within 
acceptable parameters, while optimising the return.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
4. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued)
Currency Risk 
The  Consolidated  Entity  will  undertake  its  coal  exploration  and  development  activities  in  US  currency  and  be 
exposed  to  currency  risk  on  the  value  of  its  exploration  assets  that  are  denominated  in  United  States  dollars 
(USD). 
A percentage of the Consolidated Entity's future revenues from coal exploration and development activities may 
be  denominated  in  currencies  other  than  AUD.  Risk  resulting  from  the  translation  of  assets  and  liabilities  of 
foreign operations into the Consolidated Entity's reporting currency is not hedged.   
Interest Rate Risk 
The Consolidated Entity is exposed to interest rate risks in Australia. 
Capital Management 
The Consolidated Entity's objectives when managing capital are to safeguard its ability to continue as a going 
concern, to provide returns to shareholders, to provide benefits to other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal 
capital structure to reduce the cost of capital. The Board aims to maintain and develop a capital base appropriate 
to the Consolidated Entity. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Consolidated Entity can issue 
new shares. The Board of directors undertakes periodic reviews of the Consolidated Entity's capital management 
position  to  assess  whether  the  capital  management  structure  is  appropriate  to  meet  the  Consolidated  Entity's 
medium  and  long-term  strategic  requirements.  Neither  the  Company  nor  any  of  its  subsidiaries  is  subject  to 
externally  imposed  capital  requirements.  There  were  no  significant  changes  in  the  approach  to  capital 
management during the period.
5. CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND COMMITMENTS
The  Consolidated  Entity  is  not  aware  of  any  contingent  liabilities,  which  existed  as  at  the  end  of  the  financial 
period or have arisen as at the date of this report other than as detailed below.
Pursuant to the property purchase agreements in relation to the properties/leasehold coal rights acquired during 
the previous financial years, certain royalties are payable to vendors of the various properties. No royalties are 
payable at the date of these accounts.
Pursuant to a property purchase agreement in relation to the Shell Creek Coal Project located in Johnson County, 
Wyoming, in addition to certain royalties payable in the future, an additional amount is payable to the vendors of 
US$0.10  per  short  ton*  proved  up  to  JORC  Proved  Coal  Reserve  status  over  10  years,  up  to  an  estimated 
220,000,000 short tons. An amount of US$5 million was paid to the vendors in December 2011 in lieu of the first 
50,000,000 short tons to be proven up.
*Note that this agreement uses an imperial unit of measurement known as a “short ton” which is a unit of weight 
equivalent to 2,000 pounds or 907.18474 kilograms.
6. EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO REPORTING DATE
Since  the  end  of  the  year,  the  directors  are  not  aware  of  any  matter  that  has  significantly  affected  or  may
significantly affect the operations of the Company in subsequent financial periods.
7. DIVIDENDS
No dividends were paid during or subsequent to the year ended 30th June 2016.
SEGMENT REPORTING
The consolidated Entity operates only in one segment and accordingly no segment information is disclosed.
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED ENTITIES
No subsidiaries were acquired or disposed of during the year ended 30th June 2016.
8.
9.
10. DISCONTINUING OPERATIONS
No operations were discontinued during the year ended 30th June 2016.
11. JOINT VENTURE
During the 2015 financial year, the Company acquired 30% direct interest in a joint venture entity as part of its 
port development project. The Company has made total contributions of $507,847 to the joint venture to fund its 
port  development  project.  As at  30  June  2016  the  Company’s  direct  interest  in  this  joint  venture  is  30%.  The 
Company’s share of profit for the year ended 30 June 2016 was nil (2015: nil).
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
11. JOINT VENTURE (continued)
Summarised Presentation of Aggregate Assets, Liabilities 
and Performance of Joint Venture (Unaudited) 
Current assets 
Non-current assets (expenditure capitalised on port project) 
Total assets 
Liabilities 
Net assets 
Joint venture equity 
Revenues 
Unaudited results after income tax of joint venture
2016  
$
55,691 
474,474 
530,165 
- 
530,165 
530,165 
- 
-
2015 
$
65,022 
366,885 
431,907 
- 
431,907 
431,907 
- 
-
The  above-mentioned  summarised  joint  venture  financial  information  does  not  include  the  joint  venture’s 
intellectual property as the joint venture has assigned no monetary value to this asset. The recoverability of the 
carrying  amount  of  the  joint  venture  assets  is  dependent  upon  the  successful  development  of  a  commercially 
viable and feasible port facility.
12. ASSETS HELD FOR SALE
Freehold property held for sale
Movement:
At the beginning of reporting period 
Foreign exchange fluctuation 
Transfer from exploration expenditure capitalised 
Disposal during the period 
Impairment of asset held for sale
2016  
$
2015 
$
511,787
1,168,418
1,168,418 
57,203 
- 
(570,682) 
(143,152) 
511,787
- 
- 
1,168,418 
- 
- 
1,168,418
During the 2015 financial year the Board has determined that certain freehold land in Wyoming, USA previously 
shown in the accounts as part of the capitalised exploration expenditure, is to be realised as it is now surplus to 
the Company’s requirements. 
During the period the Company disposed of a parcel of freehold land held for resale which had a book valuation 
of  US$415,000,  resulting  in  a  loss  of  US$129,000.  The  Directors  also  reassessed  the  value  of  the  remaining 
freehold land held for sale, resulting in an additional impairment of US$104,000. 
The  Directors  revalued  this  land  based  on  their  assessment  of  the  value  of  nearby  properties  and  after 
consideration of local government valuations for the parcels of land.  
It is intended that the sale of the remaining property will be realised within the next twelve months. 
The freehold land is not allocated to an operating segment.
Preliminary Yearly Report June 2016
County International Limited
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
13. CHANGE OF COMPANY NAME
The  name  of  the  Company  was  changed  from  County  Coal  Limited  to  County  International  Limited  on  26th 
November 2015.
14. FOREIGN ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
N/A
15. NTA BACKING
Net tangible asset backing per ordinary share
2016 
1.19 cents
2015 
2.59 cents
16. OTHER SIGNIFICANT INFORMATION
N/A
17. LOSS PER SHARE
The following reflects the loss and share data used in the calculations of basic and diluted loss per share.
Net loss used in calculating basic and diluted earnings per 
share 
Basic and diluted (loss) per share (cents per share) 
Weighted average number of shares used in the calculation of 
basic and diluted loss per share 
Shares on issue at year end 
Number  of  options  on  issue  at  year  end  –  each  option  is 
exercisable  at  prices  between  4  and  40  cents  per  share  and 
converts to one ordinary share
2016 
$ 
(747,225)
(0.40) 
164,735,615
188,350,008 
11,100,000
2015 
$ 
(10,896,664)
(11.57) 
94,175,004
94,175,004 
6,100,000
Share  options  are  not  considered  dilutive  as  their  impact  would  be  to  decrease  the  net  loss  per  share. 
Accordingly, diluted loss per share has not been disclosed.
Audit
This report is based on accounts, which are in the process of being audited.
Description of likely dispute or qualification if the accounts have not yet been audited or subject to review or are in the 
process of being audited or subjected to review -Nil
Description of dispute or qualification if the accounts have been audited or subjected to review  -Nil
Sign here:
............................................................ 
(Secretary)
Date:  31st August 2016
Print name: T. Flitcroft