
ARC ENERGY TRUST
Notice of Annual Meeting of Unitholders
TO:
THE UNITHOLDERS OF ARC ENERGY TRUST
TAKE NOTICE that an Annual Meeting (the "Meeting") of the holders ("Unitholders") of trust units ("Trust Units") 
of ARC Energy Trust (the "Trust") will be held at the Ballroom in the Metropolitan Centre, 333 – 4th Avenue S.W., 
Calgary, Alberta, on Wednesday, the 23rd day of May, 2007, at 3:30 p.m. (Calgary time) for the following purposes:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
to receive and consider the consolidated financial statements of the Trust for the year ended December 31, 
2006 and the auditors' report thereon;
to appoint the Trustee of the Trust;
to elect the directors of ARC Resources Ltd.;
to appoint auditors of the Trust; and
to transact such other business as may properly be brought before the Meeting or any adjournment thereof.
The specific details of the matters proposed to be put before the Meeting are set forth in the Information Circular - 
Proxy Statement accompanying and forming part of this Notice.
Unitholders of the Trust who are unable to attend the Meeting in person are requested to date and sign the 
enclosed Instrument of Proxy and to mail it to or deposit it with Computershare Trust Company of Canada, 
100  University  Avenue,  Toronto  Ontario,  M5J  2Y1.    In  order  to  be  valid  and  acted  upon  at  the  Meeting, 
forms of proxy must be returned to the aforesaid address not less than 24 hours before the time set for the 
holding of the Meeting or any adjournment thereof.
Computershare Trust Company of Canada, the Trustee of the Trust, has fixed the record date for the Meeting at the 
close of business on April 18, 2007 (the "Record Date").  Unitholders of record will be entitled to vote those Trust 
Units included in the list of Unitholders prepared as at the Record Date at the Meeting.  No Unitholder who became 
a Unitholder after the Record Date shall be entitled to vote at the Meeting.
DATED at Calgary, Alberta, this 31st day of March, 2007.
BY ORDER OF COMPUTERSHARE TRUST COMPANY 
OF CANADA, by ARC RESOURCES LTD. 
 
 
 
(signed)
John P. Dielwart 
President and Chief Executive Officer
G:\052076\0143\Notice  03.doc