
8-K 1 d797579d8k.htm FORM 8-K Form 8-K
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported): September 30, 2014
Centrus Energy Corp.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation)
1-14287
(Commission
File Number)
52-2107911
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
Two Democracy Center
6903 Rockledge Drive
Bethesda, MD 20817
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (301) 564-3200
USEC Inc.
(Former name or former address, if changed since last report.)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the
filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following provisions:
¨ Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
¨
¨
¨
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-
12)
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act
(17 CFR 240.14d-2(b))
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act
(17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
EXPLANATORY NOTE
As previously disclosed in its Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”) on March 5, 2014 (the “Petition Date”), USEC Inc. (“USEC”) filed a
voluntary petition seeking reorganization relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States
Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware
(the “Bankruptcy Court” and such case, the “Bankruptcy Case”). The Bankruptcy Case is being
administered under the caption “In re: USEC Inc., Debtor” Case No. 14-10475. USEC’s
subsidiaries (collectively, the “Non-Filing Entities”), including the United States Enrichment
Corporation (“Enrichment Corp.”) which is USEC’s primary operating subsidiary, are not Debtors
in the Bankruptcy Case. Also, as previously disclosed in its Current Report on Form 8-K filed with
the SEC on September 5, 2014, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order (the “Confirmation Order”)
approving and confirming the Plan of Reorganization of USEC Inc., dated July 11, 2014 (the
“Plan”). Except as noted in Item 1.01 or defined herein, capitalized terms have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Plan.
Consummation of the Plan was subject to certain conditions. On September 30, 2014 (the
“Effective Date”), all of the conditions were satisfied or waived, and the Plan became effective
and was implemented in accordance with its terms. On the Effective Date, USEC’s name was
changed to Centrus Energy Corp. (the “Company”) (the “Name Change”). On September 30,
2014, the Company issued a press release announcing the implementation of the Plan and the
Name Change, which is filed as Exhibit 99.1 hereto and is incorporated herein by reference.
As further described below, pursuant to the Plan, on the Effective Date, all shares of the
Company’s common stock, $0.10 par value per share (the “Old Common Stock”), all shares of the
Company’s Series B-1 12.75% convertible preferred stock, par value $1.00 per share (the “Old
Preferred Stock”), and all of the Company’s 3% convertible senior notes due 2014 (the “Old
Notes”) that were issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Date were cancelled.
Pursuant to the Plan, as further described below, on September 30, 2014, the Company issued
new Class A common stock, $0.10 par value per share (the “New Class A Common Stock”), new
Class B common stock, $0.10 par value per share (the “New Class B Common Stock”) and new
8% PIK toggle notes (the “New Notes”). In addition, pursuant to the Plan, the Company made a
cash payment of approximately $15.86 million to former holders of the Old Notes.
Item 1.01Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement
NEW NOTES, INDENTURE, PLEDGE AND SECURITY AGREEMENT AND NOTE
SUBORDINATION AGREEMENT
On the Effective Date, the Company issued the New Notes with an initial aggregate principal
amount of $240.38 million; provided that, the aggregate principal amount of the New Notes may
be increased after the date of issuance (“Issue Date”) as a result of any payment of interest on the
New Notes in the form of PIK interest. In connection with issuing the New Notes, Enrichment
Corp. entered into a Pledge and Security Agreement and the Note Subordination Agreement.
The terms of the New Notes will include those stated in the Indenture entered into by the
Company, Enrichment Corp and Delaware Trust Company, as trustee (the “Indenture”) and those
made part of the Indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended.
Capitalized terms used but not otherwise defined in this Item 1.01 have the meanings ascribed to
them in the Indenture.
The New Notes are guaranteed by Enrichment Corp., on a limited, subordinated and conditional
basis, as described in the Indenture. Under certain circumstances, Enrichment Corp. may be
released from its guarantee without the consent of the holders of the New Notes, including (other
than with respect to certain amounts owed as described in the Indenture) upon the occurrence of
certain termination events set forth in the Indenture.
The New Notes will mature 5 years from the Issue Date; provided that, the Company has the right
to extend the maturity date to 10 years from the Issue Date upon the occurrence of certain
conditions set forth in the Indenture. The New Notes will pay interest at a rate of 8.0% per annum.
Interest will accrue from the most recent date to which interest has been paid, or if no interest has
been paid, from the Issue Date. Interest will be payable semi-annually in arrears based on a 360
day year. The Company has elected to pay in kind 3.0% of interest for the semi-annual interest
payment dates occurring on March 31, 2015 and September 30, 2015. The Company has the
option to pay in kind up to 5.5% of interest from October 1, 2015 through maturity.
The New Notes are subordinated in right of payment to certain indebtedness and obligation of
the Company designated as Issuer Senior Debt in the Indenture. The New Notes rank pari passu
in right of payment with all existing and future unsubordinated indebtedness of the Company
(other than the Issuer Senior Debt) and are senior in right of payment to all existing and future
subordinated indebtedness of the Company; and only indebtedness and obligations that are
Issuer Senior Debt shall rank senior to the indebtedness evidenced by the New Notes.
The Enrichment Corp. guaranty is subordinated in right of payment to indebtedness and
obligations of Enrichment Corp. designated as Designated Senior Claims in the Indenture. The
guaranty ranks pari passu in right of payment with all existing and future unsubordinated
indebtedness of Enrichment Corp. (other than the Designated Senior Claims) and are senior in
right of payment to all existing and future subordinated indebtedness of Enrichment Corp.; and
only indebtedness and obligations of Enrichment Corp. that are Designated Senior Claims shall
rank senior to the obligations of Enrichment Corp. under the guaranty.
The New Notes are not secured by a lien on any assets of the Company. Enrichment Corp.’s
obligations under its guaranty will be secured by a lien on Enrichment Corp.’s assets constituting
collateral, including, among other things, its inventory and its accounts receivable, subject to
certain exceptions. The security interest securing the guaranty is junior in priority to any and all
security interest and liens at any time securing the Designated Senior Claims.
The New Notes are redeemable by the Company in whole or in part, at any time, at a price equal
to one hundred percent (100%) of the principal amount (including as a result of the payment of
PIK interest) of the New Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the
date of redemption. The New Notes are not subject to any mandatory redemption obligation.
There is no sinking fund provided for the New Notes. Upon the occurrence of a Change of
Control as defined in the Indenture, the Company will be required to offer to repurchase all of the
New Notes at 101% of the aggregate principal amount repurchased plus accrued and unpaid
interest, if any.
The Indenture contains covenants customary for securities such as the New Notes covering
(i) the payment of principal and interest, (ii) maintenance of an office or agency for the payment of
the notes, (iii) SEC Reports, (iv) stay, extension and usury laws, (v) payment of taxes,
(vi) existence, (vii) maintenance of properties and (viii) maintenance of insurance. The Indenture
otherwise contains no covenants that restrict the operation of the Company or its subsidiaries, or
their respective businesses other than (i) limitations on Enrichment Corp.’s ability to transfer the
collateral and (ii) limitations on liens that may be imposed on the assets of Enrichment Corp.,
which covenants are, in each case, subject to certain exceptions set forth in the Indenture.
The foregoing summary is not intended to be a complete description and is qualified in its entirety
by reference to the full text of the Indenture, Pledge and Security Agreement and Note
Subordination Agreement, which are attached hereto as Exhibits 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, respectively
and are incorporated herein by reference.
Item 1.02Termination of a Material Definitive Agreement
On the Effective Date, the Old Notes were cancelled and the Indenture dated September 28,
2007 (the “Old Indenture”) (see Exhibit 4.1 of USEC’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the
SEC on September 28, 2007), between USEC and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. was terminated.
Further, on the Effective Date the Warrants to purchase shares of Class B Common Stock or
Series C Convertible Preferred Stock issued to Toshiba America Nuclear Energy Corporation
and Babcock & Wilcox Investment Company (see Exhibits 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, of USEC’s
Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on September 2, 2010) were terminated.
Item 2.03Creation of a Direct Financial Obligation or an Obligation under an Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangement of a Registrant
The information set forth in Item 1.01 of this Current Report under the heading “NEW NOTES,
INDENTURE, PLEDGE AND SECURITY AGREEMENT AND NOTE SUBORDINATION
AGREEMENT” is incorporated by reference into this Item 2.03.
Item 3.01Notice of Delisting or Failure to Satisfy a Continued Listing Rule or Standard;
Transfer of Listing
Since April 2013, USEC has been out of compliance with the New York Stock Exchange (the
“NYSE”) continued listing requirements. In August 2013, the NYSE accepted USEC’s plan of
compliance and USEC has been subject to periodic review by the NYSE with respect to USEC’s
progress. For a description of USEC’s NYSE listing standards status, see “NYSE Listing
Standards Notices” starting on page 31 of USEC’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended June 30, 2014 filed with the SEC on August 13, 2014 and incorporated herein by
reference.
On the Effective Date, the Company provided written notice to the NYSE that, pursuant to the
Plan, all outstanding shares of Old Common Stock (CUSIP: 90333E) were cancelled.
Accordingly, the Company requested that the NYSE suspend trading of and delist the Old
Common Stock.
The Company’s New Class A Common Stock has been approved for listing on the NYSE under
the symbol LEU. The Company expects that its New Class A Common Stock will begin trading
on the NYSE on or about September 30, 2014. Continued listing of the New Class A Common
Stock requires compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing requirements which include, among
other things, requirements to maintain a minimum market capitalization and minimum share
price. There can be no assurance that the Company can meet the NYSE continued listing
requirements.
Item 3.02Unregistered Sale of Equity Securities
On the Effective Date and in accordance with the Plan, the Company issued a total of 7,563,600
shares of New Class A Common Stock and 1,436,400 shares of New Class B Common Stock.
The New Class A Common Stock was issued to former holders of the Old Notes and holders of
allowed interests/claims in Class 7 of the Plan. The New Class B Common Stock was issued to
former holders of the Old Preferred Stock that held Allowed Preferred Stock Interests/Claims.
The issuance of the shares of New Class A Common Stock and New Class B Common Stock
under the Plan was not registered with the SEC. The shares of New Class A Common Stock and
New Class B Common Stock were issued in reliance on exemptions under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) provided by Section 1145 of the Bankruptcy Code.
Section 1145 of the Bankruptcy Code exempts offers and sales of securities from registration
under Section 5 of the Securities Act if the following principal requirements are satisfied:
•  the securities must be issued under a plan of reorganization by the debtor, its successor
under a plan or an affiliate participating in a joint plan of reorganization with the debtor; and
•  the securities must be issued either (i) in exchange for the recipient’s claim against, interest in
or claim for administrative expense in the case concerning the debtor or such affiliate or
(ii) “principally” in such exchange and “partly” for cash or property (as such terms are
construed under the Bankruptcy Code).
Item 3.03Material Modification of the Rights of Security Holders
On the Effective Date, all interests in the Company’s Old Common Stock, Old Preferred Stock
and Old Notes, and the warrants and options exercisable therefor, as applicable were cancelled,
discharged and deemed of no further force and effect.
As of the Effective Date, the Company’s authorized capital stock consists of 120,000,000
authorized shares, which include 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $1.00 per share
(“Preferred Stock”) and 100,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, of
which 70,000,000 shares are classified as New Class A Common Stock and 30,000,000 shares
are classified as New Class B Common Stock.
Pursuant to the Plan and on the Effective Date, 10,000,000 shares of common stock were issued
or reserved for issuance by the Company, which includes the issuance of 7,563,600 shares of
New Class A Common Stock, the issuance of 1,436,400 shares of New Class B Common Stock
and the reservation of 1,000,000 shares of New Class A Common Stock under the Management
Incentive Plan.
Item 5.01Changes in Control of Registrant.
The information regarding the issuance of shares of New Class A Common Stock and New
Class B Common Stock and the cancellation of the Old Common Stock and Old Preferred Stock
set forth in Items 3.02 and 3.03 of this Current Report, respectively, is incorporated by reference
into this Item 5.01.
Additionally, as discussed further in Item 5.02 of this Current Report, the composition of the
Company’s Board of Directors as of the Effective Date is substantially different from the
composition of the Company’s Board of Directors prior to the Effective Date.
Item 5.02Departure of Directors or Certain Officers; Election of Directors; Appointment of
Certain Officers; Compensatory Arrangement of Certain Officers
DEPARTURE OF DIRECTORS AND APPOINTMENT OF NEW DIRECTORS
In accordance with the Plan, as of the Effective Date, the following members of the Company’s
Board of Directors were deemed to have resigned: Messrs. James R. Mellor, Sigmund L.
Cornelius, Joseph T. Doyle, Walter E. Skowronski and M. Richard Smith. In accordance with the
Plan, the following individuals were appointed to the Board:
•  Mr. Osbert Hood has served as chief operating officer of Advent Capital Management, LLC
since 2012. Mr. Hood oversees all non-investment functions including business development,
product development, investor relations, operations and technology. Prior to joining Advent,
Mr. Hood served as a consultant and business adviser from 2010 to 2012 and was chairman
and chief executive officer of MacKay Shields, LLC from 2002 to 2010. Prior to MacKay
Shields, LLC, he served as Pioneer Investments USA’s chief executive officer and president
from 2003 to 2006 and chief operating officer from 2000 to 2003.
•  Mr. W. Thomas Jagodinski has served on the Board of Directors of Lindsay Corp. (LNN) as its
Audit Committee Chairman since 2008. Mr. Jagodinski has served on the Board of Directors
and as Audit Committee Chairman of Quinpario Acquisition Corp. (QPAC), a special purpose
acquisition corporation. Effective upon the consummation of a merger in 2014, QPAC
changed its name to Jason Industries (JASN) and Mr. Jagodinski resigned from the Board.
Mr. Jagodinski served on the Board of Directors of Phosphate Holdings, Inc. and its Audit,
Compensation and Governance Committees from 2009-2014 and served as Chairman of the
Board of Directors from 2011-2014. Mr. Jagodinski also served on the Board of Directors and
as Audit Committee Chairman of Solutia Inc. from 2008 – 2012 when the company was
acquired by another company. Mr. Jagodinski, a private investor, was President and Chief
Executive Officer of Delta and Pine Land Company from 2002 until June 2007 when the
company was acquired by another company.
•  Ms. Patricia J. Jamieson retired from Keycorp in March 2013, where she held various
executive director positions, reporting directly to the chief financial officer since 1998. From
2009 to March 2013, Ms. Jamieson served as the executive director - planning & performance
management for Keycorp. From 1998 to 2009, she was the chief financial officer for Key
Corporate Bank, one of the two main divisions of Keycorp. From 1996 to October 1998, she
was the chief financial officer of McDonald & Company Investments Inc., a publicly traded
brokerage, asset management and investment banking company, which was purchased by
Keycorp in October 1998.
•  Mr. Suleman E. Lunat is a Partner of M-III Partners, LLC, an investment firm. Mr. Lunat was
most recently a senior principal and portfolio manager in the Capital Markets division of
Apollo Global Management, where he was employed from 2007 to 2013, focused on
managing a portfolio of special situation credit and equity investments in both the public and
private markets. Prior to joining Apollo in 2007, he was a senior investment analyst at both
Longacre Fund Management from 2005 to 2007 and Sandell Asset Management from 2004
to 2005. Prior to joining Sandell, he was a vice president at Greenhill & Co., where he was
employed from 1997 to 2003, focused on bankruptcy restructuring, M&A and principal
investing.
•  Mr. Michael Preston Morrell retired in 2003 as president of Allegheny Energy Supply
Company, a wholly owned
subsidiary of Allegheny Energy, Inc., an electric utility holding company. He joined Allegheny
in 1996 as senior vice president and chief financial officer. Prior to that, he worked for 19
years at General Public Utilities Corporation, an electric utility holding company, as vice
president and treasurer, vice president of a General Public Utilities Corporation subsidiary
and as a nuclear engineer. Mr. Morrell began his career as a nuclear submarine officer in the
U.S. Navy, and worked as a nuclear engineer at Burns & Roe, Inc. for one year. He
previously served on the boards of directors of all Allegheny Energy, Inc. subsidiaries, all
General Public Utilities Corporation subsidiaries and the Utilities Mutual Insurance
Company. Most recently, Mr. Morrell has served as business manager for a non-profit and
was an adjunct professor of mathematics at Shepherd University.
COMPENSATORY ARRANGEMENTS
2014 EQUITY INCENTIVE PLAN
On the Effective Date, the Company adopted the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan (“2014 Equity
Incentive Plan”) which authorizes the issuance of up to 1,000,000 shares of the New Class A
Common Stock to the Company’s employees, officers, directors and other individuals providing
services to the Company or its affiliates pursuant to options, stock appreciation rights, restricted
stock units, restricted stock, performance awards, dividend equivalent rights and other stock
based awards, as well as cash based awards. The foregoing summary is not intended to be a
complete description and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the 2014 Equity
Incentive Plan attached hereto as Exhibit 10.1 and incorporated herein by reference.
2014 POST-RESTRUCTURING INCENTIVE PLAN
On the Effective Date, the Company adopted the 2014 Post-Restructuring Incentive Plan which
provides for the award of an annual cash award for 2014 (“Annual Award”), and a long-term
incentive cash award (“LTI”) to be granted within 60 days after the Effective Date, as well as, a
grant of options under the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan in an amount to be determined by the
Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors within 60 days after the Effective Date. The
amount of each executive officer’s target Annual Award and LTI is 35% of base salary. Awards
under the Company’s quarterly incentive plan were terminated and cancelled at the Effective
Date. The Annual Award and the LTI are intended to supersede and replace awards under that
plan.
The Annual Award will be paid in cash only if a commitment is secured by December 31, 2014
which will continue the American Centrifuge Project for at least one year beyond September
2014 on a basis that will maintain a domestic enrichment capability using the American
Centrifuge technology while preserving the optionality for future commercialization, provided that
the Company retains a material ownership interest or material contractual role, directly or through
its affiliates, in such program during the period.
The foregoing summary is not intended to be a complete description and is qualified in its entirety
by reference to the full text of the 2014 Post-Restructuring Incentive Plan attached hereto as
Exhibit 10.2 and incorporated herein by reference.
EXECUTIVE SEVERANCE PLAN
On the Effective Date, the Company amended and restated its Executive Severance Plan to
allow covered executives to terminate for “good reason” during the twelve-month period following
the Effective Date (the “protected period”) and treat such termination as a termination without
“cause” entitling the executive to severance under the terms of the plan.
Under the terms of the Executive Severance Plan, if a covered executive is terminated without
cause, or for good reason during the protected period then he or she is eligible to receive: (a) a
prorated share of his or her current annual incentive (payable at the end of the performance
period based on actual performance) up to the date of termination; (b) a lump sum cash
severance equal to two times the sum of the executive’s annual base salary and bonus
(generally, the executive’s target annual award for the year of termination or, if higher, the
average of the three most recent annual bonuses paid to the executive prior to the termination
date); and (c) continuation of medical and dental coverage as well as life insurance paid for by
the Company for two years after termination (or until similar coverage is received from a
subsequent
employer, whichever occurs first), continued eligibility to participate in the Company’s employee
assistance plan for two years, and outplacement assistance services for six months (not to
exceed $15,000). Effective for terminations after January 1, 2015, the lump sum cash severance
is reduced from two times to one times the sum of the executive’s annual base salary and bonus
award, and the continuation of benefits is reduced from two years to one year after termination.
The foregoing summary is not intended to be a complete description and is qualified in its entirety
by reference to the full text of the Amended and Restated Centrus Energy Corp. Executive
Severance Plan attached hereto as Exhibit 10.3 and incorporated herein by reference.
Item 5.03Amendments to Articles of Incorporation or By-Laws; Changes in Fiscal Year
On the Effective Date and in accordance with the Plan, USEC filed a Certificate of Amendment to
the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State to effect the
Name Change.
After the Name Change, on the Effective Date and in accordance with the Plan, the Company
filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State.
The Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation includes, among other things, the
following material amendments to the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation:
•  The Company’s authorized capital stock consists of 120,000,000 authorized shares, which
include 20,000,000 shares of Preferred Stock, 70,000,000 shares of New Class A Common
Stock and 30,000,000 shares of New Class B Common Stock.
The foregoing summary is not intended to be a complete description and is qualified in its entirety
by reference to the full text of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation attached hereto
as Exhibit 3.1 and incorporated herein by reference.
Also, on the Effective Date and in accordance with the Plan, the Company adopted the Second
Amended and Restated Bylaws (the “Bylaws”) to reflect the Name Change, among other things.
The foregoing summary of the terms of the Bylaws is not intended to be a complete description
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Bylaws attached hereto as Exhibit
3.2 and incorporated herein by reference.
Item 9.01Exhibits.
(d) Exhibits
Exhibit
Number  
  3.1
3.2
4.1
4.2
Description
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Centrus Energy Corp.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Registration Statement
on Form 8-A, filed with the SEC on September 30, 2014).
Second Amended and Restated Bylaws of Centrus Energy Corp. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 3.2 of the Company’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A,
filed with the SEC on September 30, 2014).
Indenture by and among Centrus Energy Corp., as Issuer, United States
Enrichment Corporation, as Note Guarantor and Delaware Trust Company, as
Trustee and Collateral Agent, dated as of September 30, 2014.
Pledge and Security Agreement by and among Delaware Trust Company, as
Collateral Agent, and United States Enrichment Corporation dated as of
September 30, 2014.
4.3
10.1  
10.2  
10.3  
99.1
Note Subordination Agreement by and among United States Enrichment Corporation
and Delaware Trust Company, as Trustee, dated as of September 30, 2014.
Centrus Energy Corp. 2014 Equity Incentive Plan.
Centrus Energy Corp. 2014 Post-Restructuring Incentive Plan.
Amended and Restated Centrus Energy Corp. Executive Severance Plan.
Press Release dated September 30, 2014 issued by Centrus Energy Corp.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
This Current Report on Form 8-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of
Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 - that is, statements related to future events.
In this context, forward-looking statements may address our expected future business and
financial performance, and often contain words such as “expects”, “anticipates”, “intends”, “plans”,
“believes”, “will” and other words of similar meaning. Forward-looking statements by their nature
address matters that are, to different degrees, uncertain. For Centrus Energy Corp., particular
risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual future results to differ materially from those
expressed in our forward-looking statements include, uncertainty regarding our ability to maintain
the listing of our common stock on the NYSE; uncertainty of our ability to improve our operating
structure, financial results and profitability following emergence from Chapter 11; risks related to
the ongoing transition of our business, including the impact of our ceasing enrichment at the
Paducah gaseous diffusion plant and uncertainty regarding our ability to deploy the American
Centrifuge project; uncertainty regarding funding for the American Centrifuge project and the
potential for a demobilization or termination of the American Centrifuge project if additional
government funding is not provided during the term of the agreement with UT-Battelle, LLC, the
management and operating contractor for Oak Ridge National Laboratory (“ORNL”) for continued
research, development and demonstration of the American Centrifuge technology (the “ACTDO
Agreement”), including for any option periods, or upon completion of such agreement; risks
related to our ability to perform the work required under the ACTDO Agreement at a cost that
does not exceed the firm fixed funding provided thereunder; the impact of actions we have taken
or may take (including as a result of the reduction in scope of work under the ACTDO Agreement)
to reduce spending on the American Centrifuge project, including the potential loss of key
suppliers and employees, impacts to cost and schedule and the ability to remobilize for
commercial deployment of the American Centrifuge Plant, impacts on our liquidity as a result of
demobilization or termination liabilities; risks related to the underfunding of our defined benefit
pension plans and potential actions the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation could pursue in
connection with ceasing enrichment at the gaseous diffusion plants or with any demobilization or
termination of the American Centrifuge project or otherwise including the involuntary termination
of the plans, imposition of liens or requiring additional funding; the impact of uncertainty
regarding our ability to continue as a going concern on our liquidity and prospects; our ability to
implement the agreement with the U.S. Department of Energy (“DOE”) regarding the transition of
the Paducah gaseous diffusion plant and uncertainties regarding the transition costs and other
impacts of United States Enrichment Corporation, a subsidiary of Centrus Energy Corp., ceasing
enrichment at the Paducah gaseous diffusion plant and returning the plant to DOE; the continued
impact of the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan on the nuclear industry and on our
business, results of operations and prospects; the impact and potential extended duration of the
current supply/demand imbalance in the market for low enriched uranium (“LEU”); the impact of
enrichment market conditions, increased project costs and other factors on the economic viability
of the American Centrifuge project without additional government support and on our ability to
finance the project and the potential for a demobilization or termination of the project; uncertainty
regarding our ability to achieve targeted performance over the life of the American Centrifuge
Plant which could affect the overall economics of the American Centrifuge Plant; uncertainty
concerning the ultimate success of our efforts to obtain a loan guarantee from DOE and/or other
financing for the American Centrifuge project or additional government support for the project and
the timing and terms thereof; uncertainty concerning customer actions under current contracts
and in future contracting due to the delay and uncertainty in deployment of the American
Centrifuge technology and/or as a result of changes required due to our cessation of enrichment
at Paducah; the dependency of government funding or other government support for the
American Centrifuge project on Congressional appropriations or on actions by DOE or Congress;
potential changes in our anticipated
ownership of or role in the American Centrifuge project, including as a result of our role as a
subcontractor to ORNL or as a result of the need to raise additional capital to finance the project
in the future; the potential for DOE to seek to terminate or exercise its remedies under the 2002
DOE-USEC agreement, or to require modifications to such agreement that are materially adverse
to Centrus Energy Corp.’s interests; changes in U.S. government priorities and the availability of
government funding or support, including loan guarantees; risks related to our ability to manage
our liquidity without a credit facility; our dependence on deliveries of LEU from Russia under a
commercial supply agreement (the “Russian Supply Agreement”) with a Russian government
entity known as Techsnabexport (“TENEX”) and limitations on our ability to import the Russian
LEU we buy under the Russian Supply Agreement into the United States and other countries;
risks related to actions that may be taken by the U.S. Government, the Russian Government or
other governments that could affect our ability or the ability of TENEX to perform under the
Russian Supply Agreement, including the imposition of sanctions, restrictions or other
requirements; risks related to our ability to sell the LEU we procure under our fixed purchase
obligations under the Russian Supply Agreement; the decrease or elimination of duties charged
on imports of foreign-produced LEU; pricing trends and demand in the uranium and enrichment
markets and their impact on our profitability; movement and timing of customer orders; changes
to, or termination of, our agreements with the U.S. government; risks related to delays in payment
for our contract services work performed for DOE, including our ability to resolve certified claims
for payment filed by United States Enrichment Corporation under the Contracts Dispute Act; the
impact of government regulation by DOE and the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission; the
outcome of legal proceedings and other contingencies (including lawsuits and government
investigations or audits); the competitive environment for our products and services; changes in
the nuclear energy industry; the impact of volatile financial market conditions on our business,
liquidity, prospects, pension assets and credit and insurance facilities; the timing of recognition of
previously deferred revenue; and other risks and uncertainties discussed in our filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, including our Annual Report on Form 10-K and quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q. Revenue and operating results can fluctuate significantly from quarter to
quarter, and in some cases, year to year. We do not undertake to update our forward-looking
statements except as required by law.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized.
SIGNATURE
September 30, 2014
By:
Centrus Energy Corp.
/s/    John C. Barpoulis
John C. Barpoulis
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit
Number  
  3.1
3.2
4.1
4.2
4.3
10.1
10.2
10.3
99.1
Description
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Centrus Energy Corp.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 of the Company’s Registration Statement
on Form 8-A, filed with the SEC on September 30, 2014).
Second Amended and Restated Bylaws of Centrus Energy Corp. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 3.2 of the Company’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A,
filed with the SEC on September 30, 2014).
Indenture by and among Centrus Energy Corp., as Issuer, United States
Enrichment Corporation, as Note Guarantor and Delaware Trust Company, as
Trustee and Collateral Agent, dated as of September 30, 2014.
Pledge and Security Agreement by and among Delaware Trust Company, as
Collateral Agent, and United States Enrichment Corporation dated as of
September 30, 2014.
Note Subordination Agreement by and among United States Enrichment
Corporation and Delaware Trust Company, as Trustee, dated as of September 30,
2014.
Centrus Energy Corp. 2014 Equity Incentive Plan.
Centrus Energy Corp. 2014 Post-Restructuring Incentive Plan.
Amended and Restated Centrus Energy Corp. Executive Severance Plan.
Press Release dated September 30, 2014 issued by Centrus Energy Corp.