
ASX Announcement
2 September 2016
Alumina Limited and Alcoa Inc. announce amendments to
AWAC Joint Venture
Attached is a joint announcement by Alumina Limited and Alcoa Inc. regarding changes to the AWAC 
joint venture agreements.  Both parties have also agreed to settle and terminate litigation related to 
Alcoa’s separation. 
 
Also attached is a copy of the amended and restated Charter of the Strategic Council of AWAC along 
with definitions. 
 
 
Copies of publicly available relevant documents will be available at www.aluminalimited.com
Stephen Foster 
Company Secretary 
 
2 September 2016
Neither Alumina nor any other person warrants or guarantees the future performance of Alumina or any return on any investment made in 
Alumina securities. This document may contain certain forward-looking statements, including forward-looking statements within the meaning of 
the US Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words “anticipate”, "aim", "believe", "expect", "project", “estimate”, "forecast", 
"intend", "likely", “should”, "could", "will", "may", "target", "plan” and other similar expressions (including indications of "objectives") are intended 
to identify forward-looking statements. Indications of, and guidance on, future financial position and performance and distributions, and 
statements regarding Alumina's future developments and the market outlook, are also forward-looking statements.
Any forward-looking statements contained in this document are not guarantees of future performance. Such forward-looking statements involve 
known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are beyond the control of Alumina and its directors, officers, 
employees and agents that may cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in such statements. Those risks, 
uncertainties and other factors include (without limitation): (a) material adverse changes in global economic conditions, alumina or aluminium 
industry conditions or the markets served by AWAC; (b) changes in production or development costs, production levels or sales agreements; 
(c) changes in laws, regulations or policies; (d) changes in alumina or aluminium prices or currency exchange rates; (e) Alumina Limited does 
not hold a majority interest in AWAC and decisions made by majority vote may not be in the best interests of Alumina Limited; and (f) the other 
risk factors summarised in Alumina's Annual Report 2015. Readers should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Except as 
required by law, Alumina disclaims any responsibility to update or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect any new information or any 
change in the events, conditions or circumstances on which a statement is based or to which it relates.
This presentation contains certain non-IFRS financial information.  This information is presented to assist in making appropriate comparisons 
with prior year and to assess the operating performance of the business.  Where non-IFRS measures are used, definition of the measure, 
calculation method and/or reconciliation to IFRS financial information is provided as appropriate or can be found in the Alumina Limited’s ASX 
Half-Year Report for the period ended 30 June 2016.
For investor enquiries:
For media enquiries:
Chris Thiris 
Chief Financial Officer 
Phone: +61 3 8699 2607 
chris.thiris@aluminalimited.com
Australia 
0408 441 122 
Tim Duncan:  
Nerida Mossop:   0437 361 433 
Hinton and Associates:  
61 3 9600 1979
United States 
Robert Rendine 
Nikki Ritchie 
Sard Verbinnen & Co:  
(212) 687 8080
Alumina Limited Contacts: 
Investor:  Chris Thiris, Chief Financial 
Officer: +61 3 8699 2607 
Media (Australia): Nerida Mossop: 
0437 361 433; Hinton: +61 3 9600 1979 
Media (U.S.): Robert Rendine, Sard 
Verbinnen & Co: (212) 687 8080
Alcoa Contacts:  
Investor: Matt Garth: +1-212-836-2674; 
Matt.Garth@alcoa.com  
Media (U.S.): Monica Orbe: +1-212-836-
2632; Monica.Orbe@alcoa.com 
Media (Australia): Lisa Keenan, Nightingale: 
+61 409 150 771
ALCOA INC. AND ALUMINA LIMITED ANNOUNCE
AMENDMENTS TO AWAC JOINT VENTURE
Changes to AWAC JV to enhance value for Alcoa’s and Alumina’s shareholders
Parties agree to terminate litigation related to Alcoa’s separation
New York, NY September 1, 2016 and Melbourne, Australia, September 2, 2016 – Alcoa 
Inc.  (NYSE:AA)  (“Alcoa”)  and  Alumina  Limited  (ASX:AWC)  (“Alumina”)  today  announced  that  they 
have  agreed  to  make  certain  changes  to  the  Alcoa  World  Alumina  and  Chemicals  (“AWAC”)  joint 
venture that will enhance value for Alcoa, Alumina, and their respective shareholders. In conjunction 
with these amendments, the parties have agreed to terminate their litigation in the Delaware Court 
of Chancery relating to Alcoa’s pending separation into two independent, publicly traded companies. 
Alcoa Inc. remains on track to complete its separation in the second half of 2016.   
 
In  general,  the  changes  to  the  joint  venture  agreements  are  intended  to  align  more  closely  the 
partners’  interests  in  AWAC,  while  establishing  greater  strategic  flexibility  and  autonomy  for  both 
partners.  
 
Effective upon the completion of Alcoa’s separation, certain changes will be made to the governance 
and  financial  policies  of  the  joint  venture,  intended  to  enhance  the  cooperation  between  the 
shareholders. These changes will promote faster decision-making, joint input on significant decisions, 
improved information sharing and a more streamlined process for resolving disputes. The changes 
will  also  simplify  AWAC’s  dividend  and  cash  management  policies  and  require  that  AWAC  raise  a 
limited amount of debt to fund future mutually agreed growth projects. 
 
In the event of a change of control of either partner in the future, opportunities for the AWAC partners 
to engage in expansion and development projects would increase, with each partner having the right 
to proceed unilaterally with an expansion or development project inside the joint venture if the other 
partner chooses not to participate. A partner that avails itself of such an opportunity would pay for 
the  costs  related  to  the  project,  including  for  AWAC  resources  and  shared  facilities  used,  and  be 
entitled to that project’s resulting off-take. In addition, upon a change of control, the exclusivity and 
non-compete  restrictions  under  the  current  joint  venture  agreements  would  terminate,  and  be 
replaced by rights of first offer on expansions and other development projects that either party may 
choose to undertake outside of the joint venture.  
 
If a change of control of Alumina were to occur in the future, off-take rights for alumina and bauxite 
would be triggered. For example, if an industrial acquirer became the new partner in AWAC it would 
be entitled to buy alumina and bauxite at market prices for that partner’s internal consumption. In 
addition, that future partner would also be entitled to buy 1 million tons of alumina at market prices 
for resale into the market. This could have the effect of establishing a strategic joint venture partner 
and long-term customer for AWAC.
“We believe these changes create a true win-win situation and will enhance value for our AWAC joint 
venture, the future Alcoa Corporation, and its shareholders,” said Roy Harvey, President of Alcoa’s 
Global Primary Products and future CEO of Alcoa Corporation. “We are strengthening our partnership 
agreement and more closely aligning the partners’ interests. We are also establishing a broader set 
of value-creating options for AWAC by providing its owners with greater strategic flexibility. Among 
other benefits, this opens the door for an industrial partner to enter the joint venture, and like Alcoa, 
to become a long term customer for bauxite and alumina.   Alcoa looks forward to completing our 
separation, launching two strong companies later this year, and to working closely with Alumina to 
realize the full potential of the AWAC partnership.” 
 
Alumina’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Peter  Wasow,  said,  “We  have  refreshed  the  joint  venture 
agreements  to  reflect  the  new  realities  of  our  industry  and  Alcoa  and  Alumina’s  individual 
circumstances.  These agreements strengthen the AWAC joint venture for Alcoa and Alumina, giving 
the companies greater control over their investments and future strategic options. We have enjoyed 
a successful relationship with Alcoa for over 50 years and look forward to working together in this 
next phase.”  
 
 
About AWAC 
 
AWAC consists of a number of affiliated operating entities that own, operate or have an interest in 
bauxite  mines,  alumina  refineries  and  aluminum  smelters.  Following  the  completion  of  Alcoa  Inc’s 
separation which is scheduled to occur in the second half of 2016, Alcoa’s 60 percent interest in AWAC 
will be held by Alcoa Corporation, and the remaining 40 percent will continue to be held by Alumina 
Limited.  
 
About Alcoa 
 
A  global  leader  in  lightweight  metals  technology,  engineering  and  manufacturing,  Alcoa  innovates 
multi-material  solutions  that  advance  our  world.  Our  technologies  enhance  transportation,  from 
automotive and commercial transport to air and space travel, and improve industrial and consumer 
electronics  products.  We  enable  smart  buildings,  sustainable  food  and  beverage  packaging,  high 
performance defense vehicles across air, land and sea, deeper oil and gas drilling and more efficient 
power  generation.  We  pioneered  the  aluminum  industry  over  125  years  ago,  and  today,  our 
approximately 58,000 people in 30 countries deliver value-add products made of titanium, nickel and 
aluminum,  and  produce  best-in-class  bauxite,  alumina  and  primary  aluminum  products.  For  more 
information, visit www.alcoa.com, follow @Alcoa on Twitter at www.twitter.com/Alcoa and follow us 
on Facebook at www.facebook.com/Alcoa. 
 
About Alumina  
 
Alumina is a leading Australian resource company listed on the Australian Stock Exchange and the US 
Over-the-Counter market with a specific focus on bauxite and alumina, the feedstock for aluminium 
smelting.  It owns  40% of the  world’s  largest  bauxite and  alumina  business,  AWAC  the  recognised 
industry leader. Its partner in AWAC is Alcoa, who owns the remaining 60% and manages the day-
to-day operations. The AWAC joint venture was formed in 1994 and the partnership with Alcoa dates 
back to 1961. For more information, visit www.aluminalimited.com
-2-
Dissemination of Company Information
Alcoa  intends  to  make  future  announcements  regarding  Company  developments  and  financial 
performance through its website at www.alcoa.com.
Forward-Looking Statements  
 
This communication contains statements that relate to future events and expectations and as such 
constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform 
Act  of  1995.  Forward-looking  statements  include  those  containing  such  words  as  “anticipates,” 
“believes,”  “could,”  “estimates,”  “expects,”  “forecasts,”  “intends,”  “may,”  “outlook,”  “plans,” 
“projects,” “seeks,” “sees,” “should,” “targets,” “will,” “would,” or other words of similar meaning. All 
statements that reflect Alcoa’s expectations, assumptions or projections about the future, other than 
statements of historical fact, are forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements 
regarding  the  separation  transaction.  Forward-looking  statements  are  not  guarantees  of  future 
performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and changes in circumstances that are difficult 
to predict. Although Alcoa believes that the expectations reflected in any forward-looking statements 
are  based  on  reasonable  assumptions,  it  can  give  no  assurance  that  these  expectations  will  be 
attained  and  it  is  possible  that  actual  results  may  differ  materially  from  those  indicated  by  these 
forward-looking statements due to a variety of risks and uncertainties. Such risks and uncertainties 
include, but are not limited to: (a) uncertainties as to the timing of the separation and whether it will 
be  completed;  (b)  the  possibility  that  various  closing  conditions  for  the  separation  may  not  be 
satisfied; (c) the outcome of contingencies, including legal proceedings; and (d) the other risk factors 
discussed in Alcoa’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, and other reports filed with 
the SEC. Alcoa disclaims any obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether 
in response to new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.
-3-
Summary of Agreements
Effective as on completion of Alcoa’s separation transaction, the key terms of the Agreements will be 
amended as follows:
  Future alumina off-take rights.  If at any time in the future there is a change of control 
of Alumina then, from a date nominated by Alumina, Alumina or its acquirer will be entitled to 
buy, subject to its 40% ownership cap:
—  its net short position (calculated as total consumption less total owned production
per annum) of alumina at market price for its internal consumption; plus
—  up to 1Mtpa alumina off-take, (equal to approximately 7.5% of AWAC’s current total
annual production) at market prices, which it may market and sell as it sees fit;
—  in all cases subject to AWAC third party customer contracts being satisfied;
  Future bauxite off-take rights.  If there is a change of control of Alumina at any time in 
the future then, from a date nominated by Alumina, Alumina or its acquirer will be entitled to 
buy, at market prices, up to its net short position of bauxite for internal consumption, subject 
to its 40% ownership cap;
  Termination of exclusivity provisions and increased opportunity for development 
projects  and  expansions.    Immediately  on  and  from  a  change  of  control  of  Alumina  or 
Alcoa  Corporation  at  any  time  in  the  future,  the  provisions  of  the  AWAC  joint  venture 
agreements that require an acquirer of either company to sell into AWAC or divest any of its 
bauxite or alumina assets, will terminate.  In addition, following a change of control of Alumina 
or Alcoa Corporation, AWAC will no longer be the exclusive vehicle for the bauxite and alumina 
operations of Alumina and Alcoa Corporation– if either Alumina or Alcoa Corporation wishes 
to expand an existing AWAC operation, develop a new project on AWAC tenements or pursue 
a project outside of AWAC, it is entitled to do so on a sole basis after providing 180 days for 
the  other  party  to  explore  joint  participation  in  the  proposed  project.  A partner  that  avails 
itself of such an opportunity would pay for all costs related to the project, including for AWAC 
resources and shared facilities used, and would be entitled to all of the project’s resulting off-
take;
  Improved  alignment  regarding  AWAC  joint  venture  governance.    Effective  on 
completion of Alcoa’s separation, the matters that require a super-majority vote (with an 80% 
voting threshold) by members of the Strategic Council will be expanded to cover acquisitions, 
divestitures,  expansions  and  curtailments  exceeding  2Mtpa  bauxite  or  0.5Mtpa  alumina  or 
which have a sale price, acquisition price, or project total capital cost of US$50m or greater; 
implementation of related party transactions in excess of US$50m; implementation of financial 
derivatives, hedges and other commodity price or interest rate protection mechanisms; and a 
decision to file for insolvency in respect of any AWAC company;
  Enhanced debt funding and distribution policies.   The AWAC joint venture will pay a 
minimum  quarterly  distribution  of  50%  of  the  prior  quarter’s  net  profit  of  each  company 
comprising  the  AWAC  joint  venture,  instead  of  the  current  payment  of  an  annual  dividend 
equal to 30% of ATOI. Furthermore, any surplus cash (as defined in the Agreements) within 
certain  of  the  AWAC  companies  will  be  distributed  on  a  quarterly  basis.  The  AWAC  joint 
venture will also raise a limited amount of debt to fund growth projects within 12 months of 
it  becoming  permissible  under  Alcoa  Corporation’s  revolving  credit  line,  provided  that  the 
amount of debt  does not trigger a credit rating downgrade for Alcoa Corporation.
-4-
ADOPTED PURSUANT TO THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT 
TO BE EFFECTIVE AS OF THE DISTRIBUTION DATE
AMENDED AND RESTATED CHARTER OF THE
STRATEGIC COUNCIL
Originally made on 21 December 1994, as amended and restated with effect on and from the
Distribution Date and in accordance with, the agreement entitled “Framework Agreement” between
Alumina Limited (formerly known as Western Mining Corporation Holdings Limited) (formerly defined as
“WMC” and now defined as “Alumina”), Alcoa Corporation (formerly known as Alcoa Upstream
Corporation) (formerly defined as “ACOA” and now defined as “Alcoa”) and Alcoa Inc., dated September
1, 2016.
DEFINITIONS
References to “WMC” for or in connection with this Charter are taken to be references to
“Alumina”.
References to “ACOA” for or in connection with this Charter are taken to be references to “Alcoa”.
Unless otherwise defined herein, all capitalised terms used in this Restated Charter will have the
meaning set out in Schedule 1.01 of the Restated Formation Agreement unless the context requires
otherwise. In the event of inconsistency, the meaning set out in Schedule 1.01 of the Restated Formation
Agreement will prevail.  For the avoidance of doubt, the definitions set out in the Schedule of Definitions
attached to this Restated Charter are incorporated into Schedule 1.01 of the Restated Formation
Agreement with effect from the date of this Restated Charter.
AMENDMENT
The portions of this Agreement specified in Exhibit B shall be deemed to be automatically
amended and revised as set forth in Exhibit B (“Exclusivity and Sole Risk Amendments”), upon and from
the occurrence of a Change of Control in respect of either Alumina or Alcoa.
INTRODUCTION
Alcoa and Alumina have agreed to combine their interests in bauxite mining, alumina refining and
non-metallurgical alumina operations as well as certain integrated aluminum fabricating and smelting
operations to form a worldwide Enterprise. The operations of the Enterprise shall be conducted by and
through the coordinated activity of several affiliated Enterprise Companies.
This Charter sets forth certain principles and policies for the management of the Enterprise
Companies and for the rights and obligations of Alcoa and Alumina with regard to their respective
interests in the Enterprise Companies. Alcoa and its affiliates shall have a 60% interest in the Enterprise.
Alumina and its affiliates shall have a 40% interest in the Enterprise. It is the intention of Alcoa and
Alumina that their ownership interests in the Enterprise shall be 60/40 respectively and the parties shall
act and exercise rights such that this 60/40 ratio will be achieved or maintained in any future acquisitions
of minority interests in any Enterprise Company, joint ventures or new assets or companies.
PURPOSE
(a)
Strategic Council. The Strategic Council will be the principal forum for Alcoa and
Alumina to provide direction and counsel to the Enterprise Companies within the worldwide Enterprise
regarding strategic and policy matters. As of September 1, 2016, the Enterprise Companies include the
following entities and their respective subsidiaries:
(i)
Alcoa World Alumina LLC (USA);
(ii)
Alcoa of Australia Limited (Australia);
(iii)
Alúmina Española S.A. (Spain);
(iv)
AWA Saudi Limited (Hong Kong);
(v)
Alcoa World Alumina Brasil Ltda. (Brazil); and
(vi)
Alcoa Caribbean Alumina Holdings LLC.
Alcoa and Alumina shall direct and cause their representatives on any Enterprise Company
Boards, entities or operations to carry out the direction established by and implement the decisions of the
Strategic Council. This Restated Charter is not intended to create or imply the creation of any other
partnership or company.
(b)
Industrial Leadership. Under the general direction of and consistent with the decisions
of the Strategic Council, Alcoa shall be the industrial leader of the Enterprise and Alcoa shall provide the
operating management of the Enterprise and of all Enterprise Companies. If Alumina contributes any of its
operations to the Enterprise it shall retain operating management thereof unless the parties otherwise
agree.
(c)
Other Alumina Representation. Alumina will have proportional representation on the
Board of Directors of Alcoa of Australia and on the board of AWA LLC. Alumina will also have the right to
proportional representation on the board of directors of any Enterprise Company.
(d)
Secondment by Alumina. It is expected that Alumina will from time to time second to the
Enterprise or Enterprise Companies employees whose skills or experience are necessary for the support
of the operations of the Enterprise. The extent of such secondment shall be as determined by the
management of each of the Enterprise Companies, subject to the review and advice of the Strategic
Council. These seconded employees will be employed by the Enterprise Companies. Alcoa will advise
Alumina of all available positions within the Enterprise for which Alumina has indicated it may have
qualified candidates. Alcoa will determine if the Alumina candidate is the best person for the position,
-2-
acknowledging Alumina’s interest in having certain of its employees gain experience in the bauxite and
alumina businesses.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE STRATEGIC COUNCIL
(a)
Membership. The Strategic Council will have five (5) members, three (3) appointed by
Alcoa, of which one (1) will be Chairman, and two (2) by Alumina, of which one (1) will be Deputy
Chairman. Members of the Strategic Council shall serve until they resign or are removed by the party that
originally appointed that member to the Council. Resignation or removal shall be effected by written notice
to all other members of the Council.
(b)
Vacancies. Any vacancy on the Strategic Council, whether arising out of death, disability,
removal, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled by the party that had originally appointed that member to
the Council.
MEETINGS
(a)
Quorum. The presence, in person or by proxy, of not less than a majority of the total
number of members of the Strategic Council, including at least one Alumina representative, or the
presence of both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business by the Council. If any member does not attend despite proper notice, the Chairman may
reconvene the meeting in 10 days upon notice to the non-attending member. The meeting may proceed
even if said member does not attend.
(b)
Meetings. The Strategic Council shall meet as frequently as the Chairman, after
consultation with the Deputy Chairman, deems necessary and appropriate and not less than two times per
year. The Deputy Chairman may request a meeting and the Chairman must call a meeting within
3 months of the request or within two weeks, if the Deputy Chairman declares that a serious situation
exists. In the case of any such declaration, the notice provisions of Section 3(c) are waived for such
meeting. Meetings may be held by telephone or videoconferencing.
(c)
Notice. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of each meeting of the Strategic
Council, the Chairman of the Council shall send each member a notice of such meeting, the location, an
agenda, and all necessary documentation. A written waiver of notice signed by a majority of the members
of the Council including at least one Alumina member, whether before or after the time of the meeting,
shall be deemed equivalent to such notice. Items not on the agenda cannot be decided at a Strategic
Council meeting without the unanimous consent of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman. Attendance by a
member of the Council at a meeting shall also constitute waiver of notice of such meeting by that Member.
(d)
Advisors and Other Committees. From time to time as they deem necessary, the
Strategic Council may request the assistance and advice of experts and advisors from Alcoa or Alumina.
Such experts or advisors may attend the meetings of the Strategic Council, as appropriate. Employee
-3-
advisors of either member may attend the Strategic Council meetings. Non-employee advisors of either
member may attend Strategic Council meetings at the discretion of the Chairman. Prior notice by the
member planning to bring non-employee advisors, including the advisor’s identity and role, must be given
to the Chairman. While the Strategic Council will principally look to the operating management of the
Enterprise Companies for information about the businesses of the Enterprise, the Strategic Council, if
either the Chairman or Deputy Chairman so request, shall also from time to time form advisory
committees of representatives of both Alcoa and Alumina as required to assist the Strategic Council and
its members with the activities of the Enterprise and so that Alumina may make an appropriately informed
contribution to the proceedings of the Strategic Council. The scope of the responsibilities and activities
vested in such committees shall be established by the Strategic Council.
(e)
Minutes. Minutes of the meetings of the Strategic Council shall be prepared and
circulated to each member of the Council within thirty (30) days after each meeting.
VOTING
(a)
Decisions Requiring a Super-Majority Vote. The following matters shall be decided by
the vote of 80% of the members appointed to the Strategic Council:
(i)
Change of Scope of the Enterprise.
(ii)
Change in the dividend policy.
(iii)
Equity requests on behalf of the Enterprise totalling in any one year more than
US$1 billion.
(iv)
Sale of all or a majority of the assets of the Enterprise or the Enterprise
Companies taken as a whole (such assets to be valued for this purpose at the Enterprise book
value).
(v)
Loans to Alcoa or an Affiliate or Alumina or an Affiliate by any of the Enterprise
Companies, subject to the relevant provisions of Sections 8 and 9 below.
(vi)
Any Expansions, acquisitions, divestitures, closures or curtailments of the
operations of the Enterprise which are likely to result in a change in production:
1.
in excess of 2 million tonnes per annum of bauxite for any Enterprise Mine; or
2.  0.5 million tonnes per annum of alumina for any Enterprise Refinery,
or which have a sale price, acquisition price, or project total capital cost of US$50 million
or greater for any one transaction or US$50 million in aggregate for a series of related
transactions.
In relation to curtailments of operations of the Enterprise or the closure of any Enterprise
Mine or Enterprise Refinery, this 80% voting threshold:
-4-
1.  only applies to a full curtailment of the production from Enterprise operations or
an Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery production; and
2.  does not apply with respect to an Enterprise operation, Enterprise Mine or
Enterprise Refinery that has had losses in the two consecutive quarters immediately
preceding such curtailment or closure (calculated on the basis of Cash Flow from
Operating Activities).
(vii)  Without affecting any other existing rights at law, and in particular without
prejudice to any related party transaction laws, for any Enterprise Company to enter into any
related-party transaction with a total value of $50 million or greater; provided, however, that the
requirements of this Section 4 shall not apply with respect to (w) any transactions solely between
Enterprise Companies, (x) any transaction which is otherwise approved under, or is taken in
accordance with an agreement or arrangement previously approved (and still operative) pursuant
to, this Section 4, (y) any offtake or supply agreement the pricing methodology of which is the
same as that set forth in the Alumina Limited AWAC Offtake Agreements (as amended from time
to time) and that complies with all applicable requirements of Section 5(a)(iii) or (z) any Sole Risk
Project or any Sole Risk Project Management Agreement that is entered into pursuant to Exhibit C
of this Restated Charter.
(viii)
For any Enterprise Company to enter into any financial derivatives, hedges or
swaps, including, but not limited to, any currency, interest rate or commodity price loss protection
mechanism.
(ix)
Any decision by an Enterprise Company to file for insolvency (or similar) status,
protection or proceedings (including any filing for, or making any resolution in respect of
liquidation, administration, receivership, reorganisation or other similar arrangement).
(x)
A decision to amend, update or replace any pricing formula set out in the
Alumina Limited AWAC Offtake Agreements (as amended from time to time) or any method or
formula for pricing for any other supply of bauxite or alumina from the Enterprise to Alcoa or
Alumina (or any Affiliate of Alcoa or Affiliate of Alumina).
All other decisions of the Strategic Council will be decided by majority vote.
SCOPE
Within the Scope of the Enterprise as defined in this Section, Alcoa and Alumina agree to operate
to avoid commercial conflict among Alcoa, Alumina and the Enterprise. To accomplish this, Alcoa agrees
that the Enterprise shall be the exclusive vehicle for its investments, operations or participation in the
Bauxite and Alumina business (as specifically defined below in Section 5(a)(i)) included within the Scope
of the Enterprise except as noted for the activities of Alcoa Aluminio SA and Alcoa shall not compete with
-5-
the Enterprise in those businesses. Alumina agrees that the Enterprise shall be the exclusive vehicle for
its investments, operations or participation in the Bauxite and Alumina business (as specifically defined
below in Section 5(a)(i)) and Alumina shall not compete with the Enterprise in those businesses. Alumina
agrees that it will not compete with the businesses of the Integrated Operations of the Enterprise (as
defined below but excluding necessary and ancillary activities) and acknowledges that Alcoa has non-
Enterprise facilities in these businesses which Alcoa will operate and manage independently of the
Enterprise. For purposes of this Section 5 references to Alcoa and Alumina shall respectively include any
Affiliate of Alcoa or Affiliate of Alumina. The Scope of the Enterprise shall be:
(a)
Bauxite and Alumina.
(i)
The Enterprise shall be involved in the worldwide exploration, searching and
prospecting for, and the mining of bauxite and any other minerals and/or ores from which alumina
or aluminum can or may be commercially produced. The Enterprise shall also engage in the
refining and other processing of these minerals and/or ores into alumina.
(ii)
The Enterprise may also engage in the exploitation and development of minerals
discovered in the course of bauxite mining at Enterprise facilities, however, these minerals shall
not be considered to be within the definition of the Bauxite and Alumina business unless the
Members unanimously agree. The Enterprise will engage in any necessary or ancillary activity
that the majority of the Members of the Strategic Council determine may be carried on with the
above described activities. Alcoa Aluminio shall continue to produce alumina for the Brazilian
market including for Alcoa Aluminio’s own smelting needs.
(iii)
The Enterprise shall be responsible for selling alumina and bauxite to Alcoa at
arm’s length prices and terms, as well as to third parties, provided that Alcoa and Alumina shall
also have certain entitlements described in the remainder of this Section 5(a)(iii) that come into
effect only upon election by Alumina after a Change of Control in respect of Alumina has
occurred. In the event of such election by Alumina, Alcoa and Alumina shall cooperate to ensure
that their activities following Alumina’s election may be conducted in compliance with applicable
law, including relevant competition laws.
Alcoa and Alumina (or any Acquirer of Alcoa or Alumina) shall be entitled to purchase from the
Enterprise, on an evergreen basis, alumina and bauxite on market based terms and conditions,
and otherwise on the terms and conditions, and subject to the limitations, set forth in the Umbrella
Offtake Agreement.
Sales of products to Alcoa and Alumina shall be made pursuant to the terms of any offtake
agreements entered into between either Alcoa or Alumina and the Enterprise (or any Enterprise
Company) that may exist from time to time.
-6-
(iv)
The parties have agreed to a sole risk regime as provided in Exhibit C that
comes into effect only after a Change of Control in respect of Alumina or Alcoa. Alcoa and
Alumina shall cooperate to ensure that the sole risk regime may be conducted in compliance with
applicable law, including relevant competition laws.
(b)
Non-Metallurgical Alumina. The Enterprise shall be involved in the research and
development, production, marketing and sale of certain non-metallurgical alumina products.
(c)
Integrated Operations. The Enterprise shall also own and operate certain primary
aluminum smelting facilities that existed as of the formation of the Enterprise and are run as part of an
integrated operation at certain of the locations included within the Enterprise. The Enterprise will engage
in any necessary or ancillary activity that the majority of the Members of the Strategic Council determine
may be carried on with the above described activities. These operations and any future expansions
thereof will be included within the Scope of the Enterprise at existing Enterprise locations only. The
Enterprise shall also be responsible for selling aluminum to ACOA or its Affiliates at arm’s length prices as
well as to third parties.
(d)
Shipping. The Enterprise shall also operate a shipping line, the main function of which is
to support the operations of the Enterprise. The shipping line shall carry bauxite, alumina, raw materials
and other goods used in the alumina refining process, production and sale of industrial chemicals and
other goods and materials for the Enterprise. The Enterprise will engage in any necessary or ancillary
activity that the majority of the Members of the Strategic Council determine may be carried on with the
above described activities. The shipping line, however, may carry goods and materials for other parties.
(e)
Coordination with Alcoa. As the industrial leader of the Enterprise, Alcoa shall act in a
manner that is fair and reasonable to the Enterprise and to Alumina and to Alcoa in managing the related
activities of Alcoa within the Enterprise with those outside the Enterprise. The operations of the primary
metals facility of the Enterprise will be closely coordinated with the primary metals business of Alcoa.
Alcoa will provide necessary services to the Enterprise pursuant to the terms of a master services
agreement. Alcoa shall ensure that any dealings between the Enterprise and Alcoa shall be conducted on
an arm’s length basis.
NEW BUSINESSES
It is acknowledged that Alumina and Alcoa may from time to time pursue business opportunities
outside the Bauxite and Alumina businesses. If Alumina or Alcoa acquires any businesses which include
as a secondary line of business the Bauxite and Alumina business as specifically defined above in
Section 5(a)(i), Alumina or Alcoa shall offer this new Bauxite and Alumina business to the Enterprise at
the cost of acquisition or, if this business was not separately valued at the time of acquisition by Alumina
or Alcoa, a value based on an independent appraisal of the business. If all of the Enterprise Companies
and the Strategic Council elect not to accept the offer, Alumina or Alcoa shall divest itself of the secondary
-7-
Bauxite and Alumina business to a non-Affiliate. Alumina or Alcoa shall not independently pursue any
opportunities whose principal line of business is the Bauxite and Alumina business as specifically
defined above in Section 5(a)(i). Competition between Alumina and the Enterprise shall not prevent
Alumina, Alcoa and the Enterprise from exploring and utilizing any synergies that may exist as between
any competing operations or products. These synergies may include:
1)  Different ownership interests in the new opportunity or
2)  Supply, processing, distribution or other marketing arrangements with the Enterprise.
For purposes of this Section 6 references to Alcoa and Alumina shall respectively include any Affiliate of
Alcoa or Affiliate of Alumina.
ENTERPRISE COMPANY INFORMATION
(a)
Alumina shall have access during normal business hours, upon reasonable advance
notice (with the intention that the Enterprise will provide access within 28 days of receiving such notice), to
all information produced or held by the Enterprise, including all information produced or held by any
Enterprise Company and all information produced or held by Alcoa or Affiliates of Alcoa acting in the
capacity of Manager of the Enterprise and any Enterprise Company. Such information will be produced
and held jointly on behalf of the Enterprise and each of Alumina and Alcoa, and will be freely available to
each of them subject to and in accordance with these terms. Such information rights are without prejudice
to, and in no way limit the parties’ respective rights to access information regarding any Enterprise
Company under any Enterprise agreement or at law (“General Information Rights”). For the avoidance of
doubt, this Section 7 does not apply to any information relating to any businesses or interests held by
either Alcoa or Alumina that are not part of the Enterprise.
(b)
Alumina will have reasonable access to the head of each Business Unit within the
Enterprise through the Alumina Strategic Council members and other nominated Alumina representatives.
(c)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 7, Alcoa, its Affiliates and the
Enterprise Companies shall not be required to (i) violate any legal requirements (including with respect to
employee data privacy laws) or any obligation of confidentiality to any third parties, or (ii) provide access
to or disclose information where such access or disclosure would jeopardize the attorney-client privilege of
such party. Any access to or provision of information pursuant to this Section 7 shall be conducted in such
a manner as not to interfere unreasonably with the operation of the Enterprise or any Enterprise
Company; provided that this sentence shall not derogate from the rights to information set out in this
Section 7.
(d)
In addition, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 7, with respect to a
request by Alumina that relates to any Enterprise customer sales contract (“Customer Contracts”),
(i) Alumina’s access right shall be limited to two employees of Alumina who shall be nominated by
-8-
Alumina, (ii) such Customer Contracts shall be kept strictly confidential and may not be disclosed by them
to other personnel or representatives of Alumina except for the purposes of enforcing legal rights of the
Enterprise or obtaining legal advice in connection with such enforcement, and Alcoa or an Enterprise
Company may require such employees to sign customary and appropriate confidentiality undertakings,
(iii) Alcoa or any Enterprise Company may provide access to Customer Contracts by means of an
electronic data room or other protocol designed to preserve confidentiality, (iv) upon the occurrence of a
Change of Control with respect to Alumina, all rights of Alumina or any of its nominated employees to
access or receive Customer Contracts shall terminate, and they shall return or destroy any Customer
Contracts previously provided to them, and (v) in the event that Customer Contracts cannot be disclosed
due to an obligation of confidentiality to any third parties, the applicable Enterprise Company will use its
commercially reasonable efforts to seek a waiver of such confidentiality obligations or to otherwise permit
such disclosure.
(e)
Alcoa shall adopt reasonable protocols to ensure that only those Alcoa employees that
are engaged in the day-to-day operations and management of the Enterprise will be entitled to receive
Customer Contracts and only to the extent that is reasonably necessary for the management and
operation of AWAC.
(f)
Prior to providing access to any information under this Section 7, but without in any way
restricting any General Information Rights, the Enterprise may require Alcoa and/or Alumina to provide a
customary and appropriate undertaking containing confidentiality and use restrictions consistent with this
Section 7 and allowing (x) use of such information in connection with its investment in the Enterprise and
the operation of the Enterprise’s business and (y) disclosure to the extent required by law. Alcoa and
Alumina shall take reasonable measures to ensure that their access to Enterprise information is consistent
with applicable laws, including competition laws.
(g)
Alumina will also receive prompt notice of events known to Alcoa which may affect the
earnings or dividends of the Enterprise Companies or which may lead to a significant change in the
amount of leveraging within the Enterprise.
(h)
The various Enterprise Companies will prepare annual operating plans and capital
budgets (or follow any other planning/budgeting process that may be used by Alcoa from time to time).
Alcoa will keep Alumina informed of the progress in formulating such plans and budgets and will
specifically advise  Alumina if the consolidated effect of these plans and budgets appears likely to require
any equity call from Alumina in the year for which the plans and budgets are being prepared. The
operating plans and capital budgets will be approved by the Members or Boards (as appropriate) of the
various Enterprise Companies.
(i)
Any individual Request for Authorization for more than US$10 million shall be sent for
information to the members of the Strategic Council at the same time it is submitted to Alcoa corporate
management.
-9-
(j)
In the event of a proposed Change of Control of Alumina or Alcoa, the other party agrees
to provide commercially reasonable cooperation, at the expense of the party undergoing the Change of
Control, with respect to (i) filings and notifications with any governmental authority that reasonably may be
necessary, proper or advisable under the relevant competition laws to consummate and make effective
the proposed acquisition; and (ii) supplying any additional information and documentary material that may
be requested by any governmental authority under applicable law (provided, however, that neither party
shall be required to supply non-Enterprise information or documentary material).
EQUITY CALLS
(a)
Equity Calls. The cash flow of the Enterprise and borrowings shall be the preferred
source of funding for the needs of the Enterprise. Should the aggregate annual capital budget of the
Enterprise require an equity contribution from Alcoa and Alumina, an equity call can only be made upon
30 days’ notice and, if appropriate, a payment schedule shall be included.  Subject to any duties at law or
in equity to which a director may be bound, Alcoa and Alumina must procure that their representatives on
the Board of the relevant Enterprise Company resolve to give effect to any equity call made under this
section.  The following limits apply to equity calls:
(i)
With respect to amounts up to $500 million in annual equity requested to be
contributed in total by Alcoa and Alumina to the Enterprise (including amounts requested pursuant
to subsections (ii) and (iii) below), each party shall contribute its proportionate share based on its
current ownership in the Enterprise. Each party is required to make its proportional equity
contribution for amounts up to $500 million of the equity requested regardless of the
arrangements with respect to any further capital requirements of the Enterprise. If either party
does not contribute all or part of its proportionate share, then the other party may contribute its
own share and the share of the non-contributing party not contributed and, if it does so, the non-
contributing party will thereby be diluted on the basis of the formula attached as Exhibit A. The
dilution shall be proportional among all the Enterprise Companies.
(ii)
With respect to amounts in excess of $500 million but less than $1 billion in
annual equity requested to be contributed in total by Alcoa and Alumina to the Enterprise, each
party shall declare within thirty days of when the equity request is made if it has the ability to fund
its share of the request and if so each party shall contribute its proportionate share based on its
current ownership in the Enterprise. Should Alumina be unable to contribute the full amount of the
equity in the year required, the parties will work together, to find alternative interim external
financing arrangements reasonably acceptable to Alumina for the Enterprise or for Alumina. If
alternative external financing is not acceptable to Alumina, Alumina may choose to be diluted or
Alcoa may fund the Alumina proportionate share in U.S. dollars and this contribution shall be
deemed to be an unsecured loan by Alcoa to Alumina. If Alumina issues an encumbrance or
encumbrances over substantially all of its assets (other than the Enterprise Assets) to a third party
-10-
creditor, it shall, to secure any loan from Alcoa under this section, grant to Alcoa, subject to any
necessary consents (and notwithstanding Section 9(c)), a like encumbrance over its interest in the
Enterprise. Alumina shall repay the amount contributed on its behalf plus interest in a period not to
exceed one (1) year. The interest rate applied to this amount shall equal the then current one year
T-bill rate plus a margin reflecting market spreads for companies having the same credit rating as
Alumina as well as commercial underwriting and commitment fees to the extent that such fees are
incurred by Alcoa as a result of Alcoa funding Alumina’s proportionate share of the equity call
under this paragraph. If either party does not contribute all or part of its proportionate share
pursuant to such alternative financing arrangements or if the Alcoa loan is not repaid, the other
party may contribute its own share and the share of the non-contributing party not contributed and
if it does the non-contributing party shall be diluted in the amount of its unmet share of the equity
call in accordance with the formula set forth on Exhibit A, provided, however, if Alcoa does not
fund Alumina’s proportionate share when the other conditions above have been met, Alumina will
not be diluted in the amount of its unmet share of the equity call.
(iii)
With respect to amounts in excess of $1 billion in annual equity requested to be
contributed in total by Alcoa and Alumina to the Enterprise and approved pursuant to
Section 4(a)(iii) above, each party shall contribute its proportionate share, however, the parties will
work together, should Alumina be unable to contribute the full amount of the equity in the year
required, to find alternative financing arrangements reasonably acceptable to Alumina for the
Enterprise or Alumina. If Alumina does not contribute the balance of its full proportionate share,
Alcoa may make, and shall be compensated for, all or part of the remaining contribution in
Alumina’s place; however, Alumina shall not be diluted to the extent of Alcoa’s contribution to the
capital requirements in excess of US$1 billion. If Alcoa elects to proceed, Alcoa shall review with
Alumina the mechanism to compensate Alcoa for its excess contribution, which may include, but
is not limited to, a disproportionate allocation of the return associated with the excess contribution.
LEVERAGING POLICY.
(a)
Procuring of Debt funding. Alcoa must procure that long term Debt funding is provided
to the Enterprise Companies by appropriate external lenders on an ongoing basis for the purposes of
Enterprise Growth Projects (whether or not those Enterprise Growth Projects are related to the Enterprise
Company that receives such long-term Debt funding) within 12 months following the first time after the
Distribution Date that obtaining such Debt becomes permissible under the Revolving Facility, so that:
(i)
the aggregate Debt of the Enterprise Companies taken as a whole is the Target
Enterprise Debt Level; and
(ii)
the aggregate Debt of the Enterprise Companies taken as a whole is maintained
at the Target Enterprise Debt Level thereafter,
-11-
provided that, if Alcoa’s credit rating would reasonably be expected to be downgraded by Moody’s and/or
Standard & Poors due to the level of Debt raised or maintained pursuant to this Section 9(a), the
aggregate Debt of the Enterprise Companies must not exceed the level of Debt that is consistent with
avoiding such downgrade.
(b)
Debt limit. Notwithstanding Section 9(a), Alcoa and Alumina agree that the Enterprise
Companies will maintain a limit of Debt (net of cash) in the aggregate equalling 30% of total capital where
total capital is defined as the sum of Debt (net of cash) plus any minority interest plus shareholder equity.
(c)
Enterprise cash management procedures. Alcoa and Alumina agree that:
(i)
subject to Sections 4(a)(v) and 9(c)(iii), each Enterprise Company may not lend
to either Alcoa or Alumina, including any Affiliate of Alcoa or Affiliate of Alumina;
(ii)
each Enterprise Company may not deposit money with Alcoa for cash
management purposes; and
(iii)
notwithstanding Section 4(a)(v) and 9(c)(i), an Enterprise Company may grant a
loan to another Enterprise Company, by using:
(A)
Debt to fund the loan, provided that any such loan is only provided to
fund any Enterprise Growth Project; or
(B)
its Cash Available for Loans to fund the loan, provided that any such loan
(1) is only provided for the purposes of meeting the working capital needs
of that Enterprise Company and (2) has a term of no longer than six
months.
(iv)
subject to Sections 4(a)(v) and 9 and unless otherwise agreed, loans to either
Alcoa or Alumina by the Enterprise will bear interest at LIBOR plus a margin reflecting market
spread for similar credit ratings as well as commercial underwriting and commitment fees.
DISTRIBUTION POLICY.
Alcoa and Alumina agree that each Enterprise Company must, by the 20th day of the month
immediately following the relevant Calculation Date, make a Distribution of:
(a)
50% of the net income, if positive, of such Enterprise Company in respect of the Quarter
ending on or about the relevant Calculation Date as determined in accordance with United States
generally accepted accounting principles; and
(b)
the Available Cash in respect of such Enterprise Company.
-12-
DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
(a)
Designated Senior Executive. All disputes, differences, controversies or claims between
any of the parties and related to the Enterprise, if unable to be resolved, shall be referred by either party
for  resolution by written notice addressed to a senior executive officer of Alcoa and Alumina designated
for such purpose from time to time by the Chief Executive Officers of Alcoa and Alumina, respectively. The
designated officers shall meet and discuss the matter during a period of not more than 14 days from the
date of receipt of such written notice.
(b)
Chief Executive Officers. If the designated officers of Alcoa and Alumina cannot reach
an agreement resolving the dispute within the 14 days of the receipt of such written notice, either party
may refer the dispute for resolution by further written notice addressed to the Chief Executive Officers of
Alcoa and Alumina. The Chief Executive Officers shall meet and discuss the matter during a period of not
more than 21 days from the date of receipt of such further written notice.
(c)
Final Resolution. If the Chief Executive Officers of Alcoa and Alumina are unable to
resolve the dispute by unanimous consent within 21 days of receipt of such further written notice, each
party may seek all remedies available to it at law and equity.
TRANSFER OF INTERESTS.
(a)
Proportionate Reduction. Any increase or decrease by Alcoa or Alumina in their
respective ownership share in the Enterprise, unless otherwise agreed, must be proportionate among all
the Enterprise Companies except in the circumstance where governmental action results in an involuntary
divestiture in which event the parties will consult about appropriate responses to such action.
(b)
Alcoa Transfers. Alcoa may reduce its proportionate ownership share in the affiliated
companies in the Enterprise from 60% to 51% at its election. If the proposed buyer is a passive investor
who will not have representation on the Strategic Council nor any of the boards of the affiliated
companies, Alumina’s consent to the sale is not required. A passive investor shall receive business
information about the Enterprise only to the extent required by the law governing each of the affiliated
companies, as reflected in its individual governance document, plus additional information as is believed
reasonable and appropriate (including under any competition law) by Alcoa as being appropriate for the
particular investor and consented to by Alumina, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. If the
proposed buyer is an active investor who is intended by Alcoa to have representation on any of the boards
of the affiliated companies or the Strategic Council, Alcoa must obtain the consent of Alumina to the sale,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(c)
Non-seller’s Rights. Each of the governance documents for the Enterprise Companies
includes provisions regarding a first option in respect of the transfer of interests, subject to Section 12(b)
above, addressing; the transferability of interests, maximization of market value of the interest for sale,
-13-
ensuring a fair chance for the non-selling party to purchase the interest for sale and concerns of the non-
selling party regarding the identity of potential buyers (e.g., direct competitors).
GENERAL
Applicable Law. This Restated Charter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
laws of the State of Delaware, without regard to its conflicts of laws doctrine.
ORIGINALLY EXECUTED THIS 21st DAY OF December, 1994.
THIS AMENDED AND RESTATED DOCUMENT IS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO THE FRAMEWORK
AGREEMENT AND IS TO BE EXECUTED AND EFFECTIVE UPON THE DISTRIBUTION DATE.
ALCOA INC.
ALUMINA LIMITED
-14-
Exhibit A
Dilution Formula
Dilution shall be calculated proportionately among all Enterprise Companies on the basis of the value of
the Enterprise Companies before and after the equity call. The formula for determining the extent of
dilution shall be as follows:
Alcoa share of the new equity = {(A x Z) + (P x Y)} ÷ M
Alumina share of the new equity = {(B x Z) + (Q x Y)} ÷ M
where:
Y
P
Q
Z
M
A
B
=  Amount of Equity call actually paid
=  Alcoa’s share of the Equity call actually paid expressed as a percentage of Y
=  Alumina’s share of the Equity call actually paid expressed as a percentage of Y
=  Fair Market Value of the Enterprise, pre-dilution (as defined below)
=  New value of the Enterprise, giving effect to the equity call which equals (Y + Z)
=  Alcoa’s pre-dilution interest expressed as a percentage
=  Alumina’s pre-dilution interest expressed as a percentage
The “Fair Market Value” of the Enterprise Companies, pre-dilution, will be the fair market value of the
Enterprise Companies as agreed by the parties at the time of dilution. If the parties cannot agree upon a
fair market value, the parties will mutually select an independent expert to establish a pre-dilution fair
market value. The expert’s determination of fair market value of the Enterprise Companies shall be final.
The parties acknowledge that while the above formula reflects the intent of the parties if dilution is
required, the actual mechanisms chosen to effect the dilution may vary among the Enterprise Companies
depending upon their particular circumstances.
A-1
Exhibit B
Exclusivity and Sole Risk Amendments
(1)
Amendments to “Introduction”
The section of the Charter headed “Introduction” is taken to be replaced with a new Introduction
as follows:
‘INTRODUCTION.
Alcoa and Alumina have agreed to combine their interests in certain bauxite mining, alumina
refining and non-metallurgical alumina operations as well as certain integrated aluminum
fabricating and smelting operations to form a worldwide Enterprise. The operations of the
Enterprise shall be conducted by and through the coordinated activity of several affiliated
Enterprise Companies.
This Charter sets forth certain principles and policies for the management of the Enterprise
Companies and for the rights and obligations of Alcoa and Alumina with regard to their respective
interests in the Enterprise Companies. Alcoa and its affiliates shall have a 60% interest in the
Enterprise and Alumina and its affiliates shall have a 40% interest in the Enterprise. It is the
intention of Alcoa and Alumina that their ownership interests in the Enterprise shall be 60/40
respectively and the parties shall act and exercise rights such that this 60/40 ratio will be achieved
or maintained in respect of the businesses, operations, ventures, facilities, assets, mines or
refineries that are within the Scope of the Enterprise, but excluding any Sole Risk Project.
(2)
Amendments to section 1 (“Purpose”)
Clause (a) of the section of the Charter headed Section 1 “Purpose” is taken to be replaced with a
new section 1(a) as follows:
‘(a)
Strategic Council. The Strategic Council will be the principal forum for Alcoa and
Alumina to provide direction and counsel to the Enterprise Companies within the worldwide
Enterprise regarding strategic and policy matters. As of September 1, 2016, the Enterprise
Companies include the following entities and their respective subsidiaries:
(i)
Alcoa World Alumina LLC (USA);
(ii)
Alcoa of Australia Limited (Australia);
(iii)
Alúmina Española S.A. (Spain);
(iv)
AWA Saudi Limited (Hong Kong);
(v)
Alcoa World Alumina Brasil Ltda. (Brazil); and
(vi)
Alcoa Caribbean Alumina Holdings LLC.
B-1
Alcoa and Alumina shall direct and cause their representatives on any Enterprise Company
Boards, entities or operations to carry out the direction established by and implement the
decisions of the Strategic Council or, in the case of a Sole Risk Project, the entity conducting the
Sole Risk Project as elected under clause 3.2 of Exhibit C. This Restated Charter is not intended
to create or imply the creation of any other partnership or company.’
Clause (b) of the section of the Charter headed Section 1 “Purpose” is taken to be replaced with a
new section 1(b) as follows:
‘(b)
Industrial Leadership. Under the general direction of and consistent with the decisions
of the Strategic Council, Alcoa shall be the industrial leader of the Enterprise and Alcoa shall
provide the operating management of the Enterprise and of all Enterprise Companies, except with
respect to (i) the consumption and marketing of outputs to which Alumina has then-effective
offtake and marketing rights under the Alumina Limited AWAC Offtake Agreements or the
governing documents of the Enterprise and (ii) Sole Risk Projects subject to Exhibit C of this
Restated Charter. If Alumina contributes any of its operations to the Enterprise it shall retain
operating management thereof unless the parties otherwise agree.’
(3)
Amendments to section 5 (“Scope”)
The preamble of the section of the Charter headed Section 5 “Scope” is taken to be replaced with
a new preamble to section 5 as follows:
‘Alcoa and Alumina agree that, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Introduction or
Section 5, the Enterprise is no longer the exclusive vehicle for their respective investments,
operations or participation in any business, operations, ventures, facilities, assets, mines or
refineries within the bauxite and alumina industry or business or any other industry or business.
To the extent permissible under applicable competition laws, each of Alcoa and Alumina may
compete with any business, operation, venture, facility, mine or refinery of the Enterprise or in
which the Enterprise has an interest.
In addition, for the avoidance of doubt, the references in Sections 5(a)(iii) and 5(a)(iv) to a Change
of Control are inclusive of the Change of Control that causes these amendments to Section 5 to
take effect.’
(4)
Amendments to section 6 (“New Businesses”)
The section of the Charter headed Section 6 “New Businesses” is taken to be replaced with a new
section 6 as follows:
‘SECTION 6:  RIGHTS OF FIRST OFFER (over proposed non-Enterprise projects)
If Alumina or Alcoa (or an Acquirer of Alcoa or Alumina) intend to proceed with a new bauxite or
alumina project (excluding any Expansion Project or New Project (in each case as defined in
B-2
clause 1 of Exhibit C) or any other project within the Enterprise), Alcoa or Alumina (as applicable)
must first grant the other party a right of first offer to participate in such project on terms proposed
by the proposing party. If such other party wishes to participate in the project and the terms for
participation are agreed within 180 days of the proposing party giving notice of its proposed terms
for participation, the project shall be conducted and operated by the Enterprise and the relevant
interests in the project will be held within the Enterprise by an Enterprise Company. If the other
party does not wish to participate, or the terms for participation cannot be agreed within 180 days
of the proposing party giving notice of its proposed terms for participation, the proposing party is
free to proceed with the project outside the Enterprise on the terms determined by it (in its
absolute discretion). This right of first offer shall not apply to any assets or projects which are in
existence or under construction or which have existing capital commitments as at the date of
Alcoa or Alumina’s Change of Control and which are not held within the Enterprise. Alcoa or
Alumina or an Acquirer of Alcoa or Alumina (as applicable) are permitted to continue to hold and
operate any such assets or projects outside the Enterprise. For the avoidance of doubt, this
section 6 does not apply in relation to any Sole Risk Project.
(5)
Amendments to section 8 (“Equity Calls”)
The introduction to clause (a) of the section of the Charter headed Section 8 “Equity Calls” is
taken to be replaced with a new introduction to section 8(a) as follows:
‘(a)
Equity Calls. The cash flow of the Enterprise and borrowings shall be the preferred
source of funding for the needs of the Enterprise (excluding the needs of any Sole Risk Projects,
which will be funded in accordance with the sole risk regime set out at Exhibit C). Should the
aggregate annual capital budget of the Enterprise require an equity contribution from Alcoa and
Alumina, the Strategic Council may only make an equity call upon 30 days’ notice and, if
appropriate, a payment schedule shall be included. In the case of Sole Risk Projects that are
being conducted by an Enterprise Company in accordance with clause 2.4 of Exhibit C, equity
calls with respect to that Sole Risk Project must be made in accordance with clause 2.4 of
Exhibit C. Subject to any duties at law or in equity to which a director may be bound, Alcoa and
Alumina must procure that their representatives on the Board of the relevant Enterprise Company
resolve to give effect to any equity call made under this section. The following limits apply to
equity calls:’
B-3
1.
Definitions
Exhibit C
Sole Risk Regime
Capitalised terms have the meaning given in the Schedule of Definitions (Restated) unless defined 
below.
Affiliate means, with respect to any entity, any other entity controlling, controlled by, or under 
common control with such first entity, provided that for the purposes of this definition, “control” of an 
entity shall mean the ownership of 50% or more of the voting securities of such entity (and 
“controlled” and “controlling” shall have correlative meanings).
Enterprise Project means a project undertaken within the Enterprise and includes normal 
operations.
Enterprise Facilities means the operational facilities of an Enterprise Company, including but not 
limited to mining and refinery infrastructure, and including any related services required to be 
provided by the relevant Enterprise Company to operate those facilities and any services to support 
and facilitate the development, construction and operation of the Sole Risk Project.
Expansion Project means a project of a type within the Scope of the Enterprise undertaken within 
the Enterprise involving the expansion of an existing Enterprise operation, facility or venture, 
including any mine or refinery.
New Project means a project of a type within the Scope of the Enterprise undertaken within the 
Enterprise involving the development of a new mine, refinery or other operation or facility on 
Enterprise land, tenements or otherwise within Enterprise concession rights.
Non-Proposing Party has the meaning given in clause 2.2.
Proposing Party has the meaning given in clause 2.1.
Relevant Existing Project means any Enterprise Project or another Sole Risk Project, which at the 
relevant time:
(a)
is in existence;
(b)
is approved to be undertaken within the Enterprise (in the case of an Enterprise Project); or
(c)
a Proposing Party has proposed under clause 2.1 and has not declined, under clause 2.2, to 
conduct (in the case of another Sole Risk Project).
Sole Risk Project has the meaning given in clause 2.1.
Sole Risk Project Management Agreement has the meaning given in clause 2.2(d).
2.
Sole risk
2.1
Proposal for an Expansion Project or New Project
If Alcoa or Alumina or any of their respective Affiliates wish to develop, construct, operate or 
otherwise implement an Expansion Project or New Project, it (“Proposing Party”) may by written 
notice propose that the relevant Enterprise Company implement, or participate in, the Expansion 
Project or New Project (as applicable), in which case the Proposing Party must provide such detail in 
relation to the Expansion Project or New Project as is reasonably necessary to enable the other party 
(“Non-Proposing Party”) to assess the merits of the project.
2.2
Sole Risk Project
If:
(a)
(b)
the proposed Expansion Project or New Project has not been approved by the Non-
Proposing Party within 180 days of written notice of the proposal being given under 
clause 2.1; and
the proposed Expansion Project or New Project does not materially interfere with any 
Relevant Existing Project,
the Proposing Party (“Proposing Party”) may, by giving written notice to the other party (“Non-
Proposing Party”), elect to conduct the proposed Expansion Project or New Project (as applicable) 
as a sole risk project, in which case the Proposing Party:
(c)
(d)
in the case of a New Project, where it is feasible, shall conduct the project itself or through a 
nominated subsidiary (including, in either case without limitation, by the appointment of a 
manager); or
in the case of an Expansion Project relating to an Enterprise Refinery, shall enter into an 
agreement with the relevant Enterprise Company to conduct the project under the direction of 
the Proposing Party (a “Sole Risk Project Management Agreement”); or
(e)
in all other cases, may elect to:
(i)
(ii)
conduct the project itself or through a nominated subsidiary (including, in either case 
without limitation, by the appointment of a manager); or
enter into a Sole Risk Project Management Agreement with the relevant Enterprise 
Company.
(each a “Sole Risk Project”).
(f)
(g)
Subject to paragraph (g), the construction and operation of all Sole Risk Projects must 
comply with all applicable law and the standards adopted by the relevant Enterprise 
Company in place immediately prior to commencement of construction or operation of the 
Sole Risk Project. Where there are changes to those standards after commencement of the 
operations of such Sole Risk Project, these standards will be adopted for conduct of the Sole 
Risk Project to that same extent.
Where a Sole Risk Project is not the subject of a Sole Risk Project Management Agreement, 
and is functionally and operationally separate from the Enterprise Facilities, the Proposing 
Party may seek the approval of the relevant Enterprise Company to apply a standard (other 
than the standard adopted by the relevant Enterprise Company) that is a reasonably 
acceptable industry standard, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
2.3
Conduct of Sole Risk Project operated by Proposing Party or nominated Affiliate
(a)
If the Sole Risk Project is conducted in accordance with clause 2.2(c) or clause 2.2(e)(i), the 
Proposing Party or its nominated Affiliate will develop, operate and manage the Sole Risk 
Project independently of the Enterprise’s operations in accordance with this clause 2.3, 
except to the extent that the Proposing Party utilises Enterprise Facilities as agreed or 
determined in accordance with clause 2.3(b).
(b)
A Proposing Party may utilise Enterprise Facilities in connection with a Sole Risk Project 
provided:
(i)
(ii)
the Enterprise Facilities are not required or utilised, and are not reasonably expected 
to be required or utilised, for any Relevant Existing Project or reasonably expected 
projects, or have capacity in excess of that which is required or utilised, or expected 
to be required or utilised, for Relevant Existing Projects or reasonably expected 
projects; and
to the extent a Proposing Party may utilise Enterprise Facilities in accordance with 
clause 2.3(b)(i), the Proposing Party and the relevant Enterprise Company must 
negotiate in good faith with a view to entering into a shared services agreement 
(“Shared Services Agreement”) with the Proposing Party pursuant to which the 
relevant Enterprise Company will allow utilisation of the Enterprise Facilities on 
reasonable arms’ length terms. The amount payable for use of the Enterprise 
Facilities should take into account the latent capacity of some or all of the Enterprise 
Facilities proposed to be used (including loss of option value) and any coordination 
costs.
(c)
The operation and management of the Sole Risk Project by the Proposing Party or its 
nominated subsidiary will be conducted such that:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
the Proposing Party shall be the sole decision maker in respect of the Sole Risk 
Project, and will bear all risks associated with the Sole Risk Project;
the Non-Proposing Party and the Strategic Council are not entitled to participate in 
any decision making regarding the Sole Risk Project except such decisions as may 
affect the Enterprise Facilities or that arise in connection with the Sole Risk Project 
Management Agreement;
during the period of construction and operation of the Sole Risk Project, the 
Proposing Party or its nominated subsidiary will use reasonable endeavours to 
minimise interference with, or disruption to, the Enterprise and any Enterprise 
Project;
the Non-Proposing Party is not entitled to receive any offtake arising from the Sole 
Risk Project in accordance with clause 2.7; and
the cost of the Sole Risk Project, including any payments under a Shared Services 
Agreement, will be borne by the Proposing Party in accordance with clause 2.8.
2.4
Conduct of Sole Risk Project operated by an Enterprise Company
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
If the Sole Risk Project is conducted in accordance with clause 2.2(d) or clause 2.2(e)(ii), the 
relevant Enterprise Company will operate and manage the Sole Risk Project in accordance 
with this clause 2.4 subject to the applicable Sole Risk Project Management Agreement, 
which must include a requirement that during the period of construction and operation of the 
Sole Risk Project, the Enterprise Company will use reasonable endeavours to minimise 
interference with, or disruption to, the Enterprise and any Enterprise Project;
The Enterprise Facilities may be utilised to conduct the Sole Risk Project to the extent that 
the Enterprise Facilities are not required or utilised, and are not reasonably expected to be 
required or utilised, for any Relevant Existing Project or reasonably expected projects, or 
have capacity in excess of that which is required or utilised, or expected to be required or 
utilised, for Relevant Existing Projects or reasonably expected projects;
the Non-Proposing Party shall not be entitled to receive any offtake arising from the Sole 
Risk Project in accordance with clause 2.7; and
the cost of the Sole Risk Project will be borne by the Proposing Party in accordance with 
clause 2.8.
2.5
Obligation to proceed with Sole Risk Project within certain period
If a Sole Risk Project has not commenced construction within 18 months of the time period specified 
in the proposed project terms, the Proposing Party cannot proceed without the approval of the Non-
Proposing Party.
2.6
Rights to Enterprise tenement or concession rights
(a)
(b)
(c)
If the Sole Risk Project that is a New Project is conducted in accordance with clause 2.2(c) or 
clause 2.2(e)(i), the relevant Enterprise Company will use commercially reasonable 
endeavours to grant to the Proposing Party or its subsidiary, or secure the grant to that party 
of, a right to use the Enterprise land, tenement or concession rights, to the extent reasonably 
necessary to undertake the Sole Risk Project.
The Enterprise Company will, at the request of the Proposing Party, use commercially 
reasonable endeavours to excise the portion of the tenement or concession on customary 
terms, including by creation of a sublease, reasonably expected to contain the reserves and 
resources required for the Sole Risk Project.
If the existence of additional reserves or resources is established in the area that is the 
subject of a Sole Risk Project through further exploration (Additional Tonnes), the 
Proposing Party or Enterprise Company, as the case may be, will notify Alcoa and Alumina 
as soon as reasonably practicable.  For the avoidance of doubt, any such Additional Tonnes 
will be assets of the Enterprise Company.
2.7
Rights to production arising from a Sole Risk Project
(a)
(b)
If the Sole Risk Project is conducted in accordance with clause 2.2(d) or clause 2.2(e)(ii), the 
Proposing Party may exclusively purchase all offtake, including any bauxite or alumina, 
produced from the Sole Risk Project at cost and the Non-Proposing Party shall not be 
entitled to receive any production from the Sole Risk Project and the Enterprise Company 
must enter into an offtake agreement with the Proposing Party to give effect to the offtake 
rights of the Proposing Party.
If the Sole Risk Project is conducted in accordance with clause 2.2(c) or clause 2.2(e)(i), the 
Proposing Party will exclusively hold the legal title to all production resulting from the Sole 
Risk Project in accordance with clause 2.7(a) and the Non-Proposing Party shall not be 
entitled to receive any production from the Sole Risk Project, and the Proposing Party will 
have the exclusive benefit of all property, plant and equipment built or acquired for the Sole 
Risk Project.
(c)
If the production from an Enterprise Project (including an Expansion Project) reduces 
following completion of construction of that Enterprise Project then, to the extent that such 
reduction occurs as a result of actions taken at the direction of:
(i)
(ii)
the Proposing Party in connection with a Sole Risk Project, the offtake available to 
the Proposing Party will reduce; and
an Enterprise Company in connection with an Enterprise Project, the offtake 
available to the Enterprise Company will reduce,
and to the extent that reduction occurs as a result of an event that neither the Proposing 
Party and Enterprise contribute to or which the Proposing Party and Enterprise each 
materially contribute to, then the offtake available to the Proposing Party and the Enterprise 
Company will reduce in proportion to the entitlement to offtake of each party.
(d)
The Proposing Party will have the exclusive benefit of all fixtures built or acquired for the Sole 
Risk Project with ownership of those fixtures residing with the Enterprise Company.
(e)
The Enterprise will be entitled to use any unused capacity in infrastructure created by a Sole 
Risk Project, and the Proposing Party and the relevant Enterprise Company must negotiate 
in good faith with a view to entering into a shared infrastructure agreement (“Infrastructure 
Sharing Agreement”) with the Proposing Party pursuant to which the Proposing Party will 
allow utilisation of the infrastructure  by the relevant Enterprise Company on reasonable 
arms’ length terms.
2.8
Allocation of costs of Sole Risk Project
(a)
The Proposing Party must:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
bear the entire cost and liability of developing, conducting, operating, closing and 
remediating the Sole Risk Project;
pay the relevant Enterprise Company a fair market value amount (“Fair Market 
Value”) for any resources consumed;
pay any costs in connection with any proposed excising of a portion of the land, 
tenements or concession rights following a request by the Proposing Party under 
clause 2.6, including the costs to the Enterprise Company seeking and obtaining any 
Government consent required and any duty or tax payable;
pay the relevant Enterprise Company its costs, including reasonably allocated 
overhead and any other agreed payments, for use of the relevant Enterprise 
Facilities;
if the construction or operation of the Sole Risk Project results or is likely to result in 
a temporary decrease in the output or capacity of the Enterprise, which would result 
in an unavoidable loss of sales of bauxite or alumina by the Enterprise Company, the 
Proposing Party must reimburse the Non-Proposing Party for such loss; and
keep the relevant Enterprise Company and the Non-Proposing Party whole in 
respect of costs and liabilities arising from the Sole Risk Project, including any cost 
of bringing forward the closure date of an Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery or 
otherwise reducing the value of the Enterprise Facilities (whether or not directly 
utilised for the Sole Risk Project).
(b)
For the purposes of this Exhibit C, Fair Market Value will be agreed by the Proposing Party 
and the Enterprise Company or, failing agreement, will be determined by the average of 
three valuations determined by three independent experts (“Valuers”):
(i)
(ii)
based on the fact that the scheduled reserves and resources will be developed using 
the infrastructure assets available to the Enterprise;
based on the quantity of scheduled reserves and resources, and other reasonably 
anticipated bauxite prospectivity, that the applicable feasibility study identifies as 
being scheduled for delivery to the Proposing Party as part of the Sole Risk Project 
and the timing for delivery of those tonnes in accordance with the delivery schedule 
set out in the applicable feasibility study, taking into account any reduction in mine 
life arising from the consumption of those reserves and resources; and
(iii)
each Valuer will value the transaction as between a willing but not anxious seller and 
a willing but not anxious buyer at arms length and have regard to all relevant matters 
including:
(A)
current and projected demand and supply conditions in the global bauxite 
market;
(B)
likely trends in bauxite quality specifications and pricing;
(C)
(D)
(E)
likely timing and scale of development and/or expansion of all relevant 
bauxite deposits;
quantum and nature of all relevant bauxite reserves and resources, including 
grade;
projected capital and operating costs of development (taking into account the 
location of the bauxite and in particular its proximity to relevant Enterprise 
Facilities) and/or expansion over project life;
(F)
the global competitiveness of relevant bauxite product; and
(G)
the party that will bear any stamp duty or equivalent duty arising in 
connection with the transaction concerned and the amount of that duty
2.9
Allocation of benefits of Sole Risk Project
Any production economies (including reductions in fixed and variable cost on a per unit basis) which 
result from the Sole Risk Project with respect to the Enterprise shall accrue to the Enterprise 
Company.
2.10
Sale or closure of Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery
(a)
Subject to paragraph (b), if the Strategic Council or the relevant Enterprise Company 
proposes to sell, curtail or close an Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery:
(i)
(ii)
a related continuing Sole Risk Project will not be forced to close or curtail; and
the sale of those assets, to the extent they relate to a Sole Risk Project, is not 
permitted without the consent of the Proposing Party,
unless there has been consultation with the Proposing Party in good faith to determine 
whether the Proposing Party could assume operation of the Enterprise Mine or Enterprise 
Refinery with the Proposing Party having the exclusive benefit of the operations, including 
the offtake and bearing the entire operating cost and liability of conducting the Enterprise 
Mine or Enterprise Refinery. If in this scenario, the Proposing Party does assume operation 
of the Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery, liability for the closure costs will be borne by:
(iii)
(iv)
the Enterprise, to the extent of the closure costs attributable to the Enterprise Mine or 
Enterprise Refinery (in each case, excluding any Sole Risk Project) in respect of the 
period prior to the date on which the Proposing Party assumed operation of the 
Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery; and
the Proposing Party, as regards the Sole Risk Project and to the extent of the closure 
costs attributable to the Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery in respect of the 
period on and after the time from which the Proposing Party assumed control of the 
Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery.
(b)
Any sale by the Enterprise Company of an Enterprise Mine or Enterprise Refinery that 
contains a Sole Risk Project must be subject to the purchaser recognising and agreeing to 
honour the rights and interests of the Proposing Party in respect of the Sole Risk Project and 
pursuant to these terms.
2.11
Indemnity
The Proposing Party must indemnify and keep indemnified the Non-Proposing Party and the relevant 
Enterprise Company against all claims and liabilities arising out of the existence, development and 
operation of any and all of its Sole Risk Projects, including any tax liability arising as a result of the 
transfer or sale of any offtake from the Enterprise Company to the Proposing Party and all claims and 
liabilities in connection with liability assumed by the Proposing Party under clause 2.10(a).
2.12
Transfer of Sole Risk Project
If a Proposing Party transfers all of its interest in the Enterprise Company to a person other than an 
affiliate, it will also transfer, to the acquirer of that interest, each Sole Risk Project.
FINAL VERSION
SCHEDULE 1.01
DEFINITIONS
Any reference to a document also includes any variation, restatement, replacement or novation of that 
document.
“2004 Side Letter to the Charter” means the side letter to the Restated Charter dated December 30 1994 
regarding Alcoa Aluminio S.A. bauxite and alumina and inorganic industrial chemicals interests and 
related matters.
“AAC” means Alcoa Alumina & Chemicals, L.L.C. (now known as Alcoa World Alumina, LLC).
“ACAH” means Alcoa Caribbean Alumina Holdings, L.L.C.
“ACAP-A” means ACAP Australia Pty Ltd.
“ACAP-S” means ACAP Singapore Pty Ltd.
“Affiliate of Alcoa” means any entity, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common 
control with Alcoa. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, an entity shall be deemed to be in 
control of or to be controlled by another entity if such entity holds 50% or more of the outstanding voting 
equity interest in such other entity or such other entity holds 50% or more of its outstanding voting equity 
interest.
“Affiliate of Alumina” means any entity, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common 
control with Alumina. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, an entity shall be deemed to be in 
control of or to be controlled by another entity if such entity holds 50% of more of the outstanding voting 
equity interest in such other entity or such other entity holds 50% or more of its outstanding voting equity 
interest.
“AIHC” means Arconic International Holding Company LLC.
“Alcoa” means Alcoa Inc., which was formerly known as Aluminum Company of America and formerly 
defined herein as “ACOA”. Any references to “ACOA” for or in connection with this Schedule 1.01 are 
taken to be references to “Alcoa”.
“Alcoa Distribution” means the “Distribution” as defined in the Settlement Agreement.
“Alcoa Distribution Date” means the “Distribution Date” as defined in the Settlement Agreement.
“Alumina” means Alumina Limited (A.C.N.004 820 419), which was formerly known as Western Mining 
Corporation Holdings Limited and formerly defined herein as “WMC.” Any references to “WMC” for or in 
connection with this Schedule 1.01 are taken to be references to “Alumina.”
“Alumina-D” means Alumina (USA) Inc.
“Alumina-F” means Westminer International Holdings Limited (A.C.N.006 840 731).
“Alumina Limited AWAC Offtake Agreements” means the Umbrella Offtake Agreement, the Alumina 
Limited – AWAC Bauxite Supply Agreement, dated as of September 1, 2016, by and among Alcoa of 
Australia Limited, Alcoa World Alumina LLC and Alumina Limited, and the Alumina Limited – AWAC 
Alumina Supply Agreement, dated as of September 1, 2016, by and among Alcoa of Australia Limited, 
Alcoa World Alumina LLC and Alumina Limited.
“AMJ” means Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica, Inc. or Alcoa Minerals of Jamaica, as required by the context in 
which they are used.
“A of A” means Alcoa of Australia, Ltd.
“ASCA” means ASC Alumina, Inc.
“Available Cash” means, in respect of an Enterprise Company other than Alcoa World Alumina LLC 
(unless such exclusion is mutually agreed by Alumina and Alcoa to be modified following significant 
portfolio changes), on the relevant Calculation Date the amount of the Cash Balances and Cash 
Equivalents of an Enterprise Company, less any projected negative Free Cash Flow of such Enterprise
W/2771332
Company for the three months immediately following the relevant Calculation Date as reasonably and in 
good faith mutually estimated and agreed by Alcoa and Alumina under United States generally accepted 
accounting principles, less the Cash Threshold for such Enterprise Company.
“Bauxite and Alumina” means the worldwide exploration, searching and prospecting for, and the mining 
of bauxite and any other minerals and/or ores from which alumina or aluminum can or may be 
commercially produced.
“Business Day” means a day on which banks are open for general banking business in Melbourne, 
Australia and New York, New York (not being a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday in that place).
“Calculation Date” means, in respect of:
(a)  section 10(a) of the Restated Charter, the last Business Day of each Quarter; and
(b)  section 10(b) of the Restated Charter, each of January 31, April 30, July 31 and October 31.
“Cash Available for Loans” means cash on hand, demand deposits and financial investments that are 
convertible into cash, provided that this amount should be adjusted for expected cash requirements of 
such Enterprise Company for the one-month period immediately following the loan.
“Cash Balances and Cash Equivalents” means cash on hand, demand deposits and financial 
investments that are convertible in cash, less at call borrowings.
“Cash Flow from Operating Activities” means cash flow from operating activities, as determined in 
accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles.
“Cash Threshold” means, in the case of:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
A of A, US $85 million;
Alcoa World Alumina Brasil Ltda, US $35 million;
Alumina Espanola S.A., US $10 million;
AWA Saudi Limited, US $5 million;
Suralco, US $5 million,
or, in each case, such other amount as may be mutually agreed by Alumina and Alcoa in respect of the 
relevant Enterprise Company following an annual review, or in the case of Alcoa World Alumina LLC, 
significant portfolio changes.
“CBG” means Compagnie des Bauxites de Guinee
“C&L” means Coopers & Lybrand accounting firm.
“CEO's” means Chief Executive Officers
“CERCLA” means Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 
U.S.C.Sec. 9601 et seq.
“Change of Control” of a party (the “Target”) means the acquisition of beneficial ownership, by any 
person or group of persons acting in concert with respect to the Target’s securities (the “Acquirer(s)”), in 
a single transaction or series of related transactions, by way of merger, scheme of arrangement, takeover 
or other business combination or purchase, of securities that result in the Acquirer(s) having beneficial 
ownership of more than 50% of the Target’s voting equity securities (an “Acquisition Transaction”); 
provided, however, that a Change of Control will be deemed not to have occurred if, immediately following 
such Acquisition Transaction:
(a)
(b)
the Original Target Shareholders continue to have an aggregate amount of beneficial 
ownership of at least 50% (“50% threshold”) of the voting equity securities of the Target (or 
the surviving company or Acquirer(s), as applicable), and
such beneficial ownership is solely attributable to the beneficial ownership of Target voting 
securities that they had as of immediately prior to the Acquisition Transaction (for example, if 
a shareholder holds shares of both the Target and the Acquirer(s), any beneficial ownership in
-2-
the relevant post-transaction entity that is attributable to its pre-transaction ownership of the 
Acquirer(s) shall not count toward the 50% threshold).
“Competitor” means any person or entity engaged in the mining of bauxite or in the processing of 
alumina, inorganic chemicals, or production of primary aluminum, whether directly or indirectly through 
any company in which it holds, whether legally or beneficially, 10% or more of the issued capital or such 
number of shares in the issued capital or any class of shares in the issued capital which entitles it to 10% 
or more of the voting power of the shares in that company.
“Control” of a party means a party or group of parties acting in concert with respect to such first party’s 
securities:
(a)  directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the votes eligible to be cast at a general meeting of that
party; or
(b)  the direct or indirect capacity to control the composition of that party’s board or similar governing
body,
whether or not based on statutory, legal or equitable rights, and whether or not arising by means of a trust, 
agreement or the ownership of any interest in shares or stock of that entity, and “Controlled” has a 
corresponding meaning.
“Debt” means indebtedness for borrowed money owed to financial institutions, or evidenced by bills, 
bonds or notes issued to investors.
“Distribution” means a distribution by an Enterprise Company as determined under section 10 of the 
Restated Charter and payable to each Shareholder in respect of their shares in the Enterprise Company 
(and in equal amount per share for all of the Shareholders). All Distributions will be in the form of a 
dividend unless the Enterprise Company is prohibited by law from paying dividends, in which case the 
Distribution will be in the form of a capital return or other form as agreed by the relevant Shareholders.
“Distribution Date” has the meaning set forth in the Framework Agreement.
“EBDIAT” means earnings before depreciation, interest, amortization and taxes, including pre-tax income 
from the Enterprise Companies accounted for on an equity basis.
“Enterprise” means the contractual arrangement by which Alumina and Alcoa shall cause the Enterprise 
Companies to take actions in a coordinated manner, through which Alumina and Alcoa will combine their 
respective current interests in bauxite mining, alumina refining and the Alcoa non-metallurgical alumina 
operations as well as Alcoa's shipping operations and certain integrated aluminum fabricating and 
smelting operations.
“Enterprise Companies” means those Affiliates of Alcoa or Alumina that own and operate the 
combination of Alcoa's and Alumina's respective current interests in bauxite mining, alumina refining and 
the Alcoa non-metallurgical alumina operations as well as Alcoa's shipping operations and certain 
integrated aluminum fabricating and smelting operations, as more particularly described on 
Schedules 2.02 (a) to (d) of the Restated Formation Agreement.
“Enterprise Growth Project” means any proposed or potential growth project within the Enterprise, 
including, but not limited to, any acquisition of assets or interests, any Expansion, or any other project 
within the Enterprise that is reasonably expected to benefit the Enterprise or any Enterprise Company.
“Enterprise Mine” means all bauxite mines which the Enterprise Controls, directly or indirectly, including 
but not limited to Huntly, Willowdale, and Juruti.
“Enterprise Refinery” means all alumina refineries which the Enterprise Controls, directly or indirectly, 
including but not limited to the Kwinana, Pinjarra, Wagerup, Sao Luis, San Ciprian, Paranam/Suralco, and 
Point Comfort refineries.
“EST” means Eastern Standard Time.
“Exclusivity End Date” means the date on which the amendments set out at Exhibit B of the Restated 
Charter commence.
“Expansion” means any project within the Enterprise, the purpose of which is:
-3-
(a)  the expansion of an existing Enterprise operation, facility or venture, including any mine or
refinery; or
(b)  the development of a new mine, refinery or other operation or facility.
“Financial Protocol” means Schedule 2.06 to the Restated Formation Agreement.
“Financial Year” means the period from 1 January to 31 December in each year.  The first half of the 
Financial Year means the period from 1 January to the next 30 June in each year, and the second half of 
the Financial Year means the period from 1 July to the next 31 December in each year.
“Formation Date” means the date the Enterprise is formed.
“Framework Agreement” means the Framework Agreement entered into between, amongst others, 
Alcoa and Alumina and executed on or around the date of execution of this restated document.
“Free Cash Flow” means Cash Flow from Operating Activities, less Sustaining Capital Expenditure.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles of the United States.
“Heads of Agreement” or “HOA” means the Heads of Agreement dated July 6, 1994 between Alcoa and 
Alumina, as supplemented by a Supplemental Agreement to Heads of Agreement.
“ICD” means the Industrial Chemicals Division.
“Integrated Operations” means those certain primary aluminum smelting, aluminum fabricating, gold 
mining and refining operations Alcoa facilities that exist as of the formation of the Enterprise and are run 
as part of an integrated operation at certain of the locations included within the Enterprise.
“Insolvency Event” means the happening of any of the following events in respect of a person or entity:
(a)  it is unable to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable;
(b)  a meeting is convened by its directors or equity holders to place it into voluntary liquidation or to
appoint an administrator;
(c)  (i) it makes an application to a court of competent jurisdiction for its winding up or (ii) any other
person makes an application to a court of competent jurisdiction for its winding up and such 
application is not stayed, withdrawn or dismissed within forty-five (45) days;
(d)  an order by a court of competent jurisdiction is made for it to be wound up;
(e)  the appointment of a controller for a substantial portion of its assets;
(f)
it proposes to enter into or enters into any form of compromise or arrangement (formal or informal) 
with, or assignment for the benefit of, its creditors or any of them, including a filing for Chapter 11 
protection under US law or a deed of company arrangement;
(g)  an involuntary proceeding shall be commenced seeking relief in respect of it, or of a substantial
portion of its assets, under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 or any other 
applicable debtor relief law and such proceeding shall continue undismissed for forty-five (45) 
days; or
(h)  it files for protection under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 or any other
applicable debtor relief law; or
(i)  anything having a substantially similar effect to any of the events specified in paragraphs (a) to (h)
above inclusive happens to it under the law of any jurisdiction.
“LIBOR” means the rate expressed as a percentage per annum, which is the arithmetic mean of the 
respective rates quoted as at 11:00 a.m. London time on the date a payment is due to be paid, on the 
page designated LIBOR on the Reuters Monitor Money rate service for U.S. dollar deposits for 30 days.
-4-
“Licensed Technology” means Alcoa technology related to the development, processing, manufacture, 
application or use of the products and services related in any way to the scope of Enterprise Companies 
and granted to AAC & ACAH.
“Liquidating Events” means those events identified in Section 14.2 of the LLC Agreement.
“LLC Agreement” means the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of AAC, 
unless the context indicates otherwise.
“Manager” means Alcoa, any Affiliate of Alcoa, or nominees of Alcoa acting as manager and/or operator 
of an Enterprise Company from time to time.
“MRN” means Mineracao Rio do Norte S.A.
“Net Profits” means the profits of the applicable Enterprise Company after making reasonable and 
adequate provisions for depreciation, bad debts and local taxes.
“Original Target Shareholders” means the individual beneficial owners of voting equity securities of 
Target as of immediately prior to the relevant Acquisition Transaction; provided, however, that Acquirer(s) 
(including any of their Related Bodies Corporate) in the Acquisition Transaction shall not constitute 
Original Target Shareholders. 
“Permitted Subsidiary Debt Basket” means the maximum aggregate amount of Debt permitted to be 
incurred by the AWAC entities and other subsidiaries of Alcoa that are not loan parties under the 
Revolving Facility pursuant to the terms thereof.
“Property” means all real and personal property acquired by AAC and any improvements thereto, and 
shall include both tangible and intangible property.
“Quarter” means each period of three months ending on 31 March, 30 June, 30 September and 
31 December in each Financial Year (or such lesser period ending on the date of termination of this 
document in accordance with its terms).
“Related Bodies Corporate” has the meaning given in the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
“Restated Charter” means the Charter of the Strategic Council of the Alcoa/Alumina Worldwide 
Alumina/Chemicals Enterprise originally dated December 21, 1994 between Alcoa and Alumina, as 
amended and restated with effect on and from the Alcoa Distribution Date pursuant to the Framework 
Agreement.
“Restated Formation Agreement” means the Worldwide Alumina/Chemicals Enterprise Formation 
Agreement originally dated December 21, 1994 among Alcoa, Alumina, ASCA, AIHC, Alumina-D and 
Alumina-F, as amended and restated with effect on and from the Alcoa Distribution Date pursuant to the 
Framework Agreement.
“Restated May 1995 Letter” means the letter agreement between Alcoa (formerly known as “Aluminum 
Company of America”) and Alumina (formerly known as “Western Mining Corporation Holdings Limited”) 
dated 16 May 1995 regarding certain restrictions on the transfer of interests in the Enterprise Companies, 
as amended and with effect on and from the Alcoa Distribution Date pursuant to the Framework 
Agreement.
“Revolving Facility” means the revolving credit facility of Alcoa Nederland Holding B.V. (the “Revolving 
Facility Borrower”) in place from time to time, as it may be amended, amended and restated, 
supplemented, modified, replaced or refinanced, pursuant to which the Revolving Facility Borrower may 
obtain revolving borrowings from the lenders party thereto.
“Scope of Company” means the object and purpose for which the limited liability company was formed.
“Scope of the Enterprise” means those businesses and related activities identified in Section 5 of the 
Restated Charter.
“Settlement Agreement” means the Settlement and Release Agreement entered into between Alcoa, 
Alcoa Australian Holdings Pty. Ltd, Arconic International Holding Company, ASCA, Reynolds Metals 
Company, Reynolds Metals Exploration, Inc. Alcoa, Alcoa Upstream Corporation, Alumina, Alumina (USA) 
Inc., and Alumina International Holdings Pty. Limited dated September 1, 2016.
-5-
“Shareholder” means a holder of common shares, ordinary shares, limited liability company interests or 
similar equity interests in an Enterprise Company.
“Sole Risk Project” has the meaning given in clause 3.2 of Exhibit C of the Restated Charter.
“Stock Exchange” means New York Stock Exchange.
“Strategic Council” means the council formed by Alcoa and Alumina to coordinate the activities of the 
Enterprise.
“Suralco” means both Suriname Aluminum Company LLC (USA) and N.V. Alcoa Minerals of Suriname 
(Netherlands).
“Sustaining Capital Expenditure” means any capital expenditure excluding capital expenditure for the 
purpose of any Enterprise Growth Project.
“Target Enterprise Debt Level” means 50% of the Permitted Subsidiary Debt Basket applicable as at the 
commencement of the Revolving Facility, provided that:
(a)  if the Permitted Subsidiary Debt Basket is increased for any reason, including in connection with
any renewal, replacement or amendment to the Revolving Facility, this amount is increased to 
50% of that increased Permitted Subsidiary Debt Basket;
(b)  if the Revolving Facility expires, terminates or ceases for any reason, the Target Enterprise Debt
Level applicable immediately prior to the time the Revolving Facility expires, terminates or ceases, 
will continue to apply, subject to (as applicable) paragraphs (a) and (c); or
(c)  if Alcoa achieves an investment grade credit rating from either Moody’s and/or Standard & Poors,
the Target Enterprise Debt Level is taken to be the greater of:
(i)
the Target Enterprise Debt Level, applicable immediately prior to Alcoa achieving such a 
credit rating; and
(ii)  US $200 million, when permissible under the Revolving Facility.
“Tax Protocol” means the Tax Protocol attached to the LLC Agreement as Exhibit A, as such Tax 
Protocol may be revised by the Members from time to time, which outlines the tax accounting procedures 
and related information for AAC.
“Total Capital” means the sum of debt (net of cash) plus any minority interest plus shareholder equity.
“Umbrella Offtake Agreement” means the AWAC Umbrella Offtake Specifications Agreement by and 
among Alcoa of Australia Limited, Alcoa World Alumina LLC, Alumina Limited and Alcoa Inc., dated as of 
September 1, 2016.
-6-