
EX-99.2 3 d241465dex992.htm EX-99.2 EX-99.2
Exhibit 99.2
NEWS RELEASE
Parsley Energy, LLC Announces $200 Million Private Placement of
Additional 6.250% Senior Unsecured Notes due 2024
AUSTIN, Texas, August 15, 2016— Parsley Energy, LLC (“Parsley”), a subsidiary of
Parsley Energy, Inc. (NYSE: PE) (“Parsley Inc.”), and Parsley’s wholly owned subsidiary,
Parsley Finance Corp., announced today that, subject to market conditions, they intend to
offer an additional $200.0 million in aggregate principal amount of their 6.250% senior
unsecured notes due 2024 (the “New 2024 Notes”) to eligible purchasers (the “Notes
Offering”).
On May 27, 2016, Parsley and Parsley Finance Corp. completed an offering of $200.0
million of their 6.250% senior notes due 2024 (the “Initial 2024 Notes” and, together with
the New 2024 Notes, the “2024 Notes”). The New 2024 Notes will have identical terms,
other than the issue date, as the Initial 2024 Notes, and the New 2024 Notes and the Initial
2024 Notes will be treated as a single class of securities under the indenture governing the
2024 Notes.
Concurrently with the Notes Offering, Parsley Inc. is offering 7,000,000 shares of its Class
A common stock (or 8,050,000 shares if the option to purchase additional shares is
exercised in full) in an underwritten public offering (the “Concurrent Equity Offering”). The
shares of Class A common stock are being offered in the Concurrent Equity Offering by
means of a separate prospectus supplement. The Notes Offering is not conditioned on the
consummation of the Concurrent Equity Offering, and the Concurrent Equity Offering is
not conditioned on the Notes Offering.
Together with the net proceeds from the Concurrent Equity Offering, Parsley intends to
use the net proceeds from the Notes Offering to fund the aggregate purchase price for the
acquisition of oil and gas interests in Glasscock County, Texas (the “Acquisition”), and
any remaining net proceeds will be used to fund a portion of Parsley’s capital program and
for general corporate purposes, including potential future acquisitions. The Notes Offering
is not conditioned on the consummation of the Acquisition.
The securities to be offered in the Notes Offering have not been registered under the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), or any state securities laws and,
unless so registered, may not be offered or sold in the United States except pursuant to an
exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the
Securities Act and applicable state securities laws. Parsley plans to offer and sell the
securities only to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities
Act and to non-U.S. persons in transactions outside the United States pursuant to
Regulation S under the Securities Act.
This press release does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy
the securities described herein, nor shall there be any sale of these securities in any
jurisdiction in which such an offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to
registration or qualification under the securities laws of any such jurisdiction.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained in this news release constitute “forward-looking statements”
within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-
looking statements represent Parsley’s expectations or beliefs concerning future events,
and it is possible that the results described in this news release will not be achieved.
These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors,
many of which are outside of Parsley’s control, which could cause actual results to differ
materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Any forward-
looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and, except as required
by law, Parsley does not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking
statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. New factors
emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for Parsley to predict all such factors.
When considering these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the risk
factors and other cautionary statements found in Parsley Inc.’s filings with the SEC,
including, but not limited to, Parsley Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2015 and its subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and
Current Reports on Form 8-K. The risk factors and other factors noted in Parsley Inc.’s
SEC filings could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any
forward-looking statement.
Contact Information
Brad Smith, Ph.D., CFA
Parsley Energy, LLC
Vice President, Corporate Strategy and Investor Relations
ir@parsleyenergy.com
(512) 505-5199
Source: Parsley Energy, LLC