
S-4 1 a2222393zs-4.htm S-4
Use these links to rapidly review the document
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 16, 2014
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
LEGACY RESERVES LP*
LEGACY RESERVES FINANCE CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or
organization)
1311
1311
16-1751069
45-1621181
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant's principal executive offices)
303 W. Wall Street, Suite 1800
Midland, Texas 79701
(432) 689-5200
James Daniel Westcott
303 W. Wall Street, Suite 1800
Midland, Texas 79701
(432) 689-5200
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
George Vlahakos
Andrews Kurth LLP
600 Travis, Suite 4200
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 220-4200
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale of the securities to the public:
As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Registration Statement.
If the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered in connection with the formation of a holding company and there is
compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box.    o
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box
and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.    o
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.    o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. See the definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer ý
Accelerated filer o
Non-accelerated filer o
(Do not check if a
smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting company o
If applicable, place an X in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in conducting this transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer)    o
Exchange Act Rule 144-1(d) (Cross-Border Third-Party Tender Offer)    o
Each Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the
Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance
with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or until this Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the
Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of each class of securities
to be registered
6.625% Senior Notes due 2021
 
Guarantees of 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021(2)
Proposed maximum
Amount to be
offering price per
registered
unit
$300,000,000
100%
—
—
Proposed maximum
aggregate offering
price
Amount of
registration fee
$300,000,000
—
$34,860(1)
—(3)
Calculated pursuant to Rule 457(f)(2) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. For purposes of this calculation, the offering price per
note was assumed to be the stated principal amount of each original note that may be received by the registrant in the exchange
transaction in which the notes will be offered.
No separate consideration was received for the guarantees. Each subsidiary of Legacy Reserves LP that is listed below in the Table of
Additional Registrant Guarantors has guaranteed the notes being registered.
Pursuant to Rule 457(n) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, no registration fee is required for the Guarantees.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Table of Contents
TABLE OF ADDITIONAL REGISTRANT GUARANTORS
*
The following are co-registrants that guarantee the debt securities:
Exact name of registrant guarantor(1)
State or other
jurisdiction of
incorporation or
organization
I.R.S.
Employer
Identification
Number
Legacy Reserves Operating GP LLC
Legacy Reserves Operating LP
Legacy Reserves Services, Inc.
Delaware
Delaware
Texas
20-4307209 
20-4307259 
20-4442710
(1)
The address for the registrant guarantors is 303 W. Wall Street, Suite 1800, Midland, Texas 79701, and the
telephone number for the registrant guarantors is (432) 689-5200. The Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code for the registrant guarantors is 1311.
Table of Contents
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell these securities
until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This
prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any
jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED DECEMBER 16, 2014
PROSPECTUS
Legacy Reserves LP
Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation
Offer to Exchange
Up to $300,000,000 of
6.625% Senior Notes due 2021
That Have Not Been Registered Under
the Securities Act of 1933
("old notes")
For
Up to $300,000,000 of
6.625% Senior Notes due 2021
That Have Been Registered Under
the Securities Act of 1933
("new notes")
Terms of the New Notes:
•
The terms of the new notes are identical to the terms of the old notes that were issued in May 2014,
except that the new notes will be registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and will not contain
restrictions on transfer, registration rights or provisions for additional interest.
Terms of the Exchange Offer:
•
We are offering to exchange up to $300,000,000 of our old notes for new notes with materially identical
terms that have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and are freely tradable.
Interest on the new notes will accrue at the rate of 6.625% per annum, and will be payable on June 1
and December 1 of each year, with the next payment being due on June 1, 2015.
We will exchange all old notes that you validly tender and do not validly withdraw before the exchange
offer expires for an equal principal amount of new notes.
The exchange offer expires at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on                        , 2015, unless
extended.
Tenders of old notes may be withdrawn at any time prior to the expiration of the exchange offer.
The exchange of old notes for new notes will not be a taxable event for U.S. federal income tax
purposes. Please read "Certain U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences."
•
•
•
•
•
You should carefully consider the risks set forth under "Risk Factors" beginning on
page 9 of this prospectus for a discussion of factors you should consider before
participating in the exchange offer.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to the
contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is                        , 2014.
Table of Contents
This prospectus is part of a registration statement we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In
making your investment decision, you should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in
this prospectus and in the accompanying letter of transmittal. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with any
other information. If you receive any unauthorized information, you must not rely on it. We are not making an offer to
sell these securities or soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where an offer or solicitation is not
authorized or in which the person making that offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so or to anyone whom it is
unlawful to make an offer or solicitation. You should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus, or
in the documents incorporated by reference herein, is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of
this prospectus or the date of such incorporated documents, as the case may be.
Table of Contents
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
Page  
ii 
 
iii
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
EXCHANGE OFFER
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
USE OF PROCEEDS
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
CERTAIN U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
LEGAL MATTERS
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
INDEPENDENT RESERVE ENGINEER
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
1 
 
9 
 
17 
 
25 
 
26 
 
27 
 
80 
 
82 
 
83 
 
83 
 
 
83 
  A-1
This prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about Legacy Reserves LP that is not
included or delivered with this prospectus. Such information is available without charge to holders of old notes upon
written or oral request made to Legacy Reserves LP, 303 W. Wall Street, Suite 1800, Midland, Texas 79701, Tel:
(432) 659-5200; Attn: James Daniel Westcott.
Table of Contents
i
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We are required to file annual, quarterly, and current reports and other information with the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the "SEC"). You may read and copy any documents filed by us at the SEC's Public
Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further
information on the Public Reference Room. The SEC maintains an internet site that contains reports, proxy and
information statements and other information regarding us. The SEC's web site is http://www.sec.gov.
We also make available free of charge on our internet website at http://www.legacylp.com all of the documents
that we file with or furnish to the SEC as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with
the SEC. Information contained on our website is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus, and you should
not consider information contained on our website as part of this prospectus unless specifically so designated and
filed with the SEC.
We "incorporate by reference" information into this prospectus, which means that we disclose important
information to you by referring you to another document filed separately with the SEC. The information incorporated by
reference is deemed to be part of this prospectus, except for any information superseded by information contained
expressly in this prospectus, and the information we file later with the SEC will automatically supersede this
information. You should not assume that the information in this prospectus is current as of any date other than the
date on the front page of this prospectus.
We incorporate by reference in this prospectus the documents listed below that we have previously filed with the
SEC:
•
•
•
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 filed on February 21, 2014;
Our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 30, 2014 filed on May 6, 2014, for the
quarter ended June 30, 2014 filed on May 6, 2014 and for the quarter ended September 30, 2014 filed on
October 31, 2014;
Our Current Reports on Form 8 K filed April 2, 2014, April 16, 2014, April 17, 2014, May 6, 2014, May 9,
2014, May 13, 2014, May 16, 2014, May 28, 2014, June 16, 2014, June 17, 2014, July 30, 2014 and
October 8, 2014; and on Form 8-K/A filed August 14, 2014, August 25, 2014 and December 11, 2014;
and
•
Our proxy statement on Schedule 14A filed on March 31, 2014.
In addition, we incorporate by reference in this prospectus any future filings made by Legacy Reserves LP with
the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange
Act") (excluding any information in those documents that is deemed by the rules of the SEC to be furnished and not
filed with the SEC) until all offerings under the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part are
completed or terminated, and after the date on which such registration statement was initially filed with the SEC and
before the effectiveness of such registration statement.
You may request a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus and any exhibit
specifically incorporated by reference in those documents, and we will provide such document to you at no cost, by
writing or telephoning us at the following address or phone number:
Legacy Reserves LP
303 W. Wall Street, Suite 1800
Midland, Texas 79701
Attn: James Daniel Westcott
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Tel: (432) 659-5200
ii
Table of Contents
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT
REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus contains forward-looking statements that are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties,
many of which are beyond our control, which may include statements about:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
our business strategy;
the amount of oil and natural gas we produce;
the price at which we are able to sell our oil and natural gas production;
our ability to acquire additional oil and natural gas properties at economically attractive prices;
our drilling locations and our ability to continue our development activities at economically attractive
costs;
the level of our lease operating expenses, general and administrative costs and finding and development
costs, including payments to our general partner;
the level of our capital expenditures;
the level of cash distributions to our unitholders;
•
•
our future operating results; and
our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions.
All of these types of statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this prospectus, are
forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as
"may," "could," "should," "expect," "plan," "project," "intend," "anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "predict," "potential,"
"pursue," "target," "continue," the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology.
The forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are largely based on our expectations, which reflect
estimates and assumptions made by our management. These estimates and assumptions reflect our best judgment
based on currently known market conditions and other factors. Although we believe such estimates and assumptions
to be reasonable, they are inherently uncertain and involve a number of risks and uncertainties that are beyond our
control. In addition, management's assumptions about future events may prove to be inaccurate. All readers are
cautioned that the forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are not guarantees of future performance,
and our expectations may not be realized or the forward-looking events and circumstances may not occur. Actual
results may differ materially from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements due to factors
described under the caption "Risk Factors" in this prospectus, as well as the risk factors included in Item 1A. "Risk
Factors" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 and the risk factors included in
Item 1A. "Risk Factors" in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2014 and June 30,
2014. The forward-looking statements in this prospectus speak only as of the date of this prospectus; we disclaim
any obligation to update these statements unless required by securities law, and we caution you not to rely on them
unduly.
iii
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. It does not contain
all of the information that may be important to you. You should read carefully the entire prospectus, including the risk
factors beginning on page 9.
Except as used in the "Description of Notes" or unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires,
references to "Legacy Reserves," "Legacy," "we," "our," "us," or like terms refer to Legacy Reserves LP and its
subsidiaries, including Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation, collectively.
In this prospectus, we refer to the notes to be issued in the exchange offer as the "new notes" and the notes
issued in May 2014 as "old notes." We refer to the new notes and the old notes collectively as the "notes."
Overview
Legacy Reserves LP
We are a master limited partnership headquartered in Midland, Texas, focused on the acquisition and
development of oil and natural gas properties primarily located in the Permian Basin, Mid-Continent and Rocky
Mountain regions of the United States.
Our primary business objective is to generate stable cash flows allowing us to make cash distributions to our
unitholders and to support and increase quarterly cash distributions per unit over time through a combination of
acquisitions of new properties and development of our existing oil and natural gas properties.
Our oil and natural gas production and reserve data as of December 31, 2013 are as follows:
We had proved reserves of approximately 87.6 million barrels of crude oil equivalent (MMBoe), of which
70% were oil and natural gas liquids ("NGLs") and 85% were classified as proved developed producing
(PDP), 2% were proved developed non-producing, and 13% were proved undeveloped; and
•
•
Our proved reserves to production ratio was approximately 12.4 years based on the annualized
production volumes for the three months ended December 31, 2013.
We have grown primarily through two activities: the acquisition of producing oil and natural gas properties and
the development of properties in established producing trends. From 2007 through 2013, we completed 129
acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties for a total of approximately $1.6 billion. These acquisitions of primarily
long-lived, oil-weighted assets, along with our ongoing development activities and operational improvements, have
allowed us to achieve significant operational and financial growth during this time period.
Our Ownership and Organizational Structure
The chart below depicts our simplified organization and ownership structure as of December 15, 2014.
Table of Contents
1
OWNERSHIP OF LEGACY RESERVES LP
Public Unitholders
Founding Investors, Directors and Management(b)
General Partner Interest
Total
85.34%(a)
14.63%
0.03%
100.00%
Does not include (i) 2,300,000 of our Series A Preferred Units, (ii) 7,200,000 of our Series B Preferred Units,
(iii) 100,000 issued and outstanding Incentive Distribution Units, (iv) 200,000 issued but unvested Incentive
Distribution Units or (iv) 700,000 Incentive Distribution Units held in treasury by the Partnership. The Series A
Preferred Units, Series B Preferred Units and Incentive Distribution Units do not vote in the election of directors
of our general partner.
Includes entities controlled by Cary Brown, our Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Dale Brown,
a Director, Paul T. Horne, our Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, and Kyle McGraw, our
Executive Vice President, Chief Development Officer and a Director as well as certain members of
Mr. McGraw's family.
WPX Energy Rocky Mountain, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of WPX Energy, Inc., also owns 200,000
unvested Incentive Distribution Units.
(a)
(b)
(c)
2
Table of Contents
The Exchange Offer
On May 13, 2014, we completed a private offering of the old notes. We entered into a registration rights
agreement with the initial purchasers in the private offering pursuant to which we agreed to deliver to you this
prospectus and to use commercially reasonable efforts to complete the exchange offer on or before May 13, 2015.
Old Notes
New Notes
Exchange Offer
Expiration Date
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
Procedures for Tendering Old Notes
Guaranteed Delivery Procedures
Table of Contents
On May 13, 2014, we completed a private placement of
$300 million aggregate principal amount of our 6.625%
Senior Notes due 2021.
6.625% Senior Notes due 2021. The terms of the new
notes are identical to the terms of the old notes, except
that the new notes are registered under the Securities
Act of 1993, as amended (the "Securities Act"), and will
not have restrictions on transfer, registration rights or
provisions for additional interest.
We are offering to exchange new notes for old notes.
The exchange offer will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York
City time, on                  , 2015, unless we decide to
extend it.
The registration rights agreement does not require us to
accept old notes for exchange if the exchange offer, or
the making of any exchange by a holder of the old
notes, would violate any applicable law or interpretation
of the staff of the SEC. The exchange offer is not
conditioned on a minimum aggregate principal amount of
old notes being tendered. Please read "Exchange Offer
—Conditions to the Exchange Offer" for more
information about the conditions to the exchange offer.
To participate in the exchange offer, you must follow the
procedures established by The Depository Trust
Company, or DTC, for tendering notes held in book-entry
form. These procedures for using DTC's Automated
Tender Offer Program, or ATOP, require that (i) the
exchange agent receive, prior to the expiration date of
the exchange offer, a computer generated message
known as an "agent's message" that is transmitted
through DTC's automated tender offer program, and
(ii) DTC confirms that:
•
DTC has received your instructions to exchange your
notes; and
•
you agree to be bound by the terms of the letter of
transmittal.
For more information on tendering your old notes, please
refer to the section in this prospectus entitled
"Exchange Offer—Terms of the Exchange Offer," "—
Procedures for Tendering" and "Description of Notes—
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form."
None.
3
You may withdraw your tender of old notes at any time
prior to the expiration date of the exchange offer. To
withdraw, you must submit a notice of withdrawal to the
exchange agent using ATOP procedures before
5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the expiration date of
the exchange offer. Please refer to the section in this
prospectus entitled "Exchange Offer—Withdrawal of
Tenders."
If you fulfill all conditions required for proper acceptance
of old notes, we will accept any and all old notes that
you properly tender in the exchange offer on or before
5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the expiration date of
the exchange offer. We will return any old notes that we
do not accept for exchange to you without expense
promptly after the expiration date of the exchange offer
and acceptance of the old notes for exchange. Please
refer to the section in this prospectus entitled
"Exchange Offer—Terms of the Exchange Offer."
We will bear expenses related to the exchange offer.
Please refer to the section in this prospectus entitled
"Exchange Offer—Fees and Expenses."
The issuance of the new notes will not provide us with
any new proceeds. We are making this exchange offer
solely to satisfy our obligations under our registration
rights agreement.
If you do not exchange your old notes in this exchange
offer, you will no longer be able to require us to register
the old notes under the Securities Act except in limited
circumstances provided under the registration rights
agreement. In addition, you will not be able to resell,
offer to resell or otherwise transfer the old notes unless
we have registered the old notes under the Securities
Act, or unless you resell, offer to resell or otherwise
transfer them under an exemption from the registration
requirements of, or in a transaction not subject to, the
Securities Act.
The exchange of old notes for new notes in the
exchange offer will not be a taxable event for U.S.
federal income tax purposes. Please read "Certain U.S.
Federal Income Tax Consequences."
We have appointed Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association as exchange agent for the exchange offer.
You should direct questions and requests for
assistance, as well as requests for additional copies of
this prospectus or the letter of transmittal, to the
exchange agent addressed as follows: Wells Fargo
Bank, N.A., MAC N9303-121, P.O. Box 1517,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480. Eligible institutions may
make requests by facsimile at 1-612- 667-6282, Attn:
Corporate Trust Operations and may confirm facsimile
delivery by calling 1-800-344-5128.
Withdrawal of Tenders
Acceptance of Old Notes and Delivery of New Notes
Fees and Expenses
Use of Proceeds
Consequences of Failure to Exchange Old Notes
U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations
Exchange Agent
Table of Contents
4
Terms of the New Notes
The new notes will be identical to the old notes, except that the new notes are registered under the Securities
Act and will not have restrictions on transfer, registration rights or provisions for additional interest. The new notes will
evidence the same debt as the old notes, and the same indenture will govern the new notes and the old notes.
The following summary contains basic information about the new notes and is not intended to be complete. It
does not contain all the information that is important to you. For a more complete understanding of the new notes,
please refer to the section of this prospectus entitled "Description of Notes."
Issuers
Notes Offered
Maturity Date
Interest
Ranking
Table of Contents
Legacy Reserves LP and Legacy Reserves Finance
Corporation. Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation, a
Delaware corporation, is a 100% owned subsidiary of
Legacy Reserves LP that has been organized for the
sole purpose of being a co-issuer of certain of our
indebtedness, including the notes. Legacy Reserves
Finance Corporation has no operations and no revenue
other than as may be incidental to its activities as co-
issuer of our indebtedness.
$300 million aggregate principal amount of 6.625%
Senior Notes due 2021.
December 1, 2021.
Interest on the new notes accrues at a rate of 6.625%
per annum (calculated using a 360- day year).
Interest on the new notes is payable on June 1 and
December 1 of each year, with the next interest
payment being due on June 1, 2015.
Like the old notes, the new notes will be our senior
unsecured obligations. Accordingly, they will:
•
rank equal in right of payment with all of our existing and
future senior indebtedness, including $300 million in
aggregate principal amount of our 8% senior unsecured
notes maturing on December 1, 2020 (the "2020 Senior
Notes") and the $250 million in aggregate principal
amount of our 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021 that we
issued in May 2013 (the "Initial 2021 Senior Notes");
•
be effectively subordinated in right of payment to all of
our secured indebtedness, including indebtedness under
our revolving credit facility, to the extent of the value of
the collateral securing such indebtedness;
5
•
be structurally subordinated in right of payment to all
indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade
payables, of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the
notes (other than indebtedness and liabilities owed to
us, if any); and
•
Subsidiary Guarantees
Optional Redemption
Table of Contents
Equity Offering Optional Redemption
6
•
rank senior in right of payment to all of our future
subordinated indebtedness;
As of September 30, 2014, we had a total principal
amount of long-term debt of approximately $1.2 billion,
and the notes were effectively subordinated to
approximately $370 million of outstanding senior
secured indebtedness (to the extent of the value of the
collateral securing such indebtedness) under our
revolving credit facility.
The new notes are jointly and severally guaranteed by
all of our existing and future material restricted
subsidiaries (other than the co-issuer) that guarantee a
material amount of our other indebtedness, which we
refer to as "our subsidiary guarantors." Each subsidiary
guarantee of a subsidiary guarantor will:
•
rank equal in right of payment with all of the existing and
future senior unsecured indebtedness of the subsidiary
guarantor;
•
be effectively subordinated in right of payment to all
existing and future secured indebtedness of the
subsidiary guarantor, including its guarantees of our
borrowings under our revolving credit facility, to the
extent of the value of the collateral securing such
indebtedness; and
•
rank senior in right of payment to all future subordinated
indebtedness of such subsidiary guarantors.
We have the option to redeem the new notes, in whole
or in part, at any time on or after June 1, 2017 at the
redemption prices described in this prospectus under the
heading "Description of Notes—Optional Redemption,"
together with any accrued and unpaid interest to the
date of redemption.
Prior to June 1, 2017, we may redeem the new notes, in
whole or in part, at a "make-whole" redemption price
described under "Description of Notes—Optional
Redemption," together with any accrued and unpaid
interest to the date of redemption.
Prior to June 1, 2016, we may, at any time or from time
to time, redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal
amount of the new notes with the net proceeds of a
public or private equity offering at 106.625% of the
principal amount of the new notes, plus any accrued and
unpaid interest to the date of redemption, if at least 65%
of the aggregate principal amount of the notes originally
issued under the indenture remains outstanding after
such redemption and the redemption occurs within
Change of Control
Certain Covenants
Table of Contents
7
180 days of the date of the closing of such equity
offering.
If a change of control occurs, each holder of new notes
may require us to repurchase all or a portion of its new
notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of
the new notes, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to
the date of repurchase.
The indenture governing the new notes contains
covenants that, among other things, will limit our ability
and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to:
•
sell assets;
•
pay distributions on, purchase or redeem our units or
purchase or redeem our subordinated debt;
•
make investments;
•
incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue
preferred units;
•
create or incur certain liens;
•
enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other
payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us;
•
consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of
our assets;
•
engage in transactions with affiliates;
•
create unrestricted subsidiaries; and
•
engage in certain business activities.
These covenants are subject to important exceptions
and qualifications that are described under "Description
of Notes."
If the new notes achieve an investment grade credit
rating from each of Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and
Standard & Poor's Ratings Services (or if either such
entity ceases to rate the notes for reasons outside of
the Company's control, the equivalent investment grade
Absence of Established Market for the New Notes
credit rating from any other "nationally recognized
statistical rating organization" within the meaning of the
Exchange Act selected by the Company as a
replacement agency), many of these covenants will
terminate.
The new notes generally will be freely transferable and
will be fungible with the notes originally issued under the
indenture governing the notes. There can be no
assurance as to the development, maintenance or
liquidity of any market for the new notes.
We do not intend to apply for a listing of the new notes
on any securities exchange or for the inclusion of the
new notes on any automated dealer quotation system.
Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
The following table presents the ratios of earnings to fixed charges and preferred distributions of the Partnership
for the periods indicated. For purposes of computing the ratios of earnings to fixed charges, earnings consist of
income from continuing operations before adjustment for equity income from equity method investees plus fixed
charges and distributed income from investees accounted for under the equity method. Fixed charges consist of
interest expensed and an estimated interest component of rent expense.
Legacy Reserves LP
Year Ended December 31,
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges and preferred
distributions
2009  
(1)
2010
2011
2012
1.61X
4.53X
4.04X
2013
(2)
(1)
1.61X
4.53X
4.04X
(2)
Nine Months
Ended
September 30,
2014
1.96X
1.73X
(1)
(2)
Earnings were insufficient to cover fixed charges, and fixed charges exceeded earnings by approximately
$92.3 million. No preferred distributions were paid during this period.
Earnings were insufficient to cover fixed charges, and fixed charges exceeded earnings by approximately
$34.3 million. No preferred distributions were paid during this period.
Table of Contents
8
RISK FACTORS
An investment in the notes involves various material risks. Prior to making a decision about investing in the
notes, and in consultation with your own financial and legal advisors, you should carefully consider, among other
matters, the following risk factors, as well as those described under the heading "Risk Factors" in our Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 and the heading "Management's Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2013 and in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarters ended March 31, 2014, June 30, 2014 and
September 30, 2014, each of which is incorporated by reference in this prospectus, and in other filings we may make
from time to time with the SEC.
Risks Related to Investing in the New Notes
If you do not properly tender your old notes, you will continue to hold unregistered old notes and your ability
to transfer old notes will remain restricted and may be adversely affected.
We will only issue new notes in exchange for old notes that you timely and properly tender. Therefore, you
should allow sufficient time to ensure timely delivery of the old notes, and you should carefully follow the instructions
on how to tender your old notes. Neither we nor the exchange agent is required to tell you of any defects or
irregularities with respect to your tender of old notes.
If you do not exchange your old notes for new notes pursuant to the exchange offer, the old notes you hold will
continue to be subject to the existing transfer restrictions. In general, you may not offer or sell the old notes except
under an exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the Securities Act and applicable state securities laws.
We do not plan to register old notes under the Securities Act unless our registration rights agreement with the initial
purchasers of the old notes requires us to do so. Further, if you continue to hold any old notes after the exchange
offer is consummated, you may have trouble selling them because the principal amount of the currently outstanding
old notes may be reduced as a result of the exchange offer.
Our revolving credit facility has substantial restrictions and financial covenants that may restrict our business
and financing activities and our ability to make payments on the new notes.
Our revolving credit facility limits the amounts we can borrow to a borrowing base amount, determined by the
lenders in their sole discretion based on their valuation of our proved reserves and their internal criteria. The borrowing
base is redetermined semi-annually and the available borrowing amount could be decreased as a result of such
redeterminations. Decreases in the available borrowing amount could result from declines in oil and natural gas prices,
operating difficulties or increased costs, declines in reserves, lending requirements or regulations or certain other
circumstances. Our borrowing base is currently set at $950.0 million. As of September 30, 2014, approximately
$370 million of borrowings were outstanding under our revolving credit facility. Our next scheduled borrowing base
redetermination will be in April 2015.
A future decrease in our borrowing base could be substantial and could be to a level below our outstanding
borrowings. Outstanding borrowings in excess of the borrowing base are required to be repaid within 120 days
following notice from the administrative agent of the new or adjusted borrowing base. If we do not have sufficient
funds on hand for repayment, we may be required to seek a waiver or amendment from our lenders, refinance our
revolving credit facility or sell assets or debt or units. We may not be able to obtain such financing or complete such
transactions on terms acceptable to us, or at all. Failure to make the required repayment could result in a default
under our revolving credit facility, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of
operations. A default under our revolving credit facility could cause all of our existing indebtedness, including the
9
Table of Contents
new notes, the Initial 2021 Senior Notes and the 2020 Senior Notes, to be immediately due and payable.
The operating and financial restrictions and covenants in our revolving credit facility restrict, and any future
financing agreements likely will restrict, our ability to finance future operations or capital needs or to engage, expand
or pursue our business activities or to pay distributions. Our revolving credit facility restricts, and any future revolving
credit facility likely will restrict, our ability to:
incur indebtedness;
enter into certain leases;
grant certain liens;
enter into certain derivatives;
make certain loans, acquisitions, capital expenditures and investments;
make distributions other than from available cash;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
merge, consolidate or allow any material change in the character of our business; or
•
engage in certain asset dispositions, including a sale of all or substantially all of our assets.
Our revolving credit facility restricts our ability to make distributions to our limited partners or repurchase limited
partner interests, unless after giving effect to such distribution or repurchase no Event of Default (as defined in our
revolving credit facility) exists. While we currently are not restricted by our revolving credit facility from declaring a
distribution, we may be restricted from paying a distribution in the future.
We are also required to comply with certain financial covenants and ratios under the revolving credit facility. We
may not be able to comply with these restrictions and covenants in the future and our ability to do so will be affected
by the levels of cash flow from our operations and events or circumstances beyond our control, such as any potential
disruptions in the financial markets. If we violate any of the restrictions, covenants, ratios or tests in our revolving
credit facility, a significant portion of our indebtedness may become immediately due and payable, our ability to make
distributions will be inhibited and our lenders' commitment to make further loans to us may terminate. We might not
have, or be able to obtain, sufficient funds to make these accelerated payments. In addition, our obligations under our
revolving credit facility are secured by substantially all of our assets, and if we are unable to repay our indebtedness
under our revolving credit facility, the lenders can seek to foreclose on our assets.
Restrictive covenants under our indentures may adversely affect our operations.
Each of the indenture governing the new notes and the indenture governing our 2020 Senior Notes contains, and
any future indebtedness we incur may contain, a number of restrictive covenants that will impose significant operating
and financial restrictions on us, including restrictions on our ability to, among other things:
sell assets, including equity interests in our restricted subsidiaries;
pay distributions on, redeem or purchase our limited partner interests or redeem or purchase our
subordinated debt;
make investments;
incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred units;
•
•
•
•
•
create or incur certain liens;
10
Table of Contents
•
•
•
•
•
enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us;
consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our assets;
engage in transactions with affiliates;
create unrestricted subsidiaries; and
engage in certain business activities.
As a result of these covenants, we are limited in the manner in which we conduct our business, and we may be
unable to engage in favorable business activities or finance future operations or capital needs.
A failure to comply with the covenants in either the indenture governing the notes or, the indenture governing our
2020 Senior Notes, or any future indebtedness could result in an event of default under such indentures, our revolving
credit facility or the future indebtedness, which, if not cured or waived, could have a material adverse effect on our
business, financial condition and results of operations. In addition, complying with these covenants may also cause
us to take actions that are not favorable to holders of the notes and may make it more difficult for us to successfully
execute our business strategy and compete against companies who are not subject to such restrictions.
We may not be able to generate enough cash flow to meet our debt obligations.
We expect our earnings and cash flow to vary significantly from year to year due to the cyclical nature of our
industry. As a result, the amount of debt that we can manage in some periods may not be appropriate for us in other
periods. Additionally, our future cash flow may be insufficient to service our debt obligations and commitments,
including the new notes. Any insufficiency could negatively impact our business. A range of economic, competitive,
business and industry factors will affect our future financial performance and, as a result, our ability to generate cash
flow from operations and to service our debt obligations, including the new notes. Many of these factors, such as oil
and natural gas prices, economic and financial conditions in our industry and the global economy or competitive
initiatives of our competitors, are beyond our control.
If we do not generate enough cash flow from operations to satisfy our debt obligations, we may have to
undertake alternative financing plans, such as:
•
•
•
•
refinancing or restructuring our debt;
selling assets;
reducing or delaying capital investments; or
seeking to raise additional capital.
However, we cannot assure you that undertaking alternative financing plans, if necessary, would allow us to
meet our debt obligations. Our inability to generate sufficient cash flow to service and satisfy our debt obligations,
including our obligations under the new notes, or to obtain alternative financing, could materially and adversely affect
our ability to make payments on the new notes and our business, financial condition, results of operations and
prospects.
We distribute all of our available cash to our unitholders after reserves are established by our general partner,
and we are not required to accumulate cash for the purpose of meeting our future obligations to our
noteholders, which may limit the cash available to service the new notes.
Subject to the limitations on restricted payments contained in the indenture governing the new notes, the
indenture governing our 2020 Senior Notes and in our revolving credit facility, our
11
Table of Contents
partnership agreement requires us to distribute all of our "available cash" each quarter to our unitholders. "Available
cash" is defined in our partnership agreement, and it generally means, for each fiscal quarter, all cash and cash
equivalents on the date of determination of available cash for that quarter, less the amount of any cash reserves
established by our general partner to:
•
•
•
provide for the proper conduct of our business;
comply with applicable law, the terms of any of our debt instruments or other agreements; or
provide funds for distributions to our unitholders and to our general partner for any one or more of the
next four quarters.
As a result, we do not expect to accumulate significant amounts of cash. In addition, we are required to make
monthly cash distributions on our 8% Series A Fixed-to-Floating Rate Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual Preferred
Units and our 8.00% Series B Fixed-to-Floating Rate Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual Preferred Units, which further
reduces our cash on hand. In conjunction with the closing of our acquisition of certain oil and natural gas properties in
the Piceance Basin, we issued incentive distribution units to WPX Energy Rocky Mountain, LLC, a subsidiary of WPX
Energy, Inc. and our partnership agreement was amended to substantially revise our cash distribution policy.
Depending on the timing and amount of our cash distributions, these distributions could significantly reduce the cash
available to us in subsequent periods to make interest payments on the new notes.
The new notes and the guarantees are unsecured and effectively or structurally subordinated to our and our
subsidiary guarantors' existing and future secured indebtedness.
The new notes and the guarantees are our general unsecured senior obligations ranking effectively junior in right
of payment to all existing and future secured debt of ours including obligations under our revolving credit facility, to
the extent of the value of the collateral securing such debt. In addition, the guarantees are our subsidiary guarantors'
general unsecured senior obligations ranking structurally junior in right of payment to all existing and future secured
debt of our subsidiary guarantors, including obligations under our revolving credit facility, to the extent of the value of
the collateral securing such debt. As of September 30, 2014, we had $370 million of senior secured indebtedness
outstanding under our revolving credit facility, to which extent the new notes will be effectively subordinated, and
approximately $579.9 million (after deducting $0.1 million of outstanding letters of credit) of additional borrowing
capacity under our revolving credit facility.
If we or a subsidiary guarantor is declared bankrupt, becomes insolvent or is liquidated or reorganized, any
secured debt of ours or of any subsidiary guarantor will be entitled to be paid in full from our assets or the assets of
such guarantor, as applicable, securing that debt before any payment may be made with respect to the new notes or
the affected guarantees. Holders of the new notes will participate ratably with all holders of our unsecured
indebtedness that does not rank junior to the new notes, including the holders of the Initial 2021 Senior Notes and the
2020 Senior Notes and all of our other general creditors, based upon the respective amounts owed to each holder or
creditor, in our remaining assets. In any of the foregoing events, we cannot assure you that there will be sufficient
assets to pay amounts due on the new notes. As a result, holders of the new notes would likely receive less, ratably,
than holders of secured indebtedness.
Not all of our subsidiaries will guarantee the new notes. Your right to receive payments on the notes could be
adversely affected if any of our non-guarantor subsidiaries declares bankruptcy, liquidates or reorganizes.
Although all of our existing subsidiaries, other than the co-issuer and our equity method investees in which we
own a non-controlling interest, will initially guarantee the new notes, in the future, under certain circumstances, the
guarantees are subject to release, and we may have other subsidiaries in the future that are not guarantors. Thus, the
new notes will be effectively junior to the claims of all
12
Table of Contents
creditors, including trade creditors and tort claimants, of our subsidiaries that are not guarantors. In the event of the
liquidation, dissolution, reorganization, bankruptcy or similar proceedings respecting the business of a subsidiary that
is not a guarantor, creditors of that subsidiary would generally have the right to be paid in full before any distribution is
made to us or the holders of the new notes. Accordingly, there may not be sufficient funds remaining to pay amounts
due on all or any of the new notes.
Our variable rate indebtedness subjects us to interest rate risk, which could cause our debt service
obligations to increase significantly.
Borrowings under our revolving credit facility bear interest at variable rates and expose us to interest rate risk. If
interest rates increase and we are unable to effectively hedge our interest rate risk, our debt service obligations on the
variable rate indebtedness would increase even if the amount borrowed remained the same, and our net income and
cash available for servicing our indebtedness would decrease. As of September 30, 2014, if the variable interest rate
increases or decreases by 0.125%, our annual debt service obligations on our variable rate debt would increase or
decrease by approximately $0.3 million, assuming our current interest rate hedges remain in place and do not expire.
As of September 30, 2014, our annual debt service obligations on $104 million of our variable rate debt is fixed due to
our interest rate hedges.
Our debt levels may limit our flexibility to obtain additional financing and pursue other business
opportunities.
We have substantial indebtedness. As of September 30, 2014, our total principal amount of long-term debt was
approximately $1.2 billion, not including the old notes.
Our existing and future indebtedness could have important consequences to us and to the holders of the notes,
including:
our ability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, for working capital, capital expenditures,
acquisitions or other purposes may be impaired or such financing may not be available on terms
acceptable to us;
covenants in our existing and future credit and debt arrangements will require us to meet financial tests
that may affect our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business, including possible
acquisition opportunities;
our access to the capital markets may be limited;
our borrowing costs may increase;
we will need a substantial portion of our cash flow to make principal and interest payments on our
indebtedness, reducing the funds that would otherwise be available for operations, future business
opportunities and distributions to unitholders; and
•
•
•
•
•
•
our debt level will make us more vulnerable than our competitors with less debt to competitive pressures
or a downturn in our business or the economy generally.
Our ability to service our indebtedness will depend upon, among other things, our future financial and operating
performance, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions and financial, business, regulatory and other
factors, some of which are beyond our control. If our operating results are not sufficient to service our current or future
indebtedness, we will be forced to take actions such as reducing distributions, reducing or delaying business
activities, acquisitions, investments and/or capital expenditures, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our
indebtedness, or seeking additional equity capital or bankruptcy protection. We may not be able to effect any of these
remedies on satisfactory terms or at all.
13
Table of Contents
Despite our and our subsidiaries' current level of indebtedness, we may still be able to incur substantially
more debt. This could further exacerbate the risks associated with our substantial indebtedness.
We and our subsidiaries may be able to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future, subject to certain
limitations, including under our revolving credit facility, the indenture governing the 2020 Senior Notes and the
indenture governing the new notes. If new debt is added to our current debt levels, the related risks that we and our
subsidiaries now face could intensify. Our level of indebtedness could, for instance, prevent us from engaging in
transactions that might otherwise be beneficial to us or from making desirable capital expenditures. This could put us
at a competitive disadvantage relative to other less leveraged competitors that have more cash flow to devote to their
operations. In addition, the incurrence of additional indebtedness could make it more difficult to satisfy our existing
financial obligations, including those relating to the notes.
We may not be able to fund a change of control offer.
In the event of a change of control, we will be required, subject to certain conditions, to offer to purchase all
outstanding notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon
to the date of purchase. See "Description of Notes." The holders of our outstanding 2020 Senior Notes and the
holders of our outstanding Initial 2021 Senior Notes have substantially similar rights. If a change of control were to
occur today, we would not have sufficient funds available to purchase all of the outstanding notes were they to be
tendered in response to an offer made as a result of a change of control. We cannot assure you that we will have
sufficient funds available to fulfill these obligations upon a change of control in the future. Furthermore, any Change of
Control (as defined under our revolving credit facility) would constitute an event of default under our revolving credit
facility, and we may not be able to obtain a waiver with respect to such default from the lenders under our revolving
credit facility at such time.
The change of control put right might not be enforceable.
The Chancery Court of Delaware has raised the possibility in a published decision that a change of control put
right occurring as a result of a failure to have "continuing directors" comprising a majority of a board of directors may
be unenforceable on public policy grounds.
Many of the covenants contained in the indenture will terminate if the notes are rated investment grade by
both Standard & Poor's and Moody's and no default or event of default has occurred and is continuing.
Many of the covenants in the indenture governing the new notes will terminate if the new notes are rated
investment grade by both Standard & Poor's and Moody's provided at such time no default or event of default has
occurred and is continuing. The covenants restrict, among other things, our ability to pay distributions, incur debt and
to enter into certain other transactions. There can be no assurance that the new notes will ever be rated investment
grade. However, termination of these covenants would allow us to engage in certain transactions that would not have
been permitted while these covenants were in force, and these covenants would not be reinstated even if the new
notes were subsequently downgraded. See "Description of Notes—Certain Covenants—Covenant Termination."
A subsidiary guarantee could be voided if it constitutes a fraudulent transfer under U.S. bankruptcy or similar
state law, which would prevent the holders of the new notes from relying on that subsidiary to satisfy claims.
Under U.S. bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of state fraudulent transfer laws, our subsidiary
guarantees can be voided, or claims under the subsidiary guarantees may be subordinated to all other debts of that
subsidiary guarantor if, among other things, the subsidiary guarantor, at the time it incurred the indebtedness
evidenced by its guarantee or, in some states, when payments become due
14
Table of Contents
under the guarantee, received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for the incurrence of the
guarantee and:
was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such incurrence;
was engaged in a business or transaction for which the guarantor's remaining assets constituted
unreasonably small capital; or
•
•
•
intended to incur, or believed that it would incur, debts beyond its ability to pay those debts as they
mature.
A subsidiary guarantee of the notes may also be voided, without regard to the above factors, if a court finds that
the subsidiary guarantor entered into the guarantee with the actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud its creditors.
A court would likely find that a subsidiary guarantor did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair
consideration for its guarantee if the subsidiary guarantor did not substantially benefit directly or indirectly from the
issuance of the guarantees. If a court were to void a subsidiary guarantee, you would no longer have a claim against
the subsidiary guarantor. Sufficient funds to repay the notes may not be available from other sources, including the
remaining subsidiary guarantors, if any. In addition, the court might direct you to repay any amounts that you already
received from the subsidiary guarantor.
The measures of insolvency for purposes of fraudulent transfer laws vary depending upon the governing law.
Generally, a guarantor would be considered insolvent if:
the sum of its debts, including contingent liabilities, were greater than the fair saleable value of all its
assets;
the present fair saleable value of its assets is less than the amount that would be required to pay its
probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent liabilities, as they become absolute and
mature; or
•
•
•
it could not pay its debts as they become due.
Each subsidiary guarantee contains a provision intended to limit the subsidiary guarantor's liability to the
maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its subsidiary guarantee to be
a fraudulent transfer. Such provision may not be effective to protect the subsidiary guarantees from being voided
under bankruptcy law.
A financial failure by us or our subsidiaries may result in the assets of any or all of those entities becoming
subject to the claims of all creditors of those entities.
A financial failure by us or our subsidiaries could affect payment of the new notes if a bankruptcy court were to
substantively consolidate us and our subsidiaries. If a bankruptcy court substantively consolidated us and our
subsidiaries, the assets of each entity would become subject to the claims of creditors of all entities. This would
expose holders of new notes not only to the usual impairments arising from bankruptcy, but also to potential dilution
of the amount ultimately recoverable because of the larger creditor base. Furthermore, forced restructuring of the
notes could occur through the "cram-down" provisions of the bankruptcy code. Under these provisions, the new notes
could be restructured over your objections as to their general terms, primary interest rate and maturity.
Because we are a holding company, we are financially dependent on receiving distributions from our
subsidiaries.
We are a holding company and our subsidiaries conduct all of our operations and own all of our assets. We have
no significant assets other than the partnership interests, stock and other equity
15
Table of Contents
interests in our subsidiaries. As a result, our ability to make required payments on the new notes will depend on the
performance of our subsidiaries and their ability to distribute funds to us. Our rights and the rights of our creditors,
including holders of the new notes, to participate in the distribution of assets of any entity in which we own an equity
interest will be subject to prior claims of such entity's creditors upon such entity's liquidation or reorganization.
However, we may ourselves be a creditor with recognized claims against this entity, but our claims would still be
subject to the prior claims of any secured creditor of this entity and of any holder of indebtedness of this entity that is
senior to that held by us. Accordingly, a holder of our debt securities, including holders of the notes, may be deemed
to be effectively subordinated to those claims.
Your ability to transfer the notes may be limited by the absence of a trading market.
The old notes have not been registered under the Securities Act, and may not be resold by holders thereof
unless the old notes are subsequently registered or an exemption from the registration requirements of the Securities
Act is available. However, we cannot assure you that, even following registration or exchange of the old notes for new
notes, that an active trading market for the new notes will exist, and we will have no obligation to create such a
market. At the time of the private placement of the old notes, the initial purchasers advised us that they intended to
make a market in the notes. However, the initial purchasers are not obligated to make a market in the notes, and any
market making may be discontinued at any time at their sole discretion. No assurance can be given as to the liquidity
of or trading market for the new notes.
The liquidity of any trading market for the notes and the market price quoted for the notes will depend upon the
number of holders of the notes, the overall market for high yield securities, our financial performance or prospects or
the prospects for companies in our industry generally, the interest of securities dealers in making a market in the
notes and other factors.
16
Table of Contents
Purpose and Effect of the Exchange Offer
EXCHANGE OFFER
At the closing of the offering of the old notes, we and the guarantors entered into a registration rights agreement
with the initial purchasers pursuant to which we and the guarantors agreed, for the benefit of the holders of the old
notes, at our cost, to do the following:
file an exchange offer registration statement with the SEC with respect to the exchange offer for the new
notes; and
•
•
use commercially reasonable efforts to have the exchange offer consummated not later than May 13,
2015.
Once the SEC has declared the exchange offer registration statement effective, we have agreed to offer the new
notes in exchange for surrender of the old notes. We agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the
exchange offer registration statement to be effective continuously, and to keep the exchange offer open for a period of
not less than 20 business days.
For each old note surrendered to us pursuant to the exchange offer, the holder of such old note will receive a
new note having a principal amount equal to that of the surrendered old note. Interest on each new note will accrue
from the last interest payment date on which interest was paid on the surrendered old note. The registration rights
agreement also provides an agreement to include in the prospectus for the exchange offer certain information
necessary to allow a broker-dealer who holds old notes that were acquired for its own account as a result of market-
making activities or other ordinary course trading activities (other than old notes acquired directly from us or one of
our affiliates) to exchange such old notes pursuant to the exchange offer and to satisfy the prospectus delivery
requirements in connection with resales of new notes received by such broker-dealer in the exchange offer. We
agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to maintain the effectiveness of the exchange offer registration
statement for these purposes for a period ending on the earlier of 180 days from the date on which the exchange offer
registration statement is declared effective and the date on which the broker-dealer is no longer required to deliver a
prospectus in connection with market-making or other trading activities.
The preceding agreement is needed because any broker-dealer who acquires old notes for its own account as a
result of market-making activities or other trading activities is required to deliver a prospectus meeting the
requirements of the Securities Act. This prospectus covers the offer and sale of the new notes pursuant to the
exchange offer and the resale of new notes received in the exchange offer by any broker-dealer who held old notes
acquired for its own account as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities, other than old notes
acquired directly from us or one of our affiliates.
Based on interpretations by the staff of the SEC set forth in no-action letters issued to third parties, we believe
that the new notes issued pursuant to the exchange offer would in general be freely tradable after the exchange offer
without further registration under the Securities Act. However, any purchaser of old notes who is an "affiliate" of ours
or who intends to participate in the exchange offer for the purpose of distributing the related new notes:
will not be able to rely on the interpretation of the staff of the SEC;
will not be able to tender its old notes in the exchange offer; and
•
•
•
must comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act in
connection with any sale or transfer of the old notes unless such sale or transfer is made pursuant to an
exemption from such requirements.
17
Table of Contents
Each holder of the old notes (other than certain specified holders) who desires to exchange old notes for the new
notes in the exchange offer will be required to make the representations described below under "—Procedures for
Tendering—Your Representations to Us."
We further agreed to file with the SEC a shelf registration statement to register for public resale old notes held
by any holder who provides us with certain information for inclusion in the shelf registration statement if:
•
•
•
the exchange offer is not permitted by applicable law or SEC policy;
the exchange offer is for any reason not consummated on or before May 13, 2015 and the old notes are
not freely tradable prior to that date; or
prior to May 13, 2015, any holder notifies us that:
the holder is prohibited by applicable law or SEC policy from participating in the exchange offer;
the holder may not resell the new notes acquired in the exchange offer to the public without
delivering a prospectus, and the prospectus contained in the exchange offer is not appropriate or
available for such resales by such purchaser; or
•
•
•
the holder is a broker-dealer and holds old notes acquired directly from us or one of our affiliates
that are not freely tradable, and such holder cannot participate in the exchange offer.
We have agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to cause the shelf registration statement to be declared
effective by the SEC (or automatically become effective under the Securities Act) on or before the 90th day after the
date the shelf registration statement was filed, which date we refer to as the "shelf filing deadline." The shelf filing
deadline shall be 20 business days after the later of (i) the date we receive notice of the above circumstances by any
holder and (ii) the first to occur of (a) the date that we deliver the new notes to the registrar under the indenture of the
new notes in the same aggregate principal amount as the aggregate principal amount of the old notes that were
tendered by the holders of the old notes pursuant to an exchange offer and (b) May 13, 2015. We have also agreed to
use commercially reasonable efforts to keep the shelf registration statement continuously effective from the date on
which the shelf registration statement is declared effective by the SEC until the earlier of the expiration of the six-
month period referred to in Rule 144 applicable to securities held by non-affiliates under the Securities Act and such
time as all notes covered by the shelf registration statement have been sold or are freely tradable. We refer to this
period as the "shelf effectiveness period."
The registration rights agreement provides that, in the event (i) the exchange offer is not consummated on or
prior to May 13, 2015, (ii) the shelf registration statement, if required, is not declared effective (or does not
automatically become effective) on or prior to the 90th calendar day following any shelf filing deadline, or (iii) any
required shelf registration statement ceases to remain effective or becomes unusable in connection with resale for
more than 30 calendar days (each such event referred to in clauses (i) through (iii) above, a "Registration Default"),
the interest rate on the old notes will be increased by 1.0% per annum, until the earlier of the completion of the
exchange offer or until no Registration Default is in effect, at which time the increased interest shall cease to accrue
and shall be reduced to the original interest rate of the old notes.
Holders of the old notes will be required to make certain representations to us (as described in the registration
rights agreement and below under "—Procedures for Tendering—Your Representations to Us") in order to participate
in the exchange offer and will be required to deliver information to be used in connection with the shelf registration
statement and to provide comments on the shelf
18
Table of Contents
registration statement within the time periods set forth in the registration rights agreement in order to have their old
notes included in the shelf registration statement.
If we effect the registered exchange offer, we will be entitled to close the registered exchange offer 20 business
days after its commencement as long as we have accepted all old notes validly tendered in accordance with the
terms of the exchange offer and no brokers or dealers continue to hold any old notes.
This summary of the material provisions of the registration rights agreement does not purport to be complete and
is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all the provisions of the registration rights agreement, a
copy of each of which is filed as an exhibit to the registration statement that includes this prospectus.
Except as set forth above, after consummation of the exchange offer, holders of old notes that are the subject
of the exchange offer will have no registration or exchange rights under the registration rights agreement. See "—
Consequences of Failure to Exchange."
Terms of the Exchange Offer
Subject to the terms and conditions described in this prospectus and in the letter of transmittal, we will accept
for exchange any old notes properly tendered and not withdrawn prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the
expiration date of the exchange offer. We will issue new notes in a principal amount equal to the principal amount of
old notes surrendered in the exchange offer. Old notes may be tendered only for new notes and only in minimum
denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess thereof.
The exchange offer is not conditioned upon any minimum aggregate principal amount of old notes being
tendered for exchange.
As of the date of this prospectus, $300 million in aggregate principal amount of the old notes is outstanding.
This prospectus and the letter of transmittal are being sent to all registered holders of old notes. There will be no fixed
record date for determining registered holders of old notes entitled to participate in the exchange offer.
We intend to conduct the exchange offer in accordance with the provisions of the registration rights agreement,
the applicable requirements of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations of the SEC. Old
notes that the holders thereof do not tender for exchange in the exchange offer will remain outstanding and continue to
accrue interest. These old notes will continue to be entitled to the rights and benefits such holders have under the
indenture relating to the notes and the registration rights agreement.
We will be deemed to have accepted for exchange properly tendered old notes when we have given oral or
written notice of the acceptance to the exchange agent and complied with the applicable provisions of the registration
rights agreement. The exchange agent will act as agent for the tendering holders for the purposes of receiving the new
notes from us.
If you tender old notes in the exchange offer, you will not be required to pay brokerage commissions or fees or,
subject to the letter of transmittal, transfer taxes with respect to the exchange of old notes. We will pay all charges
and expenses, other than certain applicable taxes described below, in connection with the exchange offer. It is
important that you read the section "—Fees and Expenses" for more details regarding fees and expenses incurred in
connection with the exchange offer.
We will return any old notes that we do not accept for exchange for any reason without expense to their
tendering holder promptly after the expiration or termination of the exchange offer.
19
Table of Contents
Expiration Date
The exchange offer will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on                        , 2015, unless, in our sole
discretion, we extend it.
Extensions, Delays in Acceptance, Termination or Amendment
We expressly reserve the right, at any time or various times, to extend the period of time during which the
exchange offer is open. We may delay acceptance of any old notes by giving oral or written notice of such extension
to their holders at any time until 9:00 a.m., New York City time, on the business day after the previously scheduled
expiration date. During any such extensions, all old notes previously tendered will remain subject to the exchange
offer, and we may accept them for exchange.
In order to extend the exchange offer, we will notify the exchange agent orally or in writing of any extension. We
will notify the registered holders of old notes of the extension no later than 9:00 a.m., New York City time, on the
business day after the previously scheduled expiration date.
If any of the conditions described below under "—Conditions to the Exchange Offer" have not been satisfied, we
reserve the right, in our sole discretion, to:
•
•
•
delay accepting for exchange any old notes;
extend the exchange offer; or
terminate the exchange offer;
by giving oral or written notice of such delay, extension or termination to the exchange agent. Subject to the terms of
the registration rights agreement, we also reserve the right to amend the terms of the exchange offer in any manner.
Any such delay in acceptance, extension, termination or amendment will be followed promptly by oral or written
notice thereof to the registered holders of old notes. If we amend the exchange offer in a manner that we determine to
constitute a material change, we will promptly disclose such amendment by means of a prospectus supplement. The
prospectus supplement will be distributed to the registered holders of the old notes. Depending upon the significance
of the amendment and the manner of disclosure to the registered holders, we may extend the exchange offer. In the
event of a material change in the exchange offer, including the waiver by us of a material condition, we will extend the
exchange offer period, if necessary, so that at least five business days remain in the exchange offer period following
notice of the material change.
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
We will not be required to accept for exchange, or exchange any new notes for, any old notes if the exchange
offer, or the making of any exchange by a holder of old notes, would violate applicable law or any applicable
interpretation of the staff of the SEC. Similarly, we may terminate the exchange offer as provided in this prospectus
before accepting old notes for exchange in the event of such a potential violation.
In addition, we will not be obligated to accept for exchange the old notes of any holder that has not made to us
the representations described under "—Purpose and Effect of the Exchange Offer," "—Procedures for Tendering" and
"Plan of Distribution" and such other representations as may be reasonably necessary under applicable SEC rules,
regulations or interpretations to allow us to use an appropriate form to register the new notes under the Securities Act.
We expressly reserve the right to amend or terminate the exchange offer, and to reject for exchange any old
notes not previously accepted for exchange, upon the occurrence of any of the conditions to the exchange offer
specified above. We will give prompt oral or written notice of any
20
Table of Contents
extension, amendment, non- acceptance or termination to the holders of the old notes as promptly as practicable.
These conditions are for our sole benefit, and we may assert them or waive them in whole or in part at any time
or at various times in our sole discretion prior to the expiration of the exchange offer. If we fail at any time to exercise
any of these rights, this failure will not mean that we have waived our rights. Each such right will be deemed an
ongoing right that we may assert at any time or at various times prior to the expiration of the exchange offer.
In addition, we will not accept for exchange any old notes tendered, and will not issue new notes in exchange for
any such old notes, if at such time any stop order has been threatened or is in effect with respect to the registration
statement of which this prospectus constitutes a part or the qualification of the indenture relating to the notes under
the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (the "Trust Indenture Act").
Procedures for Tendering
In order to participate in the exchange offer, you must properly tender your old notes to the exchange agent as
described below. We will only issue new notes in exchange for old notes that you timely and properly tender.
Therefore, you should allow sufficient time to ensure timely delivery of the old notes, and you should follow carefully
the instructions on how to tender your old notes. It is your responsibility to properly tender your old notes. We have
the right to waive any defects. However, we are not required to waive defects and are not required to notify you of
defects in your tender.
If you have any questions or need help in exchanging your old notes, please contact the exchange agent, whose
address is as follows: Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., MAC N9303-121, P.O. Box 1517, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480.
Eligible institutions may make requests by facsimile at 1-612-677-6282, Attn: Corporate Trust Operations and may
confirm facsimile delivery by calling 1-800-344-5128.
All of the old notes were issued in book-entry form, and all of the old notes are currently represented by global
certificates held for the account of DTC. We have confirmed with DTC that the old notes may be tendered using the
ATOP procedures. The exchange agent will establish an account with DTC for purposes of the exchange offer
promptly after the commencement of the exchange offer, and DTC participants may electronically transmit their
acceptance of the exchange offer by causing DTC to transfer their old notes to the exchange agent using the ATOP
procedures. In connection with the transfer, DTC will send an "agent's message" to the exchange agent. The agent's
message will state that DTC has received instructions from the participant to tender old notes and that the participant
agrees to be bound by the terms of the letter of transmittal.
By using the ATOP procedures to exchange old notes, you will not be required to deliver a letter of transmittal to
the exchange agent. However, you will be bound by its terms just as if you had signed it.
There is no procedure for guaranteed late delivery of the old notes.
Determinations Under the Exchange Offer
We will determine, in our sole discretion, all questions as to the validity, form, eligibility, time of receipt,
acceptance of tendered old notes and withdrawal of tendered old notes. Our determination will be final and binding. We
reserve the absolute right to reject any old notes not properly tendered or any old notes our acceptance of which
would, in the opinion of our counsel, be unlawful. We also reserve the right to waive any defect, irregularities or
conditions of tender as to particular old notes. Our interpretation of the terms and conditions of the exchange offer,
including the instructions in the letter of transmittal, will be final and binding on all parties. Unless waived, all defects
or irregularities in connection with tenders of old notes must be cured within such time as we shall determine.
Although
21
Table of Contents
we intend to notify holders of defects or irregularities with respect to tenders of old notes, neither we, the exchange
agent nor any other person will incur any liability for failure to give such notification. Tenders of old notes will not be
deemed made until such defects or irregularities have been cured or waived. Any old notes received by the exchange
agent that are not properly tendered and as to which the defects or irregularities have not been cured or waived will be
returned to the tendering holder, unless otherwise provided in the letter of transmittal, as soon as practicable following
the expiration date or termination of the exchange offer.
When We Will Issue New Notes
In all cases, we will issue new notes for old notes that we have accepted for exchange under the exchange offer
only after the exchange agent timely receives:
book-entry confirmation of such old notes into the exchange agent's account at DTC; and
•
•
a properly transmitted agent's message.
Return of Old Notes Not Accepted or Exchanged
If we do not accept any tendered old notes for exchange or if old notes are submitted for a greater principal
amount than the holder desires to exchange, the unaccepted or non-exchanged old notes will be returned without
expense to their tendering holder. Such non-exchanged old notes will be credited to an account maintained with DTC.
These actions will occur as soon as practicable after the expiration or termination of the exchange offer.
Your Representations to Us
By agreeing to be bound by the letter of transmittal, you will represent to us that, among other things:
•
the new notes acquired pursuant to the exchange offer are being obtained in the ordinary course of your
business, whether or not you are the holder;
neither you nor, to your knowledge, any other person has an arrangement or understanding with any
person to participate in the distribution (within the meaning of the Securities Act) of such new notes and
you are not engaged in and do not intend to engage in the distribution (within the meaning of the
Securities Act) of such new notes;
you are not an "affiliate," as such term is defined under Rule 405 promulgated under the Securities Act,
of the Issuers; and
•
•
•
if you are a broker-dealer, you will receive the new notes for your own account in exchange for old notes
that were acquired as a result of market- making activities or other trading activities, and you
acknowledge that you will deliver a prospectus (or, to the extent permitted by law, make available a
prospectus) in connection with any resale of such new notes.
Withdrawal of Tenders
Except as otherwise provided in this prospectus, you may withdraw your tender at any time prior to 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on the expiration date of the exchange offer. For a withdrawal to be effective, you must comply
with DTC's ATOP procedures. Any notice of withdrawal must specify the name and number of the account at DTC to
be credited with withdrawn old notes and otherwise comply with the procedures of DTC.
22
Table of Contents
We will determine all questions as to the validity, form, eligibility and time of receipt of notice of withdrawal. Our
determination shall be final and binding on all parties. We will deem any old notes so withdrawn not to have been
validly tendered for exchange for purposes of the exchange offer.
Any old notes that have been tendered for exchange but are not exchanged for any reason will be credited to an
account maintained with DTC for the old notes. This crediting will take place as soon as practicable after withdrawal,
rejection of tender or termination of the exchange offer. You may retender properly withdrawn old notes by following
the procedures described under "—Procedures for Tendering" above at any time prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City
time, on the expiration date of the exchange offer.
Fees and Expenses
We will bear the expenses of soliciting tenders. The principal solicitation is being made by mail; however, we
may make additional solicitation by facsimile, telephone, electronic mail or in person by our officers and regular
employees and those of our affiliates.
We have not retained any dealer-manager in connection with the exchange offer and will not make any payments
to broker-dealers or others soliciting acceptances of the exchange offer. We will, however, pay the exchange agent
reasonable and customary fees for its services and reimburse it for its related reasonable out-of-pocket expenses.
We will pay the cash expenses to be incurred in connection with the exchange offer. They include:
all registration and filing fees and expenses;
all fees and expenses of compliance with federal securities and state "blue sky" or securities laws;
accounting and legal fees, disbursements and printing, messenger and delivery services and telephone
costs; and
•
•
•
•
related fees and expenses.
Transfer Taxes
We will pay all transfer taxes, if any, applicable to the exchange of old notes under the exchange offer. The
tendering holder, however, will be required to pay any transfer taxes, whether imposed on the registered holder or any
other person, if a transfer tax is imposed for any reason other than the exchange of old notes under the exchange
offer.
Consequences of Failure to Exchange
If you do not exchange your old notes for new notes under the exchange offer you will remain subject to the
existing restrictions on transfer of the old notes. In general, you may not offer or sell the old notes unless the offer or
sale is either registered under the Securities Act or exempt from registration under the Securities Act and applicable
state securities laws. Except as required by the registration rights agreement, we do not intend to register resales of
the old notes under the Securities Act.
Accounting Treatment
We will record the new notes in our accounting records at the same carrying value as the old notes. This
carrying value is the aggregate principal amount of the old notes less any bond discount, as reflected in our
accounting records on the date of exchange. Accordingly, we will not recognize any gain or loss for accounting
purposes in connection with the exchange offer.
23
Table of Contents
Other
Participation in the exchange offer is voluntary and you should carefully consider whether to accept. You are
urged to consult your financial and tax advisors in making your own decision on what action to take.
We may in the future seek to acquire untendered old notes in open market or privately-negotiated transactions,
through subsequent exchange offers or otherwise. We have no present plans to acquire any old notes that are not
tendered in the exchange offer or to file a registration statement to permit resales of any untendered old notes.
Table of Contents
24
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
The following table presents the ratios of earnings to fixed charges and preferred distributions of the Partnership
for the periods indicated. For purposes of computing the ratios of earnings to fixed charges, earnings consist of
income from continuing operations before adjustment for equity income from equity method investees plus fixed
charges and distributed income from investees accounted for under the equity method. Fixed charges consist of
interest expensed and an estimated interest component of rent expense.
Legacy Reserves LP
Year Ended December 31,
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges and preferred
distributions
2009  
(1)
2010
2011
2012
1.61X
4.53X
4.04X
2013
(2)
(1)
1.61X
4.53X
4.04X
(2)
Nine Months
Ended
September 30,
2014
1.96X
1.73X
(1)
(2)
Earnings were insufficient to cover fixed charges, and fixed charges exceeded earnings by approximately
$92.3 million. No preferred distributions were paid during this period.
Earnings were insufficient to cover fixed charges, and fixed charges exceeded earnings by approximately
$34.3 million. No preferred distributions were paid during this period.
Table of Contents
25
USE OF PROCEEDS
The exchange offer is intended to satisfy our obligations under the registration rights agreement. We will not
receive any proceeds from the issuance of the new notes in the exchange offer. In consideration for issuing the new
notes as contemplated by this prospectus, we will receive old notes in a like principal amount. The form and terms of
the new notes are identical in all respects to the form and terms of the old notes, except the new notes will be
registered under the Securities Act and will not contain restrictions on transfer, registration rights or provisions for
additional interest. Old notes surrendered in exchange for the new notes will be retired and cancelled and will not be
reissued. Accordingly, the issuance of the new notes will not result in any change in outstanding indebtedness.
Table of Contents
26
DESCRIPTION OF NOTES
You can find the definitions of certain terms used in this description under the subheading "—Certain
Definitions." In this description, the term "Company," "us," "our" or "we" refers only to Legacy Reserves LP and not to
any of its subsidiaries, the term "Finance Corp." refers to Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation and the term
"Issuers" refers to the Company and Finance Corp. References to the "notes" in this section of the prospectus include
both the old notes issued in May 2014 and the new notes, unless the context otherwise requires.
The new notes will be and the old notes were issued under an indenture dated as of May 28, 2013, among the
Issuers, the Guarantors and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee. The terms of the notes include those
stated in the indenture and those made part of the indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as
amended (the "Trust Indenture Act").
The following description is a summary of the material provisions of the indenture and the notes. It does not
restate those instruments in their entirety. We urge you to read the indenture and the notes because they, and not this
description, define the rights of holders of the notes. Certain defined terms used in this description but not defined
below under "—Certain Definitions" have the meanings assigned to them in the indenture.
The registered holder of a note will be treated as the owner of it for all purposes. Only registered holders will
have rights under the indenture, and all references to "Holders" in this description are to registered holders of notes.
If the exchange offer is consummated, Holders of old notes who do not exchange their notes for new notes will
vote together with the Holders of the new notes for all relevant purposes under the indenture. In that regard, the
indenture requires that certain actions by the Holders under the indenture (including acceleration after an Event of
Default) must be taken, and certain rights must be exercised, by specified minimum percentages of the aggregate
principal amount of all notes issued under the indenture. In determining whether Holders of the requisite percentage in
principal amount have given any notice, consent or waiver or taken any other action permitted under the indenture,
any old notes that remain outstanding after the exchange offer will be aggregated with the new notes, and the Holders
of any old notes and the new notes will vote together as a single series for all such purposes. Accordingly, all
references in this "Description of Notes" to specified percentages in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding
notes mean, at any time after the exchange offer for the old notes is consummated, such percentage in aggregate
principal amount of such notes and the new notes then outstanding.
Brief Description of the Notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees
The Notes.    Like the old notes, the new notes will:
be general unsecured obligations of the Issuers;
•
•
be equal in right of payment with all existing and future Senior Debt (as defined below) of either of the
Issuers, including the 2020 Senior Notes and the Initial 2021 Senior Notes;
be effectively junior in right of payment to any secured Indebtedness of either of the Issuers, including
the Company's borrowings under the Credit Agreement, to the extent of the value of the collateral
securing such Indebtedness;
rank senior in right of payment to any future subordinated Indebtedness of either of the Issuers; and
•
•
•
be unconditionally guaranteed by the Guarantors on a senior unsecured basis.
27
Table of Contents
The Subsidiary Guarantees.    The notes are currently guaranteed by all of the Company's Subsidiaries (other
than Finance Corp.) that guarantee borrowings under the Credit Agreement, which provides the Company with a senior
secured revolving credit facility.
Each guarantee of the new notes, like each guarantee of the old notes, will:
be a general unsecured obligation of the Guarantor;
be equal in right of payment with all existing and future Senior Debt of that Guarantor, including its
guarantee of the 2020 Senior Notes and the Initial 2021 Senior Notes;
rank effectively junior in right of payment to any secured Indebtedness of that Guarantor, including its
guarantees of borrowings by the Company under the Credit Agreement, to the extent of the value of the
collateral securing such Indebtedness; and
•
•
•
•
rank senior in right of payment to any future subordinated Indebtedness of that Guarantor.
As of September 30, 2014, the Company and the Guarantors had:
total principal amount of Senior Debt (excluding obligations under letters of credit and hedges) of
approximately $1.2 billion, consisting of the notes, the 2020 Senior Notes, the Initial 2021 Senior Notes
and approximately $370 million of secured revolving credit Senior Debt outstanding under the Credit
Agreement; and
•
•
no Indebtedness contractually subordinated to the notes or the guarantees, as applicable.
The indenture permits the Issuers and the Guarantors to incur additional Indebtedness, including additional
secured Senior Debt.
All of our existing Subsidiaries (other than Finance Corp.) guarantee the notes. Under the circumstances
described below under the subheading "—Certain Covenants—Additional Subsidiary Guarantees," in the future one or
more of our newly created or acquired Subsidiaries may not guarantee the notes. In the event of a bankruptcy,
liquidation or reorganization of any of these non-guarantor Subsidiaries, the non-guarantor Subsidiaries will pay current
outstanding obligations to the holders of their debt and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of
their assets to us or any Guarantor.
Currently, all of our Subsidiaries are "Restricted Subsidiaries." However, under the circumstances described
below under the subheading "—Certain Covenants—Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries," we may
designate certain of our Subsidiaries as "Unrestricted Subsidiaries." Our Unrestricted Subsidiaries will not be subject
to many of the restrictive covenants in the indenture. Our Unrestricted Subsidiaries will not guarantee the notes.
Principal, Maturity and Interest
The Issuers have issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021, including
the $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of old notes. The notes issued in May 2014 are additional notes to the
Initial 2021 Senior Notes previously issued and outstanding under the indenture. In addition to the new notes offered
hereby, the Issuers may issue additional notes from time to time. Any offering of additional notes is subject to the
covenant described below under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of
Preferred Stock." The old notes and any additional notes subsequently issued under the indenture, together with the
new notes and the Initial 2021 Senior Notes, will be treated as a single class for all purposes under the indenture,
including, without limitation, for waivers, amendments, redemptions and offers to purchase, and any such additional
notes will be fungible with the then outstanding notes to the extent set forth in the applicable offering documentation.
The Issuers may issue notes only in denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess of $2,000.
The notes will mature on December 1, 2021.
28
Table of Contents
Interest on the new notes accrues at the rate of 6.625% per annum, and is payable semi-annually in arrears on
June 1 and December 1, with the next interest payment being due on June 1, 2015. The Issuers will make each
interest payment to the Holders of record on May 15 and November 15 immediately preceding each interest payment
date.
Interest on the new notes will accrue from December 1, 2014, which was the most recent interest payment date
on the existing notes under the indenture. Additional interest may accrue on the notes as liquidated damages in
certain circumstances as described below under "—Registration Rights," and all references to "interest" in this
description include any additional interest that may be payable on the notes. Interest will be computed on the basis of
a 360-day year comprised of twelve 30-day months.
Methods of Receiving Payments on the Notes
If a Holder has given wire transfer instructions to the Issuers, the Issuers will pay all principal, interest and
premium, if any, on that Holder's notes in accordance with those instructions. All other payments on the notes will be
made at the office or agency of the paying agent and registrar within the City and State of New York unless the
Issuers elect to make interest payments by check mailed to the Holders at their addresses set forth in the register of
Holders.
Paying Agent and Registrar for the Notes
The trustee is acting as paying agent and registrar. The Company may change the paying agent or registrar
without prior notice to the Holders, and the Company or any of its Subsidiaries may act as paying agent or registrar.
Transfer and Exchange
A Holder may transfer or exchange notes in accordance with the indenture. The registrar and the trustee may
require a Holder to furnish appropriate endorsements and transfer documents in connection with a transfer of notes.
No service charge will be imposed by the Issuers, the trustee or the registrar for any registration of transfer or
exchange of notes, but Holders will be required to pay all taxes due on transfer. The Issuers are not required to
transfer or exchange any note selected for redemption. Also, the Issuers are not required to transfer or exchange any
note for a period of 15 days before a selection of notes to be redeemed.
Subsidiary Guarantees
All of our existing Subsidiaries, excluding Finance Corp., have guaranteed the notes on a senior unsecured
basis. Certain subsidiaries of the Company created or acquired after the date of the indenture will be required to
guarantee the notes under the circumstances described under "—Certain Covenants—Additional Subsidiary
Guarantees." These Subsidiary Guarantees will be joint and several obligations of the Guarantors. The obligations of
each Guarantor under its Subsidiary Guarantee will be limited as necessary to prevent that Subsidiary Guarantee from
constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law, although this limitation may not be effective to prevent the
Subsidiary Guarantees from being voided in bankruptcy. See "Risk Factors—Risks Relating to the Notes and Our
Other Indebtedness—A subsidiary guarantee could be voided if it constitutes a fraudulent transfer under U.S.
bankruptcy or similar state law, which would prevent the holders of the notes from relying on that subsidiary to satisfy
claims."
A Guarantor may not sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its properties or assets to, or
consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Guarantor is the surviving Person), another Person, other
than the Company or another Guarantor, unless:
(1)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction, no Default or Event of Default exists; and
29
Table of Contents
(2)
either:
(a)
(b)
the Person acquiring the properties or assets in any such sale or other disposition or the Person
formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other than the Guarantor)
unconditionally assumes, pursuant to a supplemental indenture substantially in the form specified
in the indenture, all the obligations of that Guarantor under the notes, the indenture and its
Subsidiary Guarantee on terms set forth therein; or
such transaction does not violate the "Asset Sales" provisions of the indenture.
The Subsidiary Guarantee of a Guarantor will be released:
in connection with any sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties or assets of
that Guarantor (including by way of merger or consolidation) to a Person that is not (either before or after
giving effect to such transaction) the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, if the sale or
other disposition does not violate the "Asset Sales" provisions of the indenture;
in connection with any sale or other disposition of Capital Stock of that Guarantor to a Person that is not
(either before or after giving effect to such transaction) the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the
Company, if the sale or other disposition does not violate the "Asset Sales" provisions of the indenture
and the Guarantor ceases to be a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company as a result of the sale or other
disposition;
if the Company designates that Guarantor as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the indenture;
upon Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance as described below under the caption "—Legal
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance" or upon satisfaction and discharge of the indenture as
described below under the caption "—Satisfaction and Discharge;"
upon the liquidation or dissolution of such Guarantor provided no Default or Event of Default has
occurred that is continuing;
at such time as such Guarantor ceases both (a) to guarantee any other Indebtedness of either of the
Issuers and any other Guarantor in excess of a De Minimis Guaranteed Amount and (b) to be an obligor
with respect to any Indebtedness under any Credit Facility; or
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
upon such Guarantor consolidating with, merging into or transferring all of its properties or assets to the
Company or another Guarantor, and as a result of, or in connection with, such transaction such
Guarantor dissolves or otherwise ceases to exist.
See "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales."
Optional Redemption
At any time prior to June 1, 2016, the Issuers may on any one or more occasions redeem up to 35% of the
aggregate principal amount of the notes issued under the indenture, at a redemption price of 106.625% of the principal
amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date (subject to the right of Holders of record on
the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date),
with the net cash proceeds of one or more Equity Offerings by the Company, provided that:
at least 65% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes originally issued under the indenture
(excluding notes held by the Company and its Subsidiaries) remains outstanding immediately after the
occurrence of such redemption; and
(1)
(2)
the redemption occurs within 180 days of the date of the closing of each such Equity Offering.
30
Table of Contents
On and after June 1, 2017, the Issuers may redeem all or a part of the notes, at the redemption prices
(expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth below, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes
to be redeemed to the applicable redemption date (subject to the right of Holders of record on the relevant record date
to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date), if redeemed during the
twelve-month period beginning on June 1 of the years indicated below:
Year
2017
2018
2019 and thereafter
Percentages  
  103.313%
  101.656%
  100.000%
Prior to June 1, 2017, the Issuers may redeem all or part of the notes, at a redemption price equal to the sum of:
(1)
(2)
the principal amount thereof, plus
the Make Whole Premium at the redemption date,
plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date (subject to the right of Holders of record on the
relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date).
Selection and Notice
If less than all of the notes are to be redeemed at any time, the trustee will select notes for redemption as
follows:
if the notes are listed on any national securities exchange, in compliance with the requirements of the
principal national securities exchange on which the notes are listed; or
(1)
(2)
if the notes are not listed on any national securities exchange, on a pro rata basis (or, in the case of
notes issued in global form, based on such method as The Depository Trust Company, or DTC, or its
successor may require).
No notes of $2,000 or less can be redeemed in part. Notices of optional redemption will be sent at least 30 but
not more than 60 days before the redemption date to each Holder of notes to be redeemed at its registered address,
except that optional redemption notices may be sent more than 60 days prior to a redemption date if the notice is
issued in connection with a defeasance of the notes or a satisfaction and discharge of the indenture. Notices of
redemption may not be conditional, except that any redemption pursuant to the first paragraph under this "—Optional
Redemption" section, may, at the Company's discretion, be subject to completion of the related Equity Offering.
If any note is to be redeemed in part only, the notice of redemption that relates to that note will state the portion
of the principal amount of that note that is to be redeemed. A new note in principal amount equal to the unredeemed
portion of the original note will be issued in the name of the Holder upon cancellation of the original note.
Unless a redemption is conditional upon the completion of a related Equity Offering, notes called for redemption
become due on the date fixed for redemption, and at the redemption price. On and after the redemption date, interest
ceases to accrue on notes or portions of them called for redemption.
31
Table of Contents
Mandatory Redemption
Except as set forth below under "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders," neither of the Issuers is required to
make mandatory redemption or sinking fund payments with respect to the notes or to repurchase the notes at the
option of the Holders.
Repurchase at the Option of Holders
Change of Control
If a Change of Control occurs, unless the Issuers have previously or concurrently exercised their right to redeem
all of the notes as described under "—Optional Redemption," each Holder will have the right to require the Company to
repurchase all or any part (equal to $2,000 or an integral multiple of $1,000 in excess of $2,000) of that Holder's notes
pursuant to a cash tender offer (the "Change of Control Offer") on the terms set forth in the indenture. In the Change
of Control Offer, the Company will offer a payment in cash ("Change of Control Payment") equal to 101% of the
aggregate principal amount of notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes repurchased,
to the date of purchase (the "Change of Control Purchase Date"), subject to the right of Holders of record on the
relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the Change of Control
Purchase Date. Within 30 days following any Change of Control, unless the Issuers have previously or concurrently
exercised their right to redeem all of the notes as described under "—Optional Redemption," the Company will send a
notice to each Holder and the trustee describing the transaction or transactions that constitute the Change of Control
and offering to repurchase notes properly tendered prior to the expiration date specified in the notice, which date will
be no earlier than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date such notice is sent, pursuant to the procedures
required by the indenture and described in such notice.
The Company will comply with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended (the "Exchange Act"), and any other securities laws and regulations thereunder to the extent those laws and
regulations are applicable in connection with the repurchase of the notes as a result of a Change of Control. To the
extent that the provisions of any securities laws or regulations conflict with the Change of Control provisions of the
indenture, the Company will comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have
breached its obligations under the Change of Control provisions of the indenture by virtue of such compliance.
Promptly following the expiration of the Change of Control Offer, the Company will, to the extent lawful, accept
for payment all notes or portions of notes properly tendered pursuant to the Change of Control Offer. Promptly after
such acceptance, the Company will, on the Change of Control Purchase Date:
deposit with the paying agent an amount equal to the Change of Control Payment in respect of all notes
or portions of notes properly tendered; and
(1)
(2)
deliver or cause to be delivered to the trustee the notes properly accepted together with an officers'
certificate stating the aggregate principal amount of notes or portions of notes being purchased by the
Company.
The paying agent will promptly mail to each Holder of notes properly tendered the Change of Control Payment for
such notes (or, if all the notes are then in global form, make such payment through the facilities of DTC), and the
trustee will promptly authenticate and mail (or cause to be transferred by book entry) to each Holder a new note equal
in principal amount to any unpurchased portion of the notes surrendered, if any; provided, however, that each new
note will be in a principal amount of $2,000 or an integral multiple of $1,000 in excess of $2,000. The Company will
publicly announce the results of the Change of Control Offer on or as soon as practicable after the Change of Control
Purchase Date.
32
Table of Contents
The Credit Agreement provides that certain change of control events with respect to the Company would
constitute an event of default thereunder, entitling the lenders, among other things, to accelerate the maturity of all
Indebtedness outstanding thereunder. Any future credit agreements or other agreements relating to Indebtedness to
which the Company or any Guarantor becomes a party may contain similar restrictions and provisions. The indenture
will provide that, prior to complying with any of the provisions of this "Change of Control" covenant, but in any event
no later than the Change of Control Purchase Date, the Company or any Guarantor must either repay all of its other
outstanding Senior Debt or obtain the requisite consents, if any, under all agreements governing such Senior Debt to
permit the repurchase of notes required by this covenant.
The provisions described above that require the Company to make a Change of Control Offer following a Change
of Control will be applicable whether or not any other provisions of the indenture are applicable. Except as described
above with respect to a Change of Control, the indenture will not contain provisions that permit the Holders to require
that the Company repurchase or redeem the notes in the event of a takeover, recapitalization or similar transaction.
The Company will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if a third party
makes the Change of Control Offer in the manner, at the time and otherwise in compliance with the requirements set
forth in the indenture applicable to a Change of Control Offer made by the Company and purchases all notes properly
tendered and not withdrawn under the Change of Control Offer.
A Change of Control Offer may be made in advance of a Change of Control, and conditioned upon the
occurrence of the Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place for the Change of Control at the time of
making the Change of Control Offer.
The definition of Change of Control includes a phrase relating to the direct or indirect sale, lease, transfer,
conveyance or other disposition of "all or substantially all" of the properties or assets of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries taken as a whole. Although there is a limited body of case law interpreting the phrase
"substantially all," there is no precise established definition of the phrase under applicable law. Accordingly, the ability
of a Holder to require the Company to repurchase its notes as a result of a sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or other
disposition of less than all of the properties or assets of the Company and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole to
another Person or group may be uncertain.
In the event that Holders of not less than 90% of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding notes accept
a Change of Control Offer and the Company (or the third party making the Change of Control Offer in lieu of the
Company as described above) purchases all of the notes held by such Holders, the Issuers will have the right, upon
not less than 30 nor more than 60 days' prior notice, given not more than 30 days following the purchase pursuant to
the Change of Control Offer described above, to redeem all of the notes that remain outstanding following such
purchase at a redemption price equal to the Change of Control Payment plus, to the extent not included in the Change
of Control Payment, accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes that remain outstanding, to the date of
redemption (subject to the right of Holders of record on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest
payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date).
Asset Sales
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, consummate an Asset Sale
unless:
(1)
the Company (or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, as the case may be) receives consideration
at the time of the Asset Sale at least equal to the fair market value (measured
Table of Contents
33
as of the date of the definitive agreement with respect to such Asset Sale) of the assets or Equity
Interests issued or sold or otherwise disposed of; and
(2)
at least 75% of the aggregate consideration received by the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries in
the Asset Sale and all other Asset Sales since the date of the indenture is in the form of cash or Cash
Equivalents. For purposes of this provision, each of the following will be deemed to be cash:
any liabilities, as shown on the Company's or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries' most recent
balance sheet, of the Company or such Subsidiary (other than contingent liabilities and liabilities
that are by their terms subordinated to the notes or any Subsidiary Guarantee) that are assumed
by the transferee of any such assets pursuant to a novation or indemnity agreement that
releases the Company or such Subsidiary from, or indemnifies it against, further liability;
with respect to any Asset Sale of oil and gas properties by the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries, any agreement by the transferee (or an Affiliate thereof) to pay all or a portion of the
costs and expenses related to the exploration, development, completion or production of such
properties and activities related thereto; and
(a)
(b)
(c)
any securities, notes or other obligations received by the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries from such transferee that are, within 120 days after the Asset Sale, converted by
the Company or such Subsidiary into cash, to the extent of the cash received in that conversion.
Within 360 days after the receipt of any Net Proceeds from an Asset Sale, the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company may apply those Net Proceeds at its option to any combination of the following:
to repay, redeem or repurchase any Senior Debt;
to invest in or acquire Additional Assets; or
(1)
(2)
(3)
to make capital expenditures in respect of the Company's or its Restricted Subsidiaries' Oil and Gas
Business.
The requirement of clause (2) or (3) of the preceding paragraph shall be deemed to be satisfied if a bona fide
binding contract committing to make the investment, acquisition or expenditure referred to therein is entered into by
the Company (or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) with a Person other than an Affiliate of the Company
within the time period specified in the preceding paragraph and such Net Proceeds are subsequently applied in
accordance with such contract within the later of six months following the date such contract is entered into and
360 days after the receipt of any Net Proceeds from such Asset Sale.
Pending the final application of any Net Proceeds, the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries may invest
the Net Proceeds in any manner that is not prohibited by the indenture. Any Net Proceeds from Asset Sales that are
not applied or invested as provided in the second or third paragraph of this covenant will constitute "Excess
Proceeds."
When the aggregate amount of Excess Proceeds exceeds $20.0 million, within ten Business Days thereof, the
Company will make an offer (an "Asset Sale Offer") to all Holders and all holders of other Indebtedness that is pari
passu with the notes containing provisions similar to those set forth in the indenture with respect to offers to purchase
or redeem with the proceeds of sales of assets, offering to purchase or redeem on a pro rata basis the maximum
principal amount of notes and such other pari passu Indebtedness that may be purchased or redeemed out of the
Excess Proceeds. The offer price in any Asset Sale Offer will be equal to 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued
and unpaid interest,
34
Table of Contents
if any, to the date of purchase or redemption, subject to the right of Holders of record on the relevant record date to
receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the date of purchase, and will be payable in
cash. If any Excess Proceeds remain after consummation of an Asset Sale Offer, the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company may use those Excess Proceeds for any purpose not otherwise prohibited by the
indenture. If the aggregate principal amount of notes accepted for payment in such Asset Sale Offer exceeds the
amount of Excess Proceeds allocated to the purchase of notes, the trustee will select the notes to be purchased on a
pro rata basis (or, in the case of notes issued in global form, based on such method as DTC or its successor may
require). Upon completion of each Asset Sale Offer, the amount of Excess Proceeds will be reset at zero.
The Company will comply with the requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and any other securities
laws and regulations thereunder to the extent those laws and regulations are applicable in connection with each
repurchase of notes pursuant to an Asset Sale Offer. To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or
regulations conflict with the "Asset Sales" provisions of the indenture, the Company will comply with the applicable
securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have breached its obligations under the "Asset Sales"
provisions of the indenture by virtue of such compliance.
The Credit Agreement contains, and future agreements may contain, prohibitions of certain events, including
events that would constitute an Asset Sale. The exercise by the Holders of their right to require the Company to
purchase the notes upon an Asset Sale could cause a default under these other agreements, even if the Asset Sale
itself does not, due to the financial effect of such repurchases on the Company. If an Asset Sale occurs at a time
when the Company is prohibited from purchasing notes, the Company could seek the consent of its senior lenders to
the purchase of notes or could attempt to refinance the borrowings that contain such prohibition. If the Company does
not obtain a consent or repay those borrowings, the Company will remain prohibited from purchasing notes. In that
case, the Company's failure to purchase tendered notes would constitute an Event of Default under the indenture,
which could, in turn, constitute a default under the other indebtedness.
Certain Covenants
Restricted Payments
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly:
(1)
(2)
(3)
declare or pay any dividend or make any other payment or distribution on account of the Company's or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries' Equity Interests (including, without limitation, any payment in
connection with any merger or consolidation involving the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries) or to the direct or indirect holders of the Company's or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries'
Equity Interests in their capacity as such (other than dividends or distributions payable in Equity
Interests (other than Disqualified Stock) of the Company or payable to the Company or a Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company);
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value (including, without limitation, in connection with
any merger or consolidation involving the Company) any Equity Interests of the Company or any direct
or indirect parent of the Company;
make any payment on or with respect to, or purchase, redeem, defease or otherwise acquire or retire for
value, any Indebtedness that is subordinated to the notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees (excluding
(a) any intercompany Indebtedness between or among the Company and any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries and (b) the purchase or other acquisition or retirement for value of any such Indebtedness
in anticipation of satisfying a sinking fund or other payment obligation due within one year of the date of
such purchase or other acquisition or retirement for value), except a payment of interest or principal at
the Stated Maturity thereof; or
35
Table of Contents
(4)
make any Restricted Investment (all such payments and other actions set forth in these clauses (1)
through (4) above being collectively referred to as "Restricted Payments");
unless, at the time of and after giving effect to such Restricted Payment, no Default (except a Reporting Default) or
Event of Default has occurred and is continuing or would occur as a consequence of such Restricted Payment and
either:
(1)
if the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the Company's most recently ended four full fiscal quarters for
which internal financial statements are available at the time of such Restricted Payment (the "Trailing
Four Quarters") is not less than 2.25 to 1.0, such Restricted Payment, together with the aggregate
amount of all other Restricted Payments made by the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries
(excluding Restricted Payments permitted by clauses (2) through (10) of the next succeeding paragraph)
with respect to the quarter for which such Restricted Payment is made, is less than the sum, without
duplication, of:
Available Cash with respect to the Company's preceding fiscal quarter; plus
100% of the aggregate net proceeds received by the Company (including the fair market value of
any Capital Stock of Persons engaged primarily in the Oil and Gas Business or long-term assets
that are used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business, in each case, to the extent acquired in
consideration of Equity Interests of the Company (other than Disqualified Stock)) after the Prior
Issue Date as a contribution to its common equity capital or from the issue or sale of Equity
Interests of the Company (other than Disqualified Stock) or from the issue or sale after the Prior
Issue Date of convertible or exchangeable Disqualified Stock or convertible or exchangeable debt
securities that have been converted into or exchanged for such Equity Interests (other than
Equity Interests (or Disqualified Stock or debt securities) sold to a Subsidiary of the Company);
plus
to the extent that any Restricted Investment that was made after the Prior Issue Date is sold for
cash or Cash Equivalents or otherwise liquidated or repaid for cash or Cash Equivalents, the
return of capital with respect to such Restricted Investment (less the cost of disposition, if any);
plus
the net reduction in Restricted Investments resulting from dividends, repayments of loans or
advances, or other transfers of assets in each case to the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries from any Person (including, without limitation, Unrestricted Subsidiaries) or from
redesignations of Unrestricted Subsidiaries as Restricted Subsidiaries, to the extent such
amounts have not been included in Available Cash for any period commencing on or after the
Prior Issue Date (items (b), (c) and (d) being referred to as "Incremental Funds"); minus
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
the aggregate amount of Incremental Funds previously expended pursuant to this clause (1) and
clause (2) below; or
(2)
if the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for the Trailing Four Quarters is less than 2.25 to 1.0, such
Restricted Payment, together with the aggregate amount of all other Restricted Payments made by the
Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries (excluding Restricted Payments permitted by clauses (2)
through (10) of the next succeeding paragraph) with respect to the quarter for which such Restricted
Payment is made (such Restricted Payments for purposes of this clause (2) meaning only distributions
on common units of the Company, plus the related distribution to the General Partner), is less than the
sum, without duplication, of:
(a)
Table of Contents
(b)
$150.0 million less the aggregate amount of all prior Restricted Payments made by the Company
and its Restricted Subsidiaries pursuant to this clause (2)(a) since the Prior Issue Date; plus
36
Incremental Funds to the extent not previously expended pursuant to this clause (2) or clause (1)
above.
The preceding provisions will not prohibit:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
the payment of any dividend or distribution or the consummation of any irrevocable redemption within
60 days after the date of declaration of the dividend or giving of the redemption notice, as the case may
be, if at the date of declaration or notice, the dividend or redemption payment would have complied with
the provisions of the indenture;
the purchase, redemption, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement of any subordinated
Indebtedness of the Company or any Guarantor or of any Equity Interests of the Company in exchange
for, or out of the net cash proceeds of the substantially concurrent (a) contribution (other than from a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) to the equity capital of the Company or (b) sale (other than to a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company) of, Equity Interests of the Company (other than Disqualified
Stock), with a sale being deemed substantially concurrent if such purchase, redemption, defeasance or
other acquisition or retirement occurs not more than 120 days after such sale; provided, however, that
the amount of any such net cash proceeds that are utilized for any such purchase, redemption,
defeasance or other acquisition or retirement will be excluded (or deducted, if included) from the
calculation of Available Cash and Incremental Funds;
the purchase, redemption, defeasance or other acquisition or retirement of subordinated Indebtedness of
the Company or any Guarantor with the net cash proceeds from an incurrence of, or in exchange for,
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness;
the payment of any dividend or distribution by a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company to the holders of
its Equity Interests on a pro rata basis;
so long as no Default (other than a Reporting Default) or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing
or would be caused thereby, the purchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement for value of any
Equity Interests of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company pursuant to any director
or employee equity subscription agreement, equity option agreement, unitholders' agreement, other
employee benefit plan or to satisfy obligations under any Equity Interests appreciation rights or option
plan or similar arrangement; provided, however, that the aggregate price paid for all such purchased,
redeemed, acquired or retired Equity Interests may not exceed $5.0 million in any calendar year (with
any portion of such $5.0 million amount that is unused in any calendar year to be carried forward to
successive calendar years and added to such amount) plus, to the extent not previously applied or
included, (a) the cash proceeds received by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries from
sales of Equity Interests of the Company to employees or directors of the Company or its Affiliates that
occur after the date of the indenture (to the extent the cash proceeds from the sale of such Equity
Interests have not otherwise been applied to the payment of Restricted Payments by virtue of clause (1)
(b) or (2)(b) of the first paragraph of this covenant) and (b) the cash proceeds of key man life insurance
policies received by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries after the date of the indenture;
the purchase, repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement for value of Equity Interests
deemed to occur upon the exercise of unit options, warrants, incentives, rights to acquire Equity
Interests or other convertible securities if such Equity Interests represent a portion of the exercise or
exchange price thereof, and any purchase, repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement for
value of Equity Interests made in lieu of withholding taxes in connection with any exercise or exchange
of unit options, warrants, incentives or rights to acquire Equity Interests;
37
Table of Contents
(7)
the purchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement for value of Equity Interests of the Company
or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company representing fractional units of such Equity Interests in
connection with a merger or consolidation involving the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary or any
other transaction permitted by the indenture;
any payments in connection with a consolidation, merger or transfer of assets in connection with a
transaction that is not prohibited by the indenture not to exceed $5.0 million in the aggregate after the
date of the indenture;
so long as no Default (other than a Reporting Default) or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing
or would be caused thereby, the declaration and payment of regularly scheduled or accrued dividends to
holders of any class or series of Disqualified Stock of the Company or any preferred securities of any
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company issued on or after the date of the indenture in accordance with the
covenant described below under the caption "—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred
Stock"; and
(8)
(9)
(10)
so long as no Default (other than a Reporting Default) or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing
or would be caused thereby, other Restricted Payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed
$5.0 million since the Prior Issue Date.
The amount of all Restricted Payments (other than cash) will be the fair market value, on the date of the
Restricted Payment, of the Restricted Investment proposed to be made or the asset(s) or securities proposed to be
transferred or issued by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted
Payment, except that the fair market value of any non-cash dividend or distribution paid within 60 days after the date
of its declaration shall be determined as of such date. The fair market value of any Restricted Investment, assets or
securities that are required to be valued by this covenant will be determined in accordance with the definition of that
term. For purposes of determining compliance with this "Restricted Payments" covenant, (x) in the event that a
Restricted Payment meets the criteria of more than one of the categories of Restricted Payments described in the
preceding clauses (1) through (10) of this covenant, or is permitted pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant,
the Company will be permitted to classify (or later classify or reclassify in whole or in part in its sole discretion) such
Restricted Payment (or portion thereof) on the date made or later reclassify such Restricted Payment (or portion
thereof) in any manner that complies with this covenant; and (y) in the event a Restricted Payment is made pursuant
to clause (1) or (2) of the first paragraph of this covenant, the Company will be permitted to classify whether all or any
portion thereof is being (and in the absence of such classification shall be deemed to have classified the minimum
amount possible as having been) made with Incremental Funds.
Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, create,
incur, issue, assume, guarantee or otherwise become directly or indirectly liable, contingently or otherwise, with
respect to (collectively, "incur") any Indebtedness (including Acquired Debt); the Company will not, and will not permit
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, issue any Disqualified Stock; and the Company will not permit any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries to issue any other preferred securities; provided, however, that the Company and any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries may incur Indebtedness (including Acquired Debt) or issue Disqualified Stock, and any of the
Company's Restricted Subsidiaries may issue other preferred securities, if, for the Company's most recently ended
four full fiscal quarters for which internal financial statements are available immediately preceding the date on which
such additional Indebtedness is incurred or such Disqualified Stock or other preferred securities are issued, the Fixed
Charge Coverage Ratio would have been at least 2.25 to 1.0, determined on a pro forma basis (including a pro forma
application of the net proceeds
38
Table of Contents
therefrom), as if the additional Indebtedness had been incurred or Disqualified Stock or other preferred securities had
been issued, as the case may be, at the beginning of such four-quarter period.
The first paragraph of this covenant will not prohibit the incurrence of any of the following items of Indebtedness
or the issuance of any Disqualified Stock described in clause (15) below (collectively, "Permitted Debt") or the
issuance of any preferred securities described in clause (11) below:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of additional Indebtedness under
one or more Credit Facilities, provided that, after giving effect to any such incurrence, the aggregate
principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred under this clause (1) (with letters of credit being deemed to
have a principal amount equal to the maximum potential liability of the Company and its Subsidiaries
thereunder) and then outstanding does not exceed the greater of (a) $1,000.0 million or (b) $475.0 million
plus 35.0% of the Company's Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets;
the incurrence by the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries of the Existing Indebtedness;
the incurrence by the Issuers and the Guarantors of Indebtedness represented by (a) the notes originally
issued under the indenture governing the 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021 and the related Subsidiary
Guarantees and (b) the exchange notes issued in March 2014 and the related Subsidiary Guarantees
issued pursuant to any registration rights agreement;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness represented by
Capital Lease Obligations, mortgage financings or purchase money obligations, in each case, incurred
for the purpose of financing all or any part of the purchase price or cost of design, construction,
installation or improvement of property, plant or equipment used in the business of the Company or such
Restricted Subsidiary, including all Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to extend, refinance,
renew, replace, defease, refund or discharge any Indebtedness incurred pursuant to this clause (4),
provided that after giving effect to any such incurrence, the principal amount of all Indebtedness
incurred pursuant to this clause (4) and then outstanding does not exceed the greater of (a) $25.0 million
or (b) 2.5% of the Company's Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets at such time;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Permitted Refinancing
Indebtedness in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to, extend, refinance, renew,
replace, defease, refund or discharge Indebtedness (other than intercompany Indebtedness) that was
permitted by the indenture to be incurred under the first paragraph of this covenant or clause (2), (3), (4),
(5), (15) or (16) of this paragraph;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of intercompany Indebtedness
between or among the Company and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; provided, however, that:
(a)
(b)
if the Company is the obligor on such Indebtedness and a Guarantor is not the obligee, such
Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all
Obligations with respect to the notes, or if a Guarantor is the obligor on such Indebtedness and
neither the Company nor another Guarantor is the obligee, such Indebtedness must be expressly
subordinated to the prior payment in full in cash of all Obligations with respect to the Subsidiary
Guarantee of such Guarantor; and
(i) any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such Indebtedness
being held by a Person other than the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company and
(ii) any sale or other transfer of any such Indebtedness to a Person that is neither the Company
nor a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company will be deemed,
39
Table of Contents
in each case, to constitute an incurrence of such Indebtedness by the Company or such
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, that was not permitted by this clause (6);
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of obligations under Hedging
Contracts;
the guarantee by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness of the Company or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries that was permitted to be incurred by another provision of this
covenant;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of obligations relating to net
Hydrocarbon balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness in respect of self-
insurance obligations or bid, plugging and abandonment, appeal, reimbursement, performance, surety
and similar bonds and completion guarantees issued or provided for the account of the Company and
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business, including guarantees and
obligations of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to letters of credit
supporting such obligations (in each case other than an obligation for money borrowed);
the issuance by any of the Company's Restricted Subsidiaries to the Company or to any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries of any preferred securities; provided, however, that:
any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such preferred
securities being held by a Person other than the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the
Company; and
(a)
(b)
any sale or other transfer of any such preferred securities to a Person that is neither the
Company nor a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company,
will be deemed, in each case, to constitute an issuance of such preferred securities by such Restricted
Subsidiary that was not permitted by this clause (11);
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness arising from the
honoring by a bank or other financial institution of a check, draft or similar instrument inadvertently
drawn against insufficient funds, so long as such Indebtedness is covered within five Business Days;
any obligation arising from agreements of the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company
providing for indemnification, adjustment of purchase price, earn outs, or similar obligations, in each
case, incurred or assumed in connection with the disposition or acquisition of any business, assets or
Capital Stock of a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company in a transaction permitted by the indenture,
provided such obligation is not reflected on the face of the balance sheet of the Company or any
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company;
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of liability in respect of the
Indebtedness of any Unrestricted Subsidiary or any Joint Venture but only to the extent that such
liability is the result of the Company's or any such Restricted Subsidiary's being a general partner or
member of, or owner of an Equity Interest in, such Unrestricted Subsidiary or Joint Venture and not as
guarantor of such Indebtedness and provided that, after giving effect to any such incurrence, the
aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred under this clause (14) and then outstanding
does not exceed $25.0 million;
(15)
Permitted Acquisition Indebtedness; and
40
Table of Contents
(16)
the incurrence by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of additional Indebtedness or the
issuance by the Company of any Disqualified Stock in an aggregate principal amount, including all
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refund, refinance, replace, defease or discharge
any Indebtedness incurred or Disqualified Stock issued pursuant to this clause (16), not to exceed the
greater of (a) $50.0 million or (b) 5.0% of the Company's Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
The Company will not incur, and will not permit any Guarantor to incur, any Indebtedness (including Permitted
Debt) that is contractually subordinated in right of payment to any other Indebtedness of the Company or such
Guarantor unless such Indebtedness is also contractually subordinated in right of payment to the notes or the
applicable Subsidiary Guarantee on substantially identical terms; provided, however, that no Indebtedness will be
deemed to be contractually subordinated in right of payment to any other Indebtedness of the Company or any
Guarantor solely by virtue of being unsecured or by virtue of being secured on a junior priority basis.
For purposes of determining compliance with this "Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock"
covenant, in the event that an item of Indebtedness (including Acquired Debt) meets the criteria of more than one of
the categories of Permitted Debt described in clauses (1) through (16) above, or is entitled to be incurred pursuant to
the first paragraph of this covenant, the Company will be permitted to divide, classify, redivide and reclassify such
item of Indebtedness on the date of its incurrence, or later divide, classify, redivide or reclassify all or a portion of
such item of Indebtedness, in any manner that complies with this covenant. Any Indebtedness outstanding under
Credit Facilities on the date of the indenture shall be considered incurred on such date under the first paragraph of this
covenant.
The accrual of interest, the accretion or amortization of original issue discount, the payment of interest on any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, and the payment of dividends on
Disqualified Stock in the form of additional securities of the same class of Disqualified Stock will not be deemed to be
an incurrence of Indebtedness or an issuance of Disqualified Stock for purposes of this covenant, provided, in each
such case, that the amount thereof is included in Fixed Charges of the Company as accrued. Further, the accounting
reclassification of any obligation of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries as Indebtedness will not be
deemed an incurrence of Indebtedness for purposes of this covenant.
Liens
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, assume or
otherwise cause or suffer to exist or become effective any Lien of any kind (other than Permitted Liens) securing
Indebtedness or Attributable Debt upon any of their property or assets, now owned or hereafter acquired, unless the
notes or any Subsidiary Guarantee of such Restricted Subsidiary, as applicable, is secured on an equal and ratable
basis with (or on a senior basis to, in the case of obligations subordinated in right of payment to the notes or such
Subsidiary Guarantee, as the case may be) the obligations so secured until such time as such obligations are no
longer secured by a Lien.
Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly, create or
permit to exist or become effective any consensual encumbrance or restriction on the ability of any Restricted
Subsidiary to:
(1)
pay dividends or make any other distributions on its Capital Stock to the Company or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries, or pay any Indebtedness or other obligations owed to the Company or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries;
Table of Contents
41
make loans or advances to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (it being understood that
the subordination of loans or advances made to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to
other Indebtedness incurred by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries shall not be deemed a
restriction on the ability to make loans or advances); or
(2)
(3)
transfer any of its properties or assets to the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries.
However, the preceding restrictions will not apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under or by reason of:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
agreements as in effect on the date of the indenture and any amendments, modifications, restatements,
renewals, increases, supplements, refundings, replacements or refinancings of those agreements or the
Indebtedness to which they relate, provided that the amendments, modifications, restatements,
renewals, increases, supplements, refundings, replacements or refinancings are no more restrictive,
taken as a whole, with respect to such dividend, distribution and other payment restrictions than those
contained in those agreements on the date of the indenture;
the indenture, the notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees;
applicable law, rule, regulation, order, approval, license, permit or similar restriction;
any instrument governing Indebtedness or Capital Stock of a Person acquired by the Company or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries as in effect at the time of such acquisition (except to the extent such
Indebtedness or Capital Stock was incurred in connection with or in contemplation of such acquisition),
which encumbrance or restriction is not applicable to any Person, or the properties or assets of any
Person, other than the Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired, provided that, in the
case of Indebtedness, such Indebtedness was otherwise permitted by the terms of the indenture to be
incurred;
customary non-assignment provisions in Hydrocarbon purchase and sale or exchange agreements or
similar operational agreements or in licenses, easements or leases, in each case entered into in the
ordinary course of business;
Capital Lease Obligations, mortgage financings or purchase money obligations, in each case for
property acquired in the ordinary course of business that impose restrictions on that property of the
nature described in clause (3) of the preceding paragraph;
any agreement for the sale or other disposition of a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that restricts
distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary pending its sale or other disposition;
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness, provided that the restrictions contained in the agreements
governing such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness are not materially more restrictive, taken as a
whole, than those contained in the agreements governing the Indebtedness being refinanced;
Liens securing Indebtedness otherwise permitted to be incurred under the provisions of the covenant
described above under the caption "—Liens" that limit the right of the debtor to dispose of the assets
subject to such Liens;
provisions with respect to the disposition or distribution of assets or property in joint venture
agreements, asset sale agreements, sale-leaseback agreements, stock sale agreements and other
agreements described in the definition of "Permitted Business Investments," entered into in the ordinary
course of business;
42
Table of Contents
any agreement or instrument relating to any property or assets acquired after the date of the indenture,
so long as such encumbrance or restriction relates only to the property or assets so acquired and is not
and was not created in anticipation of such acquisitions;
encumbrances or restrictions on cash, Cash Equivalents or other deposits or net worth imposed by
customers or lessors under contracts or leases entered into in the ordinary course of business;
the issuance of preferred securities by a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company or the payment of
dividends thereon in accordance with the terms thereof; provided that issuance of such preferred
securities is permitted pursuant to the covenant described above under the caption "—Incurrence of
Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock" and the terms of such preferred securities do not
expressly restrict the ability of such Restricted Subsidiary to pay dividends or make any other
distributions on its Capital Stock (other than requirements to pay dividends or liquidation preferences on
such preferred securities prior to paying any dividends or making any other distributions on such other
Capital Stock);
with respect to any Foreign Subsidiary, any encumbrance or restriction contained in the terms of any
Indebtedness or any agreement pursuant to which such Indebtedness was incurred if either (a) the
encumbrance or restriction applies only in the event of a payment default or a default with respect to a
financial covenant in such Indebtedness or agreement or (b) the Company determines that any such
encumbrance or restriction will not materially affect the Company's ability to make principal or interest
payments on the notes, as determined in good faith by the Board of Directors of the Company, whose
determination shall be conclusive; and
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
agreements governing other Indebtedness permitted to be incurred under the provisions of the covenant
described above under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of
Preferred Stock" and any amendments, restatements, modifications, renewals, supplements,
refundings, replacements or refinancings of those agreements; provided that the restrictions therein are
not materially more restrictive, taken as a whole, than those contained in the indenture, the notes and
the Subsidiary Guarantees or the Credit Agreement as in effect on the date of the indenture.
Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets
Neither of the Issuers may, directly or indirectly: (1) consolidate or merge with or into another Person (whether or
not such Issuer is the survivor); or (2) sell, assign, transfer, lease, convey or otherwise dispose of all or substantially
all of its properties or assets in one or more related transactions, to another Person, unless:
(1)
(2)
either: (a) such Issuer is the survivor; or (b) the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or
merger (if other than such Issuer) or to which such sale, assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or
other disposition has been made is a Person organized or existing under the laws of the United States,
any state of the United States or the District of Columbia; provided, however, that Finance Corp. may
not consolidate or merge with or into any Person other than a corporation satisfying such requirement so
long as the Company is not a corporation;
the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other than such Issuer) or the
Person to which such sale, assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or other disposition has been made
assumes all the obligations of such Issuer under the notes, the indenture and the registration rights
agreement pursuant to a supplemental indenture or other agreement reasonably satisfactory to the
trustee;
(3)
immediately after such transaction no Default or Event of Default exists;
43
Table of Contents
(4)
in the case of a transaction involving the Company and not Finance Corp., immediately after giving
effect to such transaction and any related financing transactions on a pro forma basis as if the same
had occurred at the beginning of the applicable four-quarter period, either
(a)
(b)
the Company or the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other
than the Company), or to which such sale, assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or other
disposition has been made, would be permitted to incur at least $1.00 of additional Indebtedness
pursuant to the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph of the covenant
described above under the caption "—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred
Stock;" or
the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company or the Person formed by or surviving any such
consolidation or merger (if other than the Company), or to which such sale, assignment, transfer,
lease, conveyance or other disposition has been made, would be equal to or greater than the
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company immediately before such transactions; and
(5)
such Issuer has delivered to the trustee an officers' certificate and an opinion of counsel, each stating
that such consolidation, merger or disposition and such supplemental indenture (if any) comply with the
indenture.
Notwithstanding the restrictions described in the foregoing clause (4), any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company
(other than Finance Corp.) may consolidate with, merge into or dispose of all or part of its properties and assets to the
Company without complying with the preceding clause (4) in connection with any such consolidation, merger or
disposition.
Notwithstanding the second preceding paragraph, the Company may reorganize as any other form of entity in
accordance with the following procedures provided that:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the reorganization involves the conversion (by merger, sale, contribution or exchange of assets or
otherwise) of the Company into a form of entity other than a limited partnership formed under Delaware
law;
the entity so formed by or resulting from such reorganization is an entity organized or existing under the
laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
the entity so formed by or resulting from such reorganization assumes all the obligations of the
Company under the notes, the indenture and the registration rights agreement pursuant to agreements
reasonably satisfactory to the trustee;
immediately after such reorganization no Default (other than a Reporting Default) or Event of Default
exists; and
(5)
such reorganization is not materially adverse to the Holders or Beneficial Owners of the notes (for
purposes of this clause (5) a reorganization will not be considered materially adverse to the Holders or
Beneficial Owners of the notes solely because the successor or survivor of such reorganization (a) is
subject to federal or state income taxation as an entity or (b) is considered to be an "includible
corporation" of an affiliated group of corporations within the meaning of Section 1504(b) of the Code or
any similar state or local law).
Upon any consolidation or merger or any sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or other disposition of all
or substantially all of the properties or assets of an Issuer in accordance with the foregoing in which such Issuer is not
the surviving entity, the surviving Person formed by such consolidation or into or with which such Issuer is merged or
to which such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or other disposition is made will succeed to, and be
substituted for, and may exercise every right and power of, such Issuer under the indenture with the same effect as if
such surviving
44
Table of Contents
Person had been named as such Issuer in the indenture, and thereafter (except in the case of a lease of all or
substantially all of such Issuer's properties or assets), such Issuer will be relieved of all obligations and covenants
under the indenture and the notes.
Although there is a limited body of case law interpreting the phrase "substantially all," there is no precise
established definition of the phrase under applicable law. Accordingly, in certain circumstances there may be a degree
of uncertainty as to whether a particular transaction would involve "all or substantially all" of the properties or assets
of a Person.
Transactions with Affiliates
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, make any payment to, or sell,
lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of any of its properties or assets to, or purchase any property or assets from, or
enter into or make or amend any transaction, contract, agreement, understanding, loan, advance or guarantee with, or
for the benefit of, any Affiliate of the Company (each, an "Affiliate Transaction"), unless:
(1)
(2)
the Affiliate Transaction is on terms that are no less favorable to the Company or the relevant Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company than those that would have been obtained in a comparable transaction by
the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary with an unrelated Person or, if in the good faith judgment of
the Company's Board of Directors, no comparable transaction is available with which to compare such
Affiliate Transaction, such Affiliate Transaction is otherwise fair to the Company or the relevant
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company from a financial point of view; and
the Company delivers to the trustee:
(a)
(b)
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $25.0 million but less than or equal to $50.0 million, an
officers' certificate certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate
Transactions complies with this covenant; or
with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions involving
aggregate consideration in excess of $50.0 million, an officers' certificate certifying that such
Affiliate Transaction or series of Affiliate Transactions complies with this covenant and that such
Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions has been approved by either the
Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company (so long as the members of the
Conflicts Committee approving the Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions
are disinterested) or a majority of the disinterested members of the Board of Directors of the
Company pursuant to a resolution set forth in such officers' certificate.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be subject to the
provisions of the prior paragraph:
(1)
(2)
(3)
any employment, employee benefit plan, equity award, equity option, equity appreciation, officer or
director indemnification agreement or any similar plan or arrangement entered into by the Company or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business and payments pursuant thereto;
transactions between or among any of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries;
transactions with a Person (other than an Unrestricted Subsidiary) that is an Affiliate of the Company
solely because the Company owns an Equity Interest in, or controls, such Person;
45
Table of Contents
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
transactions effected in accordance with the terms of agreements that are identified in the indenture, in
each case as such agreements are in effect on the date of the indenture, and any amendment or
replacement of any of such agreements so long as such amendment or replacement agreement is no
less advantageous to the Company in any material respect than the agreement so amended or replaced;
customary compensation, indemnification and other benefits made available to officers, directors,
employees or consultants of the Company or a Restricted Subsidiary or Affiliate of the Company,
including reimbursement or advancement of out-of-pocket expenses and provisions of officers' and
directors' liability insurance;
sales of Equity Interests (other than Disqualified Stock) to, or receipt of capital contributions from,
Affiliates of the Company;
Permitted Investments or Restricted Payments that are permitted by the provisions of the indenture
described above under the caption "—Restricted Payments;"
any transaction in which the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, as the case may be,
delivers to the trustee a letter from an accounting, appraisal, advisory or investment banking firm of
national standing stating that such transaction is fair to the company or such Restricted Subsidiary from
a financial point of view;
(a) guarantees by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of performance of obligations of the
Unrestricted Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business, except for guarantees of Indebtedness in
respect of borrowed money, and (b) pledges by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the
Company of Equity Interests in Unrestricted Subsidiaries for the benefit of lenders or other creditors of
the Unrestricted Subsidiaries;
any Affiliate Transaction with a Person in its capacity as a holder of Indebtedness or Capital Stock of
the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company if such Person is treated no more favorably
than the other holders of Indebtedness or Capital Stock of the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary;
transactions with Unrestricted Subsidiaries, customers, clients, suppliers or purchasers or sellers of
goods or services, or lessors or lessees of property, in each case in the ordinary course of business
and otherwise in compliance with the terms of the indenture which are, in the aggregate (taking into
account all the costs and benefits associated with such transactions), not materially less favorable to
the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries than those that would have been obtained in a comparable
transaction by the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary with an unrelated person, in the good faith
determination of the Company's Board of Directors or any officer of the Company involved in or
otherwise familiar with such transaction, or are on terms at least as favorable as might reasonably have
been obtained at such time from an unaffiliated party; and
(12)
transactions between the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries and any Person that would not
otherwise constitute an Affiliate Transaction except for the fact that one director of such other Person is
also a director of the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as applicable; provided that such director
abstains from voting as a director of the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as applicable, on any
matter involving such other Person.
Table of Contents
Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
46
The Board of Directors of the Company may designate any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company to be an
Unrestricted Subsidiary if that designation would not cause a Default. If a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company is
designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, the aggregate fair market value of all outstanding Investments owned by
the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries in the Subsidiary properly designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary will
be deemed to be either an Investment made as of the time of the designation that will reduce the amount available for
Restricted Payments under the first paragraph of the covenant described above under the caption "—Restricted
Payments" or represent Permitted Investments, as determined by the Company. That designation will only be
permitted if the Investment would be permitted at that time and if the Subsidiary of the Company so designated
otherwise meets the definition of an Unrestricted Subsidiary.
The Board of Directors of the Company may at any time designate any Unrestricted Subsidiary to be a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, provided that such designation will be deemed to be an incurrence of
Indebtedness by a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company of any outstanding Indebtedness of such Unrestricted
Subsidiary and such designation will only be permitted if (1) such Indebtedness is permitted under the covenant
described above under the caption "—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock," calculated on a
pro forma basis as if such designation had occurred at the beginning of the four-quarter reference period, and (2) no
Default or Event of Default would be in existence following such designation.
Additional Subsidiary Guarantees
If, after the date of the indenture, any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that is not already a Guarantor
guarantees any other Indebtedness of either of the Issuers or any Guarantor in excess of a De Minimis Guaranteed
Amount, or any Domestic Subsidiary, if not then a Guarantor, incurs any Indebtedness under any Credit Facility, then
in either case that Subsidiary will become a Guarantor by executing a supplemental indenture and delivering it to the
trustee within 20 Business Days of the date on which it guaranteed or incurred such Indebtedness, as the case may
be; provided, however, that the preceding shall not apply to Subsidiaries of the Company that have properly been
designated as Unrestricted Subsidiaries in accordance with the indenture for so long as they continue to constitute
Unrestricted Subsidiaries. Notwithstanding the preceding, any Subsidiary Guarantee of a Restricted Subsidiary of the
Company that was incurred pursuant to this paragraph will be released in the circumstances described in clause (6)
under "—Subsidiary Guarantees."
Business Activities
The Company will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, engage in any business other
than the Oil and Gas Business, except to such extent as would not be material to the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries taken as a whole.
Finance Corp. may not incur Indebtedness unless (1) the Company is a co-obligor or guarantor of such
Indebtedness or (2) the net proceeds of such Indebtedness are loaned to the Company or its other Restricted
Subsidiaries, used to acquire outstanding debt securities issued by the Company or used to repay Indebtedness of
the Company or its other Restricted Subsidiaries as permitted under the covenant described about under the caption
"—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock." Finance Corp. may not engage in any business not
related directly or indirectly to obtaining money or arranging financing for the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries.
Reports
Whether or not required by the rules and regulations of the Commission, so long as any notes are outstanding,
the Company will file with the Commission for public availability within the time periods
47
Table of Contents
specified in the Commission's rules and regulations (unless the Commission will not accept such a filing), and the
Company will furnish to the trustee and, upon its prior request, to any of the Holders or Beneficial Owners of notes,
within five Business Days of filing, or attempting to file, the same with the Commission:
all quarterly and annual reports that would be required to be filed with the Commission on Forms 10-Q
and 10-K if the Company were required to file such reports, including a "Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and, with respect to the annual report only, a
report on the annual financial statements by the Company's certified independent accountants; and
(1)
(2)
all current reports that would be required to be filed with the Commission on Form 8-K if the Company
were required to file such reports.
The availability of the foregoing reports on the SEC's EDGAR filing system will be deemed to satisfy the
foregoing delivery requirements. All such reports will be prepared in all material respects in accordance with all of the
rules and regulations applicable to such reports.
If the Company has designated any of its Subsidiaries as Unrestricted Subsidiaries, then, to the extent material,
the quarterly and annual financial information required by the preceding paragraph will include a reasonably detailed
presentation, either on the face of the financial statements or in the footnotes thereto, and in Management's
Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the financial condition and results of
operations of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries separate from the financial condition and results of
operations of the Unrestricted Subsidiaries.
Any and all Defaults or Events of Default arising from a failure to furnish or file in a timely manner a report or
other information required by this covenant shall be deemed cured (and the Company shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this covenant) upon furnishing or filing such report or other information as contemplated by this
covenant (but without regard to the date on which such report or other information is so furnished or filed); provided,
that such cure shall not otherwise affect the rights of the Holders or the trustee under "—Events of Default and
Remedies" if the principal, premium, if any, and interest have been accelerated in accordance with the terms of the
indenture and such acceleration has not been rescinded or cancelled prior to such cure.
In addition, for so long as any notes remain outstanding, the Company and the Guarantors will furnish to the
Holders and Beneficial Owners of the notes and to securities analysts and prospective investors in the notes, upon
their request, the information required to be delivered pursuant to Rule 144A(d)(4) under the Securities Act.
Covenant Termination
If at any time (a) the notes are rated Baa3 or better by Moody's and BBB- or better by S&P (or, if either such
entity ceases to rate the notes for reasons outside of the control of the Company, the equivalent investment grade
credit rating from any other "nationally recognized statistical rating organization" within the meaning of Section 3(a)
(62) of the Exchange Act selected by the Company as a replacement agency), (b) no Default has occurred and is
continuing under the indenture and (c) the Issuers have delivered to the trustee an officers' certificate certifying to the
foregoing provisions of this sentence, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries will no longer be subject to the
provisions of the indenture described above under the caption "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales"
and the following provisions of the indenture described above under the caption "—Certain Covenants:"
•
"—Restricted Payments;"
48
Table of Contents
"—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock;"
"—Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries;"
"—Transactions with Affiliates;"
"—Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries;" and
•
•
•
•
•
"—Business Activities."
However, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries will remain subject to the provisions of the indenture
described above under the caption "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control," and the following
provisions of the indenture described above under the caption "—Certain Covenants":
"—Liens;"
"—Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets" (other than the financial tests set forth in clause (4) of such
covenant);"
"—Additional Subsidiary Guarantees;"
"—Reports;" and
•
•
•
•
•
the covenant respecting payments for consent described below in the last paragraph under the caption
"—Amendment, Supplement and Waiver."
There can be no assurance that the notes will ever achieve an investment grade rating; however, upon its
occurrence, the covenants listed in the first paragraph of this covenant will terminate and will not be subject to
reinstatement. Consequently, once the conditions of the first paragraph of this covenant have been satisfied, the
notes will be entitled to substantially reduced covenant protection.
Events of Default and Remedies
Each of the following is an Event of Default:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
default for 30 days in the payment when due of interest on the notes;
default in payment when due of the principal of, or premium, if any, on the notes;
failure by the Company to comply with the provisions described under the captions "—Repurchase at
the Option of Holders—Asset Sales," "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control" or
"—Certain Covenants—Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets;"
failure by the Company for 180 days after notice to comply with the provisions described under "—
Certain Covenants—Reports;"
failure by the Company for 60 days after notice to comply with any of its other agreements in the
indenture;
(6)
default under any mortgage, indenture or instrument under which there may be issued or by which there
may be secured or evidenced any Indebtedness for money borrowed by the Company or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries (or the payment of which is guaranteed by the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries), whether such Indebtedness or guarantee now exists, or is created after the date of the
indenture, if that default:
is caused by a failure to pay principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on such Indebtedness
prior to the expiration of the grace period provided in such Indebtedness (a "Payment Default"); or
49
(a)
Table of Contents
(b)
results in the acceleration of such Indebtedness prior to its Stated Maturity,
and, in each case, the principal amount of any such Indebtedness, together with the principal amount of
any other such Indebtedness under which there has been a Payment Default or the maturity of which
has been so accelerated, aggregates $15.0 million or more; provided, however, that if, prior to any
acceleration of the notes, (i) any such Payment Default is cured or waived, (ii) any such acceleration is
rescinded, or (iii) such Indebtedness is repaid during the 60-day period commencing upon the end of any
applicable grace period for such Payment Default or the occurrence of such acceleration, as the case
may be, such Event of Default (but not any acceleration of the notes) caused by such Payment Default
or acceleration shall be automatically rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any
judgment or decree;
failure by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to pay final judgments aggregating in
excess of $15.0 million (to the extent not covered by insurance by a reputable and creditworthy insurer
as to which the insurer has not disclaimed coverage), which judgments are not paid, discharged or
stayed for a period of 60 days;
except as permitted by the indenture, any Subsidiary Guarantee shall be held in any judicial proceeding
to be unenforceable or invalid or shall cease for any reason to be in full force and effect or any
Guarantor, or any Person acting on behalf of any Guarantor, shall deny or disaffirm its obligations under
its Subsidiary Guarantee; and
(7)
(8)
(9)
certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization described in the indenture with respect to
Finance Corp., the Company or any of the Company's Restricted Subsidiaries that is a Significant
Subsidiary or any group of its Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken as a whole, would constitute a
Significant Subsidiary of the Company.
In the case of an Event of Default arising from certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization, with
respect to Finance Corp., the Company, any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that is a Significant Subsidiary or
any group of its Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a Significant Subsidiary of the
Company, all outstanding notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice. If any other
Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the then
outstanding notes may declare all the notes to be due and payable immediately.
Holders may not enforce the indenture or the notes except as provided in the indenture. Subject to certain
limitations, Holders of a majority in principal amount of the then outstanding notes may direct the trustee in its
exercise of any trust or power. The trustee may withhold from the Holders notice of any continuing Default or Event of
Default if it determines that withholding notice is in their interest, except a Default or Event of Default relating to the
payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, the notes.
The Holders of a majority in principal amount of the notes then outstanding by notice to the trustee may on
behalf of the Holders of all of the notes rescind an acceleration or waive any existing Default or Event of Default and
its consequences under the indenture, if the rescission would not conflict with any judgment or decree, except a
continuing Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on, the notes.
The Issuers will deliver to the trustee annually an officers' certificate regarding compliance with the indenture.
Upon any officer of the General Partner or Finance Corp. becoming aware of any Default or Event of Default, the
Issuers are required to deliver to the trustee a statement specifying such Default or Event of Default.
Table of Contents
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Unitholders
50
No director, officer, partner, employee, incorporator, manager or unitholder or other owner of Capital Stock of the
Issuers or any Guarantor, as such, will have any liability for any obligations of the Issuers or any Guarantor under the
notes, the indenture or the Subsidiary Guarantees, or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, such
obligations or their creation. Each Holder of notes by accepting a note waives and releases all such liability. The
waiver and release are part of the consideration for issuance of the notes. The waiver may not be effective to waive
liabilities under the federal securities laws.
Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
The Issuers may, at their option and at any time, elect to have all of their obligations discharged with respect to
the outstanding notes and all obligations of the Guarantors discharged with respect to their Subsidiary Guarantees
("Legal Defeasance"), except for:
the rights of Holders of outstanding notes to receive payments in respect of the principal of, and interest
or premium, if any, on, such notes when such payments are due from the trust referred to below;
the Issuers' obligations with respect to the notes concerning issuing temporary notes, registration of
notes, mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen notes and the maintenance of an office or agency for
payment and money for security payments held in trust;
the rights, powers, trusts, duties and immunities of the trustee, and the Issuers' obligations in
connection therewith; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the Legal Defeasance provisions of the indenture.
In addition, the Issuers may, at their option and at any time, elect to have their obligations released with respect
to certain covenants that are described in the indenture ("Covenant Defeasance") and thereafter any omission to
comply with those covenants will not constitute a Default or Event of Default with respect to the notes. In the event
Covenant Defeasance occurs, certain events (not including non-payment, bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization
events) described under "—Events of Default and Remedies" will no longer constitute an Event of Default with respect
to the notes. If the Issuers exercise either their Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance option, each Guarantor
will be released and relieved of any obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee and any security for the notes (other
than the trust) will be released.
In order to exercise either Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance:
(1)
the Issuers must irrevocably deposit with the trustee, in trust, for the benefit of the Holders, cash in
U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination of cash in U.S. dollars and non-
callable Government Securities, in amounts as will be sufficient, in the opinion of a nationally
recognized firm of independent public accountants, to pay the principal of, and interest and premium, if
any, on, the outstanding notes on the date of fixed maturity or on the applicable redemption date, as the
case may be, and the Issuers must specify whether the notes are being defeased to the date of fixed
maturity or to a particular redemption date;
(2)
in the case of Legal Defeasance, the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel
reasonably acceptable to the trustee confirming that:
the Issuers have received from, or there has been published by, the Internal Revenue Service a
ruling; or
51
(a)
Table of Contents
(b)
since the date of the indenture, there has been a change in the applicable federal income tax law,
in either case to the effect that, and based thereon such opinion of counsel will confirm that, the Holders
of the outstanding notes will not recognize income, gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a
result of such Legal Defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same amounts, in the
same manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such Legal Defeasance had not
occurred;
in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an opinion of counsel
reasonably acceptable to the trustee confirming that the Holders of the outstanding notes will not
recognize income, gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such Covenant
Defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at
the same times as would have been the case if such Covenant Defeasance had not occurred;
no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of such deposit (other than a
Default or Event of Default resulting from the borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit (and any
similar concurrent deposit relating to other Indebtedness), and the granting of Liens to secure such
borrowings);
such Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance will not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a
default under, any material agreement or instrument (other than the indenture) to which the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is bound;
the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an officers' certificate stating that the deposit was not made by
the Issuers with the intent of preferring the Holders of notes over the other creditors of the Issuers with
the intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding creditors of the Issuers or others; and
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an officers' certificate and an opinion of counsel, each stating
that all conditions precedent relating to the Legal Defeasance or the Covenant Defeasance have been
complied with.
Amendment, Supplement and Waiver
Except as provided in the next two succeeding paragraphs, the indenture or the notes may be amended or
supplemented with the consent of the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the then outstanding notes
(including, without limitation, consents obtained in connection with a purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for,
notes), and any existing Default or Event of Default (other than a Default or Event of Default in the payment of the
principal of, or premium, if any, or interest on, the notes, except a payment default resulting from an acceleration that
has been rescinded) or compliance with any provision of the indenture or the notes may be waived with the consent of
the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the then outstanding notes (including, without limitation, consents
obtained in connection with a purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for, notes).
Without the consent of each Holder affected, an amendment, supplement or waiver may not (with respect to any
notes held by a non-consenting Holder):
(1)
(2)
reduce the principal amount of notes whose Holders must consent to an amendment, supplement or
waiver;
reduce the principal of or change the fixed maturity of any note or alter or waive the provisions with
respect to the redemption or repurchase of the notes (other than provisions
52
Table of Contents
relating to the covenants described above under the caption "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders");
reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest on any note;
waive a Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on the
notes (except a rescission of acceleration of the notes by the Holders of a majority in principal amount
of the notes and a waiver of the payment default that resulted from such acceleration);
make any note payable in currency other than that stated in the notes;
make any change in the provisions of the indenture relating to waivers of past Defaults or the rights of
Holders of notes to receive payments of principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on the notes (other
than as permitted in clause (7) below);
waive a redemption or repurchase payment with respect to any note (other than a payment required by
one of the covenants described above under the caption "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders");
release any Guarantor from any of its obligations under its Subsidiary Guarantee or the indenture,
except in accordance with the terms of the indenture; or
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
make any change in the preceding amendment, supplement and waiver provisions.
Notwithstanding the preceding, without the consent of any Holder of notes, the Issuers, the Guarantors and the
trustee may amend or supplement the indenture or the notes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
to provide for uncertificated notes in addition to or in place of certificated notes;
to provide for the assumption of an Issuer's or Guarantor's obligations to Holders of notes or a
Subsidiary Guarantee in the case of a merger or consolidation or sale of all or substantially all of such
Issuer's or Guarantor's properties or assets;
to make any change that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the Holders of notes or that
does not adversely affect the legal rights under the indenture of any such Holder, provided that any
change to conform the indenture to the offering memorandum for the originally issued 6.625% Senior
Notes due 2021 will not be deemed to adversely affect such legal rights;
to secure the notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees pursuant to the requirements of the covenant
described above under the subheading "—Certain Covenants—Liens;"
to provide for the issuance of additional notes in accordance with the limitations set forth in the
indenture;
to add any additional Guarantor or to evidence the release of any Guarantor from its Subsidiary
Guarantee, in each case as provided in the indenture;
to comply with requirements of the Commission in order to effect or maintain the qualification of the
indenture under the Trust Indenture Act; or
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
to evidence or provide for the acceptance of appointment under the indenture of a successor trustee.
The consent of the Holders is not necessary under the indenture to approve the particular form of any proposed
amendment, supplement or waiver. It is sufficient if such consent approves the substance of the proposed
amendment, supplement or waiver. After an amendment, supplement or waiver under
53
Table of Contents
the indenture requiring the approval of the Holders becomes effective, the Company will send to the Holders a notice
briefly describing the amendment, supplement or waiver. However, the failure to give such notice, or any defect in the
notice, will not impair or affect the validity of the amendment, supplement or waiver.
Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries shall, directly or indirectly, pay or cause to be paid any
consideration, whether by way of interest, fee or otherwise, to any Beneficial Owner or Holder of any notes for or as
an inducement to any consent to any waiver, supplement or amendment of any terms or provisions of the indenture or
the notes, unless such consideration is offered to be paid or agreed to be paid to all Beneficial Owners and Holders
which so consent in the time frame set forth in solicitation documents relating to such consent.
Satisfaction and Discharge
The indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all notes issued thereunder (except
as to surviving rights of registration of transfer or exchange of the notes and as otherwise specified in the indenture),
when:
(1)
either:
(a)
(b)
all notes that have been authenticated, except lost, stolen or destroyed notes that have been
replaced or paid and notes for whose payment money has been deposited in trust and thereafter
repaid to the Issuers, have been delivered to the trustee for cancellation; or
all notes that have not been delivered to the trustee for cancellation have become due and
payable or will become due and payable within one year by reason of the mailing of a notice of
redemption or otherwise and the Issuers or any Guarantor has irrevocably deposited or caused to
be deposited with the trustee as trust funds in trust solely for the benefit of the Holders, cash in
U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination of cash in U.S. dollars and
non-callable Government Securities, in amounts as will be sufficient without consideration of any
reinvestment of interest, to pay and discharge the entire indebtedness on the notes not delivered
to the trustee for cancellation for principal, premium, if any, and accrued interest to the date of
fixed maturity or redemption;
in respect of clause (1)(b), no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of
the deposit or will occur as a result of the deposit (other than a Default or Event of Default resulting from
the borrowing of funds to be applied to such deposit and any similar deposit relating to other
Indebtedness and, in each case, the granting of Liens to secure such borrowings) and the deposit will
not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a default under, any material agreement or instrument
(other than the indenture) to which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is bound;
the Issuers or any Guarantor has paid or caused to be paid all sums payable by it under the indenture;
and
(2)
(3)
(4)
the Issuers have delivered irrevocable instructions to the trustee to apply the deposited money toward
the payment of the notes at fixed maturity or on the redemption date, as the case may be.
In addition, the Issuers must deliver an officers' certificate and an opinion of counsel to the trustee stating that
all conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge have been satisfied.
54
Table of Contents
Concerning the Trustee
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association will serve as trustee under the indenture. Such bank is a lender under
the Credit Agreement.
If the trustee becomes a creditor of an Issuer or any Guarantor, the indenture will limit its right to obtain payment
of claims in certain cases, or to realize on certain property received in respect of any such claim as security or
otherwise. The trustee will be permitted to engage in other transactions; however, if it acquires any conflicting interest
(as defined in the Trust Indenture Act) after a Default has occurred and is continuing, it must eliminate such conflict
within 90 days, apply to the Commission for permission to continue as trustee (if the indenture has been qualified
under the Trust Indenture Act) or resign.
The Holders of a majority in principal amount of the then outstanding notes will have the right to direct the time,
method and place of conducting any proceeding for exercising any remedy available to the trustee, subject to certain
exceptions. If an Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the trustee will be required, in the exercise of its powers,
to use the degree of care of a prudent man in the conduct of his own affairs. Subject to such provisions, the trustee
will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under the indenture at the request of any Holder of
notes, unless such Holder has offered to the trustee security or indemnity satisfactory to it against any loss, liability
or expense.
Governing Law
The indenture, the notes and the Subsidiary Guarantees will be governed by, and construed in accordance with,
the laws of the State of New York.
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form
The new notes will be issued initially only in the form of one or more global notes (collectively, the "Global
Notes"). The Global Notes will be deposited upon issuance with the trustee as custodian for The Depository Trust
Company ("DTC"), in New York, New York, and registered in the name of DTC's nominee, Cede & Co., in each case
for credit to an account of a direct or indirect participant in DTC as described below. Beneficial interests in the Global
Notes may be held through the Euroclear System ("Euroclear") and Clearstream Banking, S.A. ("Clearstream") (as
indirect participants in DTC).
The Global Notes may be transferred, in whole but not in part, only to another nominee of DTC or to a successor
of DTC or its nominee. Beneficial interests in the Global Notes may not be exchanged for notes in registered,
certificated form ("Certificated Notes") except in the limited circumstances described below. See "—Exchange of
Global Notes for Certificated Notes."
In addition, transfers of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will be subject to the applicable rules and
procedures of DTC and its direct or indirect participants (including, if applicable, those of Euroclear and Clearstream),
which may change from time to time.
Depository Procedures
The following description of the operations and procedures of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream are provided
solely as a matter of convenience. These operations and procedures are solely within the control of the respective
settlement systems and are subject to changes by them. We take no responsibility for these operations and
procedures and urge investors to contact the system or their participants directly to discuss these matters.
DTC has advised us that DTC is a limited-purpose trust company created to hold securities for its participating
organizations (collectively, the "Participants") and to facilitate the clearance and
55
Table of Contents
settlement of transactions in those securities between Participants through electronic book-entry changes in accounts
of its Participants. The Participants include securities brokers and dealers (including the initial purchasers), banks,
trust companies, clearing corporations and certain other organizations. Access to DTC's system is also available to
other entities such as banks, brokers, dealers and trust companies that clear through or maintain a custodial
relationship with a Participant, either directly or indirectly (collectively, the "Indirect Participants"). Persons who are
not Participants may beneficially own securities held by or on behalf of DTC only through the Participants or the
Indirect Participants. The ownership interests in, and transfers of ownership interests in, each security held by or on
behalf of DTC are recorded on the records of the Participants and Indirect Participants.
DTC has also advised us that, pursuant to procedures established by it:
upon deposit of the Global Notes, DTC will credit the accounts of the Participants designated by the
initial purchasers with portions of the principal amount of the Global Notes; and
(1)
(2)
ownership of these interests in the Global Notes will be shown on, and the transfer of ownership of these
interests will be effected only through, records maintained by DTC (with respect to the Participants) or
by the Participants and the Indirect Participants (with respect to other owners of beneficial interests in
the Global Notes).
Investors in the Global Notes who are Participants in DTC's system may hold their interests therein directly
through DTC. Investors in the Global Notes who are not Participants may hold their interests therein indirectly through
organizations (including Euroclear and Clearstream) which are Participants in such system. Euroclear and
Clearstream may hold interests in the Global Notes on behalf of their participants through customers' securities
accounts in their respective names on the books of their respective depositaries, which are Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V,
as operator of Euroclear, and Citibank, N.A., as operator of Clearstream. All interests in a Global Note, including those
held through Euroclear or Clearstream, may be subject to the procedures and requirements of DTC. Those interests
held through Euroclear or Clearstream may also be subject to the procedures and requirements of such systems.
The laws of some jurisdictions may require that certain Persons take physical delivery in definitive form of
securities that they own. Consequently, the ability to transfer beneficial interests in a Global Note to such Persons will
be limited to that extent. Because DTC can act only on behalf of Participants, which in turn act on behalf of the
Indirect Participants, the ability of a Person having beneficial interests in a Global Note to pledge such interests to
Persons that do not participate in the DTC system, or otherwise take actions in respect of such interests, may be
affected by the lack of a physical certificate evidencing such interests.
Except as described below, owners of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will not have notes registered in
their names, will not receive physical delivery of Certificated Notes and will not be considered the registered
owners or "Holders" thereof under the indenture for any purpose.
Payments in respect of the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on, a Global Note registered in the
name of DTC or its nominee will be payable to DTC in its capacity as the registered holder under the indenture. Under
the terms of the indenture, the Issuers, the Guarantors and the trustee will treat the Persons in whose names the
notes, including the Global Notes, are registered as the owners of the notes for the purpose of receiving payments
and for all other purposes. Consequently, neither the Issuers, the Guarantors, the trustee nor any agent of an Issuer,
a Guarantor or the trustee has or will have any responsibility or liability for:
(1)
any aspect of DTC's records or any Participant's or Indirect Participant's records relating to or payments
made on account of beneficial ownership interests in the Global Notes or for maintaining, supervising or
reviewing any of DTC's records or any Participant's or Indirect Participant's records relating to the
beneficial ownership interests in the Global Notes; or
56
Table of Contents
(2)
any other matter relating to the actions and practices of DTC or any of its Participants or Indirect
Participants.
DTC has advised us that its current practice, at the due date of any payment in respect of securities such as
the notes, is to credit the accounts of the relevant Participants with the payment on the payment date unless DTC
has reason to believe that it will not receive payment on such payment date. Each relevant Participant is credited with
an amount proportionate to its beneficial ownership of an interest in the principal amount of the relevant security as
shown on the records of DTC. Payments by the Participants and the Indirect Participants to the beneficial owners of
notes will be governed by standing instructions and customary practices and will be the responsibility of the
Participants or the Indirect Participants and will not be the responsibility of DTC, the trustee, the Guarantors or the
Issuers. Neither the Issuers, the Guarantors nor the trustee will be liable for any delay by DTC or any of its
Participants in identifying the beneficial owners of the notes, and the Issuers, the Guarantors and the trustee may
conclusively rely on and will be protected in relying on instructions from DTC or its nominee for all purposes.
Transfers between Participants in DTC will be effected in accordance with DTC's procedures, and will be settled
in same-day funds, and transfers between participants in Euroclear and Clearstream will be effected in accordance
with their respective rules and operating procedures.
Cross-market transfers between the Participants in DTC, on the one hand, and Euroclear or Clearstream
participants, on the other hand, will be effected through DTC in accordance with DTC's rules on behalf of Euroclear or
Clearstream, as the case may be, by their respective depositaries; however, such cross-market transactions will
require delivery of instructions to Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, by the counterparty in such system
in accordance with the rules and procedures and within the established deadlines (Brussels time) of such system.
Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, will, if the transaction meets its settlement requirements, deliver
instructions to its depositary to take action to effect final settlement on its behalf by delivering or receiving interests in
the relevant Global Note in DTC, and making or receiving payment in accordance with normal procedures for same-
day funds settlement applicable to DTC. Euroclear participants and Clearstream participants may not deliver
instructions directly to the depositaries for Euroclear or Clearstream.
DTC has advised us that it will take any action permitted to be taken by a Holder of notes only at the direction of
one or more Participants to whose account DTC has credited the interests in the Global Notes and only in respect of
such portion of the aggregate principal amount of the notes as to which such Participant or Participants has or have
given such direction. However, if there is an Event of Default under the notes, DTC reserves the right to exchange the
Global Notes for Certificated Notes, and to distribute such notes to its Participants.
Although DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream have agreed to the foregoing procedures to facilitate transfers of
interests in the Global Notes among participants in DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream, they are under no obligation to
perform or to continue to perform such procedures, and may discontinue such procedures at any time. None of the
Issuers, the Guarantors, the trustee or any of their respective agents will have any responsibility for the performance
by DTC, Euroclear or Clearstream or their respective participants or indirect participants of their respective obligations
under the rules and procedures governing their operations.
Table of Contents
Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes
57
A Global Note is exchangeable for Certificated Notes in minimum denominations of $2,000 and in integral
multiples of $1,000 in excess of $2,000, if:
(1)
DTC (a) notifies the Issuers that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary for the Global Note or
(b) has ceased to be a clearing agency registered under the Exchange Act and in either event the
Issuers fail to appoint a successor depositary within 90 days;
the Issuers, at their option but subject to DTC's requirements, notify the trustee in writing that they elect
to cause the issuance of the Certificated Notes; or
(2)
(3)
there has occurred and is continuing an Event of Default and DTC notifies the trustee of its decision to
exchange the Global Note for Certificated Notes.
Beneficial interests in a Global Note may also be exchanged for Certificated Notes in the other limited
circumstances permitted by the indenture. In all cases, Certificated Notes delivered in exchange for any Global Note
or beneficial interests in Global Notes will be registered in the names, and issued in any approved denominations,
requested by or on behalf of DTC (in accordance with its customary procedures) and will bear the restrictive legend
referred to in "Notice to Investors," unless that legend is not required by the indenture.
Neither the Issuer, the Guarantors nor the trustee will be liable for any delay by DTC, its nominee or any
Participant or Indirect Participant in identifying the beneficial owners of interests in Global Notes, and the Issuers, the
Guarantors and the trustee may conclusively rely on, and will be protected in relying on, instructions from DTC or its
nominee for all purposes, including with respect to the registration and delivery, and the respective principal amounts,
of the Certificated Notes to be issued.
Exchange of Certificated Notes for Global Notes
Certificated Notes may not be exchanged for beneficial interests in any Global Note, except in the limited
circumstances provided in the indenture.
Same-Day Settlement and Payment
The Issuers will make payments in respect of the notes represented by the Global Notes (including principal,
premium, if any, and interest) by wire transfer of immediately available funds to the accounts specified by DTC or its
nominee. The Issuers will make all payments of principal, interest and premium, if any, with respect to Certificated
Notes in the manner described above under "—Methods of Receiving Payments on the Notes." The notes represented
by the Global Notes are expected to be eligible to trade in DTC's Same-Day Funds Settlement System, and any
permitted secondary market trading activity in such notes will, therefore, be required by DTC to be settled in
immediately available funds. We expect that secondary trading in any Certificated Notes will also be settled in
immediately available funds.
Because of time zone differences, the securities account of a Euroclear or Clearstream participant purchasing
an interest in a Global Note from a Participant in DTC will be credited, and any such crediting will be reported to the
relevant Euroclear or Clearstream participant, during the securities settlement processing day (which must be a
business day for Euroclear and Clearstream) immediately following the settlement date of DTC. DTC has advised us
that cash received in Euroclear or Clearstream as a result of sales of interests in a Global Note by or through a
Euroclear or Clearstream participant to a Participant in DTC will be received with value on the settlement date of DTC
but will be available in the relevant Euroclear or Clearstream cash account only as of the business day for Euroclear
or Clearstream following DTC's settlement date.
58
Table of Contents
Certain Definitions
Set forth below are certain defined terms used in the indenture. Reference is made to the indenture for a full
disclosure of all such terms, as well as any other capitalized terms used herein for which no definition is provided.
"Acquired Debt" means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1)
Indebtedness of any other Person existing at the time such other Person was merged with or into or
became a Subsidiary of such specified Person, whether or not such Indebtedness is incurred in
connection with, or in contemplation of, such other Person merging with or into, or becoming a
Subsidiary of, such specified Person, but excluding Indebtedness which is extinguished, retired or
repaid in connection with such Person merging with or into or becoming a Subsidiary of such specified
Person; and
(2)
Indebtedness secured by a Lien encumbering any asset acquired by such specified Person.
"Additional Assets" means:
any assets used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business, other than Indebtedness or Capital Stock;
the Capital Stock of a Person that becomes a Restricted Subsidiary as a result of the acquisition of
such Capital Stock by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; or
(1)
(2)
(3)
Capital Stock constituting a minority interest in any Person that at such time is a Restricted Subsidiary;
provided, however, that any such Restricted Subsidiary described in clause (2) or (3) is primarily engaged in the Oil
and Gas Business.
"Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets" means (without duplication), as of the date of determination,
(1)   the sum of:
(a)   the discounted future net revenues from proved oil and natural gas reserves of the Company
and its Restricted Subsidiaries calculated in accordance with SEC guidelines before any state or federal
income taxes, as estimated in a reserve report prepared as of the end of the Company's most recently
completed fiscal year, as increased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future
net revenues from:
(i)  estimated proved oil and natural gas reserves of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries acquired since the date of such year-end reserve report; and
(ii)  estimated proved oil and natural gas reserves of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries attributable to extensions, discoveries and other additions and upward revisions of
estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves (including previously estimated development
costs incurred during the period and the accretion of discount since the prior period end) since
the date of such year-end reserve report due to exploration, development or exploitation,
production or other activities that would, in accordance with standard industry practice, cause
such revisions;
and decreased by, as of the date of determination, the estimated discounted future net revenue
attributable to:
(iii)  estimated proved oil and natural gas reserves of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries reflected in such reserve report produced or disposed of since the date of such year-
end reserve report; and
59
Table of Contents
(iv)  reductions in estimated proved oil and natural gas reserves of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries reflected in such reserve report attributable to downward revisions of
estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves since such year-end due to changes in
geological conditions or other factors that would, in accordance with standard industry practice,
cause such revisions;
in the case of the preceding clauses (i) through (iv), calculated on a pre-tax basis in accordance with
SEC guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in the Company's year-end reserve report) and estimated by
the Company's petroleum engineers or any independent petroleum engineers engaged by the Company
for that purpose;
(b)   the capitalized costs that are attributable to oil and natural gas properties of the Company and
its Restricted Subsidiaries to which no proved oil and natural gas reserves are attributable, based on the
Company's books and records as of a date no earlier than the last day of the Company's most recent
quarterly or annual period for which internal financial statements are available;
(c)   the Consolidated Net Working Capital of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries as of a
date no earlier than the last day of the Company's most recent quarterly or annual period for which
internal financial statements are available; and
(d)   the greater of:
(i)  the net book value; and
(ii)  the appraised value, as estimated by independent appraisers, of other tangible assets
(including Investments in unconsolidated Subsidiaries);
in each case, of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries as of a date no earlier than the last
day of the date of the Company's most recent quarterly or annual period for which internal
financial statements are available; provided that if no such appraisal has been performed, the
Company shall not be required to obtain such an appraisal and only clause (d)(i) of this definition
shall apply;
minus, to the extent not otherwise taken into account in the immediately preceding clause (1);
(2)   the sum of
(a)   minority interests;
(b)   any net natural gas balancing liabilities of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries as of
the last day of the Company's most recent annual or quarterly period for which internal financial
statements are available;
(c)   to the extent included in clause (1)(a) above, the discounted future net revenues, calculated in
accordance with SEC guidelines (utilizing the prices utilized in the Company's year-end reserve report),
attributable to reserves that are required to be delivered to third parties to fully satisfy the obligations of
the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to Volumetric Production Payments on the
schedules specified with respect thereto, and
(d)   the discounted future net revenues, calculated in accordance with SEC guidelines, attributable
to reserves subject to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments that, based on the estimates of
production and price assumptions included in determining the discounted future net revenues specified
in clause (1)(a) above, would be necessary to fully satisfy the payment obligations of the Company and
its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments on the schedules
specified with respect thereto.
60
Table of Contents
"Affiliate" of any specified Person means any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or controlled by or
under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For purposes of this definition, "control," as used
with respect to any Person, means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction
of the management or policies of such Person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by agreement or
otherwise; provided, however, that beneficial ownership of 10% or more of the Voting Stock of a Person will be
deemed to be control by the other Person; and further, that any third Person which also beneficially owns 10% or
more of the Voting Stock of a specified Person shall not be deemed to be an Affiliate of either the specified Person or
the other Person merely because of such common ownership in such specified Person. For purposes of this
definition, the terms "controlling," "controlled by" and "under common control with" have correlative meanings.
"Asset Sale" means:
(1)
the sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of any properties or assets (including by way of a
Production Payment or a sale and leaseback transaction); provided, however, that the disposition of all
or substantially all of the properties or assets of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries taken as a
whole will be governed by the provisions of the indenture described above under the caption "—
Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control" and/or the provisions described above under
the caption "—Certain Covenants—Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets" and not by the provisions
of the Asset Sales covenant; and
(2)
the issuance of Equity Interests in any of the Company's Restricted Subsidiaries or the sale of Equity
Interests in any of its Restricted Subsidiaries:
Notwithstanding the preceding, the following items will not be deemed to be Asset Sales:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
any single transaction or series of related transactions that involves properties or assets having a fair
market value of less than $10.0 million;
a transfer of properties or assets between or among any of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries;
an issuance or sale of Equity Interests by a Restricted Subsidiary to the Company or to another
Restricted Subsidiary;
the sale, lease or other disposition of equipment, inventory, products, accounts receivable or other
properties or assets in the ordinary course of business;
the sale or other disposition of cash or Cash Equivalents, Hedging Contracts or other financial
instruments in the ordinary course of business;
a disposition of properties or assets that constitutes (or results in by virtue of the consideration received
for such disposition) either a Restricted Payment that is permitted by the covenant described above
under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments" or a Permitted Investment;
a disposition of Hydrocarbons or mineral products inventory in the ordinary course of business;
the sale or transfer (whether or not in the ordinary course of business) of crude oil and natural gas
properties or direct or indirect interests in real property; provided that at the time of such a sale or
transfer such properties do not have associated with them any proved reserves;
61
Table of Contents
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
the farm-out, lease or sublease of developed or undeveloped crude oil or natural gas properties owned or
held by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company in exchange for crude oil and natural
gas properties owned or held by another Person;
the creation or perfection of a Lien that is not prohibited by the covenant described above under the
caption "—Certain Covenants—Liens;"
dispositions in connection with Permitted Liens;
surrender or waiver of contract rights or the settlement, release or surrender of contract, tort or other
claims of any kind;
the grant in the ordinary course of business of any non- exclusive license of patents, trademarks,
registrations therefor and other similar intellectual property;
an Asset Swap; and
(13)
(14)
(15)
any Production Payments and Reserve Sales; provided that any such Production Payments and
Reserve Sales, other than incentive compensation programs on terms that are reasonably customary in
the Oil and Gas Business for geologists, geophysicists and other providers of technical services to the
Company or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, shall have been created, incurred, issued,
assumed or guaranteed in connection with the financing of, and within 60 days after the acquisition of,
the property that is subject thereto.
"Asset Swap" means any substantially contemporaneous (and in any event occurring within 180 days of each
other) purchase and sale or exchange of any assets or properties used or useful in the Oil and Gas Business between
the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries and another Person; provided that any cash received must be
applied in accordance with the covenant described above under the caption "—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—
Asset Sales" as if the Asset Swap were an Asset Sale.
"Attributable Debt" in respect of a sale and leaseback transaction means, at the time of determination, the
present value of the obligation of the lessee for net rental payments during the remaining term of the lease included in
such sale and leaseback transaction including any period for which such lease has been extended or may, at the
option of the lessor, be extended. Such present value shall be calculated using a discount rate equal to the rate of
interest implicit in such transaction, determined in accordance with GAAP As used in the preceding sentence, the
"net rental payments" under any lease for any such period shall mean the sum of rental and other payments required
to be paid with respect to such period by the lessee thereunder, excluding any amounts required to be paid by such
lessee on account of maintenance and repairs, insurance, taxes, assessments, water rates or similar charges. In the
case of any lease that is terminable by the lessee upon payment of penalty, such net rental payment shall also
include the amount of such penalty, but no rent shall be considered as required to be paid under such lease
subsequent to the first date upon which it may be so terminated.
"Available Cash" has the meaning assigned to such term in the Partnership Agreement, as in effect on the date
of the indenture.
"Beneficial Owner" has the meaning assigned to such term in Rule 13d-3 and Rule 13d-5 under the Exchange
Act, except that in calculating the beneficial ownership of any particular "person" (as that term is used in
Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act), such "person" will be deemed to have beneficial ownership of all securities that
such "person" has the right to acquire by conversion or exercise of other securities, whether such right is currently
exercisable or is exercisable only upon the occurrence of a subsequent condition. The terms "Beneficially Owns" and
"Beneficially Owned" have correlative meanings.
62
Table of Contents
"Board of Directors" means:
with respect to Finance Corp., its board of directors;
with respect to the Company, the board of directors of the General Partner or any authorized committee
thereof; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
with respect to any other Person, the board or committee of such Person serving a similar function.
"Board Resolution" means a copy of a resolution certified by the Secretary or an Assistant Secretary of the
applicable Person to have been duly adopted by the Board of Directors of such Person and to be in full force and
effect on the date of such certification, and delivered to the trustee.
"Business Day" means each day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banking institutions in
New York, New York or another place of payment are authorized or required by law to close.
"Capital Lease Obligation" means, at the time any determination is to be made, the amount of the liability in
respect of a capital lease that would at that time be required to be capitalized on a balance sheet in accordance with
GAAP.
"Capital Stock" means:
in the case of a corporation, corporate stock;
in the case of an association or business entity, any and all shares, interests, participations, rights or
other equivalents (however designated) of corporate stock;
in the case of a partnership or limited liability company, partnership interests (whether general or limited)
or membership interests; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
any other interest or participation that confers on a Person the right to receive a share of the profits and
losses of, or distributions of assets of, the issuing Person.
"Cash Equivalents" means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
United States dollars;
securities issued or directly and fully guaranteed or insured by the United States government or any
agency or instrumentality of the United States government (provided that the full faith and credit of the
United States is pledged in support of those securities) having maturities of not more than six months
from the date of acquisition;
marketable general obligations issued by any state of the United States of America or any political
subdivision of any such state or any public instrumentality thereof maturing within one year from the
date of acquisition thereof and, at the time of acquisition thereof, having a credit rating of "A" or better
from either S&P or Moody's;
certificates of deposit, demand deposits and eurodollar time deposits with maturities of one year or less
from the date of acquisition, bankers' acceptances with maturities not exceeding one year and overnight
bank deposits, in each case, with any lender party to the Credit Agreement or with any domestic
commercial bank having capital and surplus in excess of $500.0 million and a Thomson Bank Watch
Rating of "B" or better;
repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of the types
described in clauses (2), (3) and (4) above entered into with any financial institution meeting the
qualifications specified in clause (4) above;
63
Table of Contents
commercial paper having one of the two highest ratings obtainable from Moody's or S&P and in each
case maturing within six months after the date of acquisition; and
(6)
(7)
money market funds at least 95% of the assets of which constitute Cash Equivalents of the kinds
described in clauses (1) through (6) of this definition.
"Change of Control" means the occurrence of any of the following:
the direct or indirect sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or other disposition (other than by way of merger
or consolidation), in one or a series of related transactions, of all or substantially all of the properties or
assets (including Capital Stock of the Restricted Subsidiaries of the Company) of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries taken as a whole, to any "person" (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the
Exchange Act);
the adoption of a plan relating to the liquidation or dissolution of the Company or removal of the General
Partner by the limited partners of the Company;
the consummation of any transaction (including, without limitation, any merger or consolidation), the
result of which is that any "person" (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act),
excluding the Qualifying Owners, becomes the Beneficial Owner, directly or indirectly, of more than 50%
of the Voting Stock of the General Partner, measured by voting power rather than number of shares,
units or the like;
the consummation of any transaction (including, without limitation, any merger or consolidation) the
result of which is that any "person" (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act)
becomes the Beneficial Owner, directly or indirectly, of more than 50% of the Voting Stock of the
Company, measured by voting power rather than number of shares, units or the like; or
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
the first day on which a majority of the members of the Board of Directors of the General Partner are not
Continuing Directors.
Notwithstanding the preceding, a conversion of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries from a limited
partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other form of entity to a limited liability company, corporation,
limited partnership or other form of entity or an exchange of all of the outstanding Equity Interests in one form of entity
for Equity Interests in another form of entity shall not constitute a Change of Control, so long as following such
conversion or exchange the "persons" (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) who Beneficially
Owned the Capital Stock of the Company immediately prior to such transactions continue to Beneficially Own in the
aggregate more than 50% of the Voting Stock of such entity or its general partner, as applicable, or continue to
Beneficially Own sufficient Equity Interests in such entity to elect a majority of its directors, managers, trustees or
other persons serving in a similar capacity for such entity or its general partner, as applicable, and, in either case no
"person" Beneficially Owns more than 50% of the Voting Stock of such entity or its general partner, as applicable.
"Code" means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time, and any successor statute.
"Commission" or "SEC" means the Securities and Exchange Commission.
"Consolidated Cash Flow" means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, the Consolidated Net
Income of such Person for such period plus, without duplication:
(1)
an amount equal to any extraordinary expenses or loss plus any net loss realized by such Person or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in connection with an Asset Sale, to the extent such expenses or
losses were deducted in computing such Consolidated Net Income; plus
64
Table of Contents
(2)
provision for taxes based on income or profits (including state franchise taxes accounted for as income
taxes in accordance with GAAP) of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, to the
extent that such provision for taxes was deducted in computing such Consolidated Net Income; plus
Fixed Charges of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, to the extent that any
such Fixed Charge was deducted in computing such Consolidated Net Income; plus
depreciation, depletion, amortization (including amortization of intangibles but excluding amortization of
prepaid cash expenses that were paid in a prior period), impairment, non-cash equity based
compensation expense and other non-cash charges and expenses (excluding any such non-cash charge
or expense to the extent that it represents an accrual of or reserve for cash charges or expenses in any
future period or amortization of a prepaid cash charge or expense that was paid in a prior period) of such
Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, to the extent that such depreciation, depletion,
amortization, impairment and other non-cash charges or expenses that were deducted in computing
such Consolidated Net Income; plus
if such Person accounts for its oil and gas operations using successful efforts of a similar method of
accounting, consolidated exploration expense of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries; minus
non-cash items increasing such Consolidated Net Income for such period, other than the accrual of
revenue in the ordinary course of business; and minus
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
to the extent increasing such Consolidated Net Income for such period, the sum of (a) the amount of
deferred revenues that are amortized during such period and are attributable to reserves that are subject
to Volumetric Production Payments and (b) amounts recorded in accordance with GAAP as repayments
of principal and interest pursuant to Dollar-Denominated Production Payments,
in each case, on a consolidated basis and determined in accordance with GAAP.
"Consolidated Net Income" means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, the aggregate of the net
income (loss) of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, on a consolidated basis, determined in
accordance with GAAP and without any reduction in respect of dividends or distributions on preferred securities,
provided that:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
the net income (but not loss) of any Person that is not a Restricted Subsidiary of such Person or that is
accounted for by the equity method of accounting will be included, but only to the extent of the amount
of dividends or distributions paid in cash to the specified Person or a Restricted Subsidiary of the
Person;
the net income of any Restricted Subsidiary of such Person will be excluded to the extent that the
declaration or payment of dividends or similar distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary of that net
income is not at the date of determination permitted without any prior governmental approval (that has
not been obtained) or, directly or indirectly, by operation of the terms of its charter or any judgment,
decree, order, statute, rule or governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its
stockholders, partners or members;
the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles will be excluded;
any gain (loss) realized upon the sale or other disposition of any property, plant or equipment of such
Person or its consolidated Restricted Subsidiaries (including pursuant to any sale and leaseback
transaction) which is not sold or otherwise disposed of in the ordinary course of
65
Table of Contents
business and any gain (loss) realized upon the sale or other disposition of any Capital Stock of any
Person will be excluded;
to the extent deducted in the calculation of Consolidated Net Income, any non-cash or other charges
relating to any premium or penalty paid, write off of deferred financing costs or other financial
recapitalization charges in connection with redeeming or retiring any Indebtedness prior to its Stated
Maturity will be excluded;
any "ceiling limitation" on oil and gas properties or other asset impairment writedowns on oil and gas
properties under GAAP or SEC guidelines will be excluded; and
(5)
(6)
(7)
any unrealized non-cash gains or losses or charges in respect of Hedging Contracts (including those
resulting from the application of FASB ASC Topic No. 815, Derivatives and Hedging).
"Consolidated Net Working Capital" means (a) all current assets of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries
except current assets from Hedging Contracts, less (b) all current liabilities of the Company and its Restricted
Subsidiaries, except (i) current liabilities included in Indebtedness, (ii) current liabilities associated with asset
retirement obligations relating to oil and gas properties and (iii) any current liabilities from Hedging Contracts, in each
case as set forth in the consolidated financial statements of the Company prepared in accordance with GAAP
(excluding any adjustments made pursuant to FASB ASC Topic No. 815, Derivatives and Hedging).
"continuing" means, with respect to any Default or Event of Default, that such Default or Event of Default has
not been cured or waived.
"Continuing Directors" means, as of any date of determination, any member of the Board of Directors of the
General Partner who:
was a member of such Board of Directors on the date of the indenture; or
(1)
(2)
was nominated for election or elected to such Board of Directors with the approval of a majority of the
Continuing Directors who were members of such Board at the time of such nomination or election.
"Credit Agreement" means that certain Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of March 10,
2011, by and among the Company, as borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and
the other lenders from time to time party thereto, including any related notes, guarantees, collateral documents,
instruments and agreements executed in connection therewith, and in each case as amended, restated, modified,
renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced from time to time.
"Credit Facilities" means one or more debt facilities (including, without limitation, the Credit Agreement),
commercial paper facilities or indentures, in each case with banks or other institutional lenders or institutional
investors providing for revolving credit loans, term loans, receivables financing (including through the sale of
receivables to such lenders or to special purpose entities formed to borrow from such lenders against such
receivables), letters of credit or capital markets financings, in each case, as amended, restated, modified, renewed,
refunded, replaced or refinanced (including refinancing with any capital markets transaction) in whole or in part from
time to time.
"Customary Recourse Exceptions" means, with respect to any Non-Recourse Debt of an Unrestricted
Subsidiary, exclusions from the exculpation provisions with respect to such Non-Recourse Debt for the voluntary
bankruptcy of such Unrestricted Subsidiary, fraud, misapplication of cash, environmental claims, waste, willful
destruction and other circumstances customarily excluded by lenders from exculpation provisions or included in
separate indemnification agreements in non-recourse financings.
66
Table of Contents
"Default" means any event that is, or with the passage of time or the giving of notice or both would be, an Event
of Default.
"De Minimis Guaranteed Amount" means a principal amount of Indebtedness that does not exceed $5.0 million.
"Disqualified Stock" means any Capital Stock that, by its terms (or by the terms of any security into which it is
convertible, or for which it is exchangeable, in each case at the option of the holder of the Capital Stock), or upon the
happening of any event, matures or is mandatorily redeemable, pursuant to a sinking fund obligation or otherwise, or
redeemable at the option of the holder of the Capital Stock, in whole or in part, on or prior to the date that is 91 days
after the date on which the notes mature. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any Capital Stock that would
constitute Disqualified Stock solely because the holders of the Capital Stock have the right to require the Company to
repurchase or redeem such Capital Stock upon the occurrence of a change of control or an asset sale will not
constitute Disqualified Stock if the terms of such Capital Stock provide that the Company may not repurchase or
redeem any such Capital Stock pursuant to such provisions unless such repurchase or redemption complies with the
covenant described above under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments."
"Dollar-Denominated Production Payments" means production payment obligations recorded as liabilities in
accordance with GAAP, together with all undertakings and obligations in connection therewith.
"Domestic Subsidiary" means any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that was formed under the laws of the
United States or any state of the United States or the District of Columbia and all of whose outstanding Capital Stock
is Beneficially Owned by the Company.
"Equity Interests" means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital Stock (but
excluding any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital Stock).
"Equity Offering" means any public or private sale of Capital Stock (other than Disqualified Stock) made for cash
on a primary basis by the Company after the date of the indenture, provided that at any time on or after a Change of
Control, any sale of Capital Stock to an Affiliate of the Company shall not be deemed an Equity Offering.
"Exchange Notes" means the notes issued in an Exchange Offer pursuant to the indenture.
"Exchange Offer" has the meaning set forth for such term in the applicable registration rights agreement.
"Existing Indebtedness" means the aggregate principal amount of Indebtedness of the Company and its
Restricted Subsidiaries (other than Indebtedness under the Credit Agreement, which is considered incurred under the
first paragraph under the covenant entitled "Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock" and other
than intercompany Indebtedness) in existence on the date of the indenture, until such amounts are repaid.
The term "fair market value" means the value that would be paid by a willing buyer to an unaffiliated willing seller
in a transaction not involving distress or necessity of either party, determined in good faith by the Board of Directors
of the Company in the case of amounts of $20.0 million or more and otherwise by an officer of the General Partner.
"Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio" means with respect to any specified Person for any four-quarter reference
period, the ratio of the Consolidated Cash Flow of such Person for such period to the Fixed Charges of such Person
for such period. In the event that the specified Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries incurs, assumes,
guarantees, repays, repurchases, redeems, defeases or otherwise discharges any Indebtedness (other than ordinary
working capital borrowings) or issues, repurchases or redeems
67
Table of Contents
preferred securities subsequent to the commencement of the applicable four-quarter reference period and on or prior to
the date on which the event for which the calculation of the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio is made (the "Calculation
Date"), then the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio will be calculated giving pro forma effect to such incurrence,
assumption, guarantee, repayment, repurchase, redemption, defeasance or other discharge of Indebtedness, or such
issuance, repurchase or redemption of preferred securities, and the use of the proceeds therefrom as if the same had
occurred at the beginning of such period. If any Indebtedness bears a floating rate of interest and is being given pro
forma effect, the interest expense on such Indebtedness will be calculated as if the average rate in effect from the
beginning of such period to the Calculation Date had been the applicable rate for the entire period (taking into account
any interest Hedging Contract applicable to such Indebtedness, but if the remaining term of such interest Hedging
Contract is less than 12 months, then such interest Hedging Contract shall only be taken into account for that portion
of the period equal to the remaining term thereof). If any Indebtedness that is being given pro forma effect bears an
interest rate at the option of such Person, the interest rate shall be calculated by applying such optional rate chosen
by such Person. Interest on Indebtedness that may optionally be determined at an interest rate based upon a factor of
a prime or similar rate, a eurocurrency interbank offered rate, or other rate, shall be deemed to have been based upon
the rate actually chosen, or, if none, then based upon such optional rate chosen as such Person may designate.
In addition, for purposes of calculating the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
acquisitions that have been made by the specified Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries,
including through mergers, consolidations or otherwise (including acquisitions of assets used or useful in
the Oil and Gas Business), or any Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries acquired by the specified
Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, and including, in each case, any related financing
transactions (including repayment of Indebtedness) during the four-quarter reference period or
subsequent to such reference period and on or prior to the Calculation Date, or that are to be made on
the Calculation Date, will be given pro forma effect as if they had occurred on the first day of the four-
quarter reference period, including any Consolidated Cash Flow and any pro forma expense and cost
reductions that have occurred or are reasonably expected to occur within the next 12 months, in the
reasonable judgment of the chief financial or accounting officer of the General Partner (regardless of
whether those cost savings or operating improvements could then be reflected in pro forma financial
statements in accordance with Regulation S-X promulgated under the Securities Act or any other
regulation or policy of the Commission related thereto);
the Consolidated Cash Flow attributable to discontinued operations, as determined in accordance with
GAAP, and operations or businesses (and ownership interests therein) disposed of prior to the
Calculation Date, will be excluded;
the Fixed Charges attributable to discontinued operations, as determined in accordance with GAAP, and
operations or businesses (and ownership interests therein) disposed of prior to the Calculation Date, will
be excluded, but only to the extent that the obligations giving rise to such Fixed Charges will not be
obligations of the specified Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries following the Calculation Date;
any Person that is a Restricted Subsidiary of the specified Person on the Calculation Date will be
deemed to have been a Restricted Subsidiary of the specified Person at all times during such four-
quarter period;
any Person that is not a Restricted Subsidiary of the specified Person on the Calculation Date will be
deemed not to have been a Restricted Subsidiary of the specified Person at any time during such four-
quarter period; and
68
Table of Contents
(6)
interest income reasonably anticipated by such Person to be received during the applicable four-quarter
period from cash or Cash Equivalents held by such Person or any Restricted Subsidiary of such
Person, which cash or Cash Equivalents exist on the Calculation Date or will exist as a result of the
transaction giving rise to the need to calculate the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio, will be included.
"Fixed Charges" means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, the sum, without duplication, of:
(1)
the consolidated interest expense (less interest income) of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries
for such period, whether paid or accrued (excluding (i) any interest attributable to Dollar-Denominated
Production Payments, (ii) write-off of deferred financing costs and (iii) accretion of interest charges on
future plugging and abandonment obligations, future retirement benefits and other obligations that do not
constitute Indebtedness, but including, without limitation, amortization of debt issuance costs and
original issue discount, non-cash interest payments, the interest component of all payments associated
with Capital Lease Obligations, imputed interest with respect to Attributable Debt, commissions,
discounts and other fees and charges incurred in respect of letter of credit or bankers' acceptance
financings), and net of the effect of all payments made or received pursuant to interest rate Hedging
Contracts; plus
the consolidated interest expense of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries that was capitalized
during such period; plus
any interest on Indebtedness of another Person that is guaranteed by such Person or one of its
Restricted Subsidiaries or secured by a Lien on assets of such Person or one of its Restricted
Subsidiaries, whether or not such guarantee or Lien is called upon; plus
(2)
(3)
(4)
all dividends, whether paid or accrued and whether or not in cash, on any series of Disqualified Stock of
such Person or on any series of preferred securities of its Restricted Subsidiaries, other than dividends
payable solely in Equity Interests of the payor (other than Disqualified Stock) or to such Person or a
Restricted Subsidiary of such Person,
in each case, on a consolidated basis and determined in accordance with GAAP.
"Foreign Subsidiary" means any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that (a) is not a Domestic Subsidiary and
(b) has 50% or more of its consolidated assets located outside the United States or any territory thereof.
"GAAP" means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, which are in effect from time to
time.
"General Partner" means Legacy Reserves GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and its successors
and permitted assigns under the Partnership Agreement as general partner of the Company or as the business entity
with the ultimate authority to manage the business and operations of the Company.
The term "guarantee" means a guarantee other than by endorsement of negotiable instruments for collection in
the ordinary course of business, direct or indirect, in any manner including, without limitation, by way of a pledge of
assets, acting as co-obligor or through letters of credit or reimbursement agreements in respect thereof, of all or any
part of any Indebtedness. When used as a verb, "guarantee" has a correlative meaning.
"Guarantors" means each of:
(1)
the Subsidiaries of the Company, other than Finance Corp., executing the indenture as initial
Guarantors; and
69
Table of Contents
(2)
any other Restricted Subsidiary of the Company that becomes a Guarantor in accordance with the
provisions of the indenture;
and their respective successors and assigns, in each case until the Subsidiary Guarantee of such Person has been
released in accordance with the provisions of the indenture.
"Hedging Contracts" means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1)
(2)
interest rate swap agreements, interest rate cap agreements and interest rate collar agreements entered
into with one or more financial institutions and designed to protect the Person or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries entering into the agreement against fluctuations in interest rates with respect to
Indebtedness incurred;
foreign exchange contracts and currency protection agreements entered into with one or more financial
institutions and designed to protect the Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries entering into the
agreement against fluctuations in currency exchanges rates with respect to Indebtedness incurred;
any commodity futures contract, commodity option or other similar agreement or arrangement designed
to protect against fluctuations in the price of Hydrocarbons used, produced, processed or sold by that
Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries at the time; and
(3)
(4)
other agreements or arrangements designed to protect such Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries
against fluctuations in interest rates, commodity prices or currency exchange rates;
and in each case are entered into only in the normal course of business and not for speculative purposes.
"Holder" means a Person in whose name a note is registered.
"Hydrocarbons" means crude oil, natural gas, casinghead gas, drip gasoline, natural gasoline, condensate,
distillate, liquid hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all constituents, elements or compounds thereof and
products refined or processed therefrom.
"Indebtedness" means, with respect to any specified Person, any indebtedness of such Person, whether or not
contingent:
in respect of borrowed money;
evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or similar instruments;
in respect of all outstanding letters of credit issued for the account of such Person that support
obligations that constitute Indebtedness (provided that the amount of such letters of credit included in
Indebtedness shall not exceed the amount of the Indebtedness being supported) and, without
duplication, the unreimbursed amount of all drafts drawn under letters of credit issued for the account of
such Person;
in respect of bankers' acceptances;
representing Capital Lease Obligations or Attributable Debt in respect of sale and leaseback
transactions;
representing the balance deferred and unpaid of the purchase price of any property, except any such
balance that constitutes an accrued expense or trade payable; or
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
representing any obligations under Hedging Contracts,
if and to the extent any of the preceding items (other than letters of credit and obligations under Hedging Contracts)
would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of the specified Person prepared in accordance with GAAP. In
addition, the term "Indebtedness" includes all Indebtedness of other
70
Table of Contents
Persons secured by a Lien on any asset of the specified Person (whether or not such Indebtedness is assumed by
the specified Person) and, to the extent not otherwise included, the guarantee by the specified Person of any
Indebtedness of any other Person (including, with respect to any Production Payment, any warranties or guarantees
of production or payment by such Person with respect to such Production Payment, but excluding other contractual
obligations of such Person with respect to such Production Payment).
The amount of any Indebtedness outstanding as of any date will be:
the accreted value of the Indebtedness, in the case of any Indebtedness issued with original issue
discount;
in the case of obligations under any Hedging Contracts, the termination value of the agreement or
arrangement giving rise to such obligations that would be payable by such Person at such date; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
the principal amount of the Indebtedness, together with any interest on the Indebtedness that is more
than 30 days past due, in the case of any other Indebtedness.
"Investments" means, with respect to any Person, all direct or indirect investments by such Person in other
Persons (including Affiliates) in the forms of loans (including guarantees or other obligations), advances or capital
contributions (excluding (1) commission, travel and similar advances to officers and employees made in the ordinary
course of business and (2) advances to customers in the ordinary course of business that are recorded as accounts
receivable on the balance sheet of the lender), purchases or other acquisitions for consideration of Indebtedness,
Equity Interests or other securities, together with all items that are or would be classified as investments on a balance
sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP. If the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company sells or
otherwise disposes of any Equity Interests of any direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of the Company such that,
after giving effect to any such sale or disposition, such Person is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company,
the Company will be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such sale or disposition in an amount
equal to the fair market value of the Equity Interests of such Restricted Subsidiary not sold or disposed of in an
amount determined as provided in the final paragraph of the covenant described above under the caption "—Certain
Covenants—Restricted Payments." The acquisition by the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company of a Person
that holds an Investment in a third Person will be deemed to be an Investment made by the Company or such
Subsidiary in such third Person in an amount equal to the fair market value of the Investment held by the acquired
Person in such third Person on the date of any such acquisition in an amount determined as provided in the final
paragraph of the covenant described above under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments."
"Joint Venture" means any Person that is not a direct or indirect Subsidiary of the Company in which the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries makes any Investment.
"Lien" means, with respect to any asset, any mortgage, lien, pledge, charge, security interest or encumbrance of
any kind in respect of such asset, whether or not filed, recorded or otherwise perfected under applicable law, including
any conditional sale or other title retention agreement, any lease in the nature thereof, any option or other agreement
to sell or give a security interest in and any filing of or agreement to give any financing statement under the Uniform
Commercial Code (or equivalent statutes) of any jurisdiction other than a precautionary financing statement respecting
a lease not intended as a security agreement.
"Make Whole Premium" means, with respect to a note at any time, the excess, if any, of (a) the present value at
such time of (i) the redemption price of such note at June 1, 2017 plus (ii) any required interest payments due on such
note through June 1, 2017 (except for currently accrued and unpaid interest), computed using a discount rate equal to
the Treasury Rate plus 50 basis points,
71
Table of Contents
discounted to the redemption date on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day
months), over (b) the principal amount of such note.
"Moody's" means Moody's Investors Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
"Net Proceeds" means the aggregate cash proceeds received by the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries in respect of any Asset Sale (including, without limitation, any cash received upon the sale or other
disposition of any non-cash consideration received in any Asset Sale), net of:
(1)
the direct costs relating to such Asset Sale, including, without limitation, legal, accounting and
investment banking fees and sales commissions, severance costs and any relocation expenses
incurred as a result of the Asset Sale;
(2)
(3)
(4)
taxes paid or payable as a result of the Asset Sale, in each case, after taking into account any available
tax credits or deductions and any tax sharing arrangements;
amounts required to be applied to the repayment of Indebtedness secured by a Lien on the properties or
assets that were the subject of such Asset Sale; and
any amounts to be set aside in any reserve established in accordance with GAAP or any amount placed
in escrow, in either case for adjustment in respect of the sale price of such properties or assets or for
liabilities associated with such Asset Sale and retained by the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries until such time as such reserve is reversed or such escrow arrangement is terminated, in
which case Net Proceeds shall include only the amount of the reserve so reversed or the amount
returned to the Company or its Restricted Subsidiaries from such escrow arrangement, as the case may
be.
"Non-Recourse Debt" means Indebtedness:
as to which neither the Company nor any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (a) provides credit support of any
kind (including any undertaking, agreement or instrument that would constitute Indebtedness), (b) is
directly or indirectly liable as a guarantor or otherwise, except for Customary Recourse Exceptions, or
(c) is the lender;
no default with respect to which (including any rights that the holders of the Indebtedness may have to
take enforcement action against an Unrestricted Subsidiary) would permit upon notice, lapse of time or
both any holder of any other Indebtedness (other than the notes) of the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries to declare a default on such other Indebtedness or cause the payment of the Indebtedness
to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated Maturity; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
as to which the lenders have been notified in writing that they will not have any recourse to the Capital
Stock or assets of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries except as contemplated by
clause (9) of the definition of Permitted Liens or for Customary Recourse Exceptions.
For purposes of determining compliance with the covenant described under "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of
Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock" above, in the event that any Non-Recourse Debt of any of the
Unrestricted Subsidiaries ceases to be Non-Recourse Debt of such Unrestricted Subsidiary, such event will be
deemed to constitute an incurrence of Indebtedness by a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company.
"Obligations" means any principal, premium, if any, interest (including interest accruing on or after the filing of
any petition in bankruptcy or for reorganization, whether or not a claim for post-filing interest is allowed in such
proceeding), penalties, fees, charges, expenses, indemnifications,
72
Table of Contents
reimbursement obligations, damages, guarantees, and other liabilities or amounts payable under the documentation
governing any Indebtedness or in respect thereto.
"Oil and Gas Business" means:
(1)
(2)
the acquisition, exploration, development, production, operation and disposition of interests in oil, gas
and other Hydrocarbon properties;
the gathering, marketing, treating, processing (but not refining), storing, distributing, selling and
transporting of any production from such interests or properties;
any business relating to exploration for or development, production, treatment, processing (but not
refining), storage, transportation or marketing of, oil, gas and other minerals and products produced in
association therewith;
any other business that generates gross income that constitutes "qualifying income" under
Section 7704(d) of the Code; and
(3)
(4)
(5)
any activity that is ancillary, complementary or incidental to or necessary or appropriate for the activities
described in clauses (1) through (4) of this definition.
"Partnership Agreement" means the Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of the Company,
as amended and in effect on the date of the indenture and as such may be further amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time.
"Permitted Acquisition Indebtedness" means Indebtedness or Disqualified Stock of the Company or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries to the extent such Indebtedness or Disqualified Stock was Indebtedness or Disqualified Stock
of any other Person existing at the time (a) such Person became a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company or (b) such
Person was merged or consolidated with or into the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, provided that on
the date such Person became a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company or the date such Person was merged or
consolidated with or into the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, as applicable, either
immediately after giving effect to such transaction on a pro forma basis as if the same had occurred at
the beginning of the applicable four-quarter period, the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary, as
applicable, would be permitted to incur at least $1.00 of additional Indebtedness pursuant to the Fixed
Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph of the covenant described above under the
caption "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock," or
(1)
(2)
immediately after giving effect to such transaction on a pro forma basis as if the same had occurred at
the beginning of the applicable four-quarter period, the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company
would be equal to or greater than the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of the Company immediately prior to
such transaction.
"Permitted Business Investments" means Investments made in the ordinary course of, and of a nature that is or
shall have become customary in, the Oil and Gas Business, including investments or expenditures for actively
exploring for, acquiring, developing, producing, processing, gathering, marketing or transporting Hydrocarbons through
agreements, transactions, interests or arrangements that permit one to share risk or costs, comply with regulatory
requirements regarding local ownership or satisfy other objectives customarily achieved through the conduct of the Oil
and Gas Business jointly with third parties, including without limitation:
(1)
direct or indirect ownership of crude oil, natural gas, other Hydrocarbon properties or any interest therein,
gathering, transportation, processing, storage or related systems, or ancillary real property interests and
interests therein; and
73
Table of Contents
(2)
the entry into operating agreements, joint ventures, processing agreements, working interests, royalty
interests, mineral leases, farm-in agreements, farm-out agreements, development agreements,
production sharing agreements, area of mutual interest agreements, contracts for the sale,
transportation or exchange of crude oil and natural gas and related Hydrocarbons and minerals,
unitization agreements, pooling arrangements, joint bidding agreements, service contracts, partnership
agreements (whether general or limited), or other similar or customary agreements, transactions,
properties, interests or arrangements, and Investments and expenditures in connection therewith or
pursuant thereto, in each case made or entered into in the ordinary course of the Oil and Gas Business,
excluding, however, Investments in corporations and publicly traded limited partnerships.
"Permitted Investments" means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
any Investment in the Company (including, without limitation, through purchases of notes) or in a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company;
any Investment in Cash Equivalents;
any Investment by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company in a Person, if as a result
of such Investment:
such Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company; or
(a)
(b)
such Person is merged, consolidated or amalgamated with or into, or transfers or conveys
substantially all of its properties or assets to, or is liquidated into, the Company or a Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company;
any Investment made as a result of the receipt of non-cash consideration from an Asset Sale that was
made pursuant to and in compliance with the covenant described above under the caption "—
Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales," including pursuant to clause (9) or (14) of the items
deemed not to be Asset Sales under the definition of "Asset Sale;"
any Investment in any Person solely in exchange for the issuance of Equity Interests (other than
Disqualified Stock) of the Company;
any Investments received in compromise of obligations of trade creditors or customers that were
incurred in the ordinary course of business, including pursuant to any plan of reorganization or similar
arrangement upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of any trade creditor or customer, or as a result of a
foreclosure by the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to any secured
Investment in default;
Hedging Contracts;
Permitted Business Investments; and
other Investments in any Person having an aggregate fair market value (measured on the date each
such Investment was made and without giving effect to subsequent changes in value), when taken
together with all other Investments made pursuant to this clause (9) that are at the time outstanding, do
not exceed the greater of $50.0 million or 5.0% of the Company's Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible
Assets; provided, however, that if any Investment pursuant to this clause (9) is made in any Person that
is not a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company at the date of the making of such Investment and such
Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary of the Company after such date, such Investment shall
thereafter be deemed to have been made pursuant to clause (1) above and shall cease to have been
made pursuant to this clause (9) for so long as such Person continues to be a Restricted Subsidiary of
the Company.
74
Table of Contents
"Permitted Liens" means:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
any Lien with respect to the Credit Agreement or any other Credit Facilities;
Liens in favor of the Company or the Guarantors;
Liens on property of a Person existing at the time such Person is merged with or into or consolidated
with the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, provided that such Liens were in
existence prior to the contemplation of such merger or consolidation and do not extend to any assets
(other than improvements thereon, accessions thereto and proceeds thereof) other than those of the
Person merged into or consolidated with the Company or the Restricted Subsidiary of the Company;
Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition of the property by the Company or any Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company, provided that such Liens were in existence prior to the contemplation of
such acquisition;
any interest or title of a lessor to the property subject to a Capital Lease Obligation;
Liens for the purpose of securing the payment of all or a part of the purchase price of, or Capital Lease
Obligations, purchase money obligations or other payments incurred to finance the acquisition, lease,
improvement or construction of or repairs or additions to, assets or property acquired or constructed in
the ordinary course of business; provided that:
(a)
(b)
the aggregate principal amount of Indebtedness secured by such Liens is otherwise permitted to
be incurred under the indenture and does not exceed the cost of the assets or property so
acquired or constructed; and
such Liens are created within 180 days of the later of the acquisition, lease, completion of
improvements, construction, repairs or additions or commencement of full operation of the assets
or property subject to such Lien and do not encumber any other assets or property of the
Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company other than such assets or property and
assets affixed or appurtenant thereto;
Liens existing on the date of the indenture;
Liens to secure the performance of tenders, bids, statutory obligations, surety or appeal bonds, trade
contracts, government contracts, operating leases, performance bonds or other obligations of a like
nature incurred in the ordinary course of business;
Liens on and pledges of the Equity Interests of any Unrestricted Subsidiary or any Joint Venture owned
by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company to the extent securing Non-Recourse
Debt or other Indebtedness of such Unrestricted Subsidiary or Joint Venture;
Liens in respect of Production Payments and Reserve Sales, which Liens shall be limited to the
property that is the subject of such Production Payments and Reserve Sales;
Liens on pipelines or pipeline facilities that arise by operation of law;
(11)
(12)
Liens arising under operating agreements, joint venture agreements, partnership agreements, oil and gas
leases, farm-out agreements, farm-in agreements, division orders, contracts for the sale, transportation
or exchange of crude oil and natural gas and related Hydrocarbons and minerals, unitization and pooling
declarations and agreements, area of mutual interest agreements and other agreements arising in the
ordinary course of business of the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries that are customary in the
Oil and Gas Business;
75
Table of Contents
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
Liens reserved in oil and gas mineral leases for bonus or rental payments and for compliance with the
terms of such leases;
Liens upon specific items of inventory, receivables or other goods or proceeds of the Company or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries securing such Person's obligations in respect of bankers' acceptances or
receivables securitizations issued or created for the account of such Person to facilitate the purchase,
shipment or storage of such inventory, receivables or other goods or proceeds and permitted by the
covenant "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock;"
Liens securing Obligations of the Issuers or any Guarantor under the notes or the Subsidiary
Guarantees, as the case may be;
Liens securing any Indebtedness equally and ratably with all Obligations due under the notes or any
Subsidiary Guarantee pursuant to a contractual covenant that limits Liens in a manner substantially
similar to the covenant described above under "—Certain Covenants—Liens;"
Liens to secure performance of Hedging Contracts of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
Liens securing any insurance premium financing under customary terms and conditions, provided that
no such Lien may extend to or cover any assets or property other than the insurance being acquired
with such financing, the proceeds thereof and any unearned or refunded insurance premiums related
thereto;
Liens arising from royalties, overriding royalties, revenue interests, net revenue interests, net profit
interests, reversionary interests, production payments, preferential rights of purchase, working interests
and other similar interests, all as ordinarily exist with respect to properties and assets of the Company
and its Restricted Subsidiaries or otherwise as are customary in the Oil and Gas Business;
other Liens incurred by the Company or any Restricted Subsidiary of the Company, provided that, after
giving effect to any such incurrence, the aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness then
outstanding and secured by any Liens incurred pursuant to this clause (20) does not exceed the greater
of $25.0 million or 2.5% of the Company's Adjusted Consolidated Net Tangible Assets; and
any Lien renewing, extending, refinancing or refunding a Lien permitted by clauses (1) through
(19) above, provided that (a) the principal amount of the Indebtedness secured by such Lien is not
increased except by an amount equal to a reasonable premium or other reasonable amount paid, and
fees and expenses reasonably incurred, in connection therewith and by an amount equal to any existing
commitments unutilized thereunder and (b) no assets encumbered by any such Lien other than the
assets permitted to be encumbered immediately prior to such renewal, extension, refinance or refund
are encumbered thereby (other than improvements thereon, accessions thereto and proceeds thereof).
"Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness" means any Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries issued in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to extend, refinance, renew, replace,
defease or refund other Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (other than intercompany
Indebtedness), provided that:
(1)
the principal amount of such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness does not exceed the principal amount
of the Indebtedness being extended, refinanced, renewed, replaced, defeased or refunded (plus all
accrued interest on the Indebtedness and the amount of all expenses and premiums incurred in
connection therewith);
Table of Contents
76
such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness has a final maturity date later than the final maturity date of,
and has a Weighted Average Life to Maturity equal to or greater than the Weighted Average Life to
Maturity of, the Indebtedness being extended, refinanced, renewed, replaced, defeased or refunded;
if the Indebtedness being extended, refinanced, renewed, replaced, defeased or refunded is
subordinated in right of payment to the notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees, such Permitted Refinancing
Indebtedness is subordinated in right of payment to the notes or the Subsidiary Guarantees on terms at
least as favorable to the Holders of notes as those contained in the documentation governing the
Indebtedness being extended, refinanced, renewed, replaced, defeased or refunded; and
(2)
(3)
(4)
such Indebtedness is not incurred (other than by way of a guarantee) by a Restricted Subsidiary of the
Company (other than Finance Corp.) if the Company is the issuer or other primary obligor on the
Indebtedness being extended, refinanced, renewed, replaced, defeased or refunded.
Notwithstanding the preceding, any Indebtedness incurred under Credit Facilities pursuant to the covenant
"Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Preferred Stock" shall be subject only to the refinancing provision in the
definition of Credit Facilities and not pursuant to the requirements set forth in the definition of Permitted Refinancing
Indebtedness.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, joint-stock company, trust,
unincorporated organization, limited liability company or government or other entity.
"Prior Issue Date" means December 4, 2012, the date of the initial issuance of the Issuers' 8% Senior Notes due
2020.
"Production Payments" means, collectively, Dollar-Denominated Production Payments and Volumetric
Production Payments.
"Production Payments and Reserve Sales" means the grant or transfer by the Company or a Restricted
Subsidiary of the Company to any Person of a royalty, overriding royalty, net profits interest, production payment
(whether volumetric or dollar denominated), partnership or other interest in oil and gas properties, reserves or the right
to receive all or a portion of the production or the proceeds from the sale of production attributable to such properties,
including any such grants or transfers pursuant to incentive compensation programs on terms that are reasonably
customary in the oil and gas business for geologists, geophysicists and other providers of technical services to the
Company or a Subsidiary of the Company.
"Qualifying Owners" means, collectively, the Company and its Restricted Subsidiaries.
"Reporting Default" means a Default described in clause (4) under "—Events of Default and Remedies."
"Restricted Investment" means an Investment other than a Permitted Investment.
"Restricted Subsidiary" of a Person means any Subsidiary of the referent Person that is not an Unrestricted
Subsidiary. Notwithstanding anything in the indenture to the contrary, Finance Corp. shall be a Restricted Subsidiary
of the Company.
"S&P" refers to Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., or any
successor to the rating agency business thereof.
"Senior Debt" means
(1)
all Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries outstanding under Credit Facilities
and all obligations under Hedging Contracts with respect thereto;
77
Table of Contents
any other Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries permitted to be incurred
under the terms of the indenture, unless the instrument under which such Indebtedness is incurred
expressly provides that it is subordinated in right of payment to the notes or any Subsidiary Guarantee;
and
(2)
(3)
all Obligations with respect to the items listed in the preceding clauses (1) and (2).
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding sentence, Senior Debt will not include:
any intercompany Indebtedness of the Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to the Company or
any of its Affiliates; or
(a)
(b)
any Indebtedness that is incurred in violation of the indenture.
For the avoidance of doubt, "Senior Debt" will not include any trade payables or taxes owed or owing by the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries.
"Significant Subsidiary" means any Subsidiary that would be a "significant subsidiary" as defined in Article 1,
Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X, promulgated pursuant to the Securities Act, as such Regulation is in effect on the date
of the indenture.
"Stated Maturity" means, with respect to any installment of interest or principal on any series of Indebtedness,
the date on which the payment of interest or principal was scheduled to be paid in the original documentation
governing such Indebtedness, and will not include any contingent obligations to repay, redeem or repurchase any
such interest or principal prior to the date originally scheduled for the payment thereof.
"Subsidiary" means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1)
(2)
any corporation, association or other business entity (other than a partnership or limited liability
company) of which more than 50% of the total voting power of Voting Stock is at the time owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by that Person or one or more of the other Subsidiaries of that Person
(or a combination thereof); and
any partnership (whether general or limited) or limited liability company (a) the sole general partner or
member of which is such Person or a Subsidiary of such Person, or (b) if there is more than a single
general partner or member, either (x) the only managing general partners or managing members of which
are such Person or one or more Subsidiaries of such Person (or any combination thereof) or (y) such
Person owns or controls, directly or indirectly, a majority of the outstanding general partner interests,
member interests or other Voting Stock of such partnership or limited liability company, respectively.
"Subsidiary Guarantee" means any guarantee by a Guarantor of the Issuers' Obligations under the indenture and
on the notes.
"Treasury Rate" means the yield to maturity at the time of computation of United States Treasury securities with
a constant maturity (as compiled and published in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release
H.15(519) which has become publicly available at least two Business Days prior to the date fixed for redemption (or, if
such Statistical Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar market data)) most nearly
equal to the period from the redemption date to June 1, 2017; provided, however, that if such period is not equal to the
constant maturity of a United States Treasury security for which a weekly average yield is given, the Company shall
obtain the Treasury Rate by linear interpolation (calculated to the nearest one-twelfth of a year) from the weekly
average yields of United States Treasury securities for which such yields are given, except that if the period from the
redemption date to June 1, 2017 is less than one year, the weekly average yield on actually traded United States
Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year shall be used. The Company will (a) calculate the
Treasury Rate on the second Business Day preceding the
78
Table of Contents
applicable redemption date and (b) prior to such redemption date file with the trustee an officers' certificate setting
forth the Make Whole Premium and the Treasury Rate and showing the calculation of each in reasonable detail.
"Unrestricted Subsidiary" means any Subsidiary of the Company (other than Finance Corp.) that is designated
by the Board of Directors of the Company as an Unrestricted Subsidiary pursuant to a Board Resolution, but only to
the extent that such Subsidiary:
has no Indebtedness other than Non-Recourse Debt owing to any Person other than the Company or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
is not party to any agreement, contract, arrangement or understanding with the Company or any
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company unless the terms of any such agreement, contract, arrangement
or understanding are no less favorable to the Company or such Restricted Subsidiary than those that
might be obtained at the time from Persons who are not Affiliates of the Company;
is a Person with respect to which neither the Company nor any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has any
direct or indirect obligation (a) to subscribe for additional Equity Interests or (b) to maintain or preserve
such Person's financial condition or to cause such Person to achieve any specified levels of operating
results; and
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
has not guaranteed or otherwise directly or indirectly provided credit support for any Indebtedness of the
Company or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries.
All Subsidiaries of an Unrestricted Subsidiary shall also be Unrestricted Subsidiaries.
Any designation of a Subsidiary of the Company as an Unrestricted Subsidiary will be evidenced to the trustee
by filing with the trustee a Board Resolution giving effect to such designation and an officers' certificate certifying that
such designation complied with the preceding conditions and was permitted by the covenant described above under
the caption "—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments." If, at any time, any Unrestricted Subsidiary would fail to
meet the preceding requirements as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, it will thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted
Subsidiary for purposes of the indenture and any Indebtedness of such Subsidiary will be deemed to be incurred by a
Restricted Subsidiary of the Company as of such date and, if such Indebtedness is not permitted to be incurred as of
such date under the covenant described under the caption "—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and
Issuance of Preferred Stock," the Company will be in default of such covenant.
"Volumetric Production Payments" means production payment obligations recorded as deferred revenue in
accordance with GAAP, together with all related undertakings and obligations.
"Voting Stock" of any Person as of any date means the Capital Stock of such Person that is at the time entitled
(without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote in the election of the Board of Directors of such Person.
"Weighted Average Life to Maturity" means, when applied to any Indebtedness at any date, the number of years
obtained by dividing:
the sum of the products obtained by multiplying (a) the amount of each then remaining installment,
sinking fund, serial maturity or other required payments of principal, including payment at final maturity,
in respect of the Indebtedness, by (b) the number of years (calculated to the nearest one-twelfth) that
will elapse between such date and the making of such payment; by
(1)
(2)
the then outstanding principal amount of such Indebtedness.
79
Table of Contents
You may transfer new notes issued under the exchange offer in exchange for the old notes if:
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
you acquire the new notes in the exchange offer in the ordinary course of your business;
you do not have, and to your knowledge, no one receiving new notes from you has, any arrangement or
understanding with any person to participate in the distribution (within the meaning of the Securities Act)
of such new notes in violation of the provisions of the Securities Act;
you are not engaged in, and do not intend to engage in, a distribution of the new notes; and
•
•
•
•
you are not our "affiliate" (within the meaning of Rule 405 under the Securities Act);
Each broker-dealer that receives new notes for its own account pursuant to the exchange offer in exchange for
old notes that were acquired by such broker-dealer as a result of market-making or other trading activities must
acknowledge that it will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of such new notes. This prospectus, as it
may be amended or supplemented from time to time, may be used by a broker-dealer in connection with resales of
new notes received in exchange for old notes, where such old notes were acquired as a result of market-making
activities or other trading activities.
If you wish to exchange new notes for your old notes in the exchange offer, you will be required to make
representations to us as described in "Exchange Offer—Purpose and Effect of the Exchange Offer" and "—
Procedures for Tendering—Your Representations to Us" in this prospectus and in the letter of transmittal. In addition,
if you are a broker-dealer who receives new notes for your own account in exchange for old notes that were acquired
by you as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities, you will be required to acknowledge that you
will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale by you of such new notes.
We will not receive any proceeds from any sale of new notes by broker-dealers. New notes received by broker-
dealers for their own account pursuant to the exchange offer may be sold from time to time in one or more
transactions in any of the following ways:
in the over-the-counter market;
in negotiated transactions;
through the writing of options on the new notes or a combination of such methods of resale;
•
•
•
•
at market prices prevailing at the time of resale;
at prices related to such prevailing market prices; or
at negotiated prices.
•
•
Any such resale may be made directly to purchasers or to or through brokers or dealers who may receive
compensation in the form of commissions or concessions from any such broker-dealer or the purchasers of any such
new notes.
Any broker-dealer that resells new notes that were received by it for its own account pursuant to the exchange
offer in exchange for old notes that were acquired by such broker-dealer as a result of market-making or other trading
activities may be deemed to be an "underwriter" within the meaning of the Securities Act. The letter of transmittal
states that by acknowledging that it will deliver and by delivering a prospectus, a broker-dealer will not be deemed to
admit that it is an "underwriter" within the meaning of the Securities Act. We agreed to permit the use of this
prospectus for a period of up to 180 days after the completion of the exchange offer by such broker-dealers to satisfy
this prospectus delivery requirement. Furthermore, we agree to amend or supplement this prospectus during such
80
Table of Contents
period, if so requested, in order to expedite or facilitate the disposition of any new notes by broker-dealers.
We have agreed to pay all expenses incident to the exchange offer other than fees and expenses of counsel to
the holders and brokerage commissions and transfer taxes, if any, and will indemnify the holders of the old notes
(including any broker-dealers) against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
81
CERTAIN U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following discussion is a summary of certain U.S. federal income tax considerations relevant to the
exchange of old notes for new notes, but does not purport to be a complete analysis of all potential tax effects. The
discussion is based upon the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, Treasury Regulations, Internal Revenue
Service rulings and pronouncements and judicial decisions now in effect, all of which may be subject to change at any
time by legislative, judicial or administrative action. These changes may be applied retroactively in a manner that
could adversely affect a holder of new notes. We cannot assure you that the Internal Revenue Service will not
challenge one or more of the tax consequences described in this discussion, and we have not obtained, nor do we
intend to obtain, a ruling from the Internal Revenue Service or an opinion of counsel with respect to the U.S. federal
tax consequences described herein. Some holders, including financial institutions, insurance companies, regulated
investment companies, tax-exempt organizations, dealers in securities or currencies, persons whose functional
currency is not the U.S. dollar or persons who hold the notes as part of a hedge, conversion transaction, straddle or
other risk reduction transaction may be subject to special rules not discussed below.
We recommend that each holder consult his own tax advisor as to the particular tax consequences of
exchanging such holder's old notes for new notes, including the applicability and effect of any foreign, state,
local or other tax laws or estate or gift tax considerations.
The exchange of old notes for new notes will not be an exchange or otherwise a taxable event to a holder for
U.S. federal income tax purposes. Accordingly, a holder will not recognize gain or loss upon receipt of a new note in
exchange for an old note in the exchange, and the holder's basis and holding period in the new note will be the same
as its basis and holding period in the corresponding old note immediately before the exchange.
Table of Contents
82
The validity of the new notes offered in this exchange offer will be passed on by Andrews Kurth LLP, Houston,
Texas.
LEGAL MATTERS
INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
The consolidated balance sheets of Legacy Reserves LP as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 and the related
consolidated statements of operations, unitholders' equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the three year
period ended December 31, 2013 incorporated in this prospectus by reference from Legacy Reserves LP's annual
report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 have been audited by BDO USA, LLP, an independent
registered public accounting firm, incorporated herein by reference given on the authority of said firm as experts in
auditing and accounting.
INDEPENDENT RESERVE ENGINEER
Information about our estimated net proved reserves and the future net cash flows attributable to the oil and
natural gas reserves of Legacy Reserves LP as of December 31, 2013 contained in Legacy Reserves LP's annual
report for the year ended December 31, 2013 filed on Form 10-K and incorporated herein by reference was prepared by
LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd., an independent reserve engineer and geological firm. These estimates are
incorporated herein in reliance upon the authority of such firms as experts in these matters.
Table of Contents
83
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
to Tender
Outstanding Unregistered 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021
of
LEGACY RESERVES LP
LEGACY RESERVES FINANCE CORPORATION
Pursuant to the Exchange Offer and Prospectus dated                    , 2014
THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND WITHDRAWAL RIGHTS WILL EXPIRE AT 5:00 P.M., NEW YORK CITY TIME,
ON                    , 2015 (THE "EXPIRATION DATE"), UNLESS THE EXCHANGE OFFER IS EXTENDED BY THE
ISSUERS (AS DEFINED BELOW).
The Exchange Agent for the Exchange Offer is:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
By Registered or Certified Mail:
MAC N9303-121
P.O. Box 1517
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55480
 
Attn: Corporate Trust Operations
MAC N9303-121
By Overnight Delivery:
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55479
 
Attn: Corporate Trust Operations
6th & Marquette Avenue
By Hand Delivery:
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
608 2nd Avenue South
Northstar East
Building—12th Floor
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Attn: Corporate Trust Operations
FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION: 1-612-667-6282
CONFIRM BY TELEPHONE: 1-800-344-5128
If you wish to exchange currently outstanding unregistered 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021 ("old notes") for an
equal aggregate principal amount at maturity of registered 6.625% Senior Notes due 2021 ("new notes") pursuant to
the exchange offer, you must validly tender (and not withdraw) old notes to the Exchange Agent prior to the Expiration
Date.
The undersigned hereby acknowledges receipt of the prospectus, dated                    , 2014 (the "Prospectus"),
of Legacy Reserves LP and Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation (collectively, the "Issuers"), and this letter of
transmittal (the "Letter of Transmittal"), which together describe the Issuers' offer (the "Exchange Offer") to exchange
the old notes for a like principal amount of the new notes that have been registered under the Securities Act of 1933,
as amended (the "Securities Act"). Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the respective meanings given
to them in the Prospectus.
The Issuers reserve the right, at any time or from time to time, to extend the Exchange Offer at their discretion,
in which event the term "Expiration Date" shall mean the latest date to which the Exchange Offer is extended. The
Issuers shall notify the Exchange Agent and each registered holder of the old notes of any extension by oral or written
notice prior to 9:00 a.m., New York City time, on the next business day after the previously scheduled Expiration
Date.
This Letter of Transmittal is to be used by holders of the old notes. Tender of old notes is to be made according
to the Automated Tender Offer Program ("ATOP"), of the Depository Trust Company ("DTC"), pursuant to the
procedures set forth in the Prospectus under the caption "Exchange Offer—Procedures for Tendering." DTC
participants that are accepting the Exchange Offer must transmit their acceptance to DTC, which will verify the
acceptance and execute a book-entry delivery to the Exchange
A-1
Table of Contents
Agent's DTC account. DTC will then send a computer-generated message known as an "agent's message" to the
Exchange Agent for its acceptance. For you to validly tender your old notes in the Exchange Offer, the Exchange
Agent must receive, prior to the Expiration Date, an agent's message under the ATOP procedures that confirms that:
•
•
DTC has received your instructions to tender your old notes; and
you agree to be bound by the terms of this Letter of Transmittal.
BY USING THE ATOP PROCEDURES TO TENDER OLD NOTES, YOU WILL NOT BE REQUIRED TO
DELIVER THIS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL TO THE EXCHANGE AGENT. HOWEVER, YOU WILL BE BOUND BY
ITS TERMS, AND YOU WILL BE DEEMED TO HAVE MADE THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND THE
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES IT CONTAINS, JUST AS IF YOU HAD SIGNED IT.
Table of Contents
A-2
PLEASE READ THE ACCOMPANYING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
(1)   By tendering old notes in the Exchange Offer, you acknowledge receipt of the Prospectus and this
Letter of Transmittal.
(2)   By tendering old notes in the Exchange Offer, you represent and warrant that you have full authority
to tender the old notes described above and will, upon request, execute and deliver any additional documents
deemed by the Issuers to be necessary or desirable to complete the tender of old notes.
(3)   You understand that the tender of the old notes pursuant to all of the procedures set forth in the
Prospectus will constitute an agreement between the undersigned and the Issuers as to the terms and
conditions set forth in the Prospectus.
(4)   By tendering old notes in the Exchange Offer, you acknowledge that the Exchange Offer is being
made in reliance upon interpretations contained in no-action letters issued to third parties by the staff of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC"), including Exxon Capital Holdings Corp., SEC No-Action
Letter (available May 13, 1988), Morgan Stanley & Co., Inc., SEC No-Action Letter (available June 5, 1991)
and Shearman & Sterling, SEC No-Action Letter (available July 2, 1993), that the new notes issued in
exchange for the old notes pursuant to the Exchange Offer may be offered for resale, resold and otherwise
transferred by holders thereof without compliance with the registration and prospectus delivery provisions of the
Securities Act (other than a broker-dealer who purchased old notes exchanged for such new notes directly from
the Issuers to resell pursuant to Rule 144A or any other available exemption under the Securities Act, and any
such holder that is an "affiliate" of the Issuers within the meaning of Rule 405 under the Securities Act),
provided that such new notes are acquired in the ordinary course of such holders' business and such holders
are not participating in, and have no arrangement with any other person to participate in, the distribution of such
new notes.
(5)   By tendering old notes in the Exchange Offer, you hereby represent and warrant that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the new notes acquired pursuant to the Exchange Offer are being obtained in the ordinary
course of your business, whether or not you are the holder;
neither you nor, to your knowledge, any other person has an arrangement or understanding
with any person to participate in the distribution (within the meaning of the Securities Act)
of such new notes and you are not engaged and do not intend to engage in the distribution
(within the meaning of the Securities Act) of such new notes;
you are not an "affiliate," as such term is defined under Rule 405 promulgated under the
Securities Act, of the Issuers; and
if you are a broker-dealer, you will receive the new notes for your own account in
exchange for old notes that were acquired as a result of market- making activities or other
trading activities, and you acknowledge that you will deliver a prospectus (or, to the extent
permitted by law, make available a prospectus) in connection with any resale of such new
notes.
You may, if you are unable to make all of the representations and warranties contained in Item 5 above
and as otherwise permitted in the Registration Rights Agreement (as defined below), elect to have your old
notes registered in the shelf registration statement described in the registration rights agreement, dated as of
May 13, 2014 (the "Registration Rights Agreement"), by and among the Issuers, the initial guarantors party
thereto and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC,
A-3
Table of Contents
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, RBC Capital Markets, LLC, UBS Securities LLC, Citigroup
Global Markets Inc., Barclays Capital Inc., and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, as representatives of the Initial
Purchasers (as defined therein). Such election may be made by notifying the Issuers in writing at 303 W. Wall
Street, Suite 1800, Midland, TX 79701, Attention: Dan G. LeRoy. By making such election, you agree, as a
holder of old notes participating in a shelf registration, to indemnify and hold harmless the Issuers, the
guarantors, and their respective directors, each of the officers of the Issuers and the guarantors who signs
such shelf registration statement, and each person who controls the Issuers or any of the guarantors, within
the meaning of either the Securities Act or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the
respective officers, directors, partners, employees, representatives and agents of each such person, from and
against any and all losses, claims, damages or liabilities caused by any untrue statement or alleged untrue
statement of a material fact contained in any shelf registration statement or prospectus, or in any supplement
thereto or amendment thereof, or caused by the omission or alleged omission to state therein a material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in the light of the circumstances
under which they were made, not misleading; but only with respect to information relating to the undersigned
furnished in writing by or on behalf of the undersigned expressly for use in a shelf registration statement, a
prospectus or any amendments or supplements thereto. Any such indemnification shall be governed by the
terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement, including, without limitation,
the provisions regarding notice, retention of counsel, contribution and payment of expenses set forth therein.
The above summary of the indemnification provisions of the Registration Rights Agreement is not intended to
be exhaustive and is qualified in its entirety by the Registration Rights Agreement.
(6)   If you are a broker-dealer that will receive new notes for your own account in exchange for old notes
that were acquired as a result of market- making activities or other trading activities, you acknowledge, by
tendering old notes in the Exchange Offer, that you will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of
such new notes; however, by so acknowledging and by delivering a prospectus, you will not be deemed to
admit that you are an "underwriter" within the meaning of the Securities Act.
(7)   If you are a broker-dealer and old notes held for your own account were not acquired as a result of
market-making or other trading activities, such old notes cannot be exchanged pursuant to the Exchange Offer.
(8)   Any of your obligations hereunder shall be binding upon your successors, assigns, executors,
administrators, trustees in bankruptcy and legal and personal representatives.
A-4
Table of Contents
FORMING PART OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE EXCHANGE OFFER
INSTRUCTIONS
1.
Book-Entry Confirmations
Any confirmation of a book-entry transfer to the Exchange Agent's account at DTC of old notes tendered by
book-entry transfer (a "Book-Entry Confirmation"), as well as an agent's message and any other documents required
by this Letter of Transmittal, must be received by the Exchange Agent at its address set forth herein prior to
5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the Expiration Date.
2.
Partial Tenders
Tenders of old notes will be accepted only in minimum denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of $1,000
in excess thereof. The entire principal amount of old notes delivered to the Exchange Agent will be deemed to have
been tendered unless otherwise communicated to the Exchange Agent. If the entire principal amount of all old notes
is not tendered, then old notes for the principal amount of old notes not tendered and new notes issued in exchange
for any old notes accepted will be delivered to the holder via the facilities of DTC promptly after the old notes are
accepted for exchange.
3.
Validity of Tenders
All questions as to the validity, form, eligibility (including time of receipt), acceptance and withdrawal of tendered
old notes will be determined by the Issuers, in their sole discretion, which determination will be final and binding. The
Issuers reserve the absolute right to reject any or all tenders not in proper form or the acceptance for exchange of
which may, in the opinion of counsel for the Issuers, be unlawful. The Issuers also reserve the absolute right to waive
any of the conditions of the Exchange Offer or any defect or irregularity in the tender of any old notes. The Issuers'
interpretation of the terms and conditions of the Exchange Offer (including the instructions on this Letter of
Transmittal) will be final and binding on all parties. Unless waived, any defects or irregularities in connection with
tenders of old notes must be cured within such time as the Issuers shall determine. Although the Issuers intend to
notify holders of defects or irregularities with respect to tenders of old notes, neither the Issuers, the Exchange Agent
nor any other person shall be under any duty to give notification of any defects or irregularities in tenders or incur any
liability for failure to give such notification. Tenders of old notes will not be deemed to have been made until such
defects or irregularities have been cured or waived. Any old notes received by the Exchange Agent that are not
properly tendered and as to which the defects or irregularities have not been cured or waived will be returned by the
Exchange Agent to the tendering holders, unless otherwise provided in this Letter of Transmittal, as soon as
practicable following the Expiration Date.
4.
Requests for Assistance or Additional Copies
Requests for assistance or for additional copies of the Prospectus or this Letter of Transmittal may be directed
to the Exchange Agent at the address or telephone number set forth on the cover page of this Letter of Transmittal.
Holders may also contact their broker, dealer, commercial bank, trust company or other nominee for assistance
concerning the Exchange Offer.
5.
Withdrawal
Tenders may be withdrawn only pursuant to the limited withdrawal rights set forth in the Prospectus under the
caption "Exchange Offer—Withdrawal of Tenders."
6.
No Guarantee of Late Delivery
There is no procedure for guarantee of late delivery in the Exchange Offer.
Table of Contents
Dealer Prospectus Delivery Obligation
Until                        , all dealers that effect transactions in these securities, whether or not participating in the
offering, may be required to deliver a prospectus. This is in addition to the dealers' obligation to deliver a prospectus
when acting as underwriters and with respect to unsold allotments or subscriptions.
Table of Contents
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20.    Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Legacy Reserves LP
Under our partnership agreement, in most circumstances, we will indemnify the following persons, to the fullest
extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages or similar events:
our general partner;
any departing general partner;
any person who is or was an affiliate of a general partner or any departing general partner;
•
•
•
•
any person who is or was a director, officer, member, partner, fiduciary or trustee of any entity set forth
in the preceding three bullet points;
any person who is or was serving as director, officer, member, partner, fiduciary or trustee of another
person at the request of our general partner or any departing general partner; and
•
•
any person designated by our general partner.
Any indemnification under these provisions will only be out of our assets. Unless it otherwise agrees, our general
partner will not be personally liable for, or have any obligation to contribute or loan funds or assets to us to enable us
to effectuate, indemnification. We may purchase insurance against liabilities asserted against and expenses incurred
by persons for our activities, regardless of whether we would have the power to indemnify the person against liabilities
under our partnership agreement.
Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation
Section 145 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, among other things, empowers a Delaware
corporation to indemnify any person who was or is a party, or is threatened to be made a party, to any threatened,
pending or completed action, suit or proceeding (other than an action by or in the right of the corporation) by reason of
the fact that such person is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the
request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation or other enterprise, against
expenses (including attorneys' fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably
incurred by him in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner he
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal
action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful. Similar indemnity is authorized for
such persons against expenses (including attorneys' fees) actually and reasonably incurred by such persons in
connection with the defense or settlement of any such threatened, pending or completed action or suit, if such person
acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the
corporation, provided that (unless a court of competent jurisdiction otherwise provides) such person shall not have
been adjudged liable to the corporation. Any such indemnification may be made only as authorized in each specific
case upon a determination by the stockholders or disinterested directors or by independent legal counsel in a written
opinion that indemnification is proper because the indemnitee has met the applicable standard of conduct.
Section 145 further authorizes a corporation to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is
or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the corporation
as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation or other
II-1
Table of Contents
enterprise, against any liability asserted against him and incurred by him in any such capacity, or arising out of his
status as such, whether or not the corporation would otherwise have the power to indemnify him under Section 145.
Also, the bylaws of Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation provide for the indemnification of directors, officers,
employees or agents of, and such directors and officers who serve at the request of, the company as directors,
officers, employees or agents of any other enterprise against certain liabilities under certain circumstances.
Legacy Reserves GP, LLC and Legacy Reserves Operating GP LLC
Legacy Reserves GP, LLC, the general partner of Legacy Reserves LP, and Legacy Reserves
Operating GP LLC are organized under the laws of the State of Delaware. Under the Delaware Limited Liability
Company Act, a limited liability company may, and shall have the power to, indemnify and hold harmless any member
or manager or other person from and against any and all claims and demands whatsoever.
The limited liability company agreement of Legacy Reserves GP, LLC provides that each director shall be
indemnified and held harmless by the company from and against any and all losses, claims, damages, settlements
and other amounts (collectively, "Losses") arising from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits or proceedings, in
which such director may be involved by reason of the management of the affairs of the company. However, the
director will not be provided with the foregoing indemnification if a court of competent jurisdiction has determined that
such Losses resulted primarily from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the director.
The limited liability company agreement of Legacy Reserves Operating GP LLC provides that a (i) member, any
additional members, any affiliates of such members and any directors or officers of the company, (ii) any former
member, director or officer and (iii) any member, partner, director, officer, fiduciary or trustee of any person or entity
described in clauses (i) and (ii) (collectively, "Indemnitees") shall be indemnified and held harmless by the company
from and against any and all losses, claims, damages and settlements arising from any and all claims, demands,
actions, suits or proceedings, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, in which the member is involved,
as a party or otherwise, by reason of its status as an Indemnitee. However, the Indemnitee will not be held harmless if
there has been a final non-appealable judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that, the
Indemnitee acted in bad faith or engaged in fraud, willful misconduct, or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with
knowledge that the Indemnitee's conduct was unlawful.
Legacy Reserves Operating LP
The limited partnership agreement of Legacy Reserves Operating LP provides that a (i) the general partner, any
additional general partner and any affiliates of such general partner, (ii) any officer of the partnership or any subsidiary
of the partnership, and (iii) any member, partner, director, officer, fiduciary or trustee of any person or entity described
in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) (collectively, "Indemnitees") shall be indemnified and held harmless by the partnership from
and against any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities, joint or several, expenses, judgments, fines and
settlements arising from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits or proceedings, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, in which the member is involved, as a party or otherwise, by reason of its status as an
Indemnitee. However, the Indemnitee will not be held harmless if there has been a final non-appealable judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that, the Indemnitee acted in bad faith or engaged in fraud,
willful misconduct, or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that the Indemnitee's conduct was
unlawful.
II-2
Table of Contents
Legacy Reserves Services, Inc.
Legacy Reserves Services, Inc. is incorporated under the laws of the state of Texas. The Texas Business
Organizations Code ("TBOC") governs Texas corporations. Section 8.051 of the TBOC states that: (a) An enterprise
shall indemnify a governing person, former governing person, or delegate against reasonable expenses actually
incurred by the person in connection with a proceeding in which the person is a respondent because the person is or
was a governing person or delegate if the person is wholly successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of
the proceeding. (b) A court that determines, in a suit for indemnification, that a governing person, former governing
person, or delegate is entitled to indemnification under this section shall order indemnification and award to the person
the expenses incurred in securing the indemnification.
Section 8.052 states that: (a) On application of a governing person, former governing person, or delegate and
after notice is provided as required by the court, a court may order an enterprise to indemnify the person to the extent
the court determines that the person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnification in view of all the relevant
circumstances. (b) This section applies without regard to whether the governing person, former governing person, or
delegate applying to the court satisfies the requirements of Section 8.101 or has been found liable: (1) to the
enterprise; or (2) because the person improperly received a personal benefit, without regard to whether the benefit
resulted from an action taken in the person's official capacity. (c) The indemnification ordered by the court under this
section is limited to reasonable expenses if the governing person, former governing person, or delegate is found liable:
(1) to the enterprise; or (2) because the person improperly received a personal benefit, without regard to whether the
benefit resulted from an action taken in the person's official capacity.
Section 8.101 states that: (a) An enterprise may indemnify a governing person, former governing person, or
delegate who was, is, or is threatened to be made a respondent in a proceeding to the extent permitted by
Section 8.102 if it is determined in accordance with Section 8.103 that: (1) the person: (A) acted in good faith;
(B) reasonably believed: (i) in the case of conduct in the person's official capacity, that the person's conduct was in
the enterprise's best interests; and (ii) in any other case, that the person's conduct was not opposed to the
enterprise's best interests; and (C) in the case of a criminal proceeding, did not have a reasonable cause to believe
the person's conduct was unlawful; (2) with respect to expenses, the amount of expenses other than a judgment is
reasonable; and (3) indemnification should be paid. (b) Action taken or omitted by a governing person or delegate with
respect to an employee benefit plan in the performance of the person's duties for a purpose reasonably believed by
the person to be in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the plan is for a purpose that is not opposed to
the best interests of the enterprise. (c) Action taken or omitted by a delegate to another enterprise for a purpose
reasonably believed by the delegate to be in the interest of the other enterprise or its owners or members is for a
purpose that is not opposed to the best interests of the enterprise. (d) A person does not fail to meet the standard
under Subsection (a)(1) solely because of the termination of a proceeding by: (1) judgment; (2) order; (3) settlement;
(4) conviction; or (5) a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent.
Section 8.102 states that: (a) Subject to Subsection (b), an enterprise may indemnify a governing person, former
governing person, or delegate against: (1) a judgment; and (2) expenses, other than a judgment, that are reasonable
and actually incurred by the person in connection with a proceeding. (b) Indemnification under this subchapter of a
person who is found liable to the enterprise or is found liable because the person improperly received a personal
benefit: (1) is limited to reasonable expenses actually incurred by the person in connection with the proceeding;
(2) does not include a judgment, a penalty, a fine, and an excise or similar tax, including an excise tax assessed
against the person with respect to an employee benefit plan; and (3) may not be made in relation to a proceeding in
which the person has been found liable for: (A) willful or intentional misconduct in the performance of the person's duty
to the enterprise; (B) breach of the person's duty of loyalty owed to the enterprise; or
II-3
Table of Contents
(C) an act or omission not committed in good faith that constitutes a breach of a duty owed by the person to the
enterprise. (c) A governing person, former governing person, or delegate is considered to have been found liable in
relation to a claim, issue, or matter only if the liability is established by an order, including a judgment or decree of a
court, and all appeals of the order are exhausted or foreclosed by law.
Section 8.105(b) states that: An enterprise shall indemnify an officer to the same extent that indemnification is
required under this chapter for a governing person.
Item 21.    Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(a)   The following documents are filed as exhibits to this Registration Statement, including those exhibits
incorporated herein by reference to a prior filing of the Company under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act as
indicated in parentheses:
Exhibit
Number
4.1*
4.2*
4.3*
4.5*
4.6*
Description
Registration Rights Agreement dated June 29, 2006, between Henry Holdings LP and Legacy
Reserves LP and Legacy Reserves GP, LLC (the "Henry Registration Rights Agreement") (Incorporated
by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-134056) filed
September 5, 2006, Exhibit 4.3).
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated March 15, 2006, by and among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy
Reserves GP, LLC and the other parties there to (the "Founders Registration Rights Agreement")
(Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-
134056) filed September 5, 2006, Exhibit 4.3).
 
Registration Rights Agreement dated April 16, 2007, by and among Nielson & Associates, Inc., Legacy
Reserves GP, LLC and Legacy Reserves LP (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q (File No. 001-33249) filed May 14, 2007, Exhibit 4.4).
 
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of May 13, 2014, by and among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy
Reserves Finance Corporation, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Merrill
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, RBC Capital Markets, LLC, UBS Securities LLC, Citigroup
Global Markets Inc., Barclays Capital Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as representatives of the
Initial Purchasers named therein. (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Current Report on
Form 8-K (File No. 001-33249) filed May 17, 2014, Exhibit 4.2).
 
Indenture, dated as of December 4, 2012, among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy Reserves Finance
Corporation, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee
4.7*
(including the form of the 8% senior notes due 2020) (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's
Current Report on Form 8-K (File No. 001-33249) filed December 10, 2012, Exhibit 4.1).
Indenture, dated as of May 28, 2013, among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy Reserves Finance
Corporation, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee
(including form of the 6.625% senior notes due 2021)(Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's
Current Report on Form 8-K (File No. 001-33249) filed May 31, 2013, Exhibit 4.1).
5.1** Opinion of Andrews Kurth LLP regarding the validity of the new notes.
12.1** Statement regarding computation of ratios.
II-4
Description
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
21.1*
*
**
List of subsidiaries of Legacy Reserves LP (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Annual
Report on Form 10-K (File No. 001-33249) filed February 27, 2013, Exhibit 21.1).
23.1** Consent of BDO USA, LLP.
23.2** Consent of LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd.
23.3** Consent of Andrews Kurth LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1).
24.1** Power of Attorney (included on the signature page attached hereto).
25.1** Statement of Eligibility on Form T-1 of Wells Fargo Bank, National Association.
Incorporated by reference, as indicated.
Filed herewith.
(b)   Financial Statement Schedules.
Schedules are omitted because they either are not required or are not applicable or because equivalent
information has been included in the financial statements, the notes thereto or elsewhere herein.
Item 22.    Undertakings.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers
and controlling persons of the registrants, we have been advised that, in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, such indemnification is against public policy and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim
for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by any registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a
director, officer or controlling person of a registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is
asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, such
registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a
court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed
in the Securities Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
Each registrant hereby undertakes:
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration
statement to:
(a)   include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(b)   reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of this registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate,
represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in this registration statement; notwithstanding the
foregoing, any increase or decrease in the volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities
offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the
estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to
Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20% change in the
maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the "Calculation of Registration Fee" table in the effective
registration statement; and
II-5
Table of Contents
(c)   to include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in
this registration statement, or any material change to such information in this registration statement.
That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective
amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered that
remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, if such registrant
is subject to Rule 430C, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to
an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on
Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used after
effectiveness; provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the
registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale
prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus
that was part of the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
That, for the purpose of determining liability of such registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser
in the initial distribution of the securities, in a primary offering of securities of such registrant pursuant to this
registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the
securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned
registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(a)   any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrants relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(b)   any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of such registrant or used
or referred to by the undersigned registrants;
(c)   the portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information
about the undersigned registrants or their securities provided by or on behalf of such registrant; and
(d)   any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by such registrant to the purchaser.
That, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of a registrant annual
report pursuant to Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where applicable, each
filing of an employee benefit plan's annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934)
that is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement
relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the
initial bona fide offering thereof.
To deliver or cause to be delivered with the prospectus, to each person to whom the prospectus is sent or given,
the latest annual report to security holders that is incorporated by reference in the prospectus and furnished pursuant
to, and meeting the requirements of, Rule 14a-3 or Rule 14c-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and, where
interim financial information required to be
II-6
Table of Contents
presented by Article 3 of Regulation S-X is not set forth in the prospectus, to deliver, or cause to be delivered to each
person to whom the prospectus is sent or given, the latest quarterly report that is specifically incorporated by
reference in the prospectus to provide such interim financial information.
To respond to requests for information that are incorporated by reference into the prospectus pursuant to
Items 4, 10(b), 11 or 13 of this Form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated
documents by first class mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed
subsequent to the effective date of the registration statement through the date of responding to the request.
To supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information concerning a transaction, and the company
being acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and included in the registration statement when it became
effective.
Table of Contents
II-7
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the following registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-4 and has duly caused this registration
statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Midland, State of
Texas, on December 16, 2014.
LEGACY RESERVES LP
By:  LEGACY RESERVES GP, LLC
its general partner
By:   /s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Name:   James Daniel Westcott
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Cary D. Brown and James Daniel
Westcott, or either of them, each with power to act without the other, his or her lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents,
with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to sign any or all amendments to this registration statement, including any and all post-effective
amendments, and to file the same with all exhibits thereto and other documents necessary or advisable in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto such attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, or the substitute or substitutes of
any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
/s/ CARY D. BROWN
Cary D. Brown
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
James Daniel Westcott
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer (Principal Financial
Officer)
II-8
Table of Contents
Signature
Title
/s/ MICAH C. FOSTER
Micah C. Foster
Chief Accounting Officer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Date
December 16, 2014
/s/ PAUL T. HORNE
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating
December 16, 2014
Paul T. Horne
/s/ KYLE A. MCGRAW
Kyle A. McGraw
/s/ DALE A. BROWN
Officer and Director
Executive Vice President, Chief
Development Officer and Director
Dale A. Brown
Director
/s/ WILLIAM R. GRANBERRY
William R. Granberry
Director
/s/ G. LARRY LAWRENCE
G. Larry Lawrence
Director
/s/ KYLE D. VANN
Kyle D. Vann
Director
/s/ WILLIAM D. SULLIVAN
William D. Sullivan
Director
Table of Contents
II-9
SIGNATURES
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the following registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-4 and has duly caused this registration
statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Midland, State of
Texas, on December 16, 2014.
LEGACY RESERVES FINANCE CORPORATION
By:   /s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Name:   James Daniel Westcott
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Cary D. Brown and James Daniel
Westcott, or either of them, each with power to act without the other, his or her lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents,
with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to sign any or all amendments to this registration statement, including any and all post-effective
amendments, and to file the same with all exhibits thereto and other documents necessary or advisable in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto such attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, or the substitute or substitutes of
any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ CARY D. BROWN
Cary D. Brown
Director, President and Chief Executive
Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Executive Vice President and Chief
James Daniel Westcott
/s/ MICAH C. FOSTER
Micah C. Foster
Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
Chief Accounting Officer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Table of Contents
Signature
/s/ KYLE A. MCGRAW
Kyle A. McGraw
/s/ PAUL T. HORNE
Director
Paul T. Horne
Director
Table of Contents
Title
II-10
II-11
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the following registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-4 and has duly caused this registration
statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Midland, State of
Texas, on December 16, 2014.
LEGACY RESERVES OPERATING LP
By:  LEGACY RESERVES OPERATING GP LLC,
its general partner
By:  LEGACY RESERVES LP,
its sole member
By:  LEGACY RESERVES GP, LLC,
its general partner
By:  /s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Name:  James Daniel Westcott
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Cary D. Brown and James Daniel
Westcott, or either of them, each with power to act without the other, his or her lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents,
with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to sign any or all amendments to this registration statement, including any and all post-effective
amendments, and to file the same with all exhibits thereto and other documents necessary or advisable in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto such attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, or the substitute or substitutes of
any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ CARY D. BROWN
Cary D. Brown
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Executive Vice President and Chief
James Daniel Westcott
Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
II-12
Table of Contents
Signature
Title
/s/ MICAH C. FOSTER
Chief Accounting Officer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Date
December 16, 2014
Micah C. Foster
/s/ PAUL T. HORNE
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating
Paul T. Horne
/s/ KYLE A. MCGRAW
Kyle A. McGraw
Officer and Director
Executive Vice President, Chief
Development Officer and Director
/s/ DALE A. BROWN
Director
Dale A. Brown
/s/ WILLIAM R. GRANBERRY
Director
William R. Granberry
/s/ G. LARRY LAWRENCE
Director
G. Larry Lawrence
/s/ KYLE D. VANN
Director
Kyle D. Vann
/s/ WILLIAM D. SULLIVAN
Director
William D. Sullivan
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Table of Contents
II-13
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the following registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-4 and has duly caused this registration
statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Midland, State of
Texas, on December 16, 2014.
LEGACY RESERVES OPERATING GP LLC
By:  LEGACY RESERVES LP
its sole member
By:  LEGACY RESERVES GP, LLC,
its general partner
By:  /s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Name:  James Daniel Westcott
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Cary D. Brown and James Daniel
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Westcott, or either of them, each with power to act without the other, his or her lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents,
with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to sign any or all amendments to this registration statement, including any and all post-effective
amendments, and to file the same with all exhibits thereto and other documents necessary or advisable in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto such attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, or the substitute or substitutes of
any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ CARY D. BROWN
Cary D. Brown
Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Executive Vice President and Chief
James Daniel Westcott
Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
II-14
Table of Contents
Signature
Title
/s/ MICAH C. FOSTER
Micah C. Foster
Chief Accounting Officer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ PAUL T. HORNE
Executive Vice President, Chief Operating
Paul T. Horne
/s/ KYLE A. MCGRAW
Kyle A. McGraw
Officer and Director
Executive Vice President, Chief
Development Officer and Director
/s/ DALE A. BROWN
Director
Dale A. Brown
/s/ WILLIAM R. GRANBERRY
Director
William R. Granberry
/s/ G. LARRY LAWRENCE
Director
G. Larry Lawrence
/s/ KYLE D. VANN
Director
Kyle D. Vann
/s/ WILLIAM D. SULLIVAN
Director
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
William D. Sullivan
Table of Contents
II-15
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the following registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-4 and has duly caused this registration
statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Midland, State of
Texas, on December 16, 2014.
LEGACY RESERVES SERVICES, INC.
By:  /s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Name:  James Daniel Westcott
  Title:
Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Cary D. Brown and James Daniel
Westcott, or either of them, each with power to act without the other, his or her lawful attorneys-in-fact and agents,
with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or her name, place and stead, in any and all
capacities, to sign any or all amendments to this registration statement, including any and all post-effective
amendments, and to file the same with all exhibits thereto and other documents necessary or advisable in connection
therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto such attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each
of them, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done
in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby
ratifying and confirming all that said attorneys-in-fact and agents, and each of them, or the substitute or substitutes of
any of them, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement has been
signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ CARY D. BROWN
Cary D. Brown
Director, President and Chief Executive
Officer (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ JAMES DANIEL WESTCOTT
Executive Vice President and Chief
James Daniel Westcott
/s/ MICAH C. FOSTER
Micah C. Foster
Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer)
Chief Accounting Officer and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ KYLE A. MCGRAW
Director
Kyle A. McGraw
/s/ PAUL T. HORNE
Director
Paul T. Horne
Date
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
December 16, 2014
Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
II-16
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Description
4.1* Registration Rights Agreement dated June 29, 2006, between Henry Holdings LP and Legacy Reserves LP
and Legacy Reserves GP, LLC (the "Henry Registration Rights Agreement") (Incorporated by reference to
Legacy Reserves LP's Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-134056) filed September 5, 2006,
Exhibit 4.3).
4.2* Registration Rights Agreement dated March 15, 2006, by and among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy
Reserves GP, LLC and the other parties there to (the "Founders Registration Rights Agreement")
(Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-
134056) filed September 5, 2006, Exhibit 4.3).
4.3* Registration Rights Agreement dated April 16, 2007, by and among Nielson & Associates, Inc., Legacy
Reserves GP, LLC and Legacy Reserves LP (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q (File No. 001-33249) filed May 14, 2007, Exhibit 4.4).
4.5* Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of May 13, 2014, by and among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy
Reserves Finance Corporation, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Merrill
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, RBC Capital Markets, LLC, UBS Securities LLC, Citigroup
Global Markets Inc., Barclays Capital Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as representatives of the Initial
Purchasers named therein. (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Current Report on Form 8-
K (File No. 001-33249) filed May 17, 2014, Exhibit 4.2).
 
Indenture, dated as of December 4, 2012, among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy Reserves Finance
Corporation, the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee
(including the form of the 8% senior notes due 2020) (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's
Current Report on Form 8-K (File No. 001-33249) filed December 10, 2012, Exhibit 4.1).
 
Indenture, dated as of May 28, 2013, among Legacy Reserves LP, Legacy Reserves Finance Corporation,
the Guarantors named therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (including form of
the 6.625% senior notes due 2021)(Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Current Report on
Form 8-K (File No. 001-33249) filed May 31, 2013, Exhibit 4.1).
4.6*
4.7*
*
5.1** Opinion of Andrews Kurth LLP regarding the validity of the new notes.
12.1** Statement regarding computation of ratios.
21.1* List of subsidiaries of Legacy Reserves LP (Incorporated by reference to Legacy Reserves LP's Annual
Report on Form 10-K (File No. 001-33249) filed February 27, 2013, Exhibit 21.1).
23.1** Consent of BDO USA, LLP.
23.2** Consent of LaRoche Petroleum Consultants, Ltd.
23.3** Consent of Andrews Kurth LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1).
24.1** Power of Attorney (included on the signature page attached hereto).
25.1** Statement of Eligibility on Form T-1 of Wells Fargo Bank, National Association.
Incorporated by reference, as indicated.
**
Filed herewith.
II-17