
UNIT
TED STATES
S SECURITI
WASHING
ES AND EX
GTON, D.C.
XCHANGE C
20549
COMMISSIO
N
For
EPORT PURS
E SECURITIE
rm 10-
SUANT TO S
ES EXCHANG
K 
ECTION 13 O
GE ACT OF 1
OR 15(D) 
934
ANNUAL RE
OF THE
For th
Co
he fiscal year 
ommission fi
ended Decem
le number: 0
mber 31, 201
000-30586
0
Indic
 
 
Indic
Exch
 
Indic
Secu
requi
 
Indic
every
chap
such
 
Indic
is no
state
Iv
anhoe
ame of regist
(Exact n
gy Inc.
e Energ
trant as speci
fied in its cha
arter)
(St
inco
Yukon, C
tate or other j
orporation or
Canada 
urisdiction of 
organization)
)
98-03724
(IRS Emplo
Identification
413 
oyer 
n No.)
654-999
Vancouver, B
V
(604
ne number of
9 Canada Pla
BC, Canada V
4) 688-8323 
the registran
ace
V6C 3E1
(Address
and telephon
nt’s principal e
executive offic
ces)
Securities regi
S
Securities r
stered pursua
registered pur
ant to Section
rsuant to Sect
Na
T
Title of each c
n Shares, No
Commo
lass 
o Par Value
ate by check
mark if the re
egistrant is a w
well-known se
easoned issu
n 12(b) of the 
tion 12(g) of t
ame of each e
Toron
The NA
uer, as defined
Act: None 
the Act: 
exchange on 
nto Stock Exc
ASDAQ Capita
d in Rule 405
ered
which registe
change 
al Market 
5 of the Secur
    
rities Act. 
 
 Yes    No
o
ate  by  check
hange Act.
k  mark  if  the
registrant  is
s  not  required
d  to  file  repo
orts  pursuant
to  Section  1
n  15(d)  of  the
13  or  Section
e 
 Yes    No
o  

ate by check
urities  Exchan
ired to file suc
k mark wheth
nge  Act  of  1
ch reports), a
er the registr
934  during  th
nd (2) has be
rant (1) has f
he  preceding
een subject to
filed all report
g  12  months 
o such filing re
ts required to
(or  for  such 
equirements f
o be filed by 
shorter  perio
for the past 9
or 15(d) of the
Section 13 o
e 
registrant  was
od  that  the  r
s 
  Yes   No
0 days.  
o  

ate by check
y Interactive D
pter) during th
 files).
k mark whethe
Data File req
he preceding
er the registr
uired to be su
12 months (o
rant has subm
ubmitted and 
or for such sh
mitted electro
posted pursu
horter period
nically and p
uant to Rule 4
that the regi
osted on its c
405 of Regula
istrant was re
corporate We
ation S-T (§2
equired to su
eb site, if any
y, 
232.405 of this
s 
bmit and pos
st 
 Yes   No
o
ate by check 
ot contained h
ements incorp
mark if disclo
herein, and w
porated by refe
osure of delin
will not be con
erence in Par
nquent filers p
ntained, to the
rt III of this Fo
pursuant to Ite
e best of regis
orm 10-K or a
em 405 of Re
strant’s know
any amendme
egulation S-K 
wledge, in def
ent to this For
(§ 229.405 o
finitive proxy 
rm 10-K.
of this chapter
r) 
or information
n 
 

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a 
smaller reporting company. See definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” 
in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer              
 Non-accelerated filer               
Accelerated filer                       
Smaller reporting company   
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). 
 
  
As of June 30, 2010, the aggregate market value of the registrant’s common stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant 
was $530,616,815, based on the Toronto Stock Exchange closing price on that date. At March 4, 2011, the registrant had 
343,931,658 common shares outstanding.
 Yes   No
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I 
 
 
 
PART II
PART III 
 
 
 
 
PART IV
ITEMS 1 AND 2:  Business and Properties………………………..………….………………………….………………………….….…… 5 
ITEM 1A:  Risk Factors…………………….…………………..….………………………………………….…..….………………..……… 14 
ITEM 1B:  Unresolved Staff Comments….…………………..….………………………………………….…..….………………..……… 20 
ITEM 3:  Legal Proceedings ……………………….…………………..….……………………………………………………….…...…… 20 
ITEM 5:  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters
and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities ……………………………………………………………………………………… 21 
ITEM 6:  Selected Financial Data…………………….…………………..….…………….……………………………….……….……… 23 
ITEM 7:  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations…………………………….… 24 
ITEM 7A:  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk ……………………………………………….……….……… 35 
ITEM 8:  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data…………….…………………………………………………………….…….
37 
ITEM 9:  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure…..….……..…..…….……… 77 
ITEM 9A:  Controls and Procedures..………………………………………………………….…………………..….……….…….……… 77 
ITEM 10:  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance…………………………………………………………..………… 79 
ITEM 11:  Executive Compensation …………………………………………………………………….…………………………….…....
83 
ITEM 12:  Security and Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters….…….… 93 
ITEM 13:  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence …………………………………...…….… 95 
ITEM 14:  Principal Accounting Fees and Services ……………………………………………………………………………………..… 95 
ITEM 15:  Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules ……………………………………….…………………….…………………… 97
ABBREVIATIONS 
As generally used in the oil and gas industry and in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Annual Report”), the following 
terms have the following meanings:
=   barrel 
=   barrels per day 
=   barrel of oil equivalent 
=   barrels of oil equivalent per day 
=   thousand barrels
bbl 
bbls/d 
boe 
boe/d 
mbbls 
mbbls/d  =   thousand barrels per day 
mboe 
mboe/d  =   thousands of barrels of oil equivalent per day
=   thousands of barrels of oil equivalent
=   thousand cubic feet 
=   thousand cubic feet per day 
=   million cubic feet
mcf 
mcf/d 
mmcf 
mmcf/d  =   million cubic feet per day 
mmbbls =   million barrels 
mmbls/d =   million barrels per day 
mmbtu 
tcf
=   million British thermal units 
=   trillion cubic feet
Oil equivalents compare quantities of oil with quantities of gas or express these different commodities in a common unit. A 
boe is derived by converting six thousand cubic feet of gas to one barrel of oil (6 mcf/1 bbl). Boes may be misleading, 
particularly  if  used  in  isolation.  The  conversion  ratio  is  based  on  an  energy  equivalent  conversion  method  primarily 
applicable at the burner tip and does not represent a value equivalency at the wellhead.
3
CURRENCY AND EXCHANGE RATES 
Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  reference  to  “dollars”  or  to  “$”  are  to  US  dollars  and  all  references  to  “Cdn$”  are  to 
Canadian dollars. The noon-day exchange rates for Cdn$1.00, as reported by the Bank of Canada, were:
(US$) 
Closing 
High 
Low 
Average Noon
2010 
1.01 
1.01 
0.93 
0.93
2009 
0.96 
0.97 
0.77 
0.88
2008 
0.82 
1.03 
0.77 
0.94
2007 
1.01 
1.09 
0.84 
0.93
2006 
0.86 
0.91 
0.85 
0.88
On March 4, 2011, the noon-day exchange rate was US$0.97 for Cdn$1.00. 
 
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
Certain  statements  in  this  Annual  Report,  including  those  appearing  in  Items  1  and  2  –  Business  and  Properties  and    
Item 7 – Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”), constitute 
“forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  United  States  Private  Securities  Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995, 
Section 21E of the United States Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and Section 27A of 
the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Act”). Such forward-looking statements involve known and 
unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or other 
future events, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements or other events expressly or 
implicitly predicted by such forward-looking statements. Such risks, uncertainties and other factors include:
  our short history of limited revenue, losses and negative cash flow from our current exploration and development
activities in Canada, Ecuador, China and Mongolia;
  our limited cash resources and consequent need for additional financing;  
  our ability to raise additional financing when it is required or on acceptable terms;  
 

the potential success of our Heavy-to-Light or HTLTM technology;  
the potential success of our oil and gas exploration and development properties in Canada, Ecuador, China and 
Mongolia;
  oil price volatility;  
  oil and gas industry operational hazards and environmental concerns;  
  government regulation and requirements for permits and licenses, particularly in the foreign jurisdictions in which
we carry on business;  
title matters;  
risks associated with carrying on business in foreign jurisdictions;  
conflicts of interests;  
competition for oil and gas exploration properties from larger, better financed oil and gas companies; and
 
 
 
 
  other statements contained herein regarding matters that are not historical facts.
Forward-looking  statements  can often  be  identified by  the  use  of forward-looking  terminology  such as “may”,  “expect”, 
“intend”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “believe” or “continue” or the negative thereof or variations thereon or similar terminology. 
We believe that any forward-looking statements made are reasonable based on information available to us on the date 
such  statements  were  made.  However,  no  assurance  can  be  given  as  to  future  results,  levels  of  activity  and 
achievements. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking 
statements contained in this report. All subsequent forward-looking statements, whether written or oral, attributable to us, 
or persons acting on our behalf, are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements. 
 
AVAILABLE INFORMATION 
The principal executive offices of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. (“Ivanhoe,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) are located at Suite 
654-999 Canada Place, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6C 3E1, and our registered and records office is located at 300-
204 Black Street, Whitehorse, Yukon, Y1A 2M9.
4
(the
free  of  charge,
“CSA”)  are  available,
Electronic copies of the Company’s filings with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and 
the  Canadian  Securities  Administrators 
through  our  website 
(www.ivanhoeenergy.com) or, upon request, by contacting our investor relations department at (403) 817-1108. 
 
Alternatively,  the  SEC  and  the  CSA  each  maintains  a  website  (www.sec.gov  and  www.sedar.com)  that  contains  our 
reports, proxy and information statements and other published information that have been filed or furnished with the SEC 
and the CSA. The information on our website is not, and shall not be, deemed to be part of this Annual Report.
PART I 
ITEMS 1 AND 2:  BUSINESS AND PROPERTIES 
GENERAL 
Ivanhoe is an independent international heavy oil development and production company focused on pursuing long term 
growth in its reserve base and production using advanced technologies, including its HTL™ technology.  Core operations 
are in Canada, Ecuador, China and Mongolia, with business development opportunities worldwide.  Ivanhoe is the listed 
parent  company  and  is  responsible  for  Canadian  operations.  Operations  in  Latin  American  are  conducted  through 
Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc., while activities in China and Southeast Asia are operated by Sunwing Energy Ltd. 
(“Sunwing”).   
 
We were incorporated pursuant to the laws of the Yukon Territory of Canada, on February 21, 1995, under the name 888 
China Holdings Limited. On June 3, 1996, we changed our name to Black Sea Energy Ltd. On June 24, 1999, Black Sea 
Energy Ltd. merged with Sunwing, and we changed our name to Ivanhoe. 
 
In  2005,  Ivanhoe  completed  a  merger  with  Ensyn  Group  Inc.  (“Ensyn”)  acquiring  the  proprietary,  patented  heavy  oil 
upgrading process called HTL™. In July 2008, the Company acquired oil sand assets in the Athabasca region of Canada. 
Later in 2008, we signed a contract with the Ecuador state oil companies to explore and develop Ecuador’s Pungarayacu 
heavy oil field in Block 20. In 2009, Ivanhoe sold its wholly owned subsidiary, Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc., disposing of all 
our oil and gas exploration and production operations in the United States (“US”). We also acquired a production-sharing 
contract for the Nyalga Block XVI in Mongolia in 2009, through a merger with PanAsian Petroleum Inc., a privately-owned 
corporation.   
 
CORPORATE STRATEGY 
Ivanhoe continues to pursue its core strategies, which are:
  Utilize long-standing knowledge and relationships in the Far East to pursue conventional oil and gas production
and exploration opportunities;
  Seek  out  heavy  oil  development  projects  globally  that  have  operational  needs  that  can  benefit  from  our
proprietary HTLTM technology; and
  Bias new country entry and business development to projects that, because of their remote setting, geo-political 
status or operational needs, have been overlooked by the broader industry, subsequently expanding efforts in the 
new locations to more conventional oil and gas industry activities.
Pursuing Natural Gas in China 
Ivanhoe’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Sunwing, has been conducting operations in China since the mid-1990s. In particular, 
Sunwing is focused on a key natural gas exploration project (the Zitong Block) in Sichuan Province of China. Sichuan is 
the oldest and one of the most productive gas producing regions of China. Sinopec and PetroChina have made significant 
gas discoveries in blocks adjacent to Sunwing’s Zitong Block. 
 
The Sichuan Basin, located in central China approximately 930 miles southwest of Beijing, is the country’s largest gas-
producing region, currently producing more than 800 mmcf/d and estimated by Chinese officials to contain a natural gas 
resource potential of 260 tcf. There is a strong and growing local market for natural gas, with approximately 120 million 
people living within the basin and with well-developed grid connections to adjacent industrial and population areas. 
 
Natural  gas  sales  are  regulated  in  China  and  current  prices  are  approximately  $5.00/mcf  at  the  wellhead.  As  part  of 
China’s commitment to develop cleaner sources of energy, demand for natural gas is projected to continue to grow in the 
country and Sunwing’s goal is to tap into this burgeoning market.
5
Importance of the Heavy Oil Segment of the Oil and Gas Industry 
The global oil and gas industry is being impacted by the declining availability of low cost replacement reserves. This has 
resulted in volatility in oil markets and marked shifts in the demand and supply landscape. Ivanhoe believes that long term 
demand and the natural decline of conventional oil production will see the development of higher cost and lower value 
resources, including heavy oil. 
 
Heavy oil developments can be segregated into two types: conventional heavy oil that flows to the surface without steam 
enhancement and non-conventional heavy oil and bitumen. While the Company focuses on the non-conventional heavy 
oil, both types of oil play an important role in our corporate strategy.   
 
Production of conventional heavy oil has been steadily increasing worldwide, led by Canada and Latin America but with 
significant contributions from most other oil basins, including the Middle East and the Far East, as producers struggle to 
replace declines in light oil reserves. Even without the impact of the large non-conventional heavy oil projects in Canada 
and Venezuela, world heavy oil production has become increasingly more common.  
 
With regard to non-conventional heavy oil and bitumen, a dramatic increase in interest and activity has been fueled by 
higher prices, in addition to various key advances in technology, including improved remote sensing, horizontal drilling 
and new thermal techniques. This has enabled producers to more effectively access the extensive heavy oil resources 
around the world. 
 
These  newer  technologies,  together  with  higher  oil  prices,  have  generated  increased  interest  in  heavy  oil  resources.  
Nevertheless, remaining challenges for profitable exploitation include: i) the requirement for steam and electricity to help 
extract  heavy  oil;  ii)  the  need  for  diluent  to  move  the  oil  once  it  is  at  the  surface;  iii)  the  heavy  versus  light  oil  price 
differentials that the producer is faced with when the product gets to market; and iv) conventional upgrading technologies 
are  limited  to  very  large  scale,  high  capital  cost  facilities.  These  challenges  can  lead  to  “distressed”  assets,  where 
economics are poor, or to “stranded” assets, where the resource cannot be economically produced and lies fallow. 
 
Ivanhoe’s Value Proposition 
With the application of the HTL™ process, Ivanhoe seeks to address the key heavy oil development challenges and can 
do so at a relatively small minimum economic scale.   
 
Ivanhoe’s HTL™ upgrading is a partial upgrading process that is designed to operate in facilities as small as 10,000 to 
30,000  bbls/d.  This  is  substantially  smaller  than  the  minimum  economic  scale  for  conventional  stand-alone  upgraders 
such as delayed cokers, which typically operate at scales of over 100,000 bbls/d. The HTL™ process is based on carbon 
rejection, a tried and tested concept in heavy oil processing. The key advantage of HTL™ is that it is a very fast process, 
with processing times typically under a few seconds. This results in smaller, less costly facilities and eliminates the need 
for hydrogen addition, an expensive, large minimum scale step typically required in conventional upgrading. HTL™ has 
the added advantage of converting the by-products from the upgrading process into onsite energy, rather than generating 
large volumes of low value coke.   
 
The HTL™ process offers significant advantages as a field located upgrading alternative, integrated with the upstream 
heavy oil production operation.  HTL™ provides four key benefits to the producer:
virtual elimination of external energy requirements for steam generation and/or power for upstream operations;
 
  elimination of the need for diluent or blend oils for transport; 
 

capture of the majority of the heavy versus light oil value differential; and  
relatively  small  minimum  economic  scale  of  operations  suited  for  field  upgrading  and  for  smaller  field 
developments.
The economics of a project are effectively dictated by the advantages that HTL™ can bring to a particular opportunity. 
The  more stranded  the resource  and  the  fewer  monetization  alternatives  that  the  resource  owner has,  the  greater  the 
opportunity Ivanhoe will have to establish its unique value proposition. 
 
Implementation Strategy  
Ivanhoe is an oil and gas company with a unique technology which addresses several major problems confronting the oil 
and  gas  industry  today  and  the  Company  believes  it  has  a  competitive  advantage  because  of  its  patented  upgrading 
process.  In  addition,  because  Ivanhoe  has  experienced  thermal  recovery  teams,  the  Company  is  in  a  position  to  add 
value and leverage its technology advantage by working with partners on stranded heavy oil resources around the world.
6
The Company’s continuing strategy is as follows:
  Advance its two key heavy oil projects – in Canada and Ecuador. Continue to deploy personnel and financial
resources in support of the Company’s goal to become a significant heavy oil producer.
  Advance the HTL™ process. Additional development work will continue to advance the HTL™ process through
the commercial application of HTL™ upgrading in Canada, Ecuador and beyond.
  Advance its natural gas project in the Zitong Block in Sichuan Province, China. Through its wholly-owned 
subsidiary, Sunwing Energy, proceed with additional planning and operational analysis to develop an appraisal 
program leading to a full development plan for the Zitong block.
  Enhance the Company’s financial position to support its major projects. Implementation of large projects 
requires significant capital outlays. The Company is working on various financing initiatives and establishing the 
relationships required for future development activities.
  Build  internal  capabilities.  The  Company  continues  to  seek  to  build  its  internal  leadership  and  technical
capabilities through the addition of key personnel associated with each major project.
  Continue  to  deploy  the  personnel  and  the  financial  resources  to  capture  additional  opportunities  for 
development  projects  utilizing  the  Company’s  HTL™  process.  Commercialization  of  the  Company’s 
upgrading process requires close alignment with partners, suppliers, host governments and financiers.
PROPERTY DESCRIPTIONS 
Our oil and gas operations are broken down into three geographic areas: Canada, Ecuador and Asia. The Business and 
Technology Development area captures costs incurred in the pursuit of projects throughout the world as well as expenses 
incurred to develop, enhance and identify improvements in the application of the HTL™ technology.  
 
Production, revenues, net income, capital expenditures and identifiable assets for these segments appear in Note 11 to 
the consolidated financial statements and in the MD&A in this Annual Report.  
  
Integrated Oil and Gas Properties 
Canada 
Tamarack, acquired in 2008, is a 6,880 acre block located approximately 10 miles northeast of Fort McMurray, Alberta, 
Canada. Ivanhoe holds a 100% working interest in the property, subject only to a 20% back-in right held by Talisman 
Energy Canada (“Talisman”), which expires in mid-2011. 
 
Our  independent  reserve  evaluator,  GLJ  Petroleum  Consultants  Ltd.  (“GLJ”),  has  assigned  total  3P  reserves  of             
220 mmbbls of bitumen to Tamarack. It is anticipated that the resources will be developed utilizing steam assisted gravity 
drainage (“SAGD”) technology. The Company expects that 12 well pads and approximately 160 SAGD well pairs will be 
required to fully develop and produce the targeted resource base. 
 
In March 2010, a 28 well winter delineation program was completed, which provided information necessary for regulatory 
filings.  In  November  2010,  Ivanhoe  filed  a  comprehensive  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  with  the  Government  of 
Alberta.  In  support  of  the  application,  Basic  Engineering  and  Design  and  Front  End  Engineering  and  Design  were 
completed  to  generate  a  Class  III  (+25/-20%)  capital  cost  estimate.  Subject  to  regulatory  approvals  from  the  Alberta 
Energy  Resources  Conservation  Board  and  Alberta  Environment,  construction  at  Tamarack  could  commence  in  mid-
2012, with commissioning and start-up of the production facilities expected in the fourth quarter of 2013.  
 
Ecuador  
In October 2008, Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc., an indirect wholly owned subsidiary, signed a 30 year contract with the 
Ecuador state oil companies Petroecuador and Petroproduccion.  The contract gives us the right to explore and develop 
the Pungarayacu heavy oil field in Block 20, an area of 426 square miles, approximately 125 miles southeast of Quito, 
Ecuador’s capital. We anticipate using HTL™ technology, as well as providing advanced oilfield technology, expertise and 
capital to develop, produce and upgrade heavy oil from the Pungarayacu field. The Company may also explore for lighter 
oil in the contract area and use any light oil discoveries to blend with the heavy oil for delivery to Petroproduccion.  
 
In 2010, the IP-5b well was successfully drilled, cored and logged to a total depth of 1,080 feet. The well was perforated in 
the  Hollin  oil sands  and  steam  was successfully  injected  into the reservoir  resulting  in  production  of  heated  heavy  oil.   
The  Company’s  IP-15  well,  drilled  in  2010,  encountered  certain  cementing  and  completion  problems  during  steam 
injection  operations  and  testing  at  the  well  was  suspended  without  recovering  oil.    Ivanhoe  sees  significant  variability 
between  the  two  well  locations,  supporting  the  view  that  geological  faulting  is  prevalent  in  Block  20  due  to  the  close
7
proximity  of  the  Andes,  directly  to  the  west  of  the  block.    We  plan  to  commence  a  seismic  program  following  testing 
operations  at  IP-5b  to  increase  understanding  of  the  geological  faulting  and  to  help  determine  locations  for  our  next 
appraisal wells. 
 
Conventional Oil and Gas Properties 
Asia 
China
Zitong 
In  November  2002,  we  entered  into  a  30  year  production  sharing  contract  with  China  National  Petroleum 
Corporation  (“CNPC”)  for  the  Zitong  block,  which  covers  an  area  of  approximately  658,000  gross  acres  after 
contractual  relinquishments  in  the  Sichuan  basin.  The  parties  will  jointly  participate  in  the  development  and 
production of any commercially viable deposits, with production rights limited to the later of 2032 or 20 years of 
continuous production. In 2006, we farmed out 10% of our working interest in the Zitong block to Mitsubishi Gas 
Chemical Company Inc. of Japan for $4.0 million.  
 
In Phase I of the contract, Ivanhoe reprocessed 1,649 miles of existing 2D seismic data and acquired 705 miles of 
new 2D seismic data. Two wells were drilled and although both wells encountered expected reservoirs and gas 
was  tested  on  the  second  well,  neither  well  demonstrated  commercially  viable  flow  rates  and  both  wells  were 
suspended. 
 
In Phase II, two wells were drilled in 2010 at the Zitong block, both resulting in gas discoveries. The Yixin-2 well 
was tested in December 2010 with gas flowing from the Xu-4 Formation. Following initial flow and pressure tests, 
the well was shut-in for pressure build-up.  The Zitong-1 well reached total depth in December 2010  and  was 
tested in January 2011, with gas flowing from the Xu-4 Formation. The well was subsequently shut-in to record 
reservoir pressure build-up and allow testing of the shallower, Xu-5 formation. 
 
Following the drilling of the Zitong-1 and Yixin-2 wells, areas excluding those identified for development and future 
production were to be relinquished. In January 2011, Ivanhoe received notice that the exploration period has been 
extended for an additional six months.  
 
Dagang 
Ivanhoe’s oil production originates in the Kongnan oilfield in Dagang, Hebei Province, China (the “Dagang field”).  
We have a 30 year production sharing contract with CNPC, covering an area of 10,255 gross acres. From 2001 to 
2007, we drilled 44 wells and commercial production commenced on January 1, 2009. The project reached cost 
recovery  in  September  2009  and  our  working  interest  decreased  to  49%.    Operations  in  the  Dagang  field  will 
revert to CNPC at the end of the 20 year production phase of the contract or earlier if the field is abandoned.
In  2010,  quotas  restricted  production  to  70,000  gross  tonnes  or  1,400  bbls/d  gross.  Actual  production  in  2010 
averaged 788 bbls/d net. Production quotas in 2011 are set at 80,000 gross tonnes or approximately 1,600 bbls/d 
gross.
Mongolia 
Through a merger with PanAsian Petroleum Inc. in November 2009, we acquired a production sharing contract for the 
Nyalga Block XVI in the Khenti and Tov provinces in Mongolia.  The block covers an area of approximately 3.1 million 
gross  acres,  after  a  25%  relinquishment  in  2010.    The  five  year  exploration  period  is  divided  into  three  consecutive 
phases, consisting of two years (“Phase I”), one year (“Phase II”) and two years (“Phase III”), with the ability to nominate a 
two year extension following Phase I or Phase II.
During  the  initial  seismic  program,  approximately  16%  of  the  block  in  the  Delgerkhaan  area  was  declared  by  the 
Mongolian  government  to  be  a  historical  site  and  operations  in  this  area  were  suspended.  A  letter  from  the  Mineral 
Resources and Petroleum Authority of Mongolia (“MRPAM”) stated that the obligations under year one of Phase I would 
be extended for one year from the time the Company is allowed to re-enter the suspended area. To date, access has not 
been granted and discussions with MRPAM are ongoing.  As a result, the government has adjusted the dates in which the 
project year begins. Phase II is now considered to have commenced on July 20, 2010.
From  late  2009  through  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  the  Company  acquired  an  additional  465  kilometres  of  2-D  seismic 
across Block XVI, for a total of 925 kilometres of 2-D seismic data over the Kherulen sub-basin. In 2010, preparations
8
commenced for  a  five  well  drilling  program  and  a  seismic  acquisition  program.  The  first  exploratory  location  has  been 
identified and we expect to initiate drilling operations in Mongolia in the first half of 2011. 
 
RESERVES, PRODUCTION AND RELATED INFORMATION 
In  addition  to  the  information  provided  below,  please  refer  to  the  “Supplementary  Disclosures  About  Oil  and  Gas 
Production Activities (Unaudited)” set forth in Item 8 in this Annual Report for certain details regarding the Company’s oil 
and gas proved reserves, the estimation process and production by country. We have not filed with nor included in reports 
to any other US federal authority or agency, any estimates of total proved oil reserves since the beginning of the last fiscal 
year.  
 
The following table presents estimated proved, probable and possible oil reserves as of December 31, 2010:    
 
Summary of Oil and Gas Reserves Using Average 2010 Prices(1)  
   
(mbbl)  
Proved
Canada 
Tamarack
Dagang
Other
China
- 
 - 
 - 
   
-  
175,684  
   
 - 
 43,809
1,186 
 473 
 1,659 
  
322 
470 
   
 - 
 -
Total
1,265 
473 
1,738 
 
322 
176,154 
 
- 
43,809
79 
- 
79 
  
- 
- 
   
 - 
-
Developed 
Undeveloped 
Total proved
Probable
Developed 
Undeveloped
Possible
Developed 
Undeveloped
(1)  Reserves are the Company’s total gross reserves before royalty deductions.
Canada
Probable and Possible Reserves 
In 2010, probable and possible reserves increased from nil in 2009 to 219,493 mbbls as a result of completing a 
28  well  delineation  drilling  program on the  Tamarack  lands,  further  technical evaluation and  the  submission of 
Ivanhoe’s regulatory application to the Government of Alberta in November 2010. Further reserve development is 
subject to regulatory approval and availability of financing.
Possible  reserves  are  within  the  Tamarack  project  application  area,  but  have  a  lower  degree  of  certainty 
compared to our probable reserves due to lower quality reservoir characteristics or decreased certainty based on 
the level of reservoir delineation.
Basis of Reserves Estimates 
Probable  and  possible  reserves  will  be  developed  using  a  SAGD  thermal  recovery  process,  which  has  been 
successfully  demonstrated  in  similar  projects  in  the  Athabasca  Oil  Sands  region.  Recovery  estimates  for 
Tamarack are based on applying appropriate recovery factors to original oil-in-place estimates developed through 
detailed  reservoir  characterization.  The  reservoir  characterization  is  based  on  information  gathered  during  
historical  field  delineation  programs.  Recovery  factors  applied  to  the  oil-in-place  estimates  are  the  result  of 
simulation and analytical models, incorporating the actual performance of existing analog projects.
9
China
Proved Reserves 
Proved reserves at December 31, 2010, were 1,738 mbbls compared to 1,101 mbbls at December 31, 2009, an 
increase  of  58%  after  2010  production.    Proved  reserves  increased  due  to  in-field  performance  improvements 
from  continued  water  injections,  a  partial  natural  water  drive  and  our  ongoing  hydraulic  fracture  stimulation 
program  in  the  Dagang  field.  Drilling  activity  in  late  December  2010  was  successful  and,  in  combination  with 
geological  review  and  reservoir  mapping,  supported  additional  future  drilling  locations.  Proved  reserves  also 
benefitted from a pool extension due to the addition of re-activated wells in the periphery of the reservoir. 
 
The transfer of reserves from proved undeveloped to the proved category was immaterial in 2010.  
 
Probable Reserves 
At December 31, 2010, probable reserves in China were 792 mbbls, an increase of 137% over the 334 mbbls 
reported at December 31, 2009.  Additional probable reserves were assigned based on production improvements 
and increased recovery factors discussed under proved reserves.  
 
Basis of Reserve Estimates 
Reserve  estimates  were  calculated  using  recovery  forecasts  based  on  historical  production,  supported  by 
volumetric estimates using geological parameters.  Recoveries rarely exceed 15% of the volumetrically calculated 
original  oil-in-place  per  well  spacing,  which  is  judged  acceptable  for  a  water  flood  in  a  light  oil  reservoir. 
Improvements in production history and production declines are used for a review of producing reserves. With 
further  mapping  and  geological  reviews,  proved  and  probable  undeveloped  reserves  may  then  be  assigned  to 
future drilling and well optimizations.
Internal Control Over Reserve Estimation 
Management is responsible for the estimates of oil and gas reserves and for preparing related disclosures. Estimates and 
related disclosures are prepared in accordance with SEC requirements, generally accepted industry practices in the US 
and the standards of the Canadian Oil and Gas Evaluation Handbook modified to reflect SEC requirements. Our reserve 
estimates and disclosures may differ from other Canadian issuers who follow National Instrument 51-101, “Standards of 
Disclosure for Oil and Gas Activities” (“NI 51-101”). Significant differences between SEC and Canadian reserve estimates 
and disclosures are described in the Special Note to Canadian Investors on page 11. 
 
The  process  of  estimating  reserves  requires  complex  judgments  and  decision  making  based  on  available  geological, 
geophysical, engineering and economic data. To estimate the economically recoverable oil and gas reserves and related 
future net cash flows, we consider many factors and make various assumptions including:
future production rates based on historical performance and expected future operating and investment activities; 
future oil and gas prices and quality differentials;
  expected reservoir characteristics based on geological, geophysical and engineering assessments; 
 
 
  assumed effects of regulation by governmental agencies; and 

future development and operating costs.
We  believe  these  factors  and  assumptions  are  reasonable  based  on  the  information  available  to  us  at  the  time  we 
prepared  our  estimates.  However,  these  estimates  may  change  substantially  as  additional  data  from  ongoing 
development activities and production performance becomes available and as economic conditions impacting oil and gas 
prices and costs change. 
  
Reserve estimates are categorized by the level of confidence that they will be economically recoverable.  Proved reserves 
are  those  quantities  of  oil  and  gas,  which  by  analysis  of  geoscience  and  engineering  data,  can  be  estimated  with 
reasonable  certainty  to  be  economically  producible  in  future  years  from  known  reservoirs  under  existing  economic 
conditions,  operating  methods  and  government  regulations.    The  term  “reasonable  certainty”  implies  a  high  degree  of 
confidence that the quantities of oil and gas actually recovered will equal or exceed the estimate. To achieve reasonable 
certainty, the technologies used in the estimation process have been demonstrated to yield results with consistency and 
repeatability.
10
Probable reserves are those additional reserves that are less certain to be recovered than proved reserves but which, 
together with proved reserves, are as likely as not to be recovered. Therefore, probable reserves have a higher degree of 
uncertainty than proved reserves.  Possible reserves are those additional reserves that are less certain to be recovered 
than probable reserves. Although possible reserve locations are found by “stepping out” from proved reserve locations, 
estimates of probable and possible reserves are, by their nature, more speculative than estimates of proved reserves and, 
accordingly, are subject to substantially greater risk of being realized.  
 
Our reserve estimates were prepared by GLJ and reviewed by our in-house Senior Engineering Advisor (“SEA”). Our SEA 
is a professional engineer, with over 25 years of experience in the oil industry focused on heavy oil recovery techniques. 
His  past  experience  includes  international  positions  responsible  for  thermal  horizontal  and  vertical  well  development 
projects  using  state-of-the-art  reservoir  management  techniques  and  advanced  3D  reservoir  visualization  methods  to 
integrate  complex  data  sets.  He  has  experience  supervising  project  expansions  and  investigating  new  development 
scenarios using reservoir simulation and advanced economic modeling.  
 
All reserve information in this Annual Report is based on estimates prepared by GLJ. The technical personnel responsible 
for preparing the reserve estimates at GLJ meet the requirements regarding qualifications, independence, objectivity and 
confidentiality  set  forth  in  the  Standards  Pertaining  to  the  Estimating  and  Auditing  of  Oil  and  Gas  by  the  Society  of 
Petroleum Engineers. GLJ is an independent firm of petroleum engineers, geologists, geophysicists and petrophysicists; 
they do not own an interest in our properties and are not employed on a contingent fee basis. 
 
  Our Board of Directors reviews the current reserve estimates and related disclosures as presented by the independent 
qualified  reserves  evaluators  in  their  reserve  report.  Our  Board  of  Directors  has  approved  the  reserve  estimates  and 
related disclosures.  
 
Special Note to Canadian Investors  
Ivanhoe is a SEC registrant and files annual reports on Form 10-K; accordingly, our reserves estimates and regulatory 
securities  disclosures  are  prepared  based  on  SEC  disclosure  requirements.  In  2003,  certain  Canadian  securities 
regulatory authorities adopted NI 51-101 which prescribes standards that Canadian companies are required to follow in 
the preparation and disclosure of reserves and related information.  
 
In 2010, we re-applied for, and received, exemptions from certain NI 51-101 requirements. These exemptions permit us to 
substitute  disclosures  based  on  SEC  requirements  for  much  of  the  annual  disclosure  required  by  NI  51-101  and  to 
prepare  our  reserves  estimates  and  related  disclosures  in  accordance  with  SEC  requirements,  generally  accepted 
industry practices in the US as promulgated by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and the standards of the Canadian Oil 
and Gas Evaluation Handbook (the “COGE Handbook”) modified to reflect SEC requirements. 
 
The reserve quantities disclosed in this Annual Report represent net reserves calculated on an average, first-day-of-the-
month price during the 12 month period preceding the end of the year for 2010, using the standards contained in SEC 
Regulations S-X and S-K and Accounting Standards Codification 932 Extractive Activities – Oil and Gas (section 235-55), 
formerly Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 69, “Disclosures About Oil and Gas Producing Activities”. Such 
information differs from the corresponding information prepared in accordance with Canadian disclosure standards under 
NI  51-101.  The  primary  differences  between  the  current  SEC  requirements  and  the  NI  51-101  requirements  are  as 
follows:


  SEC  registrants  apply  SEC  reserves  definitions  and  prepare  their  reserves  estimates  in  accordance  with  SEC 
requirements and generally accepted industry practices in the US, whereas NI 51-101 requires adherence to the 
definitions and standards promulgated by the COGE Handbook; 
the SEC mandates disclosure of proved reserves calculated using an average, first-day-of-the-month price during 
the 12 month period preceding and existing costs only, whereas NI 51-101 requires disclosure of reserves and 
related future net revenues using forecasted prices, with additional constant pricing disclosure being optional; 
the  SEC  mandates  disclosure  of  reserves  by  geographic  area  only,  whereas  NI  51-101  requires  disclosure  of 
more reserve categories and product types; and 
the SEC leaves the engagement of independent qualified reserves evaluators to the discretion of a company’s 
board of directors, whereas NI 51-101 requires issuers to engage such evaluators.

The  foregoing  is  a  general  and  non-exhaustive  description  of  the  principal  differences  between  SEC  disclosure 
requirements and NI 51-101 requirements. Please note that the differences between SEC and NI 51-101 requirements 
may be material.
11
Production, Sales Prices and Production Costs
Oil production (bbls/d) 
Average sales price ($/bbl) 
Average operating costs (1) ($/bbl)
2010 
788 
75.52 
33.05
2009 
1,276 
53.60 
21.88
2008 
1,339 
98.73 
43.92
(1)  Average operating costs per unit of production, based on net interest after royalties, represent lifting costs, including a windfall gain levy.  According to the 
“Administrative  Measures  on  Collection  of  Windfall  Gain  Levy  on  Oil  Exploitation  Business,”  enterprises  exploiting  and  selling  oil 
in  
China are subject to a windfall gain levy (the “Windfall Levy”) if the monthly weighted average price of oil is above $40.00/bbl.  Excludes depletion and 
depreciation, income taxes, interest, selling and general administrative expenses.
Ivanhoe’s  oil  production  originates  in  Asia,  specifically  the  Dagang  and  Daqing  fields  in  China.  The  majority  of  our 
production comes from Dagang and is sold to the national petroleum company.   
 
Producing Oil Wells  
The company does not have any producing gas wells. Producing oil wells are reported below.
Asia
2010
Gross(1)
44.0
Net(2) 
21.6
2009
Gross(1)  
44.0
Net(2) 
21.6(3)
2008
Gross(1)  
44.0
Net(2) 
36.1
(1)  Gross wells are the total number of wells in which a working interest is owned.    
(2)  Net wells are the sum of fractional working interests owned in gross wells.  
(3)  Our working interest in net wells was reduced from 82% to 49% as stipulated by the governing production sharing contracts upon the Company completing
the recovery of its development investments in September 2009.
Drilling Activity 
At December 31, 2010, we were actively drilling the Zitong-1 and Yixin-2 wells in our Zitong project and one well in our 
Dagang field. No wells were completed in 2010.  The Company did not drill any exploration or development wells in 2009 
or 2008. 
 
Acreage
Canada 
Ecuador 
Asia – China(2) 
Asia – Mongolia
Developed Acres 
Net
Gross 
- 
- 
1,525 
-
Undeveloped Acres(1) 
 Gross  
 Net  
7,520 
7,520 
272,639 
272,639 
595,338 
664,314 
3,107,907 
3,107,907
- 
- 
747 
-
(1)  Undeveloped acreage is considered to be those acres on which wells have not been drilled or completed to a point that would permit production of
commercial quantities of oil and gas regardless of whether or not such acreage contains proved reserves.
(2)  The number of developed acres disclosed in respect of our China properties relates only to those portions of the field covered by our producing operations
and does not include the remaining portions of the field previously developed by CNPC.
The  Tamarack  lease  in  Canada  will  expire  in  October  2016,  but  Ivanhoe  has  sufficient  drill  density  to  be  granted  a 
continuation by the Alberta Department of Energy one year prior to expiry or upon first production, whichever comes first. 
Although  production  activities  from  the  Tamarack  lease  is  anticipated  to  commence  in  2013,  we  plan  to  apply  for  a 
continuation of the lease prior to its expiration if the project is delayed. 
 
We signed a specific services contract with affiliated entities of the State of Ecuador in October 2008 that allows us to 
develop Block 20 for a term of 30 years, extendable by mutual agreement of the parties, for two additional periods of five 
years each, depending on the interests of the State and in conformity with local laws.  
 
Acreage in the Dagang field will return to CNPC in 2027.  Following the completion of Phase II of the Zitong Contract, the 
remaining  acreage  must  be  relinquished  to  CNPC  except  for  areas  identified  for  development  and  future  production, 
which will be relinquished upon termination of the production sharing contract in 2032.
12
Acreage  in  Mongolia  is  subject  to  periodic  relinquishments  up  to  the  end  of  the  exploration  period  and  the  remaining 
acreage designated for appraisal and development will expire 20 years after the final commercial discovery on the Nyalga 
block. 
 
BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
The Company’s Business and Technology Development segment captures HTL™ activities as well as costs associated 
with the pursuit of new business development opportunities.   
 
Technology Development 
In April 2005, Ivanhoe acquired Ensyn and thereby obtained an exclusive, irrevocable license to the HTL™ process for all 
applications other than biomass.  We have since continued to expand patent coverage to protect innovations to the HTL™ 
technology and to significantly extend Ivanhoe’s portfolio of HTL™ intellectual property. Ivanhoe is the assignee of three 
granted US patents and currently has three US patent applications pending.  In other countries, 47 patents are pending. In 
addition, Ivanhoe owns exclusive, irrevocable licenses to 21 global patents as well as proprietary technological knowledge 
for the rapid thermal processing process of petroleum. 
 
Ivanhoe operates a feedstock test facility (“FTF”) at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas. The FTF is a 
small 10-15 bbls/d, highly flexible state-of-the-art facility which will permit analysis of crude oil in small volumes. In 2010, 
the  FTF  was  used  to  support  basic  and  front-end  engineering  for  a  commercial-scale  HTL™  plant  for  the  Tamarack 
project in Canada.  Also, the unit was used to support conceptual design for several projects, including Pungarayacu in 
Ecuador.  As we continue to advance our technology, the FTF will serve an integral role in supporting the Company’s 
commercial operations.
The FTF replaced the Commercial Demonstration Facility (“CDF”), constructed in 2004. The CDF was decommissioned in 
2010 and all future testing will be conducted at the FTF.
Business Development 
The  Company  pursues  HTL™  business  development  opportunities  globally,  with  an  emphasis  on  creating  value  from 
stranded resources or resource accumulations considered too small to be economically viable using other technologies. In 
2010, HTLTM heavy oil and selected conventional oil opportunities were pursued in North and South America, the Middle 
East and North Africa.    
 
CERTAIN FACTORS AFFECTING THE BUSINESS   
Competition   
The oil and gas industry is highly competitive. Our position in the oil and gas industry, which includes the search for and 
development of new sources of supply, is particularly competitive. Our competitors include major, intermediate and junior 
oil and gas companies and other individual producers and operators, many of which have substantially greater financial 
and human resources and more developed and extensive infrastructure. Our larger competitors, by reason of their size 
and  relative  financial  strength,  can  more  easily  access  capital  markets  and  may  enjoy  a  competitive  advantage  in  the 
recruitment of qualified personnel. They may be able to absorb the burden of any changes in laws and regulations in the 
jurisdictions in which we do business more easily, adversely affecting our competitive position. Our competitors may be 
able to pay more for producing oil and gas properties and may be able to define, evaluate, bid for, and purchase a greater 
number of properties and prospects. Further, these companies may enjoy technological advantages and may be able to 
implement new technologies more rapidly. Our ability to acquire additional properties in the future will depend upon our 
ability to conduct efficient operations, to evaluate and select suitable properties, implement advanced technologies, and to 
consummate  transactions  in  a  highly  competitive  environment.  The  oil  and  gas  industry  also  competes  with  other 
industries in supplying energy, fuel and other needs of consumers.
13
Environmental Regulations   
Our  conventional  oil  and  gas  and  HTL™  operations  are  subject  to  various  levels  of  government  laws  and  regulations 
relating to the protection of the environment in the countries in which we operate. We believe that our operations comply 
in all material respects with applicable environmental laws.  
 
Environmental  legislation  imposes,  among  other  things,  restrictions,  liabilities  and  obligations  in  connection  with  the 
generation,  handling,  storage,  transportation,  treatment  and  disposal  of  hazardous  substances  and  waste  and  in 
connection  with  spills,  releases  and  emissions  of  various  substances  to  the  environment.  As  well,  environmental 
regulations are imposed on the qualities and compositions of the products sold and imported. Environmental legislation 
also  requires  that  wells,  facility  sites  and  other  properties  associated  with  our  operations  be  operated,  maintained, 
abandoned and reclaimed to the satisfaction of applicable regulatory authorities. In addition, certain types of operations, 
including  exploration  and  development  projects  and  significant  changes  to  certain  existing  projects,  may  require  the 
submission and approval of environmental impact assessments. Compliance with environmental legislation can require 
significant  expenditures  and  failure  to  comply  with  environmental  legislation  may  result  in  the  imposition  of  fines  and 
penalties  and  liability  for  clean-up  costs  and  damages.  We  anticipate  that  changes  in  environmental  legislation  may 
require,  among  other  things,  reductions  in  emissions  to  the  air  from  our  operations  and  result  in  increased  capital 
expenditures.  
 
Operations in Canada are governed by comprehensive federal, provincial and municipal regulations. We have submitted 
the Regulatory Application/Environmental Impact Assessment for the Tamarack project to the Government of Alberta. The 
regulatory process is expected to take approximately 18 to 24 months. In addition, the Company will be required to obtain 
numerous ancillary approvals prior to commencing operations and will be subject to ongoing environmental monitoring 
and auditing requirements.  
 
China, Mongolia and Ecuador continue to develop and implement more stringent environmental protection regulations and 
standards  for  different  industries.  Projects  are  currently  monitored  by  governments  based  on  the  approved  standards 
specified in the environmental impact statement prepared for individual projects. 
 
Government Regulations  
Our  business  is  subject  to  certain  federal,  state,  provincial  and  local  laws  and  regulations  in  the  regions  in  which  we 
operate  relating  to  the  exploration  for,  and  development,  production  and  marketing  of,  crude  oil  and  gas,  as  well  as 
environmental  and  safety  matters.  In  addition,  the  Chinese  government  regulates  various  aspects  of  foreign  company 
operations in China. Such laws and regulations have generally become more stringent in recent years in the US, Canada, 
Ecuador  and  China,  often  imposing  greater  liability  on  a  larger  number  of  potentially  responsible  parties.  Because  the 
requirements imposed by such laws and regulations are frequently changed, we are not able to predict the ultimate cost of 
compliance.  
 
EMPLOYEES  
As  at  December  31,  2010,  we  had  211  employees  actively  engaged  in  the  business.  None  of  our  employees  are 
unionized. 
 
ITEM 1A:  RISK FACTORS 
Our operations are exposed to various risks, some of which are common to others in the oil and gas industry and some of 
which are unique to our operations. Certain risks set out below constitute “forward-looking statements” and readers should 
refer to the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set out on page 4 of this Annual Report. 
 
Our ability to continue as a going concern may be adversely affected by inadequate funding 
We have a history of operating losses and cash flow from operating activities will not be sufficient to meet our current 
obligations  and  fund  future  capital  projects.  Historically,  we  have  relied  upon  equity  capital  as  our  principal  source  of 
funding. Continuation of the Company is dependent upon our ability to obtain additional capital to preserve our interests in 
current projects and to meet obligations associated with future projects. We may seek financing from a combination of 
strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent company level or at the project 
level. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing on favorable terms, if at all, and any future equity 
issuances may be dilutive to investors. Obtaining financing may be hampered by the inability to attract strategic investors 
to our projects on acceptable terms, volatility in equity and debt markets and a sustained decrease in the market price of 
our common shares. Without access to financing, we may not be able to continue as a going concern.
14
We may not be able to fund our substantial capital requirements 
Our business is capital intensive and the advancement of our exploration projects in China and Mongolia, development 
projects  in  Canada  and  Ecuador  and  HTL™  initiatives  require  significant  funding.    Since  cash  flows  from  existing 
operations  are  insufficient  to  fund  future  capital  expenditures,  we  intend  to  finance  future  capital  projects  with  a 
combination of strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent company level or 
at the project level or from the sale of existing assets. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing 
on favorable terms, if at all, and any future equity issuances may be dilutive to investors. Obtaining financing in the future 
may be hampered by the inability to attract strategic investors to our projects on acceptable terms, volatility in equity and 
debt markets and a sustained decrease in the market price of our common shares. If we fail to obtain adequate funding 
when needed, we may have to delay or forego potentially valuable project acquisition and development opportunities or 
default  on  existing  funding  commitments  to  third  parties  and  forfeit  or  dilute  our  rights  in  existing  oil  and  gas  property 
interests.  
 
We have fixed and contingent payment obligations to Talisman  
As a result of acquiring our Athabasca heavy oil leases from Talisman in 2008, we have fixed and contingent payment 
obligations to Talisman. These obligations include a Cdn$40.0 million convertible promissory note (the “Convertible Note”) 
that, unless converted into Ivanhoe common shares, is due in July 2011, and a contingent payment of up to Cdn$15.0 
million  that  will  become  due  and  payable  if  and  when  the  requisite  government  and  other  approvals  to  develop  the 
northern  border  of  one  of  the  Athabasca  heavy  oil  leases  are  obtained.  We  intend  to  finance  such  future  payments 
through debt and equity markets, arrangements with third parties, either at the Ivanhoe parent company level or at the 
subsidiary or project level or from the sale of existing assets. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain such 
financing on favorable terms, if at all, and any future equity issuances may be dilutive to investors. Obtaining financing in 
the future may be hampered by the inability to attract strategic investors to our projects on acceptable terms, volatility in 
equity and debt markets and a sustained decrease in the market price of our common shares.  Failure to obtain such 
additional financing could put us in default of our obligations to Talisman, which are secured by a first fixed charge and 
security  interest  in  favor  of  Talisman  over  the  Athabasca  heavy  oil  leases  and  a  general  security  interest  in  all  of  our 
present and after acquired property other than the common shares we own in our subsidiaries. In the case of such default, 
Talisman could foreclose on the secured assets, including the leases. 
 
The volatility of oil prices may affect our financial results 
Our revenues, operating results, profitability and future growth are highly dependent on the price of oil. Prices also affect 
the amount of cash flow available for capital expenditures and our ability to borrow money or raise additional capital. Even 
relatively  modest  changes  in  oil  prices  may  significantly  change  our  revenues,  results  of  operations,  cash  flows  and 
proved reserves. Historically, the market for oil has been volatile and is likely to continue to be volatile in the future. 
 
Oil prices may fluctuate widely in response to relatively minor changes in supply and demand, market uncertainty and a 
variety of additional factors that are beyond our control, such as weather conditions; overall global economic conditions; 
terrorist attacks or military conflicts; political and economic conditions in oil producing countries; the ability of members of 
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to agree to and maintain oil price and production controls; the 
level  of  demand  and  the  price  and  availability  of  alternative  fuels;  speculation  in  the  commodity  futures  markets; 
technological  advances  affecting  energy  consumption;  governmental  regulations  and  approvals;  and  proximity  and 
capacity of oil pipelines and other transportation facilities.  These factors and the volatility of the energy markets make it 
extremely difficult to predict future oil price movements with any certainty.  
 
We may be required to take write-downs if oil prices decline, our estimated development costs increase or our 
exploration results deteriorate 
We  may  be  required  to  write  down  the  carrying  value  of  our  properties  if  oil  prices  decline  or  if  we  have  substantial 
downward  adjustments  to  our  estimated  proved  reserves,  increases  in  our  estimates  of  development  costs  or 
deterioration in our exploration results. See “Critical Accounting Principles and Estimates – Impairment” in Item 7, MD&A, 
of this Annual Report.  
 
Estimates of proved reserves and future net revenue may change if the assumptions on which such estimates 
are based prove to be inaccurate 
Our estimated reserves are based on many assumptions that may turn out to be inaccurate. The accuracy of any reserve 
estimate  is  a  function  of  the  quality  of  available  data,  engineering  and  geological  interpretation  and  judgment,  the 
assumptions  used  regarding  prices  for  oil  and  gas,  production  volumes,  required  levels  of  operating  and  capital 
expenditures and quantities of recoverable oil reserves. Any significant variance from the assumptions used could result
15
in the actual quantity of our reserves and future net cash flow being materially different from the estimates we report. In 
addition, actual results of drilling, testing and production and changes in oil and gas prices after the date of the estimate 
may result in revisions to our reserve estimates. Revisions to prior estimates may be material. 
 
We  may  incur  significant  costs  on  exploration  or  development  efforts  which  may  prove  unsuccessful  or 
unprofitable 
There can be no assurance that the costs we incur on exploration or development will result in an acceptable level of 
economic  return.  We  may  misinterpret  geological  or  engineering  data,  which  may  result  in  material  losses  from 
unsuccessful  exploration  or  development  drilling  efforts.  We  bear  the  risks  of  project  delays  and  cost  overruns  due  to 
unexpected geologic conditions; equipment failures; equipment delivery delays; accidents; adverse weather; government 
and  joint  venture  partner  approval  delays;  construction  or  start-up  delays;  and  other  associated  risks.  Such  risks  may 
delay expected production and/or increase production costs. 
 
We compete for oil and gas properties and personnel with many other exploration and development companies 
throughout the world who have access to greater resources 
We operate in a highly competitive environment and compete with oil and gas companies and other individual producers 
and  operators,  many  of  which  have  longer  operating  histories  and  substantially  greater  financial  and  other  resources. 
Many of these companies not only explore for and produce oil and gas, but also carry on refining operations and market 
petroleum  and  other  products  on  a  worldwide  basis.  We  also  compete  with  companies  in  other  industries  supplying 
energy, fuel and other needs to consumers. Our larger competitors, by reason of their size and relative financial strength, 
can more easily access capital markets and may enjoy a competitive advantage in the recruitment of qualified personnel. 
They  may  be  able  to  absorb  the  burden  of  any  changes  in  laws  and  regulations  in  the  jurisdictions  in  which  we  do 
business and handle longer periods of reduced oil and gas prices more easily. Our competitors may be able to pay more 
for  productive  oil  and  gas  properties  and  may  be  able  to  define,  evaluate,  bid  for  and  purchase  a  greater  number  of 
properties and prospects.  
 
We compete with other companies to recruit and retain the limited number of individuals who possess the requisite skills 
and  experience  that  are  relevant  to  our  business.  This  competition  exposes  us  to  the  risk  that  we  will  have  to  pay 
increased compensation to such employees or increase the Company’s reliance and associated costs from partnering or 
outsourcing arrangements. There can be no assurance that employees with the abilities and expertise we require will be 
available. 
 
Changes to laws, regulations and government policies in the jurisdictions in which we operate could adversely 
affect our ability to develop our projects  
Our  projects  in  Canada,  Ecuador,  China  and  Mongolia  are  subject  to  various  international,  federal,  state,  provincial, 
territorial  and  local  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  the  exploration  for  and  the  development,  production,  upgrading, 
marketing,  pricing,  taxation  and  transportation  of  heavy  oil,  bitumen  and  related  products  and  other  matters,  including 
environmental protection. 
 
The  exercise  of  discretion  by  governmental  authorities  under  existing  legislation  and  regulations,  the  amendment  of 
existing  legislation  and  regulations  or  the  implementation  of  new  legislation  or  regulations,  affecting  the  oil  and  gas 
industry could materially increase the cost of developing and operating our projects and could have a material adverse 
impact  on  our  business.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  laws,  regulations  and  government  policies  relevant  to  our 
projects will not be changed in a manner which may adversely affect our ability to develop and operate them. Failure to 
obtain all necessary permits, leases, licenses and approvals, or failure to obtain them on a timely basis, could result in 
delays  or  restructuring  of  our  projects  and  increase  costs,  all  of  which  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our 
business. 
 
Construction, operation and decommissioning of these projects will be conditional upon the receipt of necessary permits, 
leases, licenses and other approvals from applicable government and regulatory authorities. The approval process can 
involve stakeholder consultation, environmental impact assessments, public hearings and appeals to tribunals and courts, 
among other things. An inability to secure local and regional community support could result in the necessary approvals 
being delayed or denied. There is no assurance that such approvals will be issued, or if granted, will not be appealed or 
cancelled or will be renewed upon expiry or will not contain terms and conditions that adversely affect the final design or 
economics of our projects.
16
Complying with environmental and other government regulations could be costly and could negatively impact 
our production 
Our operations are governed by various international, federal, state, provincial, territorial and local laws and regulations. 
Oil, gas, oil sands and heavy oil extraction, upgrading and transportation operations are subject to extensive regulation.  
Various approvals are required before such activities may be undertaken. We are subject to laws and regulations that 
govern  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  our  facilities,  the  discharge  of  materials  into  the  environment  and  other 
environmental protection issues. These laws and regulations may, among other potential consequences, require that we 
acquire permits before commencing drilling; restrict the substances that can be released into the environment with drilling 
and production activities; limit or prohibit drilling activities in protected areas such as wetlands or wilderness areas; require 
that reclamation measures be taken to prevent pollution from former operations; require remedial measures to mitigate 
pollution from former operations, such as plugging abandoned wells and remediating contaminated soil and groundwater; 
and require remedial measures be taken with respect to property designated as a contaminated site. 
 
The costs of complying with environmental laws and regulations in the future may harm our business. Furthermore, future 
changes in environmental laws and regulations may result in stricter standards and enforcement, larger fines and liability, 
and increased capital expenditures and operating costs, any of which could have a material adverse effect on our financial 
condition or results of operations.  
 
No assurance can be given with respect to the impact of future environmental laws or the approvals, processes or other 
requirements  thereunder  or  our  ability  to  develop  or  operate  our  projects  in  a  manner  consistent  with  our  current 
expectations. No assurance can be given that environmental laws will not limit project development or materially increase 
the cost of production, development or exploration activities or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition, results of 
operations or prospects.  
 
Our  business  involves  many  operating  risks  that  can  cause  substantial  losses;  insurance  may  not  protect  us 
against all these risks 
Our operations are subject to many risks inherent in the oil and gas industry, including fires; natural disasters; adverse 
weather conditions; explosions; encountering formations with abnormal pressures; encountering unusual or unexpected 
geological  formations;  blowouts;  cratering;  unexpected  operational  events;  equipment  malfunctions;  pipeline  ruptures; 
spills;  compliance  with  environmental  and  government  regulations  and  title  problems,  any  of  which  could  cause  us  to 
experience material losses.  
 
We are insured against some, but not all, of the hazards associated with our business, so we may sustain losses that 
could  be  substantial  due  to  events  that  are  not  insured  or  are  underinsured.  The  occurrence  of  an  event  that  is  not 
covered or not fully covered by insurance could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of 
operations. We do not carry business interruption insurance and, therefore, the loss and delay of revenues resulting from 
curtailed production are not insured. 
 
Under environmental laws and regulations, we could be liable for personal injury, clean-up costs and other environmental 
and property damages, as well as administrative, civil and criminal penalties. We maintain limited insurance coverage for 
sudden and accidental environmental damages as well as environmental damage that occurs over time. However, we do 
not believe that insurance coverage for the full potential liability of environmental damages is available at a reasonable 
cost. Accordingly, we could be liable, or could be required to cease production, if environmental damage occurs. 
 
SAGD technologies for in-situ recovery of heavy oil and bitumen are energy intensive and may be unsustainable 
We  intend  to  integrate  established  SAGD  thermal  recovery  techniques  with  our  patented  HTL™  upgrading  process. 
Heavy oil recovery using the SAGD process is subject to technical and financial uncertainty. Current SAGD technologies 
for in-situ recovery of heavy oil and bitumen are energy intensive, requiring significant consumption of natural gas and 
other fuels for the production of steam used in the recovery process. The amount of steam required in the production 
process  can  also  vary  and  impact  costs.  The  performance  of  the  reservoir  can  also  impact  the  timing  and  levels  of 
production using SAGD technology. While the technology is now being used by several producers, commercial application 
of this technology is still in the early stages relative to other methods of production and, accordingly, in the absence of an 
extended operating history, there can be no assurances with respect to the sustainability of SAGD operations. 
 
We may not successfully commercialize our HTL™ technology 
Success  in  commercializing  our  HTL™  technology  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  depends  on  our  ability  to  economically 
design,  construct  and  operate  commercial-scale  plants  and  a  variety  of  other  factors,  many  of  which  are  outside  our 
control. To date, commercial-scale HTL™ plants have only been constructed in the bio-mass industry.
17
Technological advances could render our HTL™ technology obsolete 
We expect that technological advances in the processes and procedures for upgrading heavy oil and bitumen into lighter, 
less viscous products will continue to progress. It is possible that those advances could cause our HTL™ technology to 
become uncompetitive or obsolete. 
 
Alternate sources of energy could lower the demand for our HTL™ technology 
Alternative sources of energy are continually under development.  If reliance upon petroleum based fuels decreases, the 
demand for our HTL™ upgraded product may decline. It is possible that technological advances in engine design and 
performance could reduce the use of petroleum based fuels, which would also lower the demand for our HTL™ upgraded 
product. 
 
Efforts to commercialize our HTL™ technology may give rise to claims of infringement upon the patents or other 
proprietary rights of others 
We own a license to use the HTL™ technology that we are seeking to commercialize, but we may not become aware of 
claims of infringement upon the patents or other rights of others in this technology until after we have made a substantial 
investment in the development and commercialization of projects utilizing the technology. Third parties may claim that the 
technology infringes upon past, present or future patented technologies. Legal actions could be brought against us and 
our  licensors  claiming  damages  and  seeking  an  injunction  that  would  prevent  us  from  testing  or  commercializing  the 
technology. If an infringement action were successful, in addition to potential liability for damages, we and our licensors 
could be required to obtain a claiming party’s license in order to continue to test or commercialize the technology. Any 
required license might not be made available or, if available, might not be available on acceptable terms, and we could be 
prevented  entirely  from  testing  or  commercializing  the  technology.  We  may  have  to  expend  substantial  resources  in 
litigation  defending  against  the  infringement  claims  of  others.  Many  possible  claimants,  such  as  the  major  energy 
companies that have or may be developing proprietary heavy oil upgrading technologies competitive with our technology, 
may have significantly more resources to spend on litigation. 
 
A breach of confidentiality obligations could put us at competitive risk and potentially damage our business 
While discussing potential business relationships with third parties, we may disclose confidential information on operating 
results  or  proprietary  intellectual  property.  Although  confidentiality  agreements  are  signed  by  third  parties  prior  to  the 
disclosure of any confidential information, a breach could put us at competitive risk and may cause significant damage to 
our  business.  The  harm  to  our  business  from  a  breach  of  confidentiality  cannot  presently  be  quantified,  but  may  be 
material and may not be compensable in damages. There is no assurance that, in the event of a breach of confidentiality, 
we will be able to obtain equitable remedies, such as injunctive relief, from a court of competent jurisdiction in a timely 
manner, if at all, in order to prevent or mitigate any damage to our business that such a breach of confidentiality may 
cause.  
 
Certain projects are at a very early stage of development 
Our projects are at varying stages of development. We have submitted the Regulatory Application/Environmental Impact 
Assessment  for  the  Tamarack  project  to  the  Government  of  Alberta.   The  regulatory  process  is  expected  to  take 
approximately 18 to 24 months; however, there is no assurance that the process will be completed on a timely basis and 
construction  of  the  Tamarack  Project  could  be  significantly  delayed.  The  Government  of  Alberta  may  not  approve  the 
project as proposed, or it may place certain conditions upon the approval, which could significantly impair the economics 
of the project. Our Zitong project in China and projects in Ecuador and Mongolia are at a very early stage of development; 
no reserves have yet been established and no detailed feasibility or engineering studies have yet been produced.  
 
There can be no assurances that these projects will be completed within any time frame or within the parameters of any 
determined capital cost. We have yet to establish a defined schedule for financing and fully developing such projects. In 
our efforts to continue developing these projects, we may experience delays, interruption of operations or increased costs 
as a result of unanticipated events and circumstances. These include breakdowns or failures of equipment or processes; 
construction  performance  falling  below  expected  levels  of  output  or  efficiency;  design  errors;  challenges  to  proprietary 
technology;  contractor  or  operator  errors;  non-performance  by  third  party  contractors;  labor  disputes;  disruptions  or 
declines in productivity; increases in materials or labor costs; inability to attract sufficient numbers of qualified workers; 
delays  in  obtaining,  or  conditions  imposed  by,  regulatory  approvals;  violation  of  permit  requirements;  disruption  in  the 
supply of energy; and catastrophic events such as fires, earthquakes, storms or explosions.
18
Our heavy oil project in Canada may be exposed to title risks and aboriginal claims 
We have not obtained title opinions in respect of the Athabasca heavy oil leases we acquired from Talisman and there is a 
risk that our ownership of those leases may be subject to prior unregistered agreements or interests or undetected claims 
or interests that could impair our title. Any such impairment could jeopardize our entitlement to the economic benefits, if 
any,  associated  with  the  leases,  which  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  financial  condition,  results  of 
operations and ability to execute our business plans in a timely manner, if at all. 
 
Aboriginal peoples have claimed aboriginal title and rights to large areas of land in western Canada where oil and gas 
operations  are  conducted,  including  a  claim  filed  against  the  Government  of  Canada,  the  Province  of  Alberta,  certain 
governmental entities and the regional municipality of Wood Buffalo (which includes the City of Fort McMurray, Alberta) 
claiming,  among  other  things,  aboriginal  title  to  large  areas  of  lands surrounding  Fort  McMurray  where most  of  the oil 
sands operations in Alberta are located. Such claims, if successful, could affect the title to our heavy oil leases and have a 
material adverse effect on our business. 
 
Our investment in Ecuador may be at risk if the agreement through which we hold our interest in the Block 20 
project is challenged or cannot be enforced 
We hold our interest in the Block 20 heavy oil project in Ecuador through a services agreement with Petroecuador and its 
subsidiary  Petroproduccion.  The  agreement  is  governed  by  the  laws  of  Ecuador.  Although  the  agreement  has  been 
translated  into  English,  the  official and  governing  language  of  the  agreement  is  Spanish  and  if  any  discrepancy  exists 
between the official Spanish version of the agreement and the English translation, the official Spanish version prevails. 
There may be ambiguities, inconsistencies and anomalies between the official Spanish version of the agreement and the 
English  translation  that  could  materially  affect  how  our  rights  and  obligations  under  the  agreement  are  conclusively 
interpreted and such interpretations may be materially adverse to our interests. 
 
The dispute resolution provisions of the Block 20 agreement stipulate that disputes involving industrial property, including 
intellectual property, and technical or economic issues are subject to international arbitration. Other disputes are subject 
to resolution through mediation or arbitration in Ecuador. There is a risk that we, and the other parties to the Block 20 
agreement, will be unable to agree upon the proper forum for the resolution of a dispute based on the subject matter of 
the dispute. There can also be no assurance that the other parties will comply with the dispute resolution provisions or 
otherwise voluntarily submit to arbitration. 
 
Government  policy  in  Ecuador  may  change  to  discourage  foreign  investment  or  requirements  not  foreseen  may  be 
implemented.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  our  investments  and  assets  in  Ecuador  will  not  be  subject  to 
nationalization,  requisition  or  confiscation,  whether  legitimate  or  not,  by  any  authority  or  body.  While  the  Block  20 
agreement contains provisions for compensation and reimbursement of losses we may suffer under such circumstances, 
there is no assurance that such provisions would effectively restore the value of our original investment. There can be no 
assurance that Ecuadorian laws protecting foreign investments will not be amended or abolished or that the existing laws 
will be enforced or interpreted to provide adequate protection against any or all of the risks described above. There can 
also be no assurance that the Block 20 agreement will prove to be enforceable or provide adequate protection against any 
or all of the risks described above. 
 
Our business may be harmed if we are unable to retain our interests in licenses, leases and production sharing 
contracts 
Some of our properties are held under licenses and leases, working interests in licenses and leases or production sharing 
contracts.  If  we  fail  to  meet  the  specific  requirements  of  the  instrument  through  which  we  hold  our  interest,  it  may 
terminate or expire. We may not be able to meet any or all of the obligations required to maintain our interest in each such 
license,  lease  or  production  sharing  contract.  Some  of  our  property  interests  will  terminate  unless  we  fulfill  such 
obligations. If we are unable to satisfy these obligations on a timely basis, we may lose our rights in these properties. The 
termination of our interests in these properties may harm our business. 
 
Our principal shareholder may significantly influence our business 
As at the date of this Annual Report, our largest shareholder, Robert M. Friedland, owned approximately 15.22% of our 
common shares. As a result, he has the voting power to significantly influence our policies, business and affairs and the 
outcome  of  any  corporate  transaction  or  other  matter,  including  mergers,  consolidations  and  the  sale  of  all,  or 
substantially all, of our assets. In addition, the concentration of our ownership may have the effect of delaying, deterring or 
preventing a change in control that otherwise could result in a premium in the price of our common shares.
19
If we lose our key management and technical personnel, our business may suffer 
We rely upon a relatively small group of key management personnel. Given the technological nature of our business, we 
also  rely  heavily  upon  our  scientific  and  technical  personnel.  Our  ability  to  implement  our  business  strategy  may  be 
constrained and the timing of implementation may be impacted if we are unable to attract and retain sufficient personnel. 
We  do  not  maintain  any  key  man  insurance.  We  do  not  have  employment  agreements  with  certain  of  our  key 
management and technical personnel and we cannot assure that these individuals will remain with us in the future. An 
unexpected partial or total loss of their services would harm our business. 
 
Information regarding our future plans reflects our current intent and is subject to change 
We describe our current exploration and development plans in this Annual Report. Whether we ultimately implement our 
plans will depend on the availability and cost of capital; the HTL™ technology process test results; additional seismic data 
or  reprocessed  existing  data;  current  and  projected  oil  or  gas  prices;  costs  and  availability  of  drilling  rigs  and  other 
equipment; supplies; personnel; success or failure of activities in similar areas; changes in estimates of project completion 
costs; and our ability to attract other industry partners to acquire a portion of the working interest to reduce costs and 
exposure to risks. 
 
We will continue to gather data about our projects and it is possible that additional information will cause us to alter our 
schedule or determine that a project should not be pursued at all. Our plans regarding our projects might change. 
 
ITEM 1B:  UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS 
None. 
 
ITEM 3:  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS      
The Company is a defendant in a lawsuit filed on November 20, 2008, in the United States District Court for the District of 
Colorado  by  Jack  J.  Grynberg  and  three  affiliated  companies.  The  suit  alleged  bribery  and  other  misconduct  and 
challenged the propriety of a contract awarded to the Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. 
to develop Ecuador’s Pungarayacu heavy oil field.  The plaintiff’s claims were for unspecified damages or ownership of 
the  Company’s  interest  in  the  Pungarayacu  field.  The  Company  and  related  defendants  filed  motions  to  dismiss  the 
lawsuit for lack of jurisdiction.  The Court granted the motion and dismissed the case without prejudice. The Court granted 
Mr. Robert Friedland’s request to sanction plaintiffs and plaintiffs’ counsel for their conduct related to bringing the suit by 
awarding Mr. Friedland fees and costs. The Ivanhoe corporate defendants, including the Company, have been awarded 
their costs in defending the suit and have requested an award of attorneys’ fees.   
   
On October 16, 2009, the plaintiffs filed a motion requesting that the Court vacate its judgment and allow discovery on 
jurisdictional issues on the grounds that plaintiffs had discovered new evidence.  On July 15, 2010, the Court denied the 
plaintiffs’  motion  to  vacate  the  judgment.  The  request  for  attorneys’  fees  remains  pending  before  the  Court.    On       
August 13, 2010, the plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal challenging the district court’s judgment and some of its orders.  The 
appeal is currently pending in the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.  Briefing on the appeal is complete; 
the plaintiffs have filed an opening and reply brief and the Company and related defendants have filed a response brief.  
The Court has not announced whether it will hold oral argument on the appeal before it is decided.  The likelihood of loss 
or gain resulting from the lawsuit, and the estimated amount of ultimate loss or gain, are not determinable or reasonably 
estimable at this time. 
 
On December 30, 2010, the Company received a demand for arbitration from GAR Energy and Associates, Inc. (“GAR 
Energy”) and Gonzalo A. Ruiz and Janis S. Ruiz as successors in interest to and assignees of GAR Energy.  The demand 
alleges  breach  of  contract,  fraud  and  other  misconduct  arising  from  a  consulting  agreement  and  various  collateral 
agreements  between  GAR  Energy  and  the  Company  relating  to  the  Pungarayacu  heavy  oil  field.  The  claimants  seek 
actual damages of $250,000, a portion of the Company’s interest in the Pungarayacu field and other miscellaneous relief.  
The  dispute  is  still  in  its  early  stages  and  arbitration  proceedings,  including  discovery,  have  not  yet  commenced.  The 
likelihood  of  loss  or  gain  resulting  from  this  dispute,  and  the  estimated  amount  of  ultimate  loss  or  gain,  are  not 
determinable or reasonably estimable at this time.
20
PART II
ITEM  5:    MARKET  FOR  REGISTRANT’S  COMMON  EQUITY,  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Our common shares trade on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) and The NASDAQ Capital Market (“NASDAQ”) 
under the symbols “IE” and “IVAN” respectively. The trading range of our common shares is as follows:
TSX (Cdn$)
NASDAQ (US$)
2010
2009
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4 
Q1 
Q2 
Q3 
Q4
High 
3.90 
3.36 
2.19 
2.89 
1.53 
2.16 
2.98 
3.25
Low 
2.90 
1.97 
1.59 
2.15 
0.57 
1.38 
1.31 
2.20
High 
3.79 
3.37 
2.08 
2.88 
1.22 
1.85 
2.81 
3.12
Low 
2.75 
1.87 
1.50 
2.10 
0.45 
1.10 
1.13 
2.02
On December 31, 2010, the closing prices of our common shares were Cdn$2.72 on the TSX and $2.72 on NASDAQ. 
 
As at December 31, 2010, a total of 334,365,482 of our common shares were issued and outstanding and held by 203 
holders of record with an estimated 22,700 additional shareholders whose common shares were held for them in street 
name or nominee accounts. 
 
DIVIDENDS  
We have not paid any dividends on our outstanding common shares since we were incorporated and we do not anticipate 
that we will do so in the foreseeable future. The declaration of dividends on our common shares is, subject to certain 
statutory restrictions described below, within the discretion of our Board of Directors based on their assessment of, among 
other factors, our earnings or lack thereof, our capital and operating expenditure requirements and our overall financial 
condition.  Under  the  Yukon  Business  Corporations  Act,  our  Board  of  Directors  has  no  discretion  to  declare  or  pay  a 
dividend  on  our  common  shares  if  they  have  reasonable  grounds  for  believing  that  we  are,  or  after  payment  of  the 
dividend would be, unable to pay our liabilities as they become due or that the realizable value of our assets would, as a 
result of the dividend, be less than the aggregate sum of our liabilities and the stated capital of our common shares. 
 
EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN NASDAQ MARKETPLACE RULES  
As a Canadian issuer listed on NASDAQ, we are not required to comply with certain of NASDAQ’s Marketplace Rules and 
instead may comply with applicable Canadian requirements. As a foreign private issuer, we are only required to comply 
with the following NASDAQ rules: (i) we must have an audit committee that satisfies applicable NASDAQ requirements 
and  that  is  composed  of  directors  each  of  whom  satisfy  NASDAQ’s  prescribed  independence  standards;  (ii)  we  must 
provide NASDAQ with prompt notification after an executive officer of the Company becomes aware of any material non-
compliance by us with any applicable NASDAQ Marketplace Rule; (iii) our common shares must be eligible for a Direct 
Registration Program operated by a clearing agency registered under Section 17A of the Exchange Act; and (iv) we must 
provide a brief description of any significant differences between our corporate governance practices and those followed 
by US companies quoted on NASDAQ.  
 
Applicable Canadian rules pertaining to corporate governance require us to disclose in our management proxy circular, on 
an annual basis, our corporate governance practices, including whether or not our independent directors hold regularly 
scheduled  meetings  at  which  only  independent  directors  are  present,  but  there  is  no  legal  requirement  in  Canada  for 
independent directors to hold regularly scheduled meetings at which only independent directors are present. 
 
Although our independent directors hold meetings from time to time, as and when considered necessary or desirable by 
the independent lead director or by any other independent director, such meetings are not regularly scheduled.
21
ENFORCEABILITY OF CIVIL LIABILITIES 
We  are  a  company  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the  Yukon  Territory  of  Canada.  Some  of  our  directors,  controlling 
shareholders,  officers  and  representatives  of  the  experts  named  in  this  Annual  Report  reside  outside  the  US  and  a 
substantial  portion  of  their  assets  and  our  assets  are  located  outside  the  US.  As  a  result,  it  may  be  difficult  to  effect 
service of process within the US upon the directors, controlling shareholders, officers and representatives of experts who 
are not residents of the US or to enforce against them judgments obtained in the courts of the US based upon the civil 
liability provisions of the federal securities laws or other laws of the US. There is doubt as to the enforceability in Canada, 
against us or against any of our directors, controlling shareholders, officers or experts who are not residents of the US, in 
original  actions  or  in  actions  for  enforcement  of  judgments  of  US  courts,  of  liabilities  based  solely  upon  civil  liability 
provisions of the US federal securities laws. Therefore, it may not be possible to enforce those actions against us, our 
directors, officers, controlling shareholders or experts named in this Annual Report.  
 
EXCHANGE CONTROLS AND TAXATION 
There is no law or governmental decree or regulation in Canada that restricts the export or import of capital, or affects the 
remittance of dividends, interest or other payments to a non-resident holder of our common shares, other than withholding 
tax requirements. 
 
There is no limitation imposed by the laws of Canada, the laws of the Yukon Territory, or our constating documents on the 
right of a non-resident to hold or vote our common shares, other than as provided in the Investment Canada Act (Canada) 
(the  “Investment  Act”),  which  generally  prohibits  a  reviewable  investment  by  an  investor  that  is  not  a  “Canadian”,  as 
defined, unless after review, the minister responsible for the Investment Act is satisfied that the investment is likely to be 
of net benefit to Canada. An investment in our common shares by a non-Canadian who is not a “WTO investor” (which 
includes  governments  of,  or  individuals  who  are  nationals  of,  member  states  of  the  World  Trade  Organization  and 
corporations and other entities which are controlled by them), at a time when we were not already controlled by a WTO 
investor, would be reviewable under the Investment Act under two circumstances. First, if it was an investment to acquire 
control  (within  the  meaning  of  the  Investment  Act)  and  the  value  of  our  assets,  as  determined  under  Investment  Act 
regulations, was Cdn$5 million or more. Second, the investment would also be reviewable if an order for review was made 
by  the  federal  cabinet  of  the  Canadian  government  on  the  grounds  that  the  investment  related  to  Canada’s  cultural 
heritage or national identity (as prescribed under the Investment Act), regardless of asset value (a “Cultural Business”). 
Currently,  an  investment  in  our  common  shares  by  a  WTO  investor,  or  by  a  non-Canadian  at  a  time  when  we  were 
already controlled by a WTO investor, would be reviewable under the Investment Act if it was an investment to acquire 
control  and  the  value  of  our  assets,  as  determined  under  Investment  Act  regulations,  was  not  less  than  a  specified 
amount, which for 2011 is Cdn$312 million. The Investment Act provides detailed rules to determine if there has been an 
acquisition of control. For example, a non-Canadian would acquire control of us for the purposes of the Investment Act if 
the non-Canadian acquired a majority of our outstanding common shares. The acquisition of less than a majority, but one-
third  or  more,  of  our  common  shares  would  be  presumed  to  be  an  acquisition  of  control  of  us  unless  it  could  be 
established  that,  on  the  acquisition,  we  were  not  controlled  in  fact  by  the  acquirer  through  the  ownership  of  common 
shares. An acquisition of control for the purposes of the Investment Act could also occur as a result of the acquisition by a 
non-Canadian of all or substantially all of our assets.  
 
The  Canadian  Federal  Government  has  brought  forth  certain  amendments  (the  “Amendments”)  to  the  Investment  Act. 
Once  they  come  into  force,  the  Amendments  would  generally  raise  the  thresholds  that  trigger  governmental  review. 
Specifically, with respect to WTO investors, the Amendments would see the thresholds for the review of direct acquisitions 
of control of a business which is not a Cultural Business increase from the current Cdn$312 million (based on book value) 
to  Cdn$600  million  (to  be  based  on  the  “enterprise  value”  of  the  Canadian  business)  for  the  two  years  after  the 
Amendments come into force, to Cdn$800 million in the following two years and then to Cdn$1 billion for the next two 
years. Thereafter, the threshold is to be adjusted to account for inflation. The Amendments will come into force when the 
government enacts regulations which, among other things, will provide how the “enterprise value” is to be determined.  
 
The Investment Act also provides that the Minister of Industry may initiate a review of any acquisition by a non-Canadian 
of our common shares or assets if the Minister considers that the acquisition “could be injurious to (Canada’s) national 
security”.  
 
Amounts that we may, in the future, pay or credit, or be deemed to have paid or credited, to shareholders as dividends in 
respect of the common shares held at a time when the beneficial owner is not a resident of Canada within the meaning of 
the Income Tax Act (Canada), will generally be subject to Canadian non-resident withholding tax of 25% of the amount 
paid  or  credited,  which  may  be  reduced  under  the  Canada-US  Income  Tax  Convention  (1980),  as  amended,  (the 
“Convention”). Currently, under the Convention, the rate of Canadian non-resident withholding tax on the gross amount of 
dividends paid or credited to a US resident that is entitled to the benefits of the Convention is generally 15%. However, if
22
the beneficial owner of such dividends is a US resident corporation that is entitled to the benefits of the Convention and 
owns 10% or more of our voting stock, the withholding rate is reduced to 5%. In the case of certain tax-exempt entities, 
which are residents of the US for the purpose of the Convention, the withholding tax on dividends may be reduced to 0%.  
 
SECURITIES AUTHORIZED FOR ISSUANCE UNDER EQUITY COMPENSATION PLANS 
See table under “Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters” 
set forth in Item 12 in this Annual Report.  
 
PERFORMANCE GRAPH  
See table under “Executive Compensation” set forth in Item 11 in this Annual Report. 
 
SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES  
All securities we issued during the years ended December 31, 2010 and 2009, which were not registered under the Act, 
have been detailed in previously filed Form 10-Qs and Form 8-Ks.  
 
ITEM 6.  SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 
FIVE YEAR SUMMARY OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 
The  financial  data  presented  below  has  been  revised  to  account  for  the  sale  of  all  of  the  Company’s  US  oil  and  gas 
exploration  and  production  operations  in  2009  as  discontinued  operations  on  a  retroactive  basis  in  accordance  with 
generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in Canada. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements under 
Item 8 in this Annual Report.
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
21,928 
(29,110) 
(0.09) 
 
 
409,585 
39,832 
- 
744 
1,900
23,658 
(37,731) 
(0.13) 
 
 
  281,763 
 
- 
36,934 
 
195 
 
1,900
50,670 
(38,476) 
(0.15) 
 
 
  346,875 
 
- 
37,855 
 
1,928 
 
1,900
26,689 
(33,433) 
(0.14) 
 
 
  266,516 
 
- 
9,812 
 
739 
 
1,900
36,320 
(25,677) 
(0.11) 
 
 
  278,144 
 
- 
2,737 
 
484 
 
1,900
($000s, except per share amounts) 
Results of Operations
Revenues 
Net loss from continuing operations 
Net loss from continuing operations per share – basic and diluted
Financial Position
Total assets
Debt
Long term debt  
Asset retirement obligations  
Long term obligation
RECONCILIATION TO US GAAP  
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP in Canada, which differ in certain 
respects from those principles that we would have followed had our consolidated financial statements been prepared in 
accordance  with  GAAP  in  the  US.  The  differences  between  Canadian  and  US  GAAP,  which  affect  our  consolidated 
financial statements, are described in detail in Note 20 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report. Had 
we followed US GAAP, certain selected financial information would have been reported as follows:
($000s, except per share amounts) 
Results of Operations
Revenues  
Net loss from continuing operations  
Net loss from continuing operations per share – basic and diluted
Financial Position
Total assets
Debt
Long term debt 
Asset retirement obligations  
Long term obligation
2010
36,945 
(10,271) 
(0.03)
2009
17,152 
(32,679) 
(0.12)
2008
55,335 
(47,911) 
(0.19)
393,675 
40,217 
- 
744 
1,900
262,717 
- 
38,005 
195 
1,900
292,847 
- 
40,392 
1,928 
1,900
2007
27,281 
(23,080) 
(0.10)
251,627 
- 
10,412 
739 
1,900
2006
35,628 
(35,477) 
(0.15)
252,893 
- 
2,737 
484 
1,900
23
ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Overview of 2010 Results………………………………………………………..………….…………………………………….……………………………...… 24 
Highlights…………………………….……………………………………………………………….………………………………………………………………….......…… 25
Change in Net Loss………………………...…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….……… 25
Results of Operations 
 
Revenue………………………..……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..……… 26
Netbacks………………………..……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…… 26
Operating Costs…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…….…… 27
General and Administrative…………………………………………………………………………………………………...………………………………………..…… 27
Business and Technology Development…………………………………………………………….…………………………………………………………………… 27
28
Depletion and Depreciation…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….….
Foreign Exchange…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…….
28
Interest………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….……………...…….
28
Impairment………………………….……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….……… 28
Derivatives……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…………...……..
28
Income Taxes……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..………… 29
Discontinued Operations……………………………………………………….…..………………………………………………………………………...….………… 29
Liquidity and Capital Resources……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...………… 29
Critical Accounting Principles and Estimates…………………………………………………………..…….……………..………………………………………………… 31
New Accounting Pronouncements…..……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….………………………… 33
The  following  MD&A  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  consolidated  financial  statements  for  the  year  ended 
December 31, 2010. The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP in Canada. 
The  impact  of  significant  differences  between  Canadian  and  US  GAAP  on  the  consolidated  financial  statements  is 
disclosed  in  Note  20  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements.    The  date  of  this  discussion  is  March  4,  2010.    Unless 
otherwise  noted,  tabular  amounts  are  in  thousands  of  US  dollars.  Oil  and  gas  volumes  and  reserves  and  related 
measures are presented on a working interest, before royalties basis.  
 
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW OF 2010 RESULTS 
Production decreased in 2010 compared to 2009 as Ivanhoe’s working interest at Dagang, China was reduced to 49% 
upon the Company recovering its development costs in 2009. Although realized prices in 2010 were higher than in the 
past  year,  overall  oil  revenue  declined  due  to  lower  production  volumes.  Lower  revenue  in  combination  with  higher 
general and administrative costs resulted in additional cash flow used in operating activities in 2010 compared to 2009. 
 
The  net  loss  from  continuing  operations  in  2010  improved  over  the  prior  year  as  the  result  of  non-cash  items.  Lower 
depletion expense and an unrealized foreign exchange gain compensated for the decrease in revenue, the elimination of 
a future income tax recovery and higher stock-based compensation costs.   
 
Capital expenditures totaled $86.3 million in 2010.  A 28 well winter delineation program was completed in March 2010 at 
Tamarack.  With the information gathered from the drilling program, Ivanhoe filed a comprehensive Environmental Impact 
Assessment  with  the  Government  of  Alberta  in  November  2010.  In  support  of  the  application,  Basic  Engineering  and 
Design and Front End Engineering and Design were completed to generate a Class III (+25/-20%) capital cost estimate. 
 
Two wells were drilled in the Pungarayacu field on Block 20 in Ecuador.  The IP-5b well was drilled, perforated in the 
Hollin oil sands and steam was successfully injected into the reservoir resulting in production of heated heavy oil. The 
Company’s  initial  well,  IP-15,  encountered  cementing  and  completion  problems  during  steam  injection  operations  and 
testing at the well was suspended without recovering oil. 
 
Gas  was  discovered  at  the  Zitong-1  and  Yixin-2  wells  drilled  in  the  Zitong  Block  in  China.    Following  initial  flow  and 
pressure tests, both wells have been shut-in for pressure build-up. In Dagang, one well was drilling at year end and five 
fracture stimulations were performed during 2010. In the Nyalga basin of Mongolia, additional 2D seismic was acquired 
and preparations were made for a further 2D seismic program and a drilling program.
24
HIGHLIGHTS
($000, except as stated) 
Average production (bbls/d) 
Realized oil prices ($/bbl) 
Oil revenue
Cash flow provided by (used in) operating activities 
Net loss (continuing operations(1)) 
Net loss per share - basic and diluted (continuing operations(1)) 
 
Working capital (continuing operations(1)) 
Capital expenditures (continuing operations(1))
2010
788 
75.52 
21,720 
 
(17,764) 
(29,110) 
(0.09) 
 
16,485 
86,285
2009 
1,276 
 
  53.60 
  24,968 
 
  (12,290) 
  (37,731) 
(0.13)
18,317 
26,373
2008 
1,339 
98.73 
48,370 
 
17,053 
(38,476) 
(0.15)
31,597 
21,063
(1)
In July 2009, the Company disposed of its US operations and used the proceeds for its ongoing projects. To properly reflect this sale in the Company’s 
2010 consolidated financial statements, the results of the US operations have been separately identified in comparative disclosures as “Discontinued 
Operations.”
CHANGE IN NET LOSS 
The following quantifies year-over-year changes in the components of net loss realized in the years ended December 31, 
2010, 2009 and 2008.
Cash items
Oil revenues
Production volumes 
Oil prices
Operating costs 
General and administrative, less stock-based compensation 
Business and technology development, less stock-based compensation 
Realized foreign exchange gain (loss) 
Realized gain (loss) on derivatives   
Net interest 
Current income tax expense
Total cash changes
Non-cash items
Unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives 
Unrealized foreign exchange gain (loss) 
Depletion and depreciation 
Stock-based compensation 
Provision for impairment of  intangible asset and development costs 
Write off of deferred financing costs  
Future income tax recovery 
Discontinued operations (net of tax) 
Other
Total non-cash changes 
Net loss
Change
(9,515) 
6,267 
688 
(2,563) 
(872) 
(87) 
(124) 
485 
1,631 
(4,090)
1,459 
 
8,632 
  10,908 
 
(2,246) 
 
1,903 
 
- 
(8,475) 
  23,921 
 
530 
  36,632 
  32,542
2009
24,968
(10,191) 
(18,002) 
(9,343) 
(111) 
124 
(301) 
(1,757) 
(14,613)
(1,459) 
(5,109) 
(19,868) 
(3,849) 
(1,903) 
- 
9,600 
(23,921) 
(530) 
(47,039) 
(61,652)
Change
(2,384) 
  (21,018) 
  11,324 
 
(6,198) 
 
(3,458) 
 
(346) 
 
4,554 
 
283 
 
(1,103) 
  (18,346) 
 
 
 
 
 
(7,577) 
 
(3,347) 
 
5,893 
 
(833) 
  13,151 
 
2,621 
 
9,600 
  (28,204) 
 
(417) 
 
(9,113) 
  (27,459)
2008
48,370 
 
 
 
 
  (21,515) 
  (11,804) 
(5,885) 
 
 
235 
(4,430) 
 
 
(584) 
(654) 
 
3,733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6,118 
 
(1,762) 
  (25,761) 
 
(3,016) 
  (15,054) 
 
(2,621) 
 
- 
4,283 
 
 
(113) 
  (37,926) 
  (34,193)
2010
21,720
(9,503) 
(20,565) 
(10,215) 
(198) 
- 
184 
(126) 
(18,703)
- 
3,523 
(8,960) 
(6,095) 
- 
- 
1,125 
- 
- 
(10,407) 
(29,110)
25
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 
Revenue
Production
Asia  (net bbls)
Dagang 
  Daqing
Total production 
 Average daily production (bbls/d)
Pricing
Average realized oil price ($/bbl) 
 West Texas Intermediate (WTI) ($/bbl)
2010
2009
2008
273,868 
13,751 
287,619 
788
75.52 
79.39
452,573 
 13,231 
 465,804 
1,276
471,817 
 18,096 
 489,913 
1,339
53.60 
61.80
98.73 
99.65
2010 vs 2009 
Oil revenue in 2010 was lower than in 2009 as a result of lower production volumes, despite higher realized prices 
in the current year. Production in 2010 decreased primarily as a result of Ivanhoe’s working interest in the Dagang 
field decreasing to 49% in September 2009. The Company received a 2010 production quota of 70,000 gross 
tonnes  or  approximately  680  bbls/d  net.  The  Company  took  advantage  of  this  quota  situation  and  performed 
certain maintenance workovers that normally would have been delayed.  Production quotas in 2011 are set at 
80,000 gross tonnes or approximately 1,600 bbls/d gross.  
 
Dagang  production  is  sold  at  the  three  month  rolling  average  price  of  Cinta crude,  which  historically  averages 
$3.00/bbl less than West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”).  Following the increase in Cinta crude prices in 2010, our 
realized oil prices rose compared to 2009.  
 
2009 vs 2008 
Due  to  the  combination  of  lower  production  and  realized  prices,  oil  revenue  was  lower  in  2009  than  in  2008. 
Production in 2009 decreased from 2008 due to normal field declines which were partially offset by productivity 
increases  from  adding  new  perforations,  fracture  stimulations  and  water  flood  response.  In  addition,  Ivanhoe’s 
working  interest  in  the  Dagang  field  decreased  from  82%  to  49%  in  September  2009  upon  the  Company 
recovering its development investments.  
 
Realized oil prices decreased 46% per barrel in 2009 compared to the prior year, consistent with the decline in 
Cinta crude.
Netbacks
($/bbl) 
Oil revenue(1) 
Less operating costs
Field operating 
Windfall Levy 
Engineering and support costs
Net operating revenue(1) 
Depletion 
Net revenue (loss) from operations(1)
2010 
75.52 
 
(19.96) 
(11.59) 
(1.50) 
42.47 
(29.87) 
12.60
2009 
53.60 
 
(17.13) 
(4.00) 
(0.75) 
31.72 
(38.70) 
(6.98)
2008 
98.73 
 
(21.70) 
(21.14) 
(1.08) 
54.81 
(47.22) 
7.59
(1)  Oil revenue per barrel, net operating revenue per barrel and net revenue (loss) from operations per barrel do not have standardized meanings prescribed 
by  Canadian  GAAP  and  therefore  may  not  be  comparable  to  similar  measures  used  by  other  companies.  Please  refer  to  the  Non-GAAP  Financial 
Measures at the end of this MD&A for more details.
26
Operating Costs
2010 vs 2009 
Operating costs on a per barrel basis rose in 2010, primarily as the result of an increase in the Windfall Levy 
administered in  China  due  to  higher  realized  oil  prices  in  2010  than  in  2009. The  Windfall Levy  is  imposed at 
progressive  rates  from  20%  to  40%  on  the  portion  of  the  monthly  weighted  average  sales  price  exceeding 
$40.00/bbl. 
 
Higher field costs in 2010 also contributed to the increase in operating costs per barrel. Additional electrical and 
instrumentation  costs  were  incurred  in  Dagang  as  we  installed  variable  frequency  drives  on  certain  producing 
wells  to  assist  in  reducing  future  maintenance  and  power  costs.  Additional  transportation,  oil  treatment  and 
processing expenses were also incurred, as well as higher local office costs due to increased field activity. 
 
2009 vs 2008 
Operating costs on a per barrel basis, as well as in total, decreased in 2009 from the prior year due to lower field 
costs as well as a reduction in the Windfall Levy. Field operating costs in 2009 declined from 2008 as the result of 
decreased  road  and  lease  maintenance  and  workover  costs,  offset  by  higher  oil  treatment  costs.  Once  key 
milestones  in  the  Production  Sharing  Contract  with  CNPC  were  reached  in  September  2009,  we  incurred  a 
smaller proportionate share of costs in 2009 and a decline in overall working interest. Had the Company paid a 
smaller proportionate share of costs in 2008 and the overall working interest had also been lower, field operating 
costs would have been $0.68/bbl lower in 2008. The Windfall Levy expense decreased in 2009 from the prior year 
since oil prices realized by the Company were lower in 2009.
General and Administrative
2010 vs 2009 
General and administrative expenses (“G&A”) rose in 2010, primarily as a result of higher staff and office costs 
incurred  with  the  Company’s  growing  commitments  to  its  projects  around  the  world.    Staff  and  office  costs 
increased $5.0 million in 2010 across all operating segments and corporate costs, such as stock exchange filing 
fees  and  non-cash  stock-based  compensation,  increased  by  $1.8  million,  which  were  offset  by  a  decrease  of   
$2.1 million in contract labour. 
 
2009 vs 2008 
In 2009, G&A rose in comparison to the prior period primarily as the result of higher costs in the corporate area 
and  Ecuador.  Corporate  G&A  rose  $5.5  million  in  2009  over  2008  due  to  incurring  additional  legal  fees  (see    
Item 3 to Part I of this Annual Report), corporate aircraft costs and personnel costs previously allocated to our US 
segment. These increases were partially offset by lower salary and benefit costs in 2009 due to the resignation of 
an  executive  in  2008,  severance  paid  in  2008  and  reallocating  certain  executive  salaries  to  the  Business  and 
Technology Development segment. G&A for Ecuador were $1.6 million higher in 2009 as costs incurred prior to 
signing the contract to explore and develop Block 20 were minimal. G&A in China increased $0.8 million for 2009 
over 2008 since a lower amount of G&A was allocated to capital projects in 2009. These increases were offset by 
a $0.5 million decrease in G&A incurred in Canada due to capitalizing costs related to the Tamarack property.
Business and Technology Development
2010 vs 2009 
Business and technology development costs were higher in 2010 than in 2009.  In 2010, the FTF was used to 
support basic and front-end engineering for a commercial-scale HTL™ plant for the Tamarack project in Canada 
and  to  support  conceptual  design  for  several  projects,  including  Pungarayacu  in  Ecuador.  Costs  were  also 
incurred in 2010 in connection with pursuing HTLTM heavy oil and selected conventional oil opportunities in North 
and South America, the Middle East and North Africa.    
 
2009 vs 2008 
Business and technology development expenses increased in 2009 over 2008, as a result of the startup of the 
FTF, opening an office in Houston, the pursuit of financing initiatives in 2009, as well as the reallocation of certain 
executive salaries to the Business and Technology Development segment in late 2008.
27
Depletion and Depreciation
2010 vs 2009 
Depletion  and  depreciation  expense  decreased  in  2010  compared  to  2009  due  to  lower  depletion  in  Asia  and 
reduced depreciation in the Business and Technology Development segment. Depletion in Asia was lower due to 
the combination of reduced production and higher proved reserves in China.  We stopped depreciating the CDF 
at the end of 2009 when it was retired, lowering our depreciation expense in 2010.   
 
2009 vs 2008 
Ivanhoe’s depletion and depreciation expense in 2009 was lower than in 2008. Depletion in Asia decreased in 
2009 as a result of an increase in proved reserves at our Dagang project in China as well as lower production in 
the current year.  Additionally, our depreciation expense in the Business and Technology Development segment 
decreased  in  2009  in  comparison  to  the  prior  year  as  the  depreciation  expense  associated  with  the  FTF  was 
lower than the depreciation expense incurred on the CDF.
Foreign Exchange
2010 vs 2009 
The Company incurred a net foreign exchange gain in 2010 in comparison to a net foreign exchange loss in the 
prior year. In 2010, the Canadian dollar continued to strengthen relative to the US dollar resulting in a foreign 
exchange gain on the Cdn$150.0 million proceeds raised in  our private placement in the first quarter of 2010, 
partially offset by a foreign exchange loss on our Canadian dollar debt. 
 
2009 vs 2008 
We  incurred  a  foreign  exchange  loss  primarily  due  to  the  translation  of  our  Canadian  dollar  debt  in  2009  and 
2008.  The loss was greater in 2009 than in 2008 due to the Canadian dollar strengthening relative to the US 
dollar.
Interest
2010 vs 2009 
In the first quarter of 2010, the Company raised Cdn$150.0 million through a private placement.  The short term 
investment  of  these  funds  earned  interest  income.  Interest  expense  in  2010  was  lower  than  in  2009  from  the 
repayment  of  loan  obligations  associated  with  the  Company’s  China  and  US  operations  during  the  course  of 
2009.    
 
2009 vs 2008 
Interest expense in 2009 was lower in comparison to 2008 due to the repayment of debt.  In 2008, we repaid a 
Cdn$12.5 million promissory note and $3.0 million against our bank loan for Asian operations.
Impairment  
When the FTF was completed in 2009, we commenced the abandonment process for the CDF.  The $0.9 million net asset 
value of the CDF was impaired.  Additionally, $0.8 million of development costs related to the pursuit of projects in the 
Middle East were impaired in 2009. 
 
In 2008, we impaired costs associated with our GTL project due to the lack of a definitive agreement and appropriate 
financing.  Development costs of $5.1 million and intangible license costs of $10.0 million were written off.  
 
The Company incurred costs associated with the pursuit of corporate financing initiatives by Sunwing. In the fourth quarter 
of 2008, this financing initiative was postponed indefinitely and therefore the associated costs were written down to nil.  
 
Derivatives 
In 2007, we entered into a costless collar derivative as required by the Company’s lenders to minimize variability in our 
cash flow. This derivative had a ceiling of $84.50/bbl and a floor of $55.00/bbl using the WTI as the index traded on the 
NYMEX.  In  December  2009,  the  Company  repaid  the  outstanding  loan  balance  and  this  derivative  was  subsequently 
cancelled.
28
The derivative instrument resulted in a loss to the Company in 2009, compared to a gain in 2008, due to movements in 
WTI.  WTI reached record highs at the beginning of the third quarter of 2008 before steadily declining at the end of the 
fourth quarter to a level that was the lowest dating back several years. The low benchmark prices continued into the first 
half of 2009, recovering in the last half of the year.  
 
Income Taxes  
The Company’s income tax recovery was lower in 2010 than in 2009 due to a decrease in future taxes in the current year. 
Future taxes were significantly higher in 2009 due to the sale of the Company’s US oil and gas operations.
In 2009, current income taxes included a provision for taxes in Asia and a net adjustment of $1.0 million related to 2008 
from changes in the minimum depreciation and amortization periods for oil and gas companies by the Chinese State Tax 
Administration Bureau. The future tax recovery in 2009 was driven by the sale of our US operating segment.
In 2008, current taxes were payable on Asian operations.  
 
Discontinued Operations 
In 2009, Ivanhoe sold its wholly owned subsidiary, Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc., disposing of all our oil and gas exploration 
and  production  operations  in  the  US.  The  US  operations  have  been  accounted  for  as  discontinued  operations  on  a 
retroactive basis in accordance with Canadian GAAP and the results for 2009 and 2008 have been amended accordingly.
The operating results for the discontinued operations were as follows:
Revenue 
Oil and gas   
Gain on derivative instruments  
Interest      
                               
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Depletion and depreciation     
Interest and financing  
                               
Income (loss) before disposition 
Loss on disposition (net of tax of $29.6 million for 2009, nil for 2008) 
Net income (loss) from discontinued operations
2009
5,455 
 
189 
 
8 
 
5,652 
 
 
 
2,132 
 
139 
 
3,772 
 
173 
 
6,216 
 
 
(564) 
  (23,357) 
  (23,921)
2008
18,120 
278 
 
98 
 
  18,496 
 
 
5,137 
 
2,413 
 
6,143 
 
520 
 
  14,213 
4,283 
 
- 
 
4,283
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 
Contractual Obligations and Commitments 
The  following  information  about  our  contractual  obligations  and  other  commitments  summarizes  certain  liquidity  and 
capital  resource  requirements.  The  information  presented  in  the  table  below  does  not  include  planned,  but  not  legally 
committed, capital expenditures or obligations that are discretionary and/or being performed under contracts which are 
cancelable with a 30 day notification period. Previous exploration commitments in Zitong and Nyalga have been fulfilled 
and therefore are not included below.
Debt 
Interest  
Asset retirement obligations(1) 
Long term obligation  
Leases 
Total
Total  
39,832 
2,042 
1,939 
1,900 
2,989 
48,702
2011 
39,832 
2,042 
- 
- 
1,769 
43,643
2012 
- 
- 
332 
- 
885 
1,217
2013 
- 
- 
- 
- 
335 
335
2014 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
After 2014
- 
1,607 
1,900 
- 
3,507
(1)  Represents undiscounted asset retirement obligations after inflation. The discounted value ($0.7 million) of these estimated obligations is provided for in
the consolidated financial statements.
29
Debt  
As  described  in  Note  5  to  the  consolidated  ﬁnancial  statements,  the  Company  issued  a  Cdn$40.0  million  convertible 
promissory  note  maturing  in  July  2011.  The  outstanding  principal  amount  is  convertible,  at  Talisman’s  option,  into  a 
maximum of 12,779,552 Ivanhoe common shares at Cdn$3.13 per common share. Interest at the prime rate plus 2% is 
calculated  daily  and  payable  semi-annually.  The  estimated  interest  payments  on  the  convertible  promissory  note  are 
included in the above table. 
 
Asset Retirement Obligations 
The Company is required to remedy the effect of our activities on the environment at our operating sites by dismantling 
and removing production facilities and remediating any damage caused. At December 31, 2010, we estimated the total 
undiscounted,  inflated  cost  to  settle  our  asset  retirement  obligations  in  Canada,  Ecuador  and  the  FTF  in  the  US  was     
$1.9 million. These costs are expected to be incurred between 2013 and 2038.  Ivanhoe does not make such a provision 
for asset retirement costs in connection with its oil and gas operations in China as dry holes are abandoned as occurred 
and the Company is under no obligation to contribute to the future costs to restore well sites or abandon the field.  
 
Long Term Obligation 
As part of its 2005 merger with Ensyn, the Company assumed an obligation to pay $1.9 million in the event that proceeds 
from the sale of units incorporating the HTL™ technology for petroleum applications reach a total of $100.0 million. 
 
Operating Leases 
We have long term operating leases for office space, which expire between January 2011 and September 2013.  
 
Other 
From time to time, Ivanhoe enters into consulting agreements whereby a success fee may be payable if and when either a 
definitive agreement is signed or certain other contractual milestones are met. Under the agreements, the consultant may 
receive cash, common shares, stock options or some combination thereof. These fees are not considered to be material. 
 
The Company may provide indemnities to third parties, in the ordinary course of business, that are customary in certain 
commercial transactions, such as purchase and sale agreements. The terms of these indemnities will vary based upon 
the contract, the nature of which prevents Ivanhoe from making a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential amounts 
that may be required to be paid. The Company’s management is of the opinion that any resulting settlements relating to 
indemnities are immaterial. 
 
In the normal course of business, we are subject to legal proceedings being brought against us. While the final outcome of 
these proceedings is uncertain, we believe that these proceedings, in the aggregate, are not reasonably likely to have a 
material effect on our financial position or results of operations.  
   
Sources and Uses of Cash 
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reported in 
the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities 
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Operating Activities
2010 
(17,764) 
(79,860) 
138,286
2009 
(12,290) 
6,396 
(11,875)
2008 
17,053 
(49,321) 
70,751
2010 vs 2009   
Operating activities in 2010 used more cash than in 2009 primarily as a result of lower oil revenue and higher G&A 
costs,  partially  offset  by  current  tax  savings.    2009  operating  activities  benefitted  from  net  cash  from  discontinued 
operations. An increase in accounts payable, partially offset by changes in accounts receivable and income taxes,  
represented  working  capital  cash  inﬂows  from  operating  activities  in  2010  compared  to  an  overall  working  capital 
outflow in 2009.
30
2009 vs 2008 
Operating activities in 2009 resulted in a use of cash due to significantly lower revenue in 2009, in contrast to 2008 
activities which generated cash inflows.
Investing Activities 
2010 vs 2009   
Net  cash  used  for  investing  activities  was  higher  in  2010  than  in  2009  due  to  a  more  extensive  capital  program. 
Payables related to capital expenditures were higher at December 31, 2010, than the prior year, creating a source of 
working capital.  In 2009, $35.3 million cash was generated from the sale of our US operating segment.
2009 vs 2008 
In 2009, investing activities resulted in a net cash inflow due to the sale of the US operating segment. In comparison, 
$22.3 million was paid to acquire the Tamarack leases in 2008, and when combined with other capital expenditures, 
created a net cash outflow in 2008.
Financing Activities
2010 vs 2009   
In 2010, financing activities raised $135.7 million of cash with the private placement of 50 million special warrants in 
February and March 2010 at a price of Cdn$3.00 per special warrant. Additional cash was raised through the exercise 
of stock options. The repayment of debt in 2009 resulted in a net cash outflow from financing activities.  
 
2009 vs 2008 
Financing activities in 2009 resulted in a net cash outflow due to the final debt repayment of long term notes and the 
repayment of a note associated with discontinued operations. In 2008, financing activities resulted in a net cash inflow 
due to a private placement in the third quarter and the receipt of cash from a Cdn$5.0 million loan.
Capital Structure
As at December 31,  
Cash and cash equivalents 
Debt 
Long term debt 
Shareholders’ equity
2010 
67,817 
39,832 
- 
324,109
2009 
21,512 
- 
36,934 
208,029
Ivanhoe  intends  to  use  its  cash  and  cash  equivalent  balance  to  fulfill  its  commitments  and  partially  fund  operations  in 
2011. Cash flow from operating activities may be insufficient to meet operating requirements in the next 12 months and 
additional  sources  of  funding,  either  at  a  parent  company  level  or  at  a  project  level,  will  be  required  to  grow  the 
Company’s major projects and fully develop its oil and gas properties. Historically, Ivanhoe has used external sources of 
funding,  such  as  public  and  private  equity  and  debt  markets.  There  is  no  assurance  that  we  will  be  able  to  obtain 
additional financing on favorable terms, if at all, and any future equity issuances may be dilutive to our current investors. If 
we  cannot  secure  additional  financing,  we  may  have  to  delay  our  capital  programs  and  forfeit  or  dilute  our  rights  in 
existing oil and gas property interests.  
 
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES AND ESTIMATES 
Our  significant  accounting  policies  may  be  found  in  Note  2  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements.  Some  of  these 
policies  involve  critical  accounting  estimates  because  they  require  us  to  make  particularly  subjective  or  complex 
judgments  about  matters  that  are  inherently  uncertain  and  because  of  the  likelihood  that  materially  different  amounts 
could be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. The following section discusses our critical 
accounting  estimates  and  assumptions  and  how  they  affect  the  amounts  reported  in  our  consolidated  financial 
statements.  
 
Oil and Gas Reserves 
The process of estimating quantities of reserves is inherently uncertain and complex. It requires significant judgment and 
decisions  based  on  available  geological,  geophysical,  engineering  and  economic  data.  These  estimates  may  change
31
substantially as additional data from ongoing development activities and production becomes available and as economic 
conditions impacting oil and gas prices and costs change. Such revisions could be upwards or downwards.  For details on 
our reserve estimation process, refer to the section titled “Reserves, Production and Related Information” in Items 1 and 2 
of  this  Annual  Report.    Reserve  estimates  have  a  material  impact  on  depletion  and  the  Company’s  impairment 
evaluations, which in turn have a material impact on the results of operations. 
 
Total proved reserves estimates are used to determine rates that are applied to each barrel of production in calculating 
our  depletion  expense.  In  2010,  depletion  expense  of  $9.0  million  was  recorded.  If  our  proved  reserves  estimates 
changed by 10%, our depletion and depreciation expense would have changed by approximately $0.6 million, assuming 
all other variables remained constant. 
 
Impairment 
Oil and Gas Properties and Development Costs 
We  periodically  evaluate  our  oil  and  gas  properties  and  development  costs  for  impairment.    Among  other  things,  an 
impairment of these assets may be triggered by falling oil and gas prices, a significant negative revision to our reserve 
estimates, the inability to use our HTL™ technology in certain projects, changes in capital costs or the inability to raise 
sufficient financial resources to further develop the property. If one of these occurs, we assess if the undiscounted future 
net cash flows from proved reserves at future commodity prices plus the cost of undeveloped properties is less than the 
carrying value of the capitalized costs. If an impairment is found to exist, the impaired properties are written down to their 
fair value. The fair value of the assets is calculated based on future net cash flows from proved plus probable reserves, 
discounted at a risk-free interest rate using future commodity prices, plus the cost of undeveloped properties.  
  
Cash  flow  estimates  for  our  impairment  assessments  require  assumptions  about  future  prices  and  costs,  reserves, 
discount rates and potential benefits from the application of our HTL™ technology.  Given the significant assumptions 
required  and  the  likelihood  that  actual conditions  will  differ,  we  consider  the  assessment  of  impairment  to  be  a  critical 
accounting estimate.  
 
It  is  difficult  to  determine  and  assess  how  a  decrease  in  proved  reserves  could  impact  our  impairment  tests.  The 
relationship between our reserve estimates and the estimated undiscounted cash flows and the nature of the property-by-
property impairment test is complex. As a result, we are unable to provide a reasonable sensitivity analysis of the impact 
that a reserve estimate decrease would have on our assessment of impairment. 
  
Intangible Assets 
Intangible assets consist of an exclusive, irrevocable license to deploy HTL™ technology our proprietary, patented heavy 
oil  upgrading  process.  We  periodically  review  the  intangible  assets  for  impairment  or  if  an  adverse  event  or  change 
occurs.  Indicators  of  adverse  events  could  include  HTL™  patent  expiries,  advancements  of  new  technologies  or  the 
inability  to  successfully  commercialize  the  HTL™  technology.    To  determine  if  the  intangible  assets  are  impaired,  we 
assess if the undiscounted future cash flows are in excess of the carrying value.  If not, the assets are reduced to their fair 
value based on expected discounted future cash flows.  
 
We believe that the intangible asset impairment is a critical accounting estimate because it requires management to make 
assumptions about competitive technological developments, the successful commercialization of our HTL™ technology 
and future cash flows from the HTL™ technology.  We cannot predict if an event that triggers impairment will occur, when 
it will occur or how it will affect the asset amounts we have reported. Although we believe our estimates are reasonable 
and consistent with current conditions, internal planning and expected future operations, such estimates are subject to 
significant uncertainties and judgments.   
 
Future Income Taxes 
We operate in a specialized industry and in several tax jurisdictions. As a result, our income is subject to various rates of 
taxation. The breadth of the Company’s operations and the global complexity of tax regulations require assessments of 
uncertainties and judgments in estimating the taxes we will ultimately pay. The final taxes paid are dependent upon many 
factors,  including  negotiations  with  taxing  authorities  in  various  jurisdictions,  uncertain  tax  positions  and  resolution  of 
disputes  arising  from  federal,  provincial,  state  and  local  tax  audits.  The  resolution  of  these  uncertainties  and  the 
associated final taxes may result in adjustments to our tax assets and tax liabilities.  
 
We estimate future income taxes based upon temporary differences between the assets and liabilities that we report in 
our consolidated financial statements and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities as determined under applicable tax 
laws.  We  record  a  valuation  allowance  against  our  future  income  tax  assets  when  we  believe,  based  on  all  available
32
evidence,  that  it  is  not  “more  likely  than  not”  that  all  of  our  future  income  tax  assets  recognized  will  be  realized.  The 
amount  of  the  future  income  tax  asset  recognized  and  considered  realizable  could,  however,  be  reduced  if  projected 
income is not achieved.  
 
Convertible note liability  
In connection with the acquisition of the Tamarack leases in July 2008 from Talisman, we issued a Convertible Note. The 
Convertible Note is a compound financial instrument, containing a debt instrument as well as an embedded conversion 
feature classified as equity. The residual basis method was used to value the instrument which means the fair value of the 
liability component was calculated and the remaining value was assigned to the equity component.  
 
Management estimated the value of the liability component to be Cdn$37.9 million by discounting the expected interest 
and principal payments. The remaining value of Cdn$2.1 million was allocated to the equity component. If the interest rate 
used to discount the liability decreased by 1%, the amount of the Convertible Note originally recorded as a liability would 
increase by $1.0 million and the equity component would have been $1.0 million lower.  Since the accretion of the liability 
component over the three year maturity period is capitalized on the balance sheet, there would not have been an impact 
on  our  operating  results.  Increasing  the  interest  rate  by  1%  would  have  had  the  opposite,  but  equal,  impact  on  our 
consolidated financial statements.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS 
Transition to International Financial Reporting Standards 
Effective January 1, 2011, we adopted International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”) as our basis for accounting.  
Most adjustments required on transition to IFRS were made retrospectively against opening retained earnings as of the 
date  of  the  first  comparative  balance  sheet.  Transitional  adjustments  relating  to  those  standards  where  comparative 
ﬁgures are not required to be restated will only be made as of the ﬁrst day of the year of adoption.  
 
As a foreign private issuer in the US, we will be permitted to file with the SEC consolidated financial statements prepared 
under  IFRS  without  a  reconciliation  to  US  GAAP.  The  impact  of  this  change  is  that  we  will  no  longer  prepare  a 
reconciliation of our results to US GAAP. It is possible that some of our accounting policies under IFRS could be different 
from US GAAP. 
 
First-time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards  
“First-Time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards” (“IFRS 1”) provides companies adopting IFRS for the 
ﬁrst time with a number of optional exemptions and mandatory exceptions to the general requirement for full retrospective 
application  of  IFRS  where  retrospective  restatement  would  either  be  onerous  or  would  not  provide  more  useful 
information. As a result of relying upon the exemptions described below, there was no material impact in these areas at 
the date of transition to IFRS.
33
Area of IFRS 
Property, plant 
and  equipment
Decommissioning  
liabilities
Stock-based 
compensation
Business 
combinations
Summary of Exemption Available 
Companies may elect to report property, plant and equipment from oil and gas operations on the opening balance sheet on the transition 
date at a deemed cost, instead of the actual cost, as though IFRS had been adopted retroactively. The deemed cost of an item may be 
either its fair value at the date of transition to IFRS or an amount reported under Canadian GAAP. The exemption can be applied on an 
asset-by-asset basis.  
 
Ivanhoe elected to report property, plant and equipment from oil and gas operations in its opening balance sheet on the transition date at the 
deemed cost previously calculated under Canadian GAAP.   
In accounting for changes in decommissioning liabilities, IFRS requires changes in such obligations to be added to, or deducted from, the 
cost of the asset to which they relate. The adjusted depreciable amount of the asset is then depreciated prospectively over its remaining 
useful life. Rather than recalculating the effect of all such changes throughout the life of the obligation, companies may elect to measure the 
liability and the related depreciation effects at the date of transition to IFRS.  
 
Ivanhoe elected to measure only those decommissioning liabilities outstanding from our FTF on the date of transition to IFRS. 
Companies may elect not to apply IFRS 2, “Share-Based Payment,” to stock options granted on or before November 7, 2002, or which 
vested before the date of transition to IFRS.  
 
Ivanhoe elected to utilize this exemption for the all stock options awarded after November 7, 2002, that vested before January 1, 2010.  
Companies may elect to either restate all past business combinations in accordance with IFRS 3, “Business Combinations,” or to apply an 
elective exemption from applying IFRS 3 to past business combinations 
 
Ivanhoe has elected to utilize this exemption such that transactions entered into prior to the transition date will not be restated.
Expected Areas of Signiﬁcance 
IFRS will have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing accounting in the areas described below, in addition to the 
impact of transition policy choices made under IFRS 1.
Accounting 
Policy Area 
Exploration and 
evaluation  
assets
Impairments
Impact of Policy Adoption 
The Company followed the full cost method of accounting for its oil and gas operations under Canadian (“Cdn”) GAAP, whereby all costs 
related to the exploration for, and development of, oil and gas reserves were capitalized and periodically evaluated for impairment. Under 
IFRS,  exploration  costs  will  initially  be  capitalized  as  exploration  and  evaluation  (“E&E”)  assets  until  it  can  be  determined  if  sufficient 
quantities of reserves have been found to justify commercial production. If commercial quantities of reserves are found, E&E assets will be 
reclassified to oil and gas properties and development costs and, if not, E&E assets will be expensed on the consolidated income statement. 
Costs incurred in connection with our projects in Canada, Ecuador, Mongolia and exploration projects in China will be reclassified as E&E 
assets, while producing assets in China will continue to be classified as oil and gas properties and development costs on the consolidated 
balance sheet.  
Cdn GAAP generally used a two-step approach to impairment testing: ﬁrst comparing asset carrying values with undiscounted future cash 
ﬂows  to  determine  whether  impairment  exists  and  then  measuring  any  impairment  by  comparing  asset  carrying  values  with  fair  values 
calculated using discounted cash flows. International Accounting Standard 36, “Impairment of Assets,” uses a one-step approach for both 
testing and measuring of impairment, with asset carrying values compared directly with the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in 
use  (which  uses  discounted  future  cash  ﬂows).  This  may  potentially  result  in  more  write  downs  where  carrying  values  of  assets  were 
previously supported under Cdn GAAP on an undiscounted cash ﬂow basis, but could not be supported on a discounted cash ﬂow basis. 
IFRS also requires the reversal of any previous impairment losses where circumstances have changed such that impairments have been 
reduced. Cdn GAAP prohibits the reversal of impairment losses. IFRS will result in greater variability in our operating results and asset 
carrying values.
Financial 
instruments
Capitalized G&A  G&A directly related to exploration and development activities were capitalized as oil and gas properties and development costs under Cdn 
GAAP. The threshold to capitalize G&A is higher under IFRS; therefore, we expect to capitalize less G&A in the future and G&A on the 
consolidated income statement will be higher as a result.   
Under Cdn GAAP, the equity component of the Company’s Convertible Note and the common share purchase warrants were classified as 
shareholders’  equity.  In  accordance  with  IAS  32,  “Financial  Instruments:  Presentation,”  financial  instruments  with  an  exercise  price 
denominated in a currency other than our functional currency are accounted for as derivatives.  Since our Convertible Note and common 
share  purchase warrants  are denominated in Cdn  dollars  and  our  functional currency is US dollars, these items were reclassified  from 
shareholders’ equity to liabilities under IFRS.  Additionally, IFRS requires derivative instruments to be recorded at fair value with changes in 
their fair value recognized in the income statement. This will create variability in our results of operations and the carrying value of liabilities.  
Stock options were accounted for using the fair value method under  Canadian GAAP.   The fair value was determined  using the Black 
Scholes option pricing model and recorded as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the period that the stock options vested.  
Under IFRS 2, “Share-Based Payment,” compensation expense will be charged to earnings on a graded vesting basis.  This will accelerate 
the compensation expense recognized on the consolidated income statement in comparison to Cdn GAAP.
Stock-based 
compensation
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements 
We  have  no  off-balance  sheet  arrangements  that  would  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  our  liquidity,  consolidated 
financial position or results of operations.  
 
ITEM 7A:  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 
We are exposed in varying degrees to normal market risks inherent in the oil and gas industry, including commodity price 
risk,  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk,  credit  risk  and  liquidity  risk.  We  recognize  these  risks  and  manage  our 
operations to minimize our exposures to the extent practicable. 
 
COMMODITY PRICE RISK 
Commodity  price  risk  related  to  oil  prices  is  one  of  Ivanhoe’s  most  significant  market  risk  exposures.  The  Company’s 
operating  results  and  financial  condition  are  influenced  by  the  prices  we  receive  for  our  oil  production.  Oil  prices  may 
fluctuate widely in response to a variety of factors including global and domestic economic conditions, weather conditions, 
political stability, transportation facilities, the price and availability of alternative fuels and government regulations.  
 
Based on our estimated 2011 production, a US$1.00/bbl change in the price of oil would increase or decrease net income 
and cash flows from operations for 2011 by US$0.82/bbl. In the past, we have used derivatives to minimize variability in 
our cash flow from operations when required to do so by loan covenants. However, no hedging contracts were in place in 
2010 nor do we anticipate using hedging contracts in 2011 to manage our commodity price risk.   
 
FOREIGN CURRENCY EXCHANGE RATE RISK 
Ivanhoe is exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk as a result of incurring capital expenditures and operating costs 
in currencies other than the US dollar.  A substantial portion of our activities are transacted in or referenced to US dollars, 
including oil sales in Asia, capital spending in Ecuador and ongoing FTF operations. A portion of our transactions are in 
other currencies,  such  as Dagang operating  costs  paid  in Chinese  renminbi,  Tamarack  exploration  activities  funded  in 
Cdn dollars and the 2010 common share issuance in Cdn dollars. The Company did not enter into any foreign currency 
derivatives  in  2010,  nor  do  we  anticipate  using  foreign  currency  derivatives  in  2011.  To  help  reduce  the  Company’s 
exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk, it seeks to hold assets and liabilities denominated in the same currency 
when appropriate.  
 
The  following  table  shows  the  Company’s  exposure  to  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk  on  its  net  loss  and 
comprehensive loss, assuming reasonably possible changes in the relevant foreign currency. This analysis assumes all 
other variables remain constant.
(Increase) Decrease in Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss 
Chinese renminbi  
Canadian dollar
10% Increase      
or Weakening
10% Decrease      
or Strengthening
1,438 
(2,089)
(1,758) 
167
CREDIT RISK 
Ivanhoe  is  exposed  to  credit  risk  with  respect  to  its  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  accounts  receivable,  note  receivable, 
restricted cash and long term receivables. The Company’s maximum exposure to credit risk at December 31, 2010, is 
represented by the carrying amount of these non-derivative financial assets. Most of the Company’s credit exposures are 
with counterparties in the energy industry and are therefore exposed to normal industry credit risks. Ivanhoe manages its 
credit risk by only entering into sales contracts with established entities.  
 
The  Company  believes  its  exposure  to  credit  risk  related  to  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  as  well  as  restricted  cash,  is 
minimal due to the quality of the financial institutions where the funds are held and the nature of the deposit instruments.  
 
Currently, all of the Company’s oil production is sold to one national oil corporation. As a result, 85% of the outstanding 
accounts receivable balance at December 31, 2010 (December 31, 2009 – 94%) is due from a national oil corporation.  
Long term value-added tax receivable from Ecuador will be recoverable upon commencement of commercial operations. 
Ivanhoe considers the risk of default on these items to be low due to the Company’s ongoing operations in China and 
Ecuador.
35
LIQUIDITY RISK 
Liquidity risk is the risk that suitable sources of funding for the Company’s business activities may not be available. Since 
cash flows from existing operations are insufficient to fund future capital expenditures, we intend to finance future capital 
projects with a combination of strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent 
company level or at the project level or from the sale of existing assets. There is no assurance that we will be able to 
obtain such financing on favorable terms, if at all.   
 
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES  
Oil revenue per barrel is calculated by dividing oil revenue by the Company’s total production for the respective periods 
presented.  Net operating revenue per barrel is calculated by dividing oil revenue less operating costs by total production 
for the respective periods presented.  Net revenue (loss) from operations per barrel is calculated by subtracting depletion 
from net operating revenue and dividing by total production for the respective periods presented.  The Company believes 
oil revenue per barrel, net operating revenue per barrel and net revenue (loss) from operations per barrel are important to 
investors  to  evaluate  operating  results  and  the  Company’s  ability  to  generate  cash.    Each  of  the  components  used  in 
these  calculations  can  be  reconciled  directly  to  the  consolidated  statement  of  loss  and  comprehensive  loss.  The 
calculations of oil revenue per barrel, net operating revenue per barrel and net revenue (loss) from operations per barrel 
may differ from similar calculations of other companies in the oil and gas industry, thereby limiting its usefulness as a 
comparative measure.
36
ITEM 8:  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 
Report of Independent Registered Chartered Accountants……………………………………………………….……………………….……………………….……….
Consolidated Financial Statements
38 
 
 Consolidated Balance Sheets…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…….....………………….…… 39 
 Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss………………………………………………………………….…………………………………..... 
40 
 Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity………………………………………………………………………………….……………….………………… 41 
 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows………………………………………………………………………………………….………………………….………… 42 
43 
 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements………………………………………………………………………………….……………………….…….……..
Supplementary Disclosures About Oil and Gas Production Activities (Unaudited)……….…………………… ………………….…………………………………… 
72
37
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS 
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Ivanhoe Energy Inc., 
 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  and  subsidiaries,  which 
comprise the consolidated balance sheets as at December 31, 2010 and 2009, and the consolidated statements of loss 
and  comprehensive  loss,  shareholders’  equity  and  cash  flows  for  each  of  the  years  in  the  three-year  period  ended 
December 31, 2010 and the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 
 
Management's Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements 
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial  statements  in 
accordance  with  Canadian  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  for  such  internal  control  as  management 
determines  is  necessary  to  enable  the  preparation  of  consolidated  financial  statements  that  are  free  from  material 
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
 
Auditor's Responsibility 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We conducted 
our audits in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States).  Those standards require that we comply with ethical requirements and plan 
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free from 
material misstatement. 
 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated 
financial statements.  The procedures selected depend on the auditor's judgment, including the assessment of the risks of 
material  misstatement  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements,  whether  due  to  fraud  or  error.  In  making  those  risk 
assessments,  the  auditor  considers  internal  control  relevant  to  the  entity's  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  the 
consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances.  An audit 
also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates 
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. 
 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
audit opinion.  
 
Opinion 
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial  position  of 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and subsidiaries as at December 31, 2010 and 2009 and the results of their operations and cash 
flows for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2010 in accordance with Canadian generally 
accepted accounting principles. 
 
Emphasis of Matter 
Without qualifying our opinion, we draw attention to Note 2 in the financial statements which indicates that the Company 
had an accumulated deficit of $284.9 million and working capital of $16.5 million at December 31, 2010 and cash flow 
used in operating activities of $17.8 million and a net loss of $29.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2010. 
These conditions, along with other matters as set forth in Note 2, indicate the existence of a material uncertainty that may 
cast significant doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. 
 
Other Matter 
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United 
States),  the  Company's  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of  December  31,  2010,  based  on  the  criteria 
established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the 
Treadway Commission and our report dated March 4, 2011 expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company’s internal 
control over financial reporting. 
 
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants 
Calgary, Canada 
March 4, 2011
38
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
December 31, 2010 and 2009
(US$000s, except share amounts)                               
Assets 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 15) 
Accounts receivable 
Note receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Restricted cash (Note 18)
Oil and gas properties and development costs, net (Note 3) 
Intangible assets (Note 4) 
Long term receivables (Note 12)
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity 
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities (Note 12) 
Debt (Note 5) 
Income tax payable (Note 14) 
Asset retirement obligations (Note 6)
Long term debt (Note 5) 
Asset retirement obligations (Note 6) 
Long term obligation (Note 7) 
Future income tax liability (Note 14)
Commitments and contingencies (Note 7)
Going concern and basis of presentation (Note 2)
Shareholders’ Equity
Share capital, issued 334,365,482 common shares 
December 31, 2009 282,558,593 common shares  
Purchase warrants (Note 8) 
Contributed surplus 
Convertible note (Note 5) 
Accumulated deficit
2010
2009
67,817 
6,359 
264 
2,859 
500 
77,799
237,200 
92,153 
2,433 
409,585
21,482 
39,832 
- 
- 
61,314
- 
744 
1,900 
21,518 
85,476
550,562 
 
33,423 
22,983 
2,086 
(284,945) 
324,109 
409,585
21,512 
5,021 
225 
771 
2,850 
30,379
158,392 
92,153 
839 
281,763
10,779 
- 
530 
753 
12,062
36,934 
195 
1,900 
22,643 
73,734
422,322 
 
19,427 
20,029 
2,086 
(255,835) 
208,029 
281,763
Approved on behalf of the Board:
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
(signed) “Robert M. Friedland”
Director
(signed) “Brian F. Downey”
Director
39
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss 
Three Years Ended December 31, 2010
(US$000s, except per share amounts)                        
Revenue 
Oil  
Gain (loss) on derivative instruments 
Interest
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange (gain) loss  
Interest and financing  
Impairment of intangible asset and development costs (Note 3) 
Impairment of deferred financing costs (Note 13)
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes (Note 14) 
   Current 
   Future
Net  loss – continuing operations 
Net (loss) income – discontinued operations (net of tax of $29.6 million for 2009, nil for 2008) (Note 18) 
Net loss and comprehensive loss
Net loss per common share 
Net loss – continuing operations, basic and diluted 
Net (loss) income – discontinued operations, basic and diluted 
Net loss per common share, basic and diluted
Weighted average number of common shares
Basic and diluted (000s)
2010
21,720 
- 
208 
21,928 
 
 
9,503 
26,260 
10,615 
8,960 
(3,325) 
24 
- 
- 
52,037 
 
(30,109) 
 
 
(126) 
1,125 
999 
 
(29,110) 
- 
(29,110) 
 
 
(0.09) 
- 
(0.09) 
 
 
327,442
2009
2008
24,968 
(1,335) 
25 
23,658
10,191 
21,693 
9,501 
19,868 
5,220 
856 
1,903 
- 
69,232
48,370 
1,688 
612 
50,670
21,515 
14,252 
6,453 
25,761 
1,527 
1,309 
15,054 
2,621 
88,492
(45,574)
(37,822)
(1,757) 
9,600 
7,843
(37,731) 
(23,921) 
(61,652)
(0.13) 
(0.09) 
(0.22)
(654) 
- 
(654)
(38,476) 
4,283 
(34,193)
(0.15) 
0.02 
(0.13)
279,722
258,815
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
40
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity 
Three Years Ended December 31, 2010
(US$000s)                        
Common shares, beginning of year
Shares issued for cash, net of share issue costs (Note 8) 
Shares issued for services 
Shares issued for acquisition of a business, net of share issue costs (Note 17) 
Exercise of stock options 
Exercise of purchase warrants 
Exercise of convertible debt 
Shares issued for employee bonuses
End of year
Purchase warrants, beginning of year (Note 8)
Issuance of special warrants on private placement 
Warrants issued for acquisition of a business 
Exercise of purchase warrants 
Expiry of purchase warrants
End of year
Contributed surplus, beginning of year 
Stock-based compensation expense 
Exercise of stock options 
Expiry of purchase warrants
End of year
Convertible note, beginning of year
Issuance of convertible note
End of year
Accumulated deficit, beginning of year
Net loss and comprehensive loss
End of year
2010 
422,322 
121,697 
799 
- 
5,735 
9 
- 
- 
550,562 
 
19,427 
13,999 
- 
(3) 
- 
33,423 
 
20,029 
6,894 
(3,940) 
- 
22,983 
 
2,086 
- 
2,086 
 
(255,835) 
(29,110) 
(284,945)
2009 
413,857 
- 
207 
6,874 
1,384 
- 
- 
- 
422,322
18,805 
- 
622 
- 
- 
19,427
16,862 
3,659 
(492) 
- 
20,029
2,086 
- 
2,086
2008 
324,262 
82,451 
- 
- 
1,792 
- 
4,862 
490 
413,857
23,078 
- 
- 
- 
(4,273) 
18,805
9,937 
3,239 
(587) 
4,273 
16,862
- 
2,086 
2,086
(194,183) 
(61,652) 
(255,835)
(159,990) 
(34,193) 
(194,183)
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
41
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
Three Years Ended December 31, 2010
(US$000s) 
Operating Activities 
Net loss 
Net loss (income) from discontinued operations 
Items not requiring use of cash 
Depletion and depreciation 
Provision for impairment  
Stock-based compensation (Note 9) 
Unrealized loss (gain) on derivative instruments 
Impairment of deferred financing costs (Note 13) 
Unrealized foreign exchange (gain) loss 
Future income tax recovery 
Provision for uncollectible accounts 
Other
Abandonment costs settled (Note 6) 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities – continuing operations 
Net cash provided by operating activities – discontinued operations 
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities
Investing Activities 
Capital investments  
Acquisition of oil and gas assets 
Settlement of advances 
Decrease (increase) in restricted cash 
Long term receivables 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash used in investing activities – continuing operations 
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities –  discontinued operations 
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
Financing Activities 
Shares and warrants issued on private placements, net of share issue costs 
Share issue costs on acquisition 
Proceeds from exercise of options and warrants 
Proceeds from debt obligations, net of financing costs 
Payments of debt obligations 
Payments of deferred financing costs 
Other 
Changes in non-cash working capital items 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities – continuing operations 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities –  discontinued operations 
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Foreign exchange gain (loss) on cash and cash equivalents held in a foreign currency 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents, for the year 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of year 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year – continuing operations 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of year – discontinued operations
2010
(29,110) 
-
8,960 
- 
6,095 
- 
- 
(3,523) 
(1,125) 
- 
(14) 
(179) 
1,132 
(17,764) 
- 
(17,764) 
 
 
(86,285) 
- 
- 
2,350 
(1,558) 
5,633 
(79,860) 
- 
(79,860) 
 
 
135,696 
- 
2,600 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(10) 
138,286 
- 
138,286 
 
5,643 
46,305 
21,512 
67,817 
 
67,817 
-
2009
(61,652) 
23,921 
 
19,868 
1,903 
3,849 
1,459 
- 
5,109 
(9,600) 
174 
553 
(118) 
(459) 
(14,993) 
2,703 
(12,290) 
 
 
(26,373) 
- 
- 
(2,000) 
(587) 
64 
(28,896) 
35,292 
6,396 
 
 
- 
(26) 
893 
- 
(7,416) 
- 
(100) 
(26) 
(6,675) 
(5,200) 
(11,875) 
 
16 
(17,753) 
39,265 
21,512 
 
21,512 
-
2008
(34,193) 
(4,283) 
 
25,761 
15,054 
3,016 
(6,118) 
2,621 
1,762 
- 
625 
519 
- 
6,016 
10,780 
6,273 
17,053 
 
 
(21,063) 
(22,308) 
200 
(850) 
73 
(1,035) 
(44,983) 
(4,338) 
(49,321) 
 
 
82,451 
- 
1,205 
4,790 
(15,750) 
(2,621) 
(50) 
26 
70,051 
700 
70,751
(10,574) 
27,909 
11,356 
39,265 
 
38,477 
788
(See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
42
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.  
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements  
(all tabular amounts are expressed US$000s, except share and per share amounts) 
 
1.  NATURE OF OPERATIONS 
Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  (the  “Company”  or  “Ivanhoe”),  a  Canadian  company,  is  an  independent  international  heavy  oil 
development  and  production  company  focused  on  pursuing  long  term  growth  in  its  reserves  and  production.  Ivanhoe 
plans  to  utilize  advanced  technologies  designed  to  significantly  improve  recovery  of  heavy  oil  resources,  including  its 
HTL™  technology.  In  addition,  the  Company  seeks  to  expand  its  reserve  base  and  production  through  conventional 
exploration and production of oil and gas. Our core operations are carried out in Canada, Ecuador, China and Mongolia.  
 
2.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting 
principles (“GAAP”). The impact of material differences between Canadian and US GAAP on the consolidated financial 
statements is disclosed in Note 20. 
 
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported 
amounts and other disclosures in these consolidated financial statements. Actual results may differ from those estimates. 
In particular, the amounts recorded for depletion and depreciation of the oil and gas properties and accretion for asset 
retirement obligations are based on estimates of reserves and future costs. By their nature, these estimates, and those 
related  to  future  cash  flows  used  to  assess  impairment  of  oil  and  gas  properties  and  development  costs  as  well  as 
intangible assets, are subject to measurement uncertainty and the impact on the financial statements of future periods 
could be material. 
 
Going Concern and Basis of Presentation 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP applicable to a going concern, 
which assumes that Ivanhoe will be able to meet its obligations and continue operations for at least its next fiscal year. 
Realization  values  may  be  substantially  different  from  carrying  values  as  shown  and  these  consolidated  financial 
statements do not give effect to adjustments that may be necessary to the carrying values and classification of assets and 
liabilities should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. Such adjustments could be material. 
 
At December 31, 2010, Ivanhoe had an accumulated deficit of $284.9 million and working capital of $16.5 million. In 2010, 
cash used in operating activities was $17.8 million and the Company expects to incur further losses in the development of 
its business. Continuing as a going concern is dependent upon attaining future profitable operations to repay liabilities 
arising in the normal course of operations and accessing additional capital to develop the Company’s properties (refer to 
Notes 5 and 7). Ivanhoe intends to finance its future funding requirements through a combination of strategic investors 
and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent company level or at the project level. There is no 
assurance  that  Ivanhoe will  be  able  to  obtain such financing  on favorable  terms,  if  at  all.  Without  access  to additional 
financing in 2011, there is significant doubt that the Company will be able to continue as a going concern.   
  
Principles of Consolidation 
The  consolidated  financial  statements  include  the  accounts  of  the  Company,  its  subsidiaries  and  any  variable  interest 
entities. Any reference to the Company or Ivanhoe throughout these consolidated financial statements refers to Ivanhoe, 
its subsidiaries, and any variable interest entities. All inter-entity transactions have been eliminated.  Ivanhoe conducts 
some of its oil production activities through jointly controlled operations and the consolidated financial statements reflect 
only Ivanhoe’s proportionate interest in such activities. 
 
Foreign Currency Translation 
The  Company’s  functional  currency  is  the  US  dollar.    All  of  Ivanhoe’s  operations  are  considered  integrated  and  are 
translated into US dollars using the temporal method. Under this method, monetary assets and liabilities are translated at 
the  exchange  rate  in  effect  at  the  balance  sheet  date.  Non-monetary  assets  and  liabilities,  as  well  as  operating 
transactions, are translated at the exchange rate prevailing at the time of the transaction. Translation exchange gains and 
losses are reﬂected in the results of operations.
43
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include short term investments, such as money market deposits or similar type instruments, 
with an original maturity of 90 days or less when purchased. 
 
Full Cost Accounting for Oil and Gas Operations 
The  Company  follows  the  full  cost  method  of  accounting  for  oil  and  gas  operations  whereby  all  exploration  and 
development  expenditures  are  capitalized  on  a  country-by-country  cost  center  basis.  Such  expenditures  could  include 
lease and royalty interest acquisitions, geological and geophysical expenses, carrying charges for unproved properties, 
costs  of  drilling  both  successful  and  unsuccessful  wells,  gathering  and  production  facilities  and  equipment,  major 
renovations, financing, asset retirement costs and administrative costs related to capital projects.  
 
Proceeds  from  the  sale  of  oil  and  gas  properties  are  applied  against  capitalized  costs,  without  any  gain  or  loss  being 
realized, unless such sale would significantly alter the rate of depletion and depreciation, in which case a gain or loss 
would be recognized. 
 
Capitalized Interest 
The  Company  capitalizes  interest  on  major  development  projects  until  construction  is  complete.    Capitalized  interest 
cannot exceed the actual interest incurred. 
 
Depletion and Depreciation 
Provision for depletion of oil and gas assets is calculated using the unit-of-production method, based on proved reserves 
net of royalties as evaluated by independent petroleum engineers. The cost basis used for the depletion provision is the 
capitalized costs of oil and gas assets, including undeveloped property, plus the estimated future development costs of 
proved undeveloped reserves. 
 
Furniture and equipment are depreciated on a straight line basis over the estimated useful life of the respective assets, at 
rates  ranging  from  three  to  five  years.  The  Feedstock  Testing  Facility  (“FTF”)  is  being  depreciated  over  its  expected 
economic life of 20 years.  
 
Impairment 
The  Company  annually  evaluates  the  carrying  values  of  its  oil  and  gas  properties  and  development  costs  whenever 
events or conditions occur that indicate that the carrying values may not be  recoverable from future cash flows. If  the 
carrying values exceed the sum of estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from proved reserves, the asset is 
impaired. The impairment charge is measured by assigning a fair value to the asset equal to its estimated discounted 
future  net  cash  flows  expected  from  proved  plus  probable  reserves  and  the  excess  carrying  value  is  expensed  in  the 
results of operations. The cost of unproved properties is excluded from the impairment test described above and subject 
to a separate impairment test.  If impaired, the carrying value of the unproved properties is included in the petroleum and 
gas depletable base.  
 
Cash flow estimates require assumptions about future commodity prices, ultimate recoverability of oil and gas reserves, 
operating costs and other factors. Actual results can differ materially from these estimates.  
 
Intangible Assets  
 
Intangible  assets  are  recognized  and  measured  at  cost.    Intangible  assets  with  finite  lives  are  amortized  over  their 
estimated  useful  life.    Intangible  assets  are  reviewed  at  least  annually  for  impairment,  or  when  events  or  changes  in 
circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an intangible asset may not be recoverable.  If the carrying value of an 
intangible asset exceeds its fair value or expected discounted future cash flows, the excess is expensed to the results of 
operations.   
 
Asset Retirement Costs 
The Company provides for future asset retirement obligations on its resource properties and facilities based on estimates 
established by current legislation and industry practices. The asset retirement obligation is initially measured at fair value 
and capitalized to the asset as an asset retirement cost that is depreciated over the life of the related asset. The obligation 
is accreted through interest expense until it is settled.
44
The fair value of the obligation is estimated by discounting expected future cash outflows to settle the asset retirement 
obligation using a credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate. Ivanhoe recognizes revisions to either the timing or the amount of 
the original estimate of undiscounted cash outflows as increases or decreases to the asset retirement obligation. Actual 
retirement costs are recorded against the obligation when incurred. Any difference between the recorded asset retirement 
obligations and the actual retirement costs incurred is recorded as a gain or loss in the settlement period. 
 
Oil and Gas Revenue
Sales of oil and gas are recognized in the period in which the product is delivered to the customer. Oil and gas revenue 
represents  the  Company’s  share  and  is  recorded  net  of  royalty  payments  to  governments  and  other  mineral  interest 
owners. 
 
In China, the Company conducts operations jointly with the government of China in accordance with a production sharing 
contract. Under this contract, the Company pays its share of operating costs and both its share and the government’s 
share of capital costs. The Company recovers the government’s share of the capital costs from future revenues over the 
life of the production sharing contract.  
 
Income or Loss Per Common Share 
Basic net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common 
shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income per common share amounts are calculated based on net income 
divided by dilutive common shares. Dilutive common shares are arrived at by adding weighted average common shares to 
common shares issuable on conversion of options, using the treasury stock method. The treasury stock method assumes 
that proceeds received from the exercise of in-the-money options is used to repurchase common shares at the average 
market price.  Dilution from the convertible debt is considered using the “if converted” method. 
 
Income Taxes 
Ivanhoe follows the liability method of accounting for future income taxes. Under the liability method, income tax assets 
and  liabilities  are  recorded  to  reflect  the  expected  future  tax  consequences  of  tax  loss  carry-forwards  and  temporary 
differences between the carrying value and the tax basis of the Company’s assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is 
recorded if the future benefit of income tax assets, including unused tax losses, is not more likely than not to be ultimately 
realized.  The effect of a change in tax rate on future income tax assets and liabilities is recognized in net income in the 
period in which the change is substantively enacted.    
 
Stock-based Compensation 
Options  to  purchase  common  shares  are  granted  to  directors,  officers,  employees  and  consultants  at  current  market 
prices.    The  fair  value  of  the  options  at  the  time  of  grant  is  recognized  as  a  compensation  expense  in  the  results  of 
operations over the vesting period of the option, with a corresponding increase to contributed surplus.  Upon the exercise 
of the stock options, consideration paid together with the amount previously recognized in contributed surplus, is recorded 
as  an  increase  in  share  capital.  In  the  event  that  vested  options  expire  unexercised,  the  previously  recognized 
compensation expense associated with such stock options is not reversed.  Forfeitures are estimated at the grant date 
and are subsequently adjusted to reflect actual forfeitures. 
 
Financial Assets and Liabilities 
Financial  assets  and  financial  liabilities  are  measured  at  fair  value  on  initial  recognition.  Measurement  in  subsequent 
periods depends on whether the financial instrument has been classified as held-for-trading, loans and receivables, or 
other financial liabilities. 
 
Financial assets  and  liabilities designated  as  held-for-trading  are subsequently  measured at  fair  value  with  changes  in 
those fair values charged immediately to earnings. Ivanhoe classifies all derivative contracts as held-for trading. Cash and 
cash equivalents and restricted cash are classified as held-for-trading.  Transaction costs are expensed as incurred. 
 
Loans  and  receivables  and  other  financial  liabilities  are  subsequently  measured  at  amortized  cost  using  the  effective 
interest method. Ivanhoe classifies accounts receivable and the note receivable as loans and receivables, and accounts 
payable, debt  and  the  long  term  obligation  as  other  financial  liabilities.    Transaction  costs  for  other  long  term  financial 
liabilities are deducted from the related liability and accounted for using the effective interest rate method.
45
Fair value measurements are classified according to the following hierarchy based on the amount of observable inputs 
used to value the instrument. 
Level 1 – Quoted prices are available in active markets.  Active markets are those in which transactions occur in sufficient
frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
Level 2 – Pricing inputs are other than quoted prices in an active market included in Level 1.  Prices in Level 2 are either 
directly  or  indirectly  observable  as  of  the  reporting  date.    Level  2  valuations  are  based  on  inputs,  including 
quoted forward prices for commodities, time value and volatility factors, which can be substantially observed or 
corroborated in the market place.
Level 3 – Valuation at this level are those with inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market
data.
Assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and may affect the 
placement within the fair value hierarchy.  
 
3.  OIL AND GAS PROPERTIES AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS
Oil and Gas
Asia
Conventional
Business and 
Technology 
 
Development
As at December 31, 2010
Oil and gas properties
Proved 
Unproved
Accumulated depletion 
Accumulated provision for impairment
Development costs
Feasibility studies and other deferred costs
Iraq and Libya – HTL™ 
Egypt – GTL 
Accumulated provision for impairment
Feedstock test facility 
Accumulated depreciation and impairment
Furniture and equipment
Accumulated depreciation
Integrated
Canada
Ecuador
- 
125,435 
125,435 
- 
- 
125,435 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
27 
(17) 
10 
125,445
- 
26,249 
26,249 
- 
- 
26,249
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
436 
(101) 
335 
26,584
Corporate
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
1,361 
(894) 
467 
467
159,551 
39,126 
198,677 
(108,334) 
(16,550) 
73,793
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
592 
(229) 
363 
74,156
Total
159,551 
190,810 
350,361 
(108,334) 
(16,550) 
225,477
834 
5,054 
(5,888) 
11,426 
(921) 
10,505 
 
2,474 
(1,256) 
1,218 
  237,200
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
834 
5,054 
(5,888) 
11,426 
(921) 
10,505 
 
58 
(15) 
43 
10,548
46
- 
94,431 
94,431 
- 
- 
94,431 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
24 
(8)
16 
94,447
Total
148,110 
115,597 
263,707 
(99,744) 
(16,550) 
147,413
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
834 
5,054 
(5,888) 
10,868 
(393) 
10,475 
 
22 
(11) 
11 
10,486
As at December 31, 2009
Oil and gas properties
Proved 
Unproved
Accumulated depletion 
Accumulated provision for impairment
Oil and Gas
Integrated
Canada
Ecuador
Asia
Conventional
Corporate
Business and 
Technology 
 
Development
- 
6,755 
6,755 
- 
- 
6,755
148,110 
14,411 
162,521 
(99,744) 
(16,550) 
46,227
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
Development costs
Accumulated depreciation
169 
(53) 
116 
6,871
135 
(92) 
43 
46,270
Furniture and equipment
Feasibility studies and other deferred costs
Iraq and Libya – HTL™ 
Egypt – GTL 
Accumulated provision for impairment
Feedstock test facility 
Accumulated depreciation and impairment
834 
5,054 
(5,888) 
10,868 
(393) 
10,475 
 
1,318 
(814) 
504 
  158,392 
 
Costs associated with unproved oil and gas properties that were not subject to depletion amounted to $190.8 million at 
December 31, 2010 (December 31, 2009 – $115.6 million). Costs subject to depletion included future capital expenditures 
of  $7.3  million  at  December  31,  2010  (December  31,  2009  –  $3.3  million)  relating  to  the  development  of  proved 
undeveloped reserves, as estimated by the Company’s independent reserve engineers. 
 
In 2010, $7.0 million (2009 – $4.1 million; 2008 – $1.0 million) in general and administrative expenses related directly to 
exploration  and  development  activities  and  interest  of  $2.5  million  (2009  –  $2.2  million;  2008  –  $3.8  million)  were 
capitalized.  
 
The Company performed a ceiling test calculation at December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 to assess the recoverable value 
of its oil and gas properties. The present value of future net revenue from the Company’s proved reserves exceeded the 
carrying value of the Company’s oil and gas properties in 2010, 2009 and 2008, resulting in no impairment in each of 
those  years.    West  Texas  Intermediate  prices  used  in  calculating  the  expected  future  cash  flows  were  based  on  the 
following benchmark prices adjusted for gravity, transportation and other factors as required by sales agreements as at 
December 31, 2010:
968 
(650) 
318 
318
($/bbl) 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
Thereafter
88.00 
89.00 
90.00 
92.00 
95.17 
97.55 
100.26 
102.74 
105.45 
107.56
2% per year
In 2009, Ivanhoe impaired $0.8 million of development costs associated with its HTL™ projects in Iraq and Libya.  Gas-to-
Liquids technology (“GTL”) development costs of $5.1 million and intangible GTL assets of $10.0 million were impaired in 
2008.
47
When  the  Company’s  FTF  was  placed  into  service,  the  Commercial  Demonstration  Facility  was  abandoned  and  the 
carrying value of $0.9 million was written down to nil in 2009.  
 
4.  INTANGIBLE ASSETS  
The  Company’s  intangible  assets  consist  of  an  exclusive,  irrevocable  license  to  deploy  HTL™  technology,  a  master 
license permitting Ivanhoe to use the Syntroleum Process and the exclusive right to deploy the Rapid Thermal Processing  
process in all applications other than biomass. The carrying value of the HTL™ technology as at December 31, 2010 and 
2009  was  $92.2  million.  This  asset  was  not  amortized  and  its  carrying  value  was  not  impaired  for  the  years  ended 
December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008. 
 
5.  DEBT
2009 
 38,005  
 (1,071) 
 36,934
2010 
40,217 
(385) 
39,832
As at December 31, 
Convertible note  
Unamortized discount
In connection with the acquisition of the Tamarack leases in July 2008 from Talisman Energy Canada (“Talisman”) (refer 
to Note 17), the Company issued a Cdn$40.0 million convertible promissory note (the “Convertible Note”) which matures 
in July 2011.  Interest at the prime rate plus 2% is calculated daily and is payable semi-annually. The outstanding principal 
amount  is  convertible,  at  Talisman’s  option,  into  a  maximum  of  12,779,552  Ivanhoe  common  shares  at  Cdn$3.13  per 
common  share.  The  interest  rate  on  the  Convertible  Note  at  December  31,  2010  was  5.00%  (December  31,  2009  – 
4.25%).  
 
The  Convertible  Note  is  a  compound  financial  instrument,  containing  a  debt  instrument  as  well  as  an  embedded 
conversion feature classified as equity. The residual basis method was used to value the instrument. The fair value of the 
liability component was determined and the remaining value was assigned to the bifurcated equity component. The value 
of  the  liability  was  determined  by  discounting  the  expected  interest  and  principal  payments  and  was  calculated  at 
Cdn$37.9 million with the remaining value of Cdn$2.1 million allocated to the equity component. The liability component is 
accreted over the three year maturity period up to the Cdn$40.0 million principal amount using the effective interest rate 
method.  
 
The Company’s obligations under the Convertible Note are secured by a first fixed charge and security interest in favor of 
Talisman against the acquired Talisman leases and the related assets acquired by the Company pursuant to the Talisman 
lease acquisition. 
 
Interest expense included in the statement of operations was nil in 2010 (2009 – $0.8 million; 2008 – $1.2 million). In 
2010,  $2.5  million  (2009  –  $2.2  million;  2008  –  $3.8  million)  in  interest  was  capitalized  to  oil  and  gas  properties  and 
development costs in the consolidated balance sheet.   
 
6.  ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS
At December 31, 2010, the Company’s total estimated undiscounted inflated costs to settle its asset retirement obligations 
were approximately $1.9 million (December 31, 2009 – $0.9 million).  These costs are expected to be incurred between 
2013 and 2038 and have been discounted using an inflation rate specific to the country in which the costs will be incurred 
(2% to 4%) and a weighted average credit-adjusted risk-free rate of 5.2% (December 31, 2009 – 5.3%).
As at December 31, 
Asset retirement obligations, beginning of year
Liabilities incurred 
Liabilities settled 
Accretion expense 
Revisions in estimated cash flows
Less current portion 
Asset retirement obligations, end of year
48
2010 
948 
479 
(179) 
23 
(527) 
744  
- 
744
2009 
1,928  
 185  
 (118) 
 79  
 (1,126) 
 948  
 (753)  
 195
7. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES  
Long Term Obligation 
As part of its 2005 merger with Ensyn Group Inc., the Company assumed an obligation to pay $1.9 million in the event 
that proceeds from the sale of units incorporating the HTL™ technology for petroleum applications reach a total of $100.0 
million. 
 
Income Taxes 
The Company has an uncertain tax position in China related to when it is entitled to take tax deductions on capitalized 
development  costs  that  are  amortized  over  six  years  on  a  straight  line  basis.  To  the  extent  that  there  is  a  different 
interpretation  in  the  timing  of  the  deductibility  of  development  costs,  this  could  potentially  result  in  an  increase  in  the 
current tax expense of $0.9 million.  
 
The Company has an uncertain tax position related to the calculation of a gain on the consideration received from two 
farm-out transactions. To the extent that the calculation of the gain is interpreted differently and the amounts are subject 
to withholding tax, there would be an additional current tax expense of approximately $0.7 million.  
 
No amounts have been recorded in the consolidated financial statements related to the above mentioned uncertain tax 
positions as management has determined the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome to the Company to be low.  
 
Lease Commitments 
In 2010, the Company expended $2.6 million (2009 – $1.2 million; 2008 – $1.1 million) on operating leases relating to the 
rental of office space, which expire between January 2011 and September 2013. As at December 31, 2010, future net 
minimum payments for operating leases were the following:
2011  
2012  
2013
1,769 
885 
335 
2,989
Other 
The Company may be required to make a Cdn$15.0 million cash payment to Talisman upon receiving government and 
other approvals necessary to develop the northern border of one of the Tamarack leases (refer to Note 17). 
 
Occasionally, Ivanhoe enters into consulting agreements whereby a success fee may be payable if and when either a 
definitive agreement is signed or certain other contractual milestones are met. Under these agreements, the consultant 
may receive cash, common shares, stock options or some combination thereof. 
 
From  time  to  time,  Ivanhoe  is  involved  in  litigation  or  has  claims  brought  against  it  in  the  normal  course  of  business.  
Management is currently not aware of any claims that would materially affect the reported financial position or results of 
operations.
49
8.  SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The  authorized  capital  of  the  Company  consists  of  an  unlimited  number  of  common  shares  without  par  value  and  an 
unlimited number of preferred shares without par value.
(000s)                        
Common shares, beginning of year
Shares issued for cash 
Shares issued for services 
Shares issued for acquisition of a business (Note 17) 
Exercise of stock options 
Exercise of purchase warrants 
Exercise of convertible debt 
Shares issued for employee bonuses
End of year
2010 
282,559 
50,000 
280 
- 
1,525 
2 
- 
- 
334,366
2009 
279,381 
- 
81 
2,683 
414 
- 
- 
- 
282,559
2008 
244,874 
29,334 
- 
- 
2,666 
- 
2,291 
216 
279,381
The following reflects the changes in the Company’s common share purchase warrants for the three year period ended 
December 31, 2010.
(000s)                        
Purchase warrants, beginning of year
Private placements 
Issued on acquisition 
Exercised 
Expired 
End of year
Year of  
Issue 
2006 
2009 
2010 
2010
Price per  
Special 
Warrant
US$2.23 
N/A 
Cdn$3.00 
Cdn$3.00
Outstanding(1)
(000s)
11,398 
735 
10,417 
2,083 
24,633
2010 
12,135 
12,500 
- 
(2) 
- 
24,633
2009 
11,400 
- 
735 
- 
- 
12,135
2008 
26,496 
29,334 
- 
(29,334) 
(15,096) 
11,400
Exercise 
Price per 
Share 
Cdn$2.93(2) 
Cdn$4.05 
Cdn$3.16 
Cdn$3.16
Cash 
Value on 
Exercise 
($US000s) 
33,577 
2,993 
33,095 
6,619 
76,284
Value
($US000s) 
18,802 
622 
11,419 
2,580 
33,423
Expiry 
  Date 
May 2011 
Feb 2011 
Feb 2011 
Feb 2011
(1)  One common share is issuable for each purchase warrant upon exercise. 
(2)  Each common share purchase warrant originally entitled the holder to purchase one common share at a price of $2.63 per share until the fifth anniversary
date of the closing. In September 2006, these warrants were listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange and the exercise price was changed to Cdn$2.93.
In January 2010, the Company completed a Cdn$125.0 million private placement (the “Private Placement”) consisting of 
41,666,667 special warrants (“Special Warrants”) at Cdn$3.00. Each Special Warrant was converted into one common 
share  of  the  Company  and  one-quarter  of  a  common  share  purchase  warrant.  Each  whole  common  share  purchase 
warrant entitles the holder to acquire one common share of the Company at an exercise price of Cdn$3.16 on or before 
February 25, 2011 (refer to Note 19). The net proceeds from the Private Placement were approximately Cdn$120.2 million 
after  deducting  fees  and  commissions  of  Cdn$4.3  million  and  expenses  of  the  Private  Placement  of  approximately 
Cdn$0.5 million.  
 
Under the terms of the Private Placement, an additional 8,333,333 Special Warrants issuable at Cdn$3.00 per Special 
Warrant  were  subject  to  an  option,  which  were  exercised  in  February  2010  for  Cdn$25.0  million.  The  net  proceeds 
realized  by  the  Company  from  the  issue  of  the  Special  Warrants  were  Cdn$23.8  million,  after  deducting  fees  and 
commissions payable of Cdn$1.1 million and expenses of Cdn$0.1 million. Each Special Warrant was converted into one 
common share and one-quarter of a common share purchase warrant following the issuance of a receipt for a prospectus 
by applicable Canadian securities regulatory authorities, which occurred on March 12, 2010.
50
The Company calculated the value of the common share purchase warrants using the Black Scholes option pricing model 
which included assumptions related to risk-free interest rates, volatility factors, and the expected life of the warrant. The 
value of the 10.4 million and 2.1 million purchase warrants issued in 2010 were calculated using a risk-free interest rate of 
0.7% and 0.9% respectively, a volatility factor of 78.9% and 71.6% respectively and an expected life of one year.   
 
In January 2010, one of the Company’s subsidiaries signed an agreement that granted a private investor an option to 
acquire  a  20%  interest  in  the  subsidiary  for  Cdn$25.0  million.  The  option  is  valid  for  one  year  and  does  not  become 
exercisable until the first quarter of 2011.  The option was determined to have a nominal value at the grant date. 
 
In  2009,  0.7  million  purchase  warrants  were  issued  in  exchange  for  outstanding  warrants  of  a  company  that  Ivanhoe 
acquired (refer to Note 17). 
 
In July 2008, the Company completed a Cdn$88.0 million private placement consisting of 29,334,000 special warrants at 
Cdn$3.00 per special warrant (the “Offering”). Each of these special warrants entitled the holder to one common share of 
the  Company  upon  exercise  of  the  special  warrant.  In  August  2008,  all  of  these  special  warrants  were  exercised  for 
29,334,000 common shares. The net proceeds from the Offering were approximately Cdn$83.4 million after deducting the 
agents’ commission of Cdn$4.0 million and expenses of Cdn$0.6 million. The Company used Cdn$22.5 million of the net 
proceeds of the Offering to complete the cash component of the Talisman lease acquisition.  
 
In April 2008, the Company obtained a loan from a third party finance company in the amount of Cdn$5.0 million bearing 
interest at 8% per annum. The principal and accrued and unpaid interest matured and was repayable in August 2008. In 
August  2008,  the  lender  exercised  its  option  to  convert  the  entire  outstanding  balance  into  the  Company’s  common 
shares at a conversion price of Cdn$2.24 per share. 
 
As the Company incurred a net loss for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, the following potentially 
dilutive securities had an anti-dilutive effect on basic earnings per share:
2009 
15,013 
12,135 
12,780 
39,928
2008 
11,913 
11,400 
12,780 
36,093
(000s of common shares) 
Stock options 
Purchase warrants 
Convertible debt
2010 
16,927 
24,633 
12,780 
54,340
9.  STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION 
The Company has an Employees’ and Directors’ Equity Incentive Plan under which it can grant stock options to directors 
and eligible employees to purchase common shares, issue common shares to directors and eligible employees for bonus 
awards  and  issue  common  shares  under  a  share  purchase  plan  for  eligible  employees.  The  total  number  of  common 
shares that may be issued under this plan cannot exceed 7% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common shares 
which,  at  December  31,  2010,  was  23.4  million  (December  31,  2009  –  29.3  million).    The  maximum  common  share 
issuances under this plan was changed from a fixed number of common shares to a percentage of outstanding common 
shares in the second quarter of 2010. 
 
Stock options are issued at the weighted average trading price for the five days immediately preceding the award and are 
conditional on continuing employment. Expiration and vesting periods are set at the discretion of the Board of Directors, 
but  typically  vest  over  three  to  four  years  and  expire  five  to  ten  years  from  the  date  of  issue.  In  2007,  the  Company 
granted stock option awards that vest upon meeting various departmental and company-wide goals.  At December 31, 
2010, there were approximately 479,000 unvested options outstanding.
51
The following table summarizes changes in the Company’s outstanding stock options:
2010 
  Weighted  
Average 
 
Exercise 
 
Price 
 
(Cdn$) 
 
2.27 
 
2.56 
 
2.28 
 
2.60 
 
2.64 
 
2.24 
 
 
 
2.19
Number 
of Stock 
Options 
(000s) 
15,013 
6,041 
(2,743) 
(635) 
(749) 
16,927
7,324
Number 
of Stock 
Options 
(000s) 
11,913 
4,188 
(413) 
(114) 
(561) 
15,013
7,101
2009 
  Weighted  
Average 
 
Exercise 
 
Price 
 
(Cdn$) 
 
2.32 
 
2.17 
 
2.46 
 
2.44 
 
2.41 
 
2.27
2.48
Number 
of Stock 
Options 
(000s) 
12,945 
3,832 
(3,067) 
(580) 
(1,217) 
11,913
5,062
2008 
  Weighted  
Average 
 
Exercise 
 
Price 
 
(Cdn$) 
 
2.37 
 
1.79 
 
0.90 
 
5.78 
 
3.05 
 
2.32
2.61
information
respecting  stock  options  outstanding  and  exercisable  as  at
Outstanding, beginning of year 
Granted 
Exercised 
Expired 
Forfeited 
Outstanding, end of year 
 
Exercisable, end of year
following
The 
December 31, 2010:
table  summarizes
Weighted Average 
Exercise Price
(Cdn$) 
1.74 
2.34 
3.08 
2.24
Exercisable
(000s) 
3,723 
2,079 
1,522 
7,324
Exercisable 
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(years) 
2.3 
2.7 
1.6 
2.3
Weighted Average 
Exercise Price
(Cdn$) 
1.73 
2.41 
2.98 
2.19
Range of
Exercise Prices
(Cdn$) 
1.51 to 2.06 
2.15 to 2.71 
2.77 to 3.41
Outstanding
(000s) 
6,289 
7,788 
2,850 
16,927
Outstanding 
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(years)
2.7 
4.9 
3.8 
3.9
The  fair  value  of  each  option  award  is  estimated  on  the  date  of  grant  using  the  Black  Scholes  option  pricing  formula. 
Service  condition  options  are  amortized  on  a  straight  line  attribution  approach  and  performance  condition  options 
amortized over the service period, both with the following weighted average assumptions for the years presented:
Expected life (in years) 
Volatility 
Dividend yield 
Risk-free rate
2010 
6.0 
75.2% 
0.0% 
2.6%
2009 
4.6 
81.1% 
0.0% 
2.6%
2008 
4.0 
63.5% 
0.0% 
3.1%
The weighted average grant date fair value of stock options granted in 2010 was Cdn$1.73 (2009 – Cdn$1.62; 2008 – 
Cdn$0.90).
52
The Company’s stock-based compensation related to option awards, share bonus awards and common shares issued for 
services were classified as follows in the consolidated statement of loss:
General and administrative
Option awards 
Share bonus awards 
Shares issued for services
Business and technology development
Option awards 
Share bonus awards
Discontinued operations
Option awards 
Share bonus awards
2010
2009
2008
5,695 
- 
 - 
5,695
400 
 - 
400
- 
 - 
- 
 6,095
3,484  
 -  
 207  
 3,691
2,241  
 207  
 -  
 2,448
158  
 -  
 158
432  
 136  
 568
17  
 -  
 17  
 3,866
391  
 147  
 538  
 3,554
Additionally, in 2010, $0.8 million (2009 – nil; 2008 – $0.2 million) of stock-based compensation was capitalized to oil and 
gas properties and development costs. 
 
10.  RETIREMENT PLAN 
In 2001, the Company adopted a defined contribution retirement or thrift plan (“401(k) Plan”) to assist US employees in 
providing for retirement or other future financial needs. Employees’ contributions (up to the maximum allowed by US tax 
laws) were matched 100% by the Company in 2010. In 2010, the Company’s matching contributions to the 401(k) Plan 
were $0.4 million (2009 – $0.4 million; 2008 – $0.5 million). 
 
11.  SEGMENT INFORMATION 
The Company subdivides its operations into four areas: Oil and Gas – Integrated, Oil and Gas – Conventional, Business 
and  Technology  Development  and  Corporate.    Accounting  policies  for  segments  are  the  same  as  those  described  in 
Significant Accounting Policies (refer to Note 2). 
 
Oil and Gas – Integrated 
Projects in this segment have two primary components: conventional exploration and production activities supported by 
enhanced oil recovery techniques, such as steam assisted gravity drainage and deployment of the HTL™ technology. The 
Company has two projects currently reported in this segment: a heavy oil project in Canada and a heavy oil project in 
Ecuador.  
 
Oil and Gas – Conventional 
Projects  in  this  segment  consist  of  conventional  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production  activities  without  enhanced  oil 
recovery techniques or the use of HTL™ technology.  The Company has two conventional projects in Asia, located in 
China and Mongolia. Prior to July 2009, the Company conducted conventional exploration, development and production 
activities primarily in the US (refer to Note 18). 
 
Business and Technology Development 
The Company’s Business and Technology Development segment captures HTL™ activities as well as costs associated 
with the pursuit of new business development opportunities.   
 
Corporate 
The Corporate area tracks costs associated with the board of directors, executive officers, corporate debt, financings and 
other corporate activities.
53
2010 
Oil and Gas
Integrated
Canada
Ecuador
Conventional 
Asia
US(1)
Business and 
Technology 
Development
Corporate(2)
Total
Revenue 
Oil(3) 
Interest
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange 
Interest and financing
Loss – continuing operations before income taxes 
       
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Future
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net loss – discontinued operations  
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
   
Capital investments 
   
Identifiable assets as at December 31, 2010
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
1,802 
187 
9 
(15) 
6 
1,989
(1,989) 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
(1,989) 
- 
(1,989)
29,987 
 
125,569
- 
- 
-
- 
2,707 
43 
47 
- 
7 
2,804
(2,804) 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
(2,804) 
- 
(2,804) 
 
18,727 
 
28,916
21,720 
6 
21,726
9,503 
3,619 
- 
8,697 
(62) 
- 
21,757
(31) 
 
 
(111) 
(73) 
(184) 
 
(215) 
- 
(215) 
 
36,613 
 
91,189
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
10,385 
(36) 
- 
11 
10,360
(10,360) 
 
 
- 
1,198 
1,198 
 
(9,162) 
- 
(9,162) 
 
567 
 
102,810
- 
202 
202
- 
18,132 
- 
243 
(3,248) 
- 
15,127
(14,925) 
 
 
(15) 
- 
(15) 
 
(14,940) 
- 
(14,940) 
 
391 
 
61,101
21,720 
208 
21,928
9,503 
26,260 
10,615 
8,960 
(3,325) 
24 
52,037
(30,109) 
 
 
(126) 
1,125 
999 
 
(29,110) 
- 
(29,110) 
 
86,285 
 
409,585
(1)  The Company sold its US operations in the third quarter of 2009. 
(2)  Corporate activities undertaken on behalf of a segment are allocated to that segment at cost. 
(3)  All revenues in Asia are generated from the sale of production to one customer.
54
Business and 
Technology 
Development
Corporate(2)
Total
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
8,941 
1,633 
2 
79
1,903 
12,558
(12,558) 
 
 
- 
9,600 
9,600 
 
(2,958)
- 
(2,958) 
 
2,093 
 
102,878
- 
- 
19 
19 
 
 
- 
15,518 
- 
145 
5,155 
7
- 
20,825
(20,806) 
 
 
(358) 
- 
(358) 
 
(21,164)
- 
(21,164) 
 
95 
 
19,166
24,968 
(1,335) 
25 
23,658 
 
 
10,191 
21,693 
9,501 
19,868 
5,220 
856
1,903 
69,232
(45,574) 
 
 
(1,757) 
9,600 
7,843 
 
(37,731)
(23,921) 
(61,652) 
 
26,373 
 
281,763
2009 
Oil and Gas
Integrated
Canada
Ecuador
Conventional
Asia
US(1)
Revenue 
Oil(3) 
Loss on derivative instruments 
Interest
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange 
Interest and financing 
Provision for impairment of intangible asset and
development costs
Loss – continuing operations before income taxes 
    
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Future
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net loss – discontinued operations (net of tax of $29.6
million)
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
    
Capital investments 
              
Identifiable assets as at December 31, 2009
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
1,129 
560 
4 
(8) 
-
- 
1,685
(1,685) 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
(1,685)
- 
(1,685) 
 
12,756 
 
94,594
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
2,269 
- 
53 
- 
-
- 
2,322
(2,322) 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
(2,322)
- 
(2,322) 
 
5,380 
 
7,597
24,968 
(1,335) 
6 
23,639 
 
 
10,191 
2,777 
- 
18,033 
71 
770
- 
31,842
(8,203) 
 
 
(1,399) 
- 
(1,399) 
 
(9,602)
- 
(9,602) 
 
6,049 
 
57,528
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
-
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
-
(23,921) 
  (23,921) 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
-
(1)  The Company sold its US operations in the third quarter of 2009. 
(2)  Corporate activities undertaken on behalf of a segment are allocated to that segment at cost. 
(3)  All revenues in Asia are generated from the sale of production to one customer.
55
Revenue 
Oil(3) 
Gain on derivative instruments 
Interest
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative 
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange  
Interest expense and financing  
Provision for impairment of GTL intangible assets and
development costs
Write off of deferred financing costs
Loss – continuing operations before income taxes
Current provision for  income taxes
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net income – discontinued operations  
Net (loss) income and comprehensive (loss) 
income
Capital investments 
 
Identifiable assets as at December 31, 2008
2008 
Oil and Gas
Integrated
Canada
Ecuador
Conventional
Asia
US(1)
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
1,627 
189 
3 
26 
- 
- 
- 
1,845 
 
(1,845) 
 
- 
 
(1,845) 
- 
(1,845)
6,484 
 
81,126
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
658 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
658 
 
(658) 
 
- 
 
(658) 
- 
(658)
1,369 
 
1,766
48,370 
1,688 
50 
50,108 
 
 
21,515 
1,967 
- 
23,135 
278 
821 
- 
2,621 
50,337 
 
(229) 
 
(650) 
 
(879) 
- 
(879)
8,378 
 
64,901
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
 
- 
4,283 
4,283
- 
 
65,371
Business and 
Technology 
Development
Corporate(2)
Total
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
6,264 
2,618 
- 
76 
15,054 
- 
24,012 
 
(24,012) 
 
(2) 
 
(24,014) 
- 
(24,014)
4,832 
 
105,587
- 
- 
562 
562 
 
 
- 
10,000 
- 
5 
1,223 
412 
- 
- 
11,640 
 
(11,078) 
 
(2) 
 
(11,080) 
- 
(11,080)
- 
 
28,124
48,370 
1,688 
612 
50,670 
 
 
21,515 
14,252 
6,453 
25,761 
1,527 
1,309 
15,054 
2,621 
88,492 
 
(37,822) 
 
(654) 
 
(38,476) 
4,283 
(34,193)
21,063 
 
 
 
  346,875
(1)  The Company sold its US operations in the third quarter of 2009. 
(2)  Corporate activities undertaken on behalf of a segment are allocated to that segment at cost. 
(3)  All revenues in Asia are generated from the sale of production to one customer.
12.  FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  
The Company’s financial instruments are comprised of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, note receivable, 
restricted cash, long term receivables, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, debt and a long term obligation.   
 
The Company’s cash and restricted cash are transacted in active markets and have been classified using Level 1 inputs.  
 
Carrying  amounts of  financial  instruments  approximate  their  fair value  except  for debt.  The  Company calculated  the  fair 
value of its debt to be $40.2 million as at December 31, 2010. 
 
Financial Risk Factors 
In  the  normal  course  of  operations,  the  Company  is  exposed  to  market  risks  resulting  from  movements  in  commodity 
prices, foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates, which may result in fluctuations in the fair value or future cash 
flows of its financial instruments.
56
Commodity Price Risks 
Commodity price risk refers to the risk that the value of a financial instrument or cash flows associated with the instrument 
will  fluctuate  due  to  the  changes  in  market  commodity  prices.  Oil  prices  and  quality  differentials  are  influenced  by 
worldwide  factors  such  as  OPEC  actions,  political  events  and  supply  and  demand  fundamentals.  The  Company  may 
periodically use different types of derivative instruments to manage its exposure to price volatility.  
 
In 2007, the Company entered into a costless collar derivative to minimize variability in its cash flow from the sale of up to 
18,000 bbls/month of the Company’s production from its Dagang field in China over a three year period. This derivative 
had a ceiling price of $84.50 /bbl and a floor price of $55.00 /bbl using the WTI as the index traded on the NYMEX. The 
contracts  related  to  this  derivative  were  put  in  place  as  part  of  the  Company’s  bank  loan  facility  and  consequently  all 
remaining contracts were settled when this loan was repaid in December 2009. 
 
Results of these derivative transactions for the three years ended December 31, 2010, are:
2009
2008
2010 
- 
- 
-
(4,430) 
6,118 
1,688
124 
(1,459) 
(1,335)
Realized gains (losses) on derivative transactions 
Unrealized gains (losses) on derivative transactions 
 
 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk 
Ivanhoe is exposed to foreign currency exchange rate risk as a result of incurring capital expenditures and operating costs 
in currencies other than the US dollar.  A substantial portion of the Company’s activities are transacted in or referenced to 
US dollars, including oil sales in Asia, capital spending in Ecuador and ongoing FTF operations. A portion of transactions 
are in other currencies, such as Dagang operating costs paid in Chinese renminbi, Tamarack exploration activities funded 
in  Canadian  dollars  and  the  2010  common  share  issuance  in  Canadian  dollars.  The  Company  did  not  enter  into  any 
foreign currency derivatives in 2010, nor do we anticipate using foreign currency derivatives in 2011. To help reduce the 
Company’s  exposure  to  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk,  the  Company  seeks  to  hold  assets  and  liabilities 
denominated in the same currency when appropriate.  
 
The  following  table  shows  the  Company’s  exposure  to  foreign  currency  exchange  rate  risk  on  its  net  loss  and 
comprehensive loss, assuming reasonably possible changes in the relevant foreign currency. This analysis assumes all 
other variables remain constant.
(Increase) Decrease in Net Loss and Comprehensive Loss 
Chinese renminbi  
Canadian dollar
Change From a 10%   
Increase or Weakening
Change From a 10%
Decrease or Strengthening
1,438 
(2,089)
(1,758) 
167
Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate as a result of 
changes in market interest rates. Interest rate risk arises from interest-bearing borrowings which have a variable interest 
rate. The Company’s net loss and accumulated deficit would not have changed with a change in interest rates in 2010 as 
the Company’s debt consists of the Convertible Note issued for the acquisition of the Tamarack leases for which interest 
is capitalized.  
 
Credit Risk 
Ivanhoe  is  exposed  to  credit  risk  with  respect  to  its  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  accounts  receivable,  note  receivable, 
restricted cash and long term receivables. The Company’s maximum exposure to credit risk at December 31, 2010, is 
represented by the carrying amount of these non-derivative financial assets. Most of the Company’s credit exposures are 
with counterparties in the energy industry and are therefore exposed to normal industry credit risks. Ivanhoe manages its 
credit risk by entering into sales contracts only with established entities.  
 
The  Company  believes  its  exposure  to  credit  risk  related  to  cash  and  cash  equivalents,  as  well  as  restricted  cash,  is 
minimal due to the quality of the financial institutions where the funds are held and the nature of the deposit instruments.
57
Currently, all of the Company’s oil production is sold to one national oil corporation. As a result, 85% of the outstanding 
accounts receivable balance at December 31, 2010 (December 31, 2009 – 94%) is due from a national oil corporation.  
Long term receivables are composed of value-added tax receivable amounts from Ecuador and will be recoverable upon 
commencement  of  commercial  operations.  Ivanhoe  considers  the  risk  of  default  on  these  items  to  be  low  due  to  the 
Company’s ongoing operations in China and Ecuador.   
 
In 2008, the Company recorded an allowance associated with an advance balance for the outstanding amount of $0.7 
million.
As at  December 31,   
Accounts receivable – current 
Accounts receivable – over 90 days
2010
6,329 
30 
6,359
2009 
5,004 
17 
5,021
Liquidity Risk 
Liquidity risk is the risk that suitable sources of funding for the Company’s business activities may not be available. Since 
cash flows from existing operations are insufficient to fund future capital expenditures, we intend to finance future capital 
projects with a combination of strategic investors and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent 
company level or at the project level or from the sale of existing assets. There is no assurance that we will be able to 
obtain such financing on favorable terms, if at all.
As at  December 31, 2010 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Long term debt and interest
Less than 1 year
21,482
41,275
13.  CAPITAL MANAGEMENT 
The Company’s main source of funds has historically been public and private equity and debt markets. The Company’s 
cash  flow  from  operating  activities  will not  be  sufficient  to  meet  its  operating and  capital  obligations  and,  as  such,  the 
Company  intends  to  finance  its  operating  and  capital  projects  from  a  combination  of  strategic  investors  in  its  projects 
and/or public and private debt and equity markets, either at a parent company level or at a project level.  There have been 
no significant changes in Management’s objectives, policies and processes to manage capital from the previous year.  
 
The Company defines capital as total shareholders’ equity plus cash and cash equivalents and debt.
As at December 31,  
Cash and cash equivalents 
Debt 
Long term debt 
Shareholders’ equity
2010 
67,817 
39,832 
- 
324,109
2009 
21,512 
- 
36,934 
208,029
The  Company’s  management  reviews  the  capital  structure  on  a  regular  basis  to  maintain  an  optimal  debt  to  equity 
balance. In order to maintain or adjust its capital structure, the Company may refinance its existing debt, raise new debt, 
seek cost sharing arrangements with partners or issue new shares. 
 
In  2008,  the  Company  expensed  $2.6  million  of  deferred  financing  costs  that  were  directly  attributable  to  a  proposed 
offering of securities for its wholly-owned Chinese subsidiary. 
 
As at December 31, 2010, the Company is not subject to any financial covenants.
58
14.  INCOME TAXES 
The  Company  and  its subsidiaries  are required  to  individually  file  tax  returns  in  each  of  the  jurisdictions  in which  they 
operate. The provision for income taxes differs from the amount computed by applying the statutory income tax rates to 
the  net  losses  before  income  taxes.  The  combined  Canadian  federal  and  provincial  statutory  rates  as  at             
December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008 were 28.0%, 29.0% and 29.5%, respectively. The sources and tax effects for the 
differences were as follows:
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes 
Combined Canadian federal and provincial statutory rates 
Tax benefit  
Foreign net (gains) losses affected at lower income tax rates 
Effect of change in foreign exchange rates  
Expiry of tax loss carry-forwards 
Tax credit carry-forward 
Compensation not deductible  
Financing costs not deductible  
Net currency exchange (gains) losses not deductible  
Change in prior year estimate of tax loss carry-forwards 
Realized derivative (gains) losses not taxable/deductible  
Effect of change in effective income tax rates on future tax assets 
Other differences
Change in valuation allowance 
Provision for (recovery of) income taxes
2010 
(30,109)
28.0%  
(8,431) 
 
(396) 
 
(2,309) 
 
982   
 
- 
 
1,310 
 
- 
 
(900) 
 
(918) 
 
- 
 
1,096 
 
425 
 
(9,141) 
 
8,142 
 
(999)
2009 
(45,574)
29.0%  
(13,217) 
 
106 
 
(2,858) 
 
911 
 
(350) 
 
1,456 
 
- 
 
1,501 
 
3,941 
 
334 
 
(4,453) 
 
32 
 
(12,597) 
 
4,754 
 
(7,843)
2008 
(37,822) 
29.5%
(11,158) 
4,562 
3,006 
2,875 
- 
753 
695 
402 
(59) 
(422) 
(331) 
(127) 
196 
458 
654
Significant components of the Company’s future net income tax assets and liabilities were as follows:
As at December 31, 
 
Oil and gas properties and investments 
Intangibles 
Tax loss carry-forwards 
Tax credit carry-forward 
Valuation allowance
2010
Assets
Liabilities 
(8,569) 
(30,493) 
- 
- 
- 
(39,062)
Assets 
471 
- 
37,583 
350 
(29,570) 
8,834
2009
Liabilities 
(1,124) 
(30,354) 
- 
- 
- 
(31,478)
266 
- 
54,990 
- 
(37,712) 
17,544
59
The consolidated loss carry-forward amounts and the year of expiry as at December 31, 2010, are shown in the table 
below.  In  China,  the  loss carry-forwards  have  no  expiration  period.  A  loss  of  approximately  Cdn$55.3 million  from  the 
disposition of Russian operations in 2000, is a capital loss for Canadian income tax purposes, and is available for carry-
forward against future Canadian capital gains indefinitely and is not included in the future income tax assets above. 
  
Year of Expiry 
2011 
2012 
2014 
2015 
2018 
2019 
2020 – 2025 
2026 – 2030 
No expiry
505 
2,327 
5,243 
6,803 
2,093 
1,079 
5,508 
116,123 
63,994 
203,675
There are no current income taxes payable at December 31, 2010 (December 31, 2009 – $0.2 million related to China, 
$0.3 million related to the US). 
 
Prior to the Company selling its US operating segment in July 2009, the Company had future tax assets arising from net 
operating loss carry-forwards generated by this business segment. These future income tax assets were partially offset by 
certain future income tax liabilities in the US and by a valuation allowance. As at June 30, 2009, as a result of the sale of 
the  business  segment,  the  Company  was  no  longer  able  to  offset  these  tax  assets  and  liabilities  but  was  required  to 
present these future income tax assets as “assets from discontinued operations” and a future income tax liability, both in 
the amount of $29.6 million in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. The future income tax assets classified as 
assets from discontinued operations were included in the $23.4 million loss on disposition. Revisions were made to the 
future income tax liability during the third quarter of 2009 based on revised projections of taxable income and utilization of 
net operating loss carry-forwards.  
 
As at December 31, 2010, the Company’s future income tax liability is $21.5 million in the accompanying consolidated 
balance sheet, composed of $18.8 million in the US tax jurisdiction and $2.7 million related to Mongolia. 
 
In April 2009, the Chinese State Tax Administration Bureau issued Circular [2009] No. 49 (the “Circular”) on depletion, 
depreciation and amortization expense by oil and gas companies. One of the changes to the existing rules included in the 
Circular that affects the Company was the increase of the minimum depreciation and amortization period from six years to 
eight years. The implementation of the new rules was retroactive to January 1, 2008. Upon reviewing the tax effect of the 
Circular, the Company revised its 2008 current tax payable in China to $1.6 million from the $0.6 million that was recorded 
in 2008. The $1.6 million tax payable was subsequently paid in June 2009.
60
15.  SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION 
Supplemental cash flow information for each of the years ended December 31 was as follows:
Cash paid during the year for 
Income taxes 
Interest
Investing and financing activities, non-cash
Acquisition of business/assets
2010
2009
2008
656 
1,610 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
799 
-
1,876 
2,122 
 
 
 
6,899 
622 
- 
7,521 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
207 
-
5 
1,120 
 
 
 
- 
- 
52,052 
52,052 
 
 
4,737 
125 
4,862 
 
490 
175
2010
2009
2008
(551) 
(39) 
176 
2,076 
(530) 
1,132 
 
(775) 
(2,264) 
8,672 
5,633 
 
(10) 
6,755
(1,253) 
(225) 
(175) 
1,314 
(120) 
(459) 
 
(140) 
41 
163 
64 
 
(26) 
(421)
3,509 
- 
(48) 
1,905 
650 
6,016 
 
7 
(70) 
(972) 
(1,035) 
 
26 
5,007
2010 
10,147 
57,670 
67,817
2009 
21,512 
- 
21,512
Shares issued  
Warrants issued 
Debt issued  
 
 
Extinguishment of debt 
Extinguishment of interest
Conversion of debt to common shares
Shares issued for bonuses and services 
Stock-based compensation capitalized
Changes in non-cash working capital items
Operating activities
Accounts receivable 
Note receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Income tax payable
Investing activities
Accounts receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Financing activities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Cash and cash equivalents are composed of the following:
As at December 31,  
Bank accounts 
Term deposit
16. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS 
The Company has entered into agreements with a number of entities which are related or controlled through common 
directors  or  shareholders.  These  entities  provide  access  to  an  aircraft,  the  services  of  administrative  and  technical 
personnel and office space or facilities in various international locations. The Company is billed on a cost recovery basis 
in  most  cases.  In  2010,  the  costs  incurred  in  the  normal  course  of  business  with  respect  to  the  above  arrangements
61
amounted  to  $3.3  million  (2009  –  $3.8  million;  2008  –  $3.0  million).  These  transactions  have  been  measured  at  their 
exchange amount and are recorded in general and administrative and business and technology expense in the statement 
of operations. As at December 31, 2010, amounts included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities on the consolidated 
balance sheet under these arrangements were $0.2 million (December 31, 2009 – $0.1 million).  
 
17. ACQUISITION AND PROJECT-RELATED AGREEMENTS 
Mongolia 
In November 2009, the Company completed the acquisition of PanAsian Petroleum Inc. (“PPI”) which provides it with the 
exclusive right to explore, develop and produce oil or gas within Block XVI in Mongolia’s Nyalga Basin. This transaction 
with PPI resulted in the Company issuing 2,683,291 common shares in exchange for all of the issued and outstanding 
common  shares  of  PPI.  In  addition,  existing  purchase  warrants  in  PPI  were  converted  to  735,449  Ivanhoe  purchase 
warrants that entitle the holders to purchase Ivanhoe’s common shares at Cdn$4.05 per share and expire in February 
2011. 
 
The consideration for this acquisition and the net assets acquired are summarized as follows:
Purchase consideration
2,683,291 common shares(1) 
735,449 warrants to purchase Ivanhoe common shares (Note 8)
Net assets acquired
Cash 
Non-cash working capital, net 
Oil and gas properties – unproved 
Future income tax liability
6,899  
         622  
            7,521
29  
               (606) 
            10,742  
            (2,644) 
           7,521
(1)  The closing share price on the Toronto Stock Exchange on the date of acquisition, November 26, 2009, was Cdn$2.70.
Canada 
In July 2008, the Company acquired from Talisman two leases located in the Athabasca oil sands region in the Province 
of  Alberta,  Canada.  The  amount  paid  was  Cdn$75.0  million  of  which  Cdn$22.5  million  was  paid  on  closing  and  two 
promissory notes were issued to Talisman. The principal amount of the first note was Cdn$12.5 million with an interest 
rate of prime plus 2%. The first note matured and was repaid on December 31, 2008. The second promissory note was 
Cdn$40.0  million,  with  an  interest  rate  of  prime  plus  2%.  The  second  note  matures  in  July  2011  and  the  outstanding 
principal amount is convertible at Talisman’s option into a maximum of 12,779,552 Ivanhoe common shares at Cdn$3.13 
per common share.  
 
The Company may be required to make a Cdn$15.0 million cash payment to Talisman upon receiving government and 
other approvals necessary to develop the northern border of one of the Tamarack leases. 
  
Talisman retains a back-in right (the “Back-in Right”), exercisable once per lease until July 11, 2011, to re-acquire up to a 
20% undivided interest in each lease. If the Back-in Right is exercised, the cost to Talisman would be 20% of 200% of 
Ivanhoe’s acquisition cost and certain expenses incurred since acquisition in respect of the relevant lease. 
 
Until July 11, 2011, Talisman also has the right of first offer to acquire any interests in heavy oil projects in the Province of 
Alberta that the Company or any of its subsidiaries wishes to sell, excluding the acquired leases.  
 
Ecuador
In October 2008, Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. (“IE Ecuador”) entered into a contract with Empresa Estatal de Petroleos 
del Ecuador, Petro (“Petroecuador”), the state oil company of Ecuador, and its affiliate, Empresa Estatal de Exploracion y 
Produccion de Petroleos del Ecuador, Petroproduccion (“Petroproduccion”) to explore and develop an exploration block in 
Ecuador that includes the Pungarayacu heavy oil field, utilizing the Company’s HTL™ technology. IE Ecuador is a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc. (“IE Latin America”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
62
IE Ecuador will lead the development of the project. The contract is guaranteed by its parent company IE Latin America, 
which will obtain or provide funding and financing for IE Ecuador’s operations under the contract. The contract’s 30 year 
term may be extended by mutual agreement. To recover its investments, costs and expenses, and to provide for a profit, 
IE  Ecuador  will  receive  from  Petroproduccion  a  payment  of  US$37.00/bbl  of  oil  produced  and  delivered  to 
Petroproduccion. The payment will be adjusted quarterly, on a weighted average basis, for movement in a basket of three 
US Government published producer price indices relating to steel products, refinery products and upstream oil and gas 
equipment.  
 
18.  DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 
In  2009,  management  commenced  a  process  to  sell  all  of  the  Company’s  US  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production 
operations. On July 17, 2009, the Company completed the sale of its wholly-owned subsidiary Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc. 
for  a  purchase  price  of  $39.2  million.  The  purchaser  acquired  the  Company’s  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production 
operations in California and Texas and additional exploration acreage in California.  
 
The Company used approximately $5.2 million of the sales proceeds to repay an outstanding loan to a third party financial 
institution  holding  a  security  interest  in  Ivanhoe  Energy  (USA)  Inc.’s  assets.  The  Company  applied  the  balance  of  the 
sales proceeds in the ongoing development of its heavy oil projects in Canada and Ecuador and for general corporate 
purposes.  
 
An escrow deposit of $2.0 million was set aside from the sale proceeds and made available to the purchaser for a period 
of one year to satisfy any indemnification obligations of the Company. In July 2010, the purchaser notified the Company of 
a claim against the entire escrow deposit for alleged breaches of certain covenants in the purchase and sale agreement in 
respect  of  tax  matters.  While  the  Company  believed  there  was  no  basis  for  the  claim,  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2010, 
Ivanhoe agreed to pay the purchaser $250,000 of the escrow deposit to avoid a lengthy legal dispute and the remaining 
$1.75 million was returned to Ivanhoe. 
 
In conjunction with the disposition of the US assets and the Company’s focus on heavy oil opportunities, the Company 
closed  its  support  office  in  Bakersfield,  California  and  transferred  its  accounting  operations  to  Calgary,  Alberta.  This 
transition was completed by the end of the second quarter of 2010. Total costs associated with this closure, including 
severance and retention payments, were approximately $0.6 million.   
 
The operating results for this discontinued operation for the periods noted were:
Revenue 
Oil and gas  
Gain on derivative instruments  
Interest  
                               
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Depletion and depreciation     
Interest and financing  
                               
 
Income (loss)  before disposition 
Loss on disposition (net of tax of $29.6 million for 2009, nil for 2008) 
 
Net income (loss) from discontinued operations
2010
2009
2008
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
 
-
5,455 
189 
8 
5,652
2,132 
139 
3,772 
173 
6,216 
 
(564) 
(23,357) 
 
(23,921)
18,120 
278 
98 
18,496
5,137 
2,413 
6,143 
520 
14,213 
 
4,283 
- 
 
4,283
19. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS 
On  January  24,  2011,  the  Company  announced  its  application  to  extend  the  expiry  date  of  12,410,000  unlisted 
outstanding  common  share  purchase  warrants  had  been  approved  by  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange.  The  extension 
excluded 90,000 warrants held by an insider.  These warrants were scheduled to expire on January 26, 2011 and instead
63
expired on February 25, 2011. The Company received proceeds of $27.2 million from the exercise of 8,616,665 out of the 
12,320,000 common share purchase warrants. These proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. 
 
20. ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES REQUIRED UNDER US GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES  
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP as applied in Canada. In 
the case of the Company, Canadian GAAP conforms in all material respects with US GAAP except for certain matters, the 
details of which are as follows: 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
The application of US GAAP has the following effects on consolidated balance sheet items as reported under Canadian 
GAAP:
As at December 31, 
 
 
Assets 
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents 
Accounts receivable 
Note receivable 
Prepaid and other current assets 
Restricted cash 
Total current assets 
    
Oil and gas properties and development costs, net
Intangible assets 
Long term receivables  
Total assets 
    
Liabilities and shareholders' equity 
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities 
Debt 
 
Income tax payable 
Derivative instruments 
Asset retirement obligation 
Total current liabilities
Long term debt 
 
Asset retirement obligations 
Long term obligation 
Future income tax liability 
Total liabilities 
    
Shareholders' equity
Share capital 
 
 
 
Purchase warrants 
Contributed surplus 
 
Convertible note  
Accumulated deficit
Total shareholders' equity 
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity
2010
Canadian 
GAAP
Increase 
(Decrease)  Notes
US 
GAAP
Canadian 
GAAP
2009 
Increase 
(Decrease)  Notes
67,817 
6,359 
264 
2,859 
500 
77,799 
 
237,200 
 
 
 
92,153 
2,433 
409,585 
 
 
 
21,482 
39,832 
 
- 
- 
- 
61,314 
 
- 
 
744 
1,900 
21,518 
85,476 
 
 
550,562 
 
 
 
33,423 
22,983 
 
2,086 
(284,945) 
324,109 
409,585
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
(iii) 
 
(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vii) 
(vi) 
(vi) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(iii)
67,817 
6,359 
264 
2,859 
500 
77,799 
 
221,290 
 
 
 
92,153 
2,433 
393,675 
 
 
 
21,482 
40,217 
 
- 
7,228 
- 
68,927 
 
- 
 
744 
1,900 
21,518 
93,089 
 
 
638,420 
 
 
 
- 
17,443 
 
- 
(355,277) 
300,586 
393,675
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
(38,500) 
24,172 
(1,582) 
 
- 
- 
(15,910) 
 
 
 
- 
504 
(119) 
- 
7,228 
- 
7,613 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
7,613 
 
 
74,455 
(1,155) 
1,358 
13,200 
(33,423) 
(2,593) 
(2,947) 
(2,086) 
(70,332) 
(23,523) 
(15,910) 
 
64
21,512 
5,021 
225 
771 
2,850 
30,379 
 
158,392 
 
 
 
92,153 
839 
281,763 
 
 
 
10,779 
- 
 
530 
- 
753 
12,062 
 
36,934 
 
195 
1,900 
22,643 
73,734 
 
 
422,322 
 
 
 
19,427 
20,029 
 
2,086 
(255,835) 
208,029 
281,763
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
(38,500) 
20,315 
(861)
- 
- 
(19,046) 
 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
8,249 
- 
8,249 
 
1,225 
(154) 
- 
- 
- 
9,320 
 
 
74,455 
(551) 
1,358 
13,200 
(19,427) 
(3,197) 
(2,947) 
(2,086) 
(89,171) 
(28,366) 
(19,046)
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) 
 
 
 
(iii) 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vii) 
(vi) 
(vi) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(iii)
US 
GAAP
21,512 
5,021 
225 
771 
2,850 
30,379 
 
139,346 
 
 
 
92,153 
839 
262,717 
 
 
 
10,779 
- 
 
530 
8,249 
753 
20,311 
 
38,005 
 
195 
1,900 
22,643 
83,054 
 
 
510,784 
 
 
 
- 
13,885 
 
- 
(345,006) 
179,663 
262,717
Oil and Gas Properties and Development Costs 
(i)
There are certain differences between the full cost method of accounting for oil and gas properties as applied in 
Canada and as applied in the US.  The principal difference is in the method of performing ceiling test evaluations. 
In  the  ceiling  test  evaluation  for  US  GAAP  purposes,  the  Company  limits,  on  a  country-by-country  basis,  the 
capitalized  costs  of  oil  and  gas  properties,  net  of  accumulated  depletion,  depreciation  and  amortization  and 
deferred  income  taxes,  to  (a)  the  present  value  of  estimated  future  net  revenues  computed  by  applying  a  12 
month average oil price to reserves to estimated future production of proved oil and gas reserves as of the date 
of the latest balance sheet presented, less estimated future expenditures (based on current costs) to be incurred 
in  developing  and  producing  the  proved  reserves  computed  using  a  discount  factor  of  10%  and  assuming 
continuation  of  existing  economic  conditions;  plus  (b)  the  cost  of  properties  not  being  amortized  (e.g.  major 
development projects) and (c) the lower of cost or fair value of unproved properties included in the costs being 
amortized less (d) income tax effects related to the difference between the book and tax basis of the properties 
referred to in (b) and (c) above. If capitalized costs exceed this limit, the excess is charged as a provision for 
impairment. Unproved properties and major development projects are assessed on a quarterly basis for possible 
impairments  or  reductions  in  value.  If  a  reduction  in  value  has  occurred,  the  impairment  is  transferred  to  the 
carrying value of proved oil and gas properties. The Company performed the ceiling test in accordance with US 
GAAP and determined that for the year ended December 31, 2010, no impairment provision was required.  The 
cumulative  differences  in  the  amount  of  impairment  provisions  between  US  and  Canadian  GAAP  were  $38.5 
million at December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2009.
(ii)  The cumulative differences in the amount of impairment provisions between US and Canadian GAAP resulted in
reductions in accumulated depletion.
(iii)  Under Canadian GAAP, the Company was required to bifurcate the value of the Convertible Note, allocating a 
portion to debt and a portion to equity. Under US GAAP, convertible debt securities are classified as debt in their 
entirety.  Under  Canadian  GAAP,  this  discount  accretion  was  capitalized.  To  reconcile  to  US  GAAP  the  entire 
$2.1 million recorded in equity is reversed as well as the unamortized discount of $0.4 million and the accreted 
discount  that  was  capitalized  in  the  amount  of  $1.6  million.  In  addition,  because  the  convertible  note  is  not 
denominated  in  US  currency  the  re-measurement  of  the  different  carrying  value  for  US  GAAP  results  in  an 
increase  to  net  income.  The  foreign  exchange  gain  of  $0.1  million  is  shown  as  a  separate  amount  in  the  US 
GAAP  reconciliation  of  the  Company’s  balance  sheet  shown  above  and  is  adjusted  to  the  foreign  exchange 
expense line item in the US GAAP reconciliation of the statement of operations below.
Shareholders’ Equity 
(iv)
In June 1999, the shareholders approved a reduction of stated capital in respect of the common shares by an 
amount of $74.5 million being equal to the accumulated deficit as at December 31, 1998. Under US GAAP, a 
reduction of the accumulated deficit such as this is not recognized except in the case of a quasi reorganization.
(v)  Under Canadian GAAP, the Company accounts for all stock options granted to employees and directors since 
January 1, 2002 using the fair value based method of accounting. Under this method, compensation costs are 
recognized in the financial statements over the stock options’ vesting period using an option-pricing model for 
determining the fair value of the stock options at the grant date. Under US GAAP, prior to January 1, 2006, the 
Company applied Accounting Principles Board (“APB”) Opinion No. 25, as interpreted by Financial Accounting 
Standards  Board (“FASB”)  Interpretation  No.  44,  in accounting  for  its  stock  option  plan  and  did  not  recognize 
compensation costs in its financial statements for stock options issued to employees and directors. Beginning 
January 1, 2006, the Company applied the revision to FASB’s Accounting Standards Codification Manual (“ASC”) 
Topic  718  “Stock  Compensation”  (formerly  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting  Standards  (“SFAS”)  No.  123R) 
which supersedes APB No. 25, “Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees”. The Company elected to implement 
this  statement  on  a  modified  prospective  basis  whereby  the  Company  began  recognizing  stock-based 
compensation  in  its  US  GAAP  results  of  operations  for  the  unvested  portion  of  awards  outstanding  as  at   
January 1, 2006 and for all awards granted after January 1, 2006. There are no significant differences between 
the accounting for stock options under Canadian GAAP and US GAAP subsequent to January 1, 2006.
(vi)  The Company accounts for purchase warrants as equity under Canadian GAAP. The accounting treatment of 
warrants under US GAAP reflects the application of ASC Topic 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” (formerly SFAS 
No.  133).  Under  ASC  Topic  815,  share  purchase  warrants  with  an  exercise  price  denominated  in  a  currency 
other than a company’s functional currency are accounted for as derivative liabilities. Changes in the fair value of
65
the warrants are required to be recognized in the statement of operations each reporting period for US GAAP 
purposes. At the time that the Company’s share purchase warrants are exercised, the value of the warrants will 
be  reclassified  to  shareholders’  equity  for  US  GAAP  purposes.  Under  Canadian  GAAP,  the  fair  value  of  the 
warrants on the issue date is recorded as a reduction to the proceeds from the issuance of common shares, with 
the offset to the warrant component of equity. The warrants are not revalued to fair value under Canadian GAAP.
(vii)  Under US GAAP, the aggregate value attributed to the acquisition of royalty rights during 1999 and 2000 was 
$1.4 million higher, due to the difference between Canadian and US GAAP in the value ascribed to the common  
shares issued, primarily resulting from differences in the recognition of effective dates of the transactions.
Consolidated Statements of Loss and Comprehensive Loss  
The application of US GAAP had the following effects on net loss and net loss per share as reported under Canadian 
GAAP:
Canadian 
GAAP
21,720 
- 
208 
21,928 
 
 
9,503 
26,260 
10,615 
8,960 
(3,325) 
24 
52,037 
 
(30,109) 
 
 
(126) 
1,125 
999 
 
(29,110) 
- 
(29,110) 
 
 
(0.09) 
- 
(0.09) 
 
 
327,442
2010 
Increase 
(Decrease)  Notes 
  
 
(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) 
(iii)
- 
15,017 
- 
15,017 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
(3,857) 
35 
- 
(3,822) 
 
18,839 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
18,839 
- 
18,839 
 
 
0.06 
- 
0.06 
 
 
-
US 
GAAP
21,720 
15,017 
208 
36,945 
 
 
9,503 
26,260 
10,615 
5,103 
(3,290) 
24 
48,215 
 
(11,270) 
 
 
(126) 
1,125 
999 
 
(10,271) 
- 
(10,271) 
 
 
(0.03) 
- 
(0.03) 
 
 
327,442
Revenue 
Oil  
Gain on derivative instruments 
Interest  
 
 
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange  
Interest and financing  
 
 
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes 
 
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Future
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net loss – discontinued operations 
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
 
Net loss per share 
Net loss – continuing operations, basic and diluted 
Net loss – discontinued operations, basic and diluted 
Net loss per share, basic and diluted 
 
Weighted average number of common shares
Basic and diluted (000s)
66
Canadian 
GAAP
24,968 
(1,335) 
25 
23,658 
 
 
10,191 
21,693 
9,501 
19,868 
5,220 
856 
1,903 
69,232 
 
(45,574) 
 
 
(1,757) 
9,600 
7,843 
 
(37,731) 
(23,921) 
(61,652) 
 
 
(0.13) 
(0.09) 
(0.22) 
 
 
279,722
2009 
Increase 
(Decrease)  Notes 
  
 
(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(iii) 
 
(viii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x)
- 
(6,506) 
- 
(6,506) 
 
 
- 
- 
150 
(10,574) 
(154) 
- 
(980) 
(11,558) 
 
5,052 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
5,052 
24,890 
29,942 
 
 
0.01 
0.10 
0.11 
 
 
-
US 
GAAP
24,968 
(7,841) 
25 
17,152 
 
 
10,191 
21,693 
9,651 
9,294 
5,066 
856 
923 
57,674 
 
(40,522) 
 
 
(1,757) 
9,600 
7,843 
 
(32,679) 
969 
(31,710) 
 
 
(0.12) 
0.01 
(0.11) 
 
 
279,722
Revenue 
Oil  
Loss on derivative instruments 
Interest  
 
   
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange  
Interest and financing  
Provision for impairment of  intangible asset and development  
 
   
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes 
    
(Provision for) recovery of income taxes 
Current 
Future
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net income (loss) – discontinued operations (net of tax of $29.6 million) 
Net loss and comprehensive loss 
    
Net income (loss) per share 
Net loss – continuing operations, basic and diluted 
Net income (loss) – discontinued operations, basic and diluted 
Net loss per share, basic and diluted 
    
Weighted average number of common shares
Basic and diluted (000s)
67
Canadian 
GAAP
2008 
Increase 
(Decrease)  Notes
US 
GAAP
Revenue 
Oil  
Gain on derivative instruments 
Interest
Expenses 
Operating  
General and administrative  
Business and technology development 
Depletion and depreciation 
Foreign exchange  
Interest and financing 
Provision for impairment of intangible asset and development  
Write off of deferred financing  
Provision for impairment of oil and gas properties
Loss from continuing operations before income taxes
Current provision for income taxes
Net loss – continuing operations 
Net income (loss) – discontinued operations 
Net loss and comprehensive loss
Net income (loss) per share 
Net loss  – continuing operations, basic and diluted 
Net income (loss) – from discontinued operations, basic and diluted 
Net loss per share, basic and diluted
Weighted average number of common shares
48,370 
1,688 
612 
50,670 
 
 
21,515 
14,252 
6,453 
25,761 
1,527 
1,309 
15,054 
2,621 
- 
88,492 
 
(37,822) 
 
(654) 
 
(38,476) 
4,283 
(34,193) 
 
 
(0.15) 
0.02 
(0.13) 
 
 
258,815
- 
4,665 
- 
4,665 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
(2,820) 
- 
- 
(4,640) 
 
21,560 
14,100 
 
(9,435) 
 
- 
 
(9,435) 
(19,423) 
(28,858) 
 
 
(0.04) 
(0.07) 
(0.11) 
 
 
-
(vi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ix) 
 
 
(viii) 
 
(ix) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x)
48,370 
6,353 
612 
55,335 
 
 
21,515 
14,252 
6,453 
22,941 
1,527 
1,309 
10,414 
2,621 
21,560 
102,592 
 
(47,257) 
 
(654) 
 
(47,911) 
(15,140) 
(63,051) 
 
 
(0.19) 
(0.05) 
(0.24) 
 
 
258,815
Basic and diluted (000s) 
 
Development Costs 
(viii)  For Canadian GAAP, feasibility, marketing and related costs incurred prior to executing a HTL™ or GTL definitive 
agreement are capitalized and are subsequently written down upon determination that a project’s future value 
has  been  impaired.  The  Company  wrote  off  $5.1  million  in  GTL  development  costs  under  Canadian  GAAP. 
These  costs  had  already  been  expensed  under  US  GAAP  in  previous  periods  and  therefore  this  transaction 
reduced the net loss for US GAAP purposes in 2008.
Depletion and Depreciation 
(ix)  As discussed under “Oil and Gas Properties and Development Costs” in this note, there is a difference between 
US and Canadian GAAP in performing the ceiling test evaluation under the full cost method. Application of the 
ceiling test evaluation under US GAAP has resulted in an accumulated net increase in impairment provisions on 
the Company’s US and China oil and gas properties. This net increase in US GAAP impairment provisions has 
resulted in lower depletion rates for US GAAP purposes and a reduction in the net losses for the years ended 
December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008.
Discontinued Operations 
(x)  As at December 31, 2009, the $24.9 million adjustment related to discontinued operations included a $1.4 million 
increase that is attributed to the acquisition of royalty rights during 2000 and 1999 due to the difference between 
Canadian and US GAAP in the value ascribed to the common shares issued, primarily resulting from differences 
in  the  recognition  of  effective  dates  of  the  transactions.  Additionally,  there  was  a  $3.1  million  increase  due  to
68
depletion.  These  increases  were  offset  by  $29.4  million  decrease  due  to  impairment  differences.  These 
accumulated balance sheet adjustments were charged off as part of the gain/loss calculation at the time of sale 
and  flow  through  the  statement  of  operations  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2009  in  the  Net  Loss  from 
Discontinued Operations line item.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
As a result of the expensing of HTL™ and GTL development costs as required under US GAAP and the recovery of such 
costs, the statement of cash flow under US GAAP would result in a net use of cash from operating activities of $17.8 
million, $12.4 million and cash provided from operating activities of $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2010, 
2009 and 2008, respectively. Additionally, capital investments reported under investing activities would be $86.3 million, 
$26.2 million and $20.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 
 
Additional US GAAP Disclosures 
Oil and Gas Properties and Development Costs 
The categories of costs included in “Oil and Gas Properties and Development Costs”, including the US GAAP adjustments 
were as follows:
As at December 31, 2010 
Property acquisition  
Capitalized interest 
Exploration  
Development  
Production facilities 
HTL™ facilities 
Support equipment and general property 
 
Accumulated depletion and depreciation 
Provision for impairment
As at December 31, 2009 
Property acquisition  
Capitalized interest 
Exploration  
Development  
Production facilities 
HTL™ facilities 
Support equipment and general property 
 
Accumulated depletion and depreciation 
Provision for impairment
Canada 
77,742 
4,936 
30,085 
- 
- 
11,089 
27 
123,879 
(17) 
- 
123,862
Ecuador 
2,089 
- 
19,763 
- 
4,397 
- 
436 
26,685 
(101) 
- 
26,584
Canada 
77,093 
3,049 
6,437 
- 
- 
6,991 
24 
93,594 
(8) 
- 
93,586
Ecuador 
852 
- 
2,988 
- 
2,483 
- 
601 
6,924 
(53) 
- 
6,871
Asia 
31,137 
- 
75,091 
91,885 
- 
- 
1,157 
199,270 
(84,391) 
(55,050) 
59,829
Asia 
42,298 
- 
32,831 
87,100 
- 
- 
427 
162,656 
(79,521) 
(55,050) 
28,085
Corporate 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1,361 
1,361 
(894) 
- 
467
Corporate 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
968 
968 
(650) 
- 
318
Business and 
Technology 
Development
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
11,426 
58 
11,484 
(936) 
- 
10,548
Business and 
Technology 
Development
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10,868 
22 
10,890 
(404) 
- 
10,486
Total 
110,968 
4,936 
124,939 
91,885 
4,397 
22,515 
3,039 
362,679 
(86,339) 
(55,050) 
221,290
Total 
120,243 
3,049 
42,256 
87,100 
2,483 
17,859 
2,042 
275,032 
(80,636) 
(55,050) 
139,346
As at December 31, 2010, the costs of unproved properties included in oil and gas properties and development costs, 
which have been excluded from the depletion and ceiling test calculations, were incurred as follows:
Property acquisition  
Exploration
Total 
90,992 
98,235 
189,227
2010 
1,786 
72,705 
74,491
2009 
11,920 
17,655 
29,575
2008 
77,187 
6,325 
83,512
Prior to 2008
99 
1,550 
1,649
69
As at December 31, 2010, the costs of unproved oil and gas by prospect were incurred as follows:
Canada
Tamarack
Ecuador
Block 20
Asia
Zitong Block 
Nyalga Block
Total
2010
2009
2008
Prior to 2008
123,852 
  
 
 26,249 
 
 
23,652 
15,474 
 39,126 
 189,227
30,282 
 
 
19,494 
 
 
20,403 
4,312 
24,715 
74,491
12,480 
 
 
5,301 
 
 
632 
11,162 
11,794 
29,575
81,090 
 
 
1,454 
 
 
968 
- 
968 
83,512
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
1,649 
- 
1,649 
1,649
Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities 
The following was the breakdown of accounts payable and accrued liabilities as at December 31, 2010:
Trade payables 
Accrued liabilities
8,922  
12,560 
21,482
3,767 
7,012 
10,779
Stock-based Compensation 
 
The aggregate intrinsic value of total options outstanding as well as options exercisable as at December 31, 2010 was 
$8.1  million  and  $3.8  million  respectively.  The  total  intrinsic  value  of  options  exercised  during  the  year  ended      
December 31, 2010 was $2.3 million (2009 – $3.0 million; 2008 – $5.4 million), and the cash received from exercise of 
options during the year ended December 31, 2010 was $2.6 million (2009 – $0.9 million; 2008 – $0.2 million). 
 
A summary of the Company’s unvested options as at December 31, 2010, and changes during the year then ended, is 
presented below:
Outstanding, beginning of year 
Granted 
Vested 
Cancelled and forfeited 
Outstanding, end of year
Unvested options outstanding as at December 31, 2010, by type:
Based on fulfilling service conditions 
Based on fulfilling performance conditions
Number of       
Stock Options
(000s) 
 7,912  
6,040 
(3,060) 
(748) 
 10,144
Weighted-Average 
Grant Date Fair Value
(Cdn$) 
1.21 
1.73 
1.53 
1.77 
1.55
9,665 
479 
10,144
As at December 31, 2010, there was $10.0 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to unvested share-
based compensation arrangements granted by the Company. That cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average  period  of  3.0  years.  The  total  fair  value  of  options  vested  during  the  year  ended  December  31,  2010  was        
$4.7 million (2009 – $2.2 million; 2008 – $3.0 million).
70
Impact of New and Pending US GAAP Accounting Standards 
There  were  no  changes  in  accounting  standards  in  2010  that  affected  or  are  expected  to  affect  the  Company.    As  a 
foreign  private  issuer  in  the  US,  Ivanhoe  is  permitted  to  file  with  the  SEC  consolidated  financial  statements  prepared 
under IFRS beginning in 2011 without a reconciliation to US GAAP. The impact of this change is that the Company will no 
longer prepare a reconciliation of its results to US GAAP. It is possible that some of the Company’s accounting policies 
under IFRS could be different from US GAAP.
71
SUPPLEMENTARY DISCLOSURES ABOUT OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES  
(Unaudited)  
(all tabular amounts are expressed in US$000s, except reserves and depletion rate amounts) 
 
The  following  information  about  the  Company’s  oil  and  gas  producing  activities  is  presented  in  accordance  with 
Accounting Standards Codification 932 Extractive Activities – Oil and Gas (section 235-55) formerly US SFAS No. 69, 
“Disclosures About Oil and Gas Producing Activities”. 
 
Oil and Gas Reserves 
Proved oil and gas reserves are those quantities of oil and gas, which, by analysis of geoscience and engineering data, 
can  be  estimated  with  reasonable  certainty  to  be  economically  producible  from  a  given  date  forward,  from  known 
reservoirs, and under existing economic conditions, operating methods, and government regulations. 
 
Proved developed oil and gas reserves are proved reserves that can be expected to be recovered: (i) through existing 
wells with existing equipment and operating methods or in which the cost of the required equipment is relatively minor 
compared to the cost of a new well; and (ii) through installed extraction equipment and infrastructure operational at the 
time of the reserves estimate if the extraction is by means not involving a well. 
 
Estimates  of  oil  and  gas  reserves  are  subject  to  uncertainty  and  will  change  as  additional  information  regarding  the 
producing fields and technology becomes available and as future economic conditions change. 
 
Reserves presented in this section represent the Company’s share of reserves, excluding royalty interests of others. The 
reserves were based on the estimates by the independent petroleum engineering firm of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. 
The changes in the Company’s net proved oil reserves in China for the three-year period ended December 31, 2010, were 
as follows:
(mbbls) 
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2007
Revisions of previous estimates 
Production
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2008
Revisions of previous estimates 
Production
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2009
Revisions of previous estimates 
Production
Net proved reserves, December 31, 2010
1,280
242(1)  
 (490) 
1,032  
535(2) 
 (466) 
1,101  
925(3) 
(288) 
1,738
(1)  The oil reserve revision is due to better performance of the Dagang property in relation to the 2007 reserve report. 
(2)  The oil reserve revision is due to improved production and fracture performance of the Dagang property in relation to what was estimated in the 2008
reserve report.
(3)  The reserve revision in 2010 is mainly related to lower estimated decline rates on the Dagang property based on production to date.
Net proved producing reserves in China as at December 31, were as follows:
(mbbls) 
2008 
2009 
2010
862 
            885 
1,265
72
Standardized  Measure  of  Discounted  Future Net  Cash  Flows  and  Changes  Therein  Relating to  Proved  Oil  and 
Gas Reserves 
For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2010  and  2009,  future  net  cash  flows  were  computed  using  12  month  historical 
average prices in estimating the Company’s proved oil reserves, current costs, and statutory tax rates adjusted for tax 
deductions, that relate to existing proved oil reserves.  For the year ended December 31, 2008, future net cash flows were 
computed  using  year-end  prices,  year-end  costs,  and  statutory  tax  rates.  The  following  standardized  measure  of 
discounted future net cash flows from proved oil reserves was computed using prices of $76.35, $58.00 and $41.57 /bbl of 
oil in 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. A discount rate of 10% was applied in determining the standardized measure of 
discounted future net cash flows. 
 
The  Company  does  not  believe  that  this  information  reflects  the  fair  market  value  of  its  oil  and  gas  properties.  Actual 
future net cash flows will differ from the presented estimated future net cash flows in that:
•   future production from proved reserves will differ from estimated production; 
•   future production may also include production from probable and possible reserves; 
•   future, rather than average annual, prices and costs will apply; and  
•   existing economic, operating and regulatory conditions are subject to change.
73
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows for China as at December 31 in each of the three most 
recently completed financial years were as follows:
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future income taxes 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future income taxes 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
Future cash inflows 
Future development and restoration costs 
Future production costs 
Future net cash flows 
10% annual discount 
Standardized measure
2010 
132,745  
(7,209) 
(58,790)   
(12,238) 
54,508    
(14,861) 
39,647
2009 
63,862 
(3,307) 
(36,825) 
(593) 
23,137 
(4,589) 
18,548
2008 
42,906 
(3,310) 
(22,934) 
16,662 
(2,576) 
14,086
Note: The Company is using current costs in the preparation of the information shown in the tables above and to determine proved reserves. However, 
future production costs may not be easily comparable to historical production costs. The two main causes of difficulty in analyzing future production 
costs when compared to historical spending are summarized as follows:
1.
In March 2006, the Ministry of Finance of the Peoples Republic of China (“PRC”) issued the “Administrative Measures on Collection of Windfall 
Gain  Levy  on  Oil  Exploitation  Business”  (the  “Windfall  Levy  Measures”).  According  to  the  Windfall  Levy  Measures,  effective  as  of             
March  26,  2006,  enterprises  exploiting  and  selling  oil  in  the  PRC  are  subject  to  a  windfall  gain  levy  (the  “Windfall  Levy”)  if  the  monthly 
weighted average price of oil is above $40.00/bbl. The Windfall Levy is imposed at progressive rates from 20% to 40% on the portion of the 
weighted  average  sales  price  exceeding  $40.00/bbl.  As  a  result,  the  cost  associated  with  the  Windfall  Levy  is  not  related  to  production 
volumes but instead is related to the commodity price. As an example, as oil prices increased during 2008, the amount of the Windfall Levy 
also  increased  significantly,  resulting  in  a  $13.46  per  bbl  increase  in  2008  when  compared  to  2007.  The  Windfall  Levy  accounted  for 
$21.14/bbl cost of the total $43.92/bbl operating costs in our China operations, or in absolute terms $10.4 million of the total $21.5 million. This 
compared to only $4.00/bbl or $1.9 million in absolute terms incurred during 2009.
2.  Effective January 1, 2009, the Dagang field reached “Commercial Production” status as defined by the Production Sharing Contract with our 
partner CNPC. The effect of this change is that the Company no longer pays 100% of operating costs but now pays 82%, representing the 
“pre-cost recovery” proportionate share. Effective September 1, 2009, the project reached cost recovery and the working interests changed to 
51%  CNPC  and  49%  for  the  Company.  In  our  2008  independent  reserve  report  that  was  used  to  prepare  the  standardized  measure 
disclosures above, the 49/51% reversion was estimated based on total costs yet to recover.
74
Changes in standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows from China as at December 31 in each of the three 
most recently completed financial years were as follows:
2010 
(12,216) 
15,878 
(8,082) 
4,924    
31,578 
1,855    
(11,645) 
(1,193) 
21,099 
18,548    
39,647
2009
(14,777) 
        6,396  
       (3,536) 
        3,712 
      11,106  
        1,409  
          (593) 
           745  
        4,462  
      14,086  
  18,548
2008 
  (26,855) 
(21,620) 
(2,708) 
4,720 
3,739 
4,959 
925 
1,335 
(35,505) 
49,591 
   14,086
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Increase 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Increase 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
Sale of oil and gas, net of production costs 
Net changes in prices and production costs 
Net change in future development costs 
Development costs incurred during the period that reduced future development costs 
Revisions of previous quantity estimates 
Accretion of discount 
Net change in income taxes 
Changes in production rates (timing) and other 
Decrease 
Standardized measure, beginning of year 
Standardized measure, end of year
75
Costs incurred in oil and gas property acquisition, exploration, and development activities for the Company’s oil and gas 
properties were as follows:
Canada 
Property acquisition
Unproved 
Exploration 
 
Ecuador 
Property acquisition
Unproved 
Exploration
Asia 
Property acquisition
Unproved 
Exploration 
Development
Total
The US GAAP depletion rates, on a net production basis, were as follows:
China ($/bbl) 
2010 
2009 
2008
2010
649 
29,634 
30,283 
 
 
1,237 
18,257 
19,494 
 
 
- 
31,326 
5,057 
36,383 
86,160
2009
1,361 
11,119 
12,480 
 
 
- 
5,301 
5,301 
 
 
11,161 
1,253 
3,785 
16,199 
33,980
2008
75,732 
5,357 
81,089 
 
 
863 
591 
1,454 
 
 
- 
1,956 
6,420 
8,376 
90,919
16.45 
16.06 
 41.61
The results of operations from producing activities for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
Oil revenue 
Operating  
Depletion 
Provision for impairment 
Results of operations from producing activities
2010 
21,720 
(9,503) 
(8,590) 
- 
3,627
2009 
24,968 
(10,191) 
(7,479) 
- 
7,298
2008 
48,370 
(21,515) 
(20,385) 
(21,560) 
(15,090)
76
ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING 
AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.    
 
ITEM 9A: CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 
The  Company’s  management,  including  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Financial  Officer,  evaluated  the 
effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange 
Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) as of December 31, 2010. Based upon this evaluation, management concluded that 
these controls and procedures were (1) designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in the Company’s 
reports under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief 
Financial  Officer  to  allow  timely  decisions  regarding  required  disclosure  and  (2)  effective  in  accomplishing  those 
objectives, in that they provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by the Company in the 
reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time 
periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Any controls and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, 
can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the desired control objectives.  
 
MANAGEMENT REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING  
The management of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial 
reporting. Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the Company’s 
principal executive and principal financial officers and effected by the Company’s board of directors, management and 
other  personnel,  to  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of 
consolidated  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  Canadian  generally  accepted  accounting 
principles and includes those policies and procedures that:
  pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the Company;
  provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of consolidated 
financial statements in accordance with Canadian generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and 
expenditures  of  the  Company  are  being  made  only  in  accordance  with  authorizations  of  management  and 
directors of the Company; and
  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use  or
disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections  of  any  evaluation  of  effectiveness  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  controls  may  become 
inadequate  because  of  changes  in  conditions,  or  that  the  degree  of  compliance  with  the  policies  or  procedures  may 
deteriorate.  The  Company’s  management  assessed  the  effectiveness  of  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting as of December 31, 2010. In making this assessment, the Company’s management used the criteria set forth by 
the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  (COSO) in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated 
Framework.  Based  on  our  assessment,  management  has  concluded  that,  as  of  December 31,  2010,  the  Company’s 
internal control over financial reporting was effective based on those criteria. Management has reviewed the results of its 
assessment  with  the  Audit  Committee  of  the  Board  of  Directors.  Deloitte  &  Touche  LLP,  the  Company’s  independent 
registered  Chartered  Accountants  that  audited  the  financial  statements  included  in  Item  8  of  this  Form  10-K,  has  also 
audited the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2010, as stated in 
their report which immediately follows.
/s/ Robert M. Friedland 
Robert M. Friedland 
Chief Executive Officer 
 
March 4, 2011
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Chief Financial Officer
77
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS  
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
 
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as 
of  December  31,  2010,  based  on  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.  The Company's management is responsible for 
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control 
over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.  
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. 
 
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United 
States).    Those  standards  require  that  we  plan  and  perform  the  audit  to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about  whether 
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.  Our audit included obtaining an 
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and 
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such 
other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances.  We believe that our audit provides a reasonable 
basis for our opinion. 
 
A company's internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company's 
principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company's 
board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted 
accounting principles.  A company's internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that 
(1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and 
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary 
to  permit  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that 
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and 
directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company's assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
 
Because  of  the  inherent  limitations  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  including  the  possibility  of  collusion  or 
improper  management  override  of  controls,  material  misstatements  due  to  error  or  fraud  may  not  be  prevented  or 
detected on a timely basis.  Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial 
reporting  to  future  periods  are  subject  to  the  risk  that  the  controls  may  become  inadequate  because  of  changes  in 
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.  
 
In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of 
December  31,  2010,  based  on  the  criteria  established  in  Internal  Control  —  Integrated  Framework  issued  by  the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. 
 
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  Canadian  generally  accepted  auditing  standards  and  the  standards  of  the 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year 
ended  December  31,  2010  of  the  Company  and  our  report dated  March  4,  2011  expressed  an  unqualified  opinion  on 
those financial statements. 
 
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants 
Calgary, Canada 
March 4, 2011
78
CHANGES IN INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING  
There  were  no  changes  in  the  Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  that  occurred  during  the  12  months 
ended  December  31,  2010,  that  have  materially  affected,  or  are  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the  Company’s 
internal control over financial reporting.
PART III
ITEM 10:  DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
Each director is elected for a one-year term or until his successor has been duly elected or appointed.  All of our directors 
were elected at our last annual general meeting of shareholders (“AGM”) held on April 28, 2010. The term of office of 
each director concludes at our next AGM, unless the director’s office is earlier vacated in accordance with our by-laws.
Name 
A. Robert Abboud 
Robert M. Friedland 
Howard R. Balloch 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
Age 
81 
60 
59 
59 
69 
57 
67 
36 
61
Positions Held 
Co-Chairman and Independent Lead Director                            
Executive Co-Chairman   
Director  
Director 
Director  
Director  
Director 
Director 
Director
Officers serve at the pleasure of the Board of Directors.
Name  
Robert M. Friedland 
David A. Dyck 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Ian Barnett 
K. C. Patrick Chua  
David R. Martin
Gerald G. Moench 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith
Age 
60 
50 
53 
56 
55 
80
61 
58 
52
Current Position 
Chief Executive Officer   
President and Chief Operating Officer  
Chief Financial Officer  
Executive Vice President, Corporate Development 
Executive Vice President 
President, Chief Executive Officer & Co-Chairman of Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc. 
Co-Chairman of Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. 
Executive Vice President 
Executive Vice President, Technology and Chief Technology Officer 
Executive Vice President, Upstream
Ivanhoe Director
Since 
2006 
1995 
2002 
2010 
2005 
2005 
2007 
2010 
2005
Executive Officer
Since 
2008 
2010 
2009 
2007 
1999 
2008
1999 
2007 
2007
A. ROBERT ABBOUD  
Mr. Abboud has been Co-Chairman and Independent Lead Director of the Company since May 2006 and serves as a 
member of the Company’s Audit, Nominating and Corporate Governance and Executive Committees.  Mr. Abboud has 
been  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  A.  Robert  Abboud  and  Company,  a  private  investment  company,  since 
1984, and has had a 46-year career in oil and gas, banking and foreign affairs.  He was previously President and Chief 
Operating  Officer  of  Occidental  Petroleum  Corporation,  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  First  Chicago 
Corporation and The First National Bank of Chicago, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of First City Bancorporation of 
Texas,  Chairman  of  ACB  International,  Ltd.,  a  joint  venture  that  included  the  Bank  of  China  and  a  subsidiary  of  the 
Chinese  Ministry  of  Foreign  Relations  and  Trade.    Mr.  Abboud  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of 
AMOCO and as Audit Committee Chairman for AAR Corporation, Alberto-Culver Company, Hartmarx Corporation, ICN 
Pharmaceuticals  Inc.  and  Inland  Steel  Industries.  Mr.  Abboud  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Arts  (Cum  Laude)  from  Harvard 
College, a J.D. from Harvard Law School and a Master of Business Administration from Harvard Business School, and is 
a member of the Illinois and Massachusetts Bar Associations, as well as the Federal Bar and American Bar Associations. 
Mr. Abboud was selected to serve on our Board due to his extensive experience at the senior executive and board level in 
the  oil  and  gas  industry  and  in  international  finance,  and  for  the  financial  acumen,  strategic  insight,  acute  business 
judgment and international business experience he brings to the Company.
79
ROBERT M. FRIEDLAND 
Mr.  Friedland  has  been  Executive  Co-Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Company  since  May  2008.    A  co-
founder of the Company, Mr. Friedland has been a director since February 1995, Deputy Chairman of the Company from 
June 1999 to May 2008 and President of the Company from May 2008 to May 2010.  Mr. Friedland has been the Chair of 
the  Company’s  Executive  Committee  since  its  formation  in  October  2008.    Mr.  Friedland  has  also  been  Executive 
Chairman  of  Ivanhoe  Mines  Ltd.,  a  Canadian  public  company  with  extensive  operating,  development  and  exploration 
interests  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  since  1994  and  was  appointed  as  Chief  Executive  Officer  in  October  2010.    Mr. 
Friedland is Chairman (since 1991) and President (since 1988) of Ivanhoe Capital Corporation, a private company based 
in  Singapore  that  specializes  in  providing  venture  capital  and  project  financing  for  international  business  enterprises, 
predominantly  in  the  fields  of  energy  and  minerals.  He  has  also  been  Chairman  since  2000,  and  was  President  from 
2003-2008, of Ivanhoe Nickel & Platinum Ltd., and was Chairman of Potash One Inc., a Canadian public company, from 
May 2009 to January 2011. Mr. Friedland brings many valuable attributes to our Board, including his extensive experience 
in  international  corporate  finance  and  as  a  senior  executive  and  director  of  several  internationally-focused  natural 
resource  companies  and  his  proven  track  record  in  overseeing  the  exploration  for,  and  discovery  of,  major  resource 
deposits in Canada, Mongolia and elsewhere.   
 
HOWARD R. BALLOCH  
Mr. Balloch has been a director of the Company since January 2002.  Mr. Balloch is the Chair of both the Nominating and 
Corporate Governance and Compensation and Benefits Committees, and is a member of the Executive Committee.  He is 
Chairman of Canaccord Genuity Asia, following the acquisition by Canaccord Financial Inc. of The Balloch Group, the 
investment  advisory  firm  he  founded  in  2001.  A  veteran  Canadian  diplomat,  Mr.  Balloch  began  serving  as  Canada’s 
ambassador to the People’s Republic of China, Mongolia and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in 1996 after a 
20-year career in the Government of Canada’s Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and Privy Council 
Office.  Mr. Balloch is Vice Chairman of the Canada China Business Council, having served as its President between 
2001 and 2006.   Mr. Balloch holds a Bachelor of Arts (Honours) degree in Political Science and Economics and a Master 
of Arts in International Relations from McGill University, and completed Ph.D. studies at the University of Toronto and at 
Fondation Nationale de Sciences Politiques, Paris.  Mr. Balloch was selected to serve as a director on our Board based 
on  his  experience  as  a  Canadian  diplomat  and  as  an  international  businessman,  his  extensive  knowledge  of  foreign 
affairs and the political and regulatory environment in many of the key regions in which the Company operates, including 
China, and his knowledge and experience in matters of public company governance.     
 
CARLOS A. CABRERA 
Mr. Cabrera has been a director of the Company since May 2010 and serves as a member of the Audit, Nominating and 
Corporate Governance and Compensation and Benefits Committees.  Mr. Cabrera is the former Chairman, President and 
Chief  Executive  Officer  of  UOP  LLC,  a  Honeywell  company.    He  is  the  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
National  Institute  of  Low  Carbon  and  Clean  Energy  (NICE)  based  in  Beijing,  China.    Mr.  Cabrera  also  serves  as  a 
Distinguished  Associate  to  the  World  Energy  Consultancy  Firm  FACTS.    Mr.  Cabrera  serves  on  the  Global  Advisory 
Board  of  the  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School  of  Business.    During  Mr.  Cabrera’s  35  years  in  the  refining  and 
petrochemicals industry, he has been granted seven U.S. patents, authored numerous publications and frequently serves 
on  industry  panels  as  a  recognized  business  and  technical  leader.  He  has  a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  in  chemical 
engineering  from  the  University  of  Kentucky  and  a  Master’s  degree  in  business  administration  from  the  University  of 
Chicago. Mr. Cabrera brings to the Board extensive experience in petroleum refining, gas processing and petrochemical 
production as well as international business development and senior executive management experience. 
 
BRIAN F. DOWNEY  
Mr. Downey joined the Board of Directors in July 2005 and was appointed Chairman of the Audit Committee at that time.  
Mr. Downey also serves as a member of the Compensation and Benefits Committee and the Nominating and Corporate 
Governance  Committee.    Mr.  Downey  has  been  President  of  Downey  &  Associates  Management  Inc.,  a  real  estate 
holding company, since July 1986, and Financial Advisor to Lending Solutions, Inc., a full-service loan call centre located 
in the US whose clients are primarily US and Canadian financial institutions, since January 2002.  From 1995 to 2002 he 
was a principal and served as CEO of Lending Solutions, Inc., and from 1986 to 1995 he served as President and Chief 
Executive  Officer  of  Credit  Union  Central  of  Canada,  the  national  trade  association  and  national  liquidity  facility  for  all 
credit unions in Canada.  Mr. Downey has a Certified Management Accountant (CMA) designation from the University of 
Manitoba and is a Member of the Society of Management Accountants of Ontario.  Mr. Downey was selected to serve as 
a director on our Board due to his extensive experience and expertise in financial and accounting matters.  Mr. Downey is 
the Company’s “audit committee financial expert” within the meaning of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
80
DR. ROBERT G. GRAHAM 
Dr. Graham has been a director of the Company since April 2005 and served as the Company’s Chief Technology Officer 
from  April  2007  to  September  2007.    Dr.  Graham  co-founded  Ensyn  and  served  on  the  board  and  in  various  senior 
executive roles with Ensyn until it was acquired by the Company in 2005. Since then, he has served as Chairman (since 
June 2007) and Chief Executive Officer (since July 2008), and President and Chief Executive Officer (from April 2005 to 
June 2007) of Ensyn Corporation.  Dr. Graham has been working on the commercial development of the RTP™ biomass 
refining  and  petroleum  upgrading  technologies  since  the  early  1980’s.    This  work  culminated  in  the  development  of 
commercial RTP applications in the wood industry in the late 1980’s and the establishment of Ensyn Renewables Inc. to 
capitalize  on  commercial  projects  for  this  business.    In  1997,  Dr.  Graham  initiated  the  application  of  this  commercial 
RTP™ technology in the petroleum industry.  Dr. Graham holds Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Science Honours 
degrees from Carlton University, and a Master of Engineering and Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from the University of 
Western Ontario.  Dr. Graham brings unique skill, expertise and experience to our Board as the inventor of our HTL™ 
technology and as a scientist and businessman with extensive experience in the technology industry.  
 
PETER G. MEREDITH  
Mr. Meredith joined the Board of Directors in December 2007 and serves as a member of the Executive Committee.  He 
previously  served  as  a  director  from  1996  to  1999  and  as  the  Company’s  Chief  Financial  Officer  from  June  1999  to 
January 2000.  Mr. Meredith has been Deputy Chairman of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. since May 2006 and was Chief Financial 
Officer  of  Ivanhoe  Mines  from  May  2004  to  May  2006  and  from  June  1999  to  November  2001.    He  is  also  presently 
Chairman (since October, 2009) and was previously Chief Executive Officer (June 2007 to October 2009) of SouthGobi 
Resources Ltd, and served as Chief Financial Officer of Ivanhoe Capital Corporation from 1996 to March 2009.  Prior to 
joining the Company, Mr. Meredith spent 31 years with Deloitte & Touche LLP, Chartered Accountants, where he retired 
as a partner in 1996. He was a member of its Canadian board of directors from 1991 to 1996. Mr. Meredith is a Chartered 
Accountant  and  is  a  member  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  British  Columbia,  the  Institute  of  Chartered 
Accountants  of  Ontario  and  the  Ordre  des Comptables  Agrees  du  Quebec.    Mr.  Meredith  was  selected  to  serve  as  a 
director on our Board due to his extensive experience at the senior executive and board level with international resource 
companies and his financial accounting, reporting and corporate finance expertise, and the depth of his knowledge of the 
Company’s  operations  and  of  the  political  and  regulatory  requirements  of  the  regions  in  which  the  Company  operates 
derived from his involvement in leadership roles with the Company and other resource companies operating in similar 
regions since 1996.  
 
ALEXANDER A.  MOLYNEUX 
Mr.  Molyneux  is  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Canadian-based  SouthGobi  Resources  Ltd.  (TSX:SGQ, 
HK:1878). SouthGobi is focused on exploration and development of its Permian-age coal deposits in Mongolia’s South 
Gobi region to supply a wide range of coal products to markets in Mongolia and China. SouthGobi’s largest shareholder is 
Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. Before joining SouthGobi in 2009, Mr. Molyneux was Head of Metals and Mining Investment Banking 
for  Citigroup  where  he  established  a  leading  metals  and  mining  investment  banking  business  in  Asia.  During  a 
distinguished career at Citigroup and UBS, he advised on coal-related public offerings, mergers and acquisitions, bond 
and debt offerings totalling several billion dollars. Mr. Molyneux holds a Bachelor’s degree in Economics from Monash 
University  in  Australia.    Mr.  Molyneux  was  selected  to  serve  as  a  director  on  our  Board  based  on  his  comprehensive 
background in the areas of international capital markets, corporate finance and investment banking in Asia and elsewhere 
and his experience in doing business in the natural resource sector in China and Mongolia. 
 
ROBERT A. PIRRAGLIA 
Mr. Pirraglia has been a director of the Company since April 2005 and acted as the Chair of the Business Development 
Committee from August 2007 until May 2008.  He is currently a member of the Compensation and Benefits Committee 
and the Nominating and the Corporate Governance Committee.  Mr. Pirraglia is an engineer and attorney with more than 
25 years of experience in the development of energy projects and projects employing innovative technologies.  He served 
on  the  board  of  Ensyn  Group,  Inc.  starting  in  1996,  and  was  also  Chief  Operating  Officer  of  Ensyn  Group,  Inc.from 
September  1998  to  April  2005.  He  is  currently  Executive  Vice  President  of  Ensyn  Corporation  and  was  the  Chief 
Operating Officer and Vice President of the company from April 2005 to October 2007.  He is also a director of Pirraglia 
Associates, Inc. and RRP Development Holdings, LLC.  In addition to being a founder and manager of several energy and 
waste processing companies, Mr. Pirraglia has provided management and business consulting services to various US, 
Canadian  and  European  companies.    Mr.  Pirraglia  holds  a  Bachelor  of  Electrical  Engineering  degree  from  New  York 
University and a J.D. from Fordham University School of Law. Mr. Pirraglia brings significant legal, technical and project 
management  experience  and  expertise  to  our  Board  as  well  as  governance  experience  acting  as  a  public  company 
director.
81
DAVID A. DYCK 
Mr. Dyck was appointed President and Chief Operating Officer of the Company in May 2010 and continues to serve as 
President and Chief Executive Officer of Ivanhoe Energy Canada Inc.  Mr. Dyck was the Executive Vice President, Capital 
Markets  from  October  2009  to  May  2010.  Prior  to  his  appointment  with  Ivanhoe  Energy  Canada,  Mr.  Dyck  served  as 
President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  LeaRidge  Capital  Inc.  (January  2008  to  October  2009)  and  as  Senior  Vice 
President Finance and Chief Financial Officer of Western Oil Sands Inc. (April 2000 to October 2007).   
 
GERALD D. SCHIEFELBEIN 
Mr. Schiefelbein has been the Chief Financial Officer of the Company since November 2009. Prior to his appointment as 
Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Schiefelbein served as Chief Financial Officer, Oil Americas - BP p.l.c. (September 2007 to 
February 2009), Controller, Oil Americas - BP p.l.c. (February 2006 to September 2007) and Controller, Other Businesses 
and Corporate (September 2003 to February 2006) for BP p.l.c., one of the world’s largest energy companies.   
 
IAN BARNETT 
Mr. Barnett has been the Executive Vice President, Corporate Development of the Company since March 2007.  From 
January 2005 to November 2005, Mr. Barnett was a consultant to the Company and was Vice President, Finance from 
November 2005 to March 2007.  Mr. Barnett is a member of the Board of Ensyn Corporation and has been a director 
(since 1996) and consultant (1999-2007) to various companies in the Ensyn group of companies. He is also co-founder 
and has been a director of Heptagon Investments Ltd. since 1991. 
 
K. C. PATRICK CHUA 
Mr.  Chua  has  been  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Company  since  June  1999  and  Chairman  of  the  Company’s 
subsidiary Sunwing Energy Ltd. since April 2004.  From March 2000 to April 2004 he was President of Sunwing Energy 
Ltd. 
 
DAVID R. MARTIN 
Mr.  Martin  is  the  President,  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Co-Chairman  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Latin  America  Inc.  and  Co-
Chairman  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Ecuador  Inc.,  the  Company’s  wholly  owned  subsidiaries.    He  was  the  Chairman  of  the 
Company  from  August  1998  to  May  2006  at  which  time  he  was  appointed  as  Executive  Co-Chairman,  serving  in  the 
position until May 2008.  
 
Mr.  Martin  has  over  50  years  of  international  experience  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry,  having  spent  26  years  in  senior 
management positions with Occidental Petroleum Corporation.  Part of the founding team at Occidental Petroleum, Mr. 
Martin was President and Chief Executive Officer of Occidental Oil & Gas Corporation from 1983 to 1996.  He was also 
Executive  Vice-President  and  a  director  of  Occidental  Petroleum  Corporation  and  a  director  of  Canadian  Occidental 
Petroleum.    
 
GERALD G. MOENCH 
Mr.  Moench  has  been  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Company  since  June  1999  and  President  of  the  Company’s 
subsidiary Sunwing Energy Ltd.  since April 2004. 
 
MICHAEL A. SILVERMAN 
Mr. Silverman has been the Executive Vice President, Technology and Chief Technology Officer of the Company since 
September, 2007.  From May, 2007 to September, 2007 he was Vice President, Technology of the Company.  Prior to 
joining  the  Company,  Mr.  Silverman  served  as  Vice  President,  Petrochemicals  (May  2004  to  May  2007)  and  Director, 
Technology Center (May 2000 to May 2004) for KBR, Inc.  
 
EDWIN J. VEITH 
Mr. Veith has been Executive Vice President, Upstream of the Company since September 2007.  Mr. Veith has also been 
Vice President, HTL Technology of Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc. from November 2005 until June 2009.  From June 2001 to 
November 2005, he was Chief Reservoir Engineer of Ivanhoe Energy (USA) Inc.
82
OTHER PUBLIC COMPANY DIRECTORSHIPS   
The following is information respecting directorships held by our directors over the last five years at public and registered 
investment companies.  
 
Messrs. Howard R. Balloch, Peter G. Meredith and Robert M. Friedland are all directors of Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. Mr. Balloch 
is also a director of Methanex Corporation and Canaccord Financial Inc. and was previously a director of East Energy 
Corp. and Tiens Biotech Group USA Inc.  Messrs. Friedland and Meredith are both directors of Ivanhoe Australia Limited. 
Mr. Friedland was a director of Potash One Inc., a Canadian public company. Mr. Meredith is also a director of Entrée 
Gold Inc., SouthGobi Resources Ltd. and Great Canadian Gaming Corporation, and was previously a director of Jinshan 
Gold  Mines  Inc.  (renamed  China  Gold  International)  and  Olympus  Pacific  Minerals  Inc.    Mr.  Molyneux  is  a  director  of 
SouthGobi Resources Ltd. Mr. Cabrera is also a director of GEVO, Inc. 
 
BOARD COMMITTEES 
As required under the Business Corporations Act (Yukon) and under section 3(a)(58)(A) of the Exchange Act, our Board 
of Directors has a separately designated standing Audit Committee. The members of the Audit Committee are Messrs. 
Brian F. Downey (Chair), A. Robert Abboud and Carlos A. Cabrera. Mr. Downey, one of our current independent directors, 
has been determined by the Board of Directors to be an Audit Committee financial expert. We believe that Mr. Downey’s 
prior experience working as a Certified Management Accountant and significant financial and business experience at the 
executive levels of management qualifies him to be an Audit Committee financial expert.  
 
We  also  have  a  Compensation  and  Benefits  Committee,  a  Nominating  and  Corporate  Governance  Committee  and  an 
Executive  Committee.  The  current  members  of  the  Compensation  and  Benefits  Committee  are  Messrs.  Howard  R. 
Balloch (Chair), Robert A. Pirraglia, Carlos A. Cabrera and Brian F. Downey. The current members of the Nominating and 
Corporate  Governance  Committee  are  Messrs.  Howard  R.  Balloch  (Chair),  Robert  A.  Pirraglia,  Brian  F.  Downey,      
Carlos  A.  Cabrera  and  A.  Robert  Abboud.  The  current  members  of  the  Executive  Committee  are  Messrs.  Robert  M. 
Friedland (Chair), A. Robert Abboud, Howard R. Balloch and Peter G. Meredith. 
 
CODE OF BUSINESS CONDUCT AND ETHICS 
We  have  a  Code  of  Business  Conduct  and  Ethics  applicable  to  all  employees,  consultants,  officers  and  directors 
regardless  of  their  position  in  our  organization,  at  all  times  and  everywhere  we  do  business. The  Code  of  Business 
Conduct  and  Ethics  provides  that  our  employees,  consultants,  officers  and  directors  will  uphold  our  commitment  to  a 
culture  of  honesty,  integrity  and  accountability  and  that  we  require  the  highest  standards  of  professional  and  ethical 
conduct from our employees, consultants, officers and directors. A copy of our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, as 
amended, may be obtained, without charge, by request to Ivanhoe Energy Inc., Suite 654-999 Canada Place, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada V6C 3E1, Attention: Corporate Secretary or by phone to 604-688-8323. 
 
ITEM 11.  EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 
We are a foreign private issuer that voluntarily files its annual reports on Form 10-K. As permitted by Item 402(a)(1) of 
Regulation  S-K,  we  follow  the  disclosure  requirements  applicable  in  Canada  with  respect  to  executive  compensation 
(Form 51-102 F6 of the Canadian Securities Administrators), which we believe address the requirements of, and require 
more detailed information than, Items 6.B and 6.E.2 of Form 20-F.  
 
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS  
Compensation and Benefits Committee, Philosophy and Goals 
The  Company’s  executive  compensation  program  is  administered  by  the  Compensation  and  Benefits  Committee 
(“Compensation Committee”).  The members of the Compensation Committee are all independent directors.  Following 
review and approval by the Compensation Committee, decisions relating to executive compensation are reported to, and 
approved by, the Board of Directors.
83
In determining the nature and quantum of compensation for the Company’s executive officers the Company is seeking to 
achieve the following objectives, in approximately an equal level of importance:





to provide a strong incentive to management to contribute to the achievement of Ivanhoe’s short-term and long-
term corporate goals; 
to ensure that the interests of Ivanhoe’s executive officers and the interests of the Company’s shareholders are 
aligned; 
to ensure that Ivanhoe is able to attract, retain and motivate executive officers of the highest caliber in light of the 
strong competition in the oil and gas industry for qualified personnel; 
to recognize that the successful implementation of Ivanhoe’s corporate strategy cannot necessarily be measured, 
at this stage of its development, only with reference to quantitative measurement criteria of corporate or individual 
performance; and 
to provide fair, transparent, and defensible compensation
Recent Developments Related to Executive Compensation 
Effective May 18, 2010, David A. Dyck was promoted to the position of President and Chief Operating Officer of Ivanhoe. 
On September 3, 2010, Greg Phaneuf was appointed Senior Vice President, Corporate Development of Ivanhoe and Ian 
Barnett  provided  notice  that  effective  March  31,  2011,  he  will  resign  from  his  position  as  Executive  Vice  President, 
Corporate Development of the Company to pursue other business interests. 
 
How We Make Compensation Decisions 
The  Compensation  Committee  oversees  and  sets  the  general  guidelines  and  principles  for  the  implementation  of  the 
Company’s executive compensation policies, assesses the individual performance of the Company’s executive officers 
and makes recommendations to the Board of Directors.  Based on these recommendations, the Board of Directors makes 
decisions concerning the nature and scope of the compensation to be paid to the Company’s executive officers.   The 
Compensation  Committee  bases  its  recommendations  to  the  Board  on  Ivanhoe’s  compensation  philosophy  and  on 
individual and corporate performance. 
 
The  Compensation  Committee  annually  reviews,  and  recommends  to  the  Board,  the  cash  compensation,  any  annual 
performance bonus, long term incentive grants and overall compensation package for each of the Corporation’s executive 
officers. 
 
Decisions for base salary adjustments are usually made during the first quarter of the new fiscal year.  Although specific 
individual targets were not set for executives for the 2010 year, in the normal course of business, targets for performance 
bonuses for the fiscal year are set at the beginning of the fiscal year, and decisions on actual bonuses are made at some 
point during the first quarter following the end of the fiscal year.  Incentive awards are ordinarily made during the first 
quarter following the end of the fiscal year. In the normal course of business, management presents its compensation 
recommendations for consideration by the Compensation Committee. 
 
The Compensation Committee may seek compensation advice where appropriate from external consultants, and based 
on significant changes to the Company’s executive management team in 2009, the Compensation Committee instructed 
senior  management  to  make  a  series  of  executive  compensation  proposals  to  the  Compensation  Committee. 
Subsequently, in the second quarter of 2010 the Compensation Committee engaged the services of the consulting firm 
Mercer Canada Ltd. to undertake a comprehensive review of executive compensation for named executive positions and 
other  senior  management  positions.    For  2011  and  beyond,  the  Company  will  be  implementing  a  new  compensation 
program based on the results of the Mercer study and incorporating specific performance targets and objectives. Certain 
aspects of this new program were applied in 2010 to decisions relating to long term incentive awards in October 2010.  
 
Since no performance targets or objectives were adopted upon which to base executive compensation decisions for the 
2010 fiscal year, the Compensation Committee based its decisions for the purposes of establishing 2010 base salaries 
and bonuses awarded in 2010 in respect of the 2009 fiscal year on available industry data and a subjective review of the 
role played by senior management in corporate performance and achievements. 
 
Elements of Total Compensation 
The compensation package that the Company provides to its executive officers generally consists of base salary, annual 
performance bonuses and equity incentives.  The Company’s compensation policy reflects a belief that an element of total 
compensation for the Company’s executive officers should be “at risk” and in the form of common shares or incentive 
stock options so as to create a strong link to build shareholder value.  In setting compensation levels, the Compensation
84
Committee takes into account an executive’s past performance, future expectations for performance and also considers 
both  the  cumulative  compensation  being  granted  to  executives  as  well  as  internal  and  external  equity  amongst  the 
Company’s executives.  At this stage of the Company’s development, the Company also considers the available cash 
resources of the Company. 
 
The following summarizes the primary purpose of each compensation element and its emphasis:
  Base salary – paid in cash as a fixed amount of compensation for performing the day to day responsibilities of the
job.
  Performance bonus – annual award, paid in cash and earned for the achievement of near term critical strategic
corporate and project goals.
  Long Term Incentive awards – annual equity award, in the form of a combination of stock options and restricted 
share  units,  granted  to  align  the  interests  of  the  executive  with  longer  term  Company  goals,  the  creation  of 
shareholder value and the retention of key executives.
Peer Comparator Group 
A new comparator group was established in 2010 as part of the process of establishing a new executive compensation 
program.  The comparator group includes oil and gas companies with international operations, oil sands operations and 
similar market capitalization. The comparator group  was composed of Pacific Rubiales Energy Corporation, Black Pearl 
Resources Inc., Niko Resources Ltd., Connacher Oil & Gas Ltd., Athabasca Oil Sands Corporation, OPTI Canada Inc., 
Petrobank Energy & Resources Ltd., TransGlobe Energy Corporation, Bankers Petroleum Ltd., Ithaca Energy Inc., Gran 
Tierra  Energy  Inc.,  Calvalley  Petroleum  Inc.,  Paramount  Resources  Ltd.,  Pan  Orient  Energy  Corporation,  UTS  Energy 
Corporation, Southern Pacific Resources Corporation, Transatlantic Petroleum Ltd. and Oilsands Quest Inc. 
 
However, for purposes of establishing 2010 base salaries and bonuses for the 2010 fiscal year in respect of the 2009 
fiscal year, the Compensation Committee relied on data from the comparator group and externally generated survey data 
from the energy sector, primarily in the category of exploration and production companies.  
 
Base Salary 
The  base  salaries  of  the  Company’s  executive  officers  are  determined  at  the  commencement  of  employment  as  an 
executive  officer  by  the  terms  of  the  executive  officer’s  employment  contract.    The  base  salary  is  determined  by  a 
subjective  assessment  of  each  individual’s  performance,  experience  and  other  factors  the  Company  believes  to  be 
relevant, including prevailing industry demand for personnel having comparable skills and performing similar duties, the 
compensation the individual could reasonably expect to receive from a competitor and the Company’s ability to pay.   
 
Under the Company’s compensation program and onward, salary levels are to be assessed using a pay grade system 
that is consistent with industry practice.  Each of the Company’s employees, including the Company’s executive officers, 
is placed in a pay grade based upon his or her position, knowledge, skills, relevant experience and credentials.  Annual 
salary  increases  are  made  based  on  performance  and  the  relative  position  within  a  pay  grade.    The  Compensation 
Committee  also  considers  retention  risks,  succession  requirements  and  compensation  changes  in  the  market  in 
determining salary changes.   
 
Cash Performance Bonus 
The annual bonus program is intended to align the performance of the Company’s employees with the near term critical 
goals defined in the annual business plan.  The program calls on the same pay grade system used to establish base 
salary to be used for determining the bonus targets for each employee. 
 
Prior  to  adoption  of  the  Company’s  new  compensation  plan  under  the  existing  plan  potential  bonus  amounts  in  the 
ordinary course were expected to range from 40% of salary (target) and 60% of salary (maximum) for the Company’s 
Chief Financial Officer and 25%-30% of salary  (target) and 37.5%-45% of salary (maximum) for other executive officers.  
However,  for  the  2010  year,  specific  performance  targets  were  not  set  and  individual  executives  were  evaluated 
subjectively in terms of their contribution to overall corporate objectives and execution of the corporate business plan.  
 
Under the new compensation plan for 2011 and onwards, cash bonuses are awarded to the Company’s executive officers 
and  senior  non-executive  management  according  to  the  performance  of  the  Company  and  the  success  in  meeting,  or 
exceeding, the annual established corporate and project targets. For executive officers, potential bonus awards can range 
from 55% to 75% of base salary multiplied by a weighted achievement factor ranging from 0% to 200%.
85
Long Term Incentive Plan 
Equity based compensation is granted to the Company’s executive officers and management.  This long term incentive 
portion  of  salary  is  meant  to  retain  key  employees  over  the  long  term  and  to  focus  the  efforts  of  those  individuals  on 
shareholder return and the longer broader goals of the organization.  To remain competitive within the industry and to 
provide parity with compensation levels within the Comparator Peer Group, equity grants are used to enhance the overall 
total compensation package. 
 
Equity  based  compensation  is  determined  as  a  percentage  of  base  pay  and  may  have  a  combination  of  stock  option 
grants and restricted share units, the combination of which is determined by the pay grade level.  The higher the grade 
level the higher the weighting towards “at risk” stock option grants. 
 
All outstanding stock options that have been granted under the Company’s Equity Incentive Plan were granted at prices 
not less than 100% of the fair market value of the Company’s common shares on the dates such options were granted. In 
addition, the Board of Directors has traditionally taken an approach to vesting that is based on the passage of time and 
option  exercise  periods  and  vesting  schedules  for  options  granted  to  executive  officers  are  determined  by  the 
Compensation Committee and the Board of Directors.  
 
Under  the  new  compensation  plan,  equity  grants  are  awarded  to  the  Company’s  executive  officers  and  senior  non-
executive  management  according  to  performance  and  the  success  in  meeting  or  exceeding  the  annual  established 
corporate and project targets.  For executive officers, potential value of equity grants can range from 160% to 225% of 
base  salary  multiplied  by  a  weighted  achievement  factor  ranging  from  0%  to  200%.  For  the  2010  year,  specific 
performance targets were not set and individual executives were evaluated subjectively in terms of their contribution to 
overall corporate objectives and execution of the corporate business plan.      
 
The new compensation plan for 2011 will result in the establishment of a Restricted Share Unit Plan to provide a form of 
equity compensation that is less dilutive than produced by a plan based on options. The amounts awarded through the 
Restricted Share Unit Plan will be shares purchased on the TSX through a Trustee.  Restricted Share Units are subject to 
the vesting provisions of the plan.  Should the employee voluntarily leave the employment of the Company any unvested 
Restricted Share Units are forfeited by the employee under the terms of the plan.  
 
2010 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION DECISIONS 
Salary Compensation 
Robert Friedland, Executive Co-Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, has voluntarily waived a cash salary from Ivanhoe 
to help conserve the Company’s cash. 
 
Pending finalization and adoption of the Company’s new compensation plan, the Company determined to increase base 
salaries for executive officer’s by 4.2%, which percentage was established with reference to the average increase in base 
salaries for executives of Canadian exploration and production companies reported as part of the externally generated 
compensation  data  in  respect  to  the  Canadian  oil  and  gas  industry  upon  which  the  Compensation  Committee  relied. 
Exceptions to this include significant changes in roles and responsibilities during the year. 
 
Bonus Compensation  
As specific performance targets were not set for individual executives, bonuses awarded in 2010 in respect of the 2009 
fiscal year were awarded based on subject criteria in terms of the individual executive’s contribution to overall corporate 
objectives and execution of the corporate business plan. In March 2010, the Compensation Committee created a bonus 
pool  having  an  aggregate  value  of  approximately  $1.4  million  from  which  bonuses  for  the  entire  Company  would  be 
drawn, representing approximately 18.7% of aggregate base salaries paid by the Company to its executive officers and 
other  senior  management  staff  during  the  prior  fiscal  year.  This  percentage  was  established  with  reference  to  the 
Compensation  Committee’s  understanding  of  what  Canadian  exploration  and  production  companies  paid  based  on 
externally  generated  compensation  data  in  respect  of  the  Canadian  oil  and  gas  industry  and  upon  which  the 
Compensation Committee relied.  The Compensation Committee also allocated an additional $250,000 for payment of 
additional  bonuses  to  executives  perceived  by  the  Compensation  Committee  as  having  achieved  extraordinary 
performance. The final allocation was made with input from the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, who did not accept 
any salary or bonus.
86
Incentive Compensation 
For  the  2010  year,  specific  performance  targets  were  not  set  and  individual  executives  were  evaluated  subjectively  in 
terms  of  their  contribution  to  overall  corporate  objectives  and  execution  of  the  corporate  business  plan.  The 
Compensation Committee also considered overall compensation factors, the need to retain valuable employees and the 
practices of comparator companies. 
 
In  April  2010,  at  the  recommendation  of  the  Compensation  Committee,  the  Company  granted  options  to  purchase 
250,000 common shares to David R. Martin, President, CEO and Co-Chairman of Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc., in 
recognition of his considerable efforts made on behalf of the Company to advance its projects and business interests in 
Latin America.   
 
In October, 2010, at the recommendation of the Compensation Committee, the Company granted options to purchase 
1,000,000 common shares to Robert M. Friedland, Executive Co-Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, in recognition of 
the considerable efforts made on behalf of the Company to advance its projects and business interests without receiving 
an  annual  salary.    In  October  2010,  the  Company  further  granted  options  to  purchase  200,000  common  shares  to      
David A. Dyck, President and Chief Operating Officer, and 130,000 shares to each of David M. Martin, President, CEO 
and Co-Chairman of Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc., Edwin J. Veith, Executive Vice-President, Upstream, and Gerald 
Schiefelbein, Chief Financial Officer.  
 
Other Compensation 
The Company does not provide its executive officers with a pension plan and the share purchase plan of the Company 
has not been activated.  In 2010, the Company paid Mr. Veith US$22,000 for the purpose of contributing to his 401(k) 
retirement plan and $28,570 as an expatriate housing allowance.   
Performance Graph
The following graph shows the change in a Cdn$100 investment in Ivanhoe common shares over the past five years, 
compared to the S&P/TSX Composite Index, the S&P/TSX Oil & Gas Exploration & Production and the S&P/TSX Energy 
Sector Index.  Our common shares were added to the S&P/TSX Composite Index on March 22, 2010.
250
200
150
100
50
0
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
S&P/TSX Composite  Index 
S&P/TSX Oil & Gas Exploration & Production Index 
S&P/TSX Energy Sector Index
2005 
  100.00 
  100.00 
  100.00 
  100.00
2006 
  127.64 
  114.51 
 
97.87 
  103.18
2007 
  126.02 
  122.72 
  103.78 
  108.34
2008 
  47.15 
  79.73 
  68.54 
  68.98
2009 
  240.65 
  104.20 
 
94.08 
93.10
2010 
  221.14 
  119.26 
  102.89 
  102.41
The trend in overall compensation paid to the Company’s executive officers over the past five years has not tracked the 
performance of the market price of the Company’s common shares, or the S&P/TSX Composite Index, particularly since 
2007.    Market  price  targets  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  have,  however,  been  included  as  a  component  of  the 
Company’s annual bonus incentives.
87
Option-Based Awards  
Please see the section “Incentive Compensation” in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis for a discussion of the 
Company’s approach to option-based awards.   
 
In  2010,  the  Company  issued  option-based  awards  under  its  Equity  Incentive  Plan  to  executive  officers  as  described 
under the heading “2010 Executive Compensation Decisions.”   
 
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE 
The following table sets forth all compensation earned by the individuals who served as our Chief Executive Officer, our 
Chief Financial Officer and by each of our other three most highly compensated executive officers as of the end of 2010 
(the “Named Executive Officers” or “NEOs”). Our NEOs may change from year to year due to fluctuations in our executive 
officers’ annual compensation.
All Other
Compensation
Compensation
Name and Principal Position 
Robert M. Friedland(4) 
Executive Co-Chairman & CEO 
 
David A. Dyck 
President & COO 
 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
CFO 
 
David R. Martin 
President, CEO & Co-Chairman, 
Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc. 
Edwin J. Veith 
Executive VP, Upstream
Year 
2010 
2009 
2008 
2010 
2009(5) 
2008 
2010 
2009(6) 
2008 
2010 
2009 
2008 
2010 
2009 
2008
Salary(1)
($)
- 
- 
- 
374,297 
82,842 
- 
264,523 
61,750  
- 
296,971 
285,000 
285,000 
263,627 
253,000 
239,250
Share-  
Based 
Awards
($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
29,965(8)
- 
-
29,965(8)
Option-     
Based  
Awards(2)
($)
1,497,797 
- 
1,977,888 
299,559 
982,223 
- 
194,714 
392,889 
- 
194,714 
537,100(7)
- 
194,714 
228,623 
-
Non-Equity Incentive  
Plan Compensation      
Annual Incentive
Awards(3) ($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
42,424 
- 
- 
29,874 
- 
- 
134,942 
- 
- 
128,936 
-
Pension     
Value ($)
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
22,000 
19,645 
21,354 
22,000 
21,083 
19,958
($) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
31,914(9)
-
-
Total
($)
1,497,797 
- 
1,977,888 
673,856 
1,107,489 
- 
459,237 
484,513 
- 
513,685 
976,687 
336,319 
512,255 
631,642 
289,173
the pay periods.
(1)  Amounts paid in Canadian dollars to Messrs. Dyck and Schiefelbein were converted to US currency based on the monthly average exchange rate during
(2)  Estimated fair value on date of grant calculated using the Black Scholes option pricing model. Key assumptions are outlined in Note 9 to the consolidated 
financial statements. The value of stock options with a Canadian dollar exercise price was converted to US dollars using the Bank of Canada exchange 
rate on date of grant.
(3)  A cash bonus was paid in 2010 in connection with the NEOs performance in 2009.  The bonus was not previously disclosed as the amounts had not been
finalized by the filing date of our 2009 10K report.
(4)  Mr. Friedland is also a director of the Company.  Pursuant to the Company’s policies regarding management directors, Mr. Friedland does not receive
compensation from the Company for acting as a director.
(5)  Mr. Dyck joined the Corporation effective October 21, 2009, and was employed for approximately two months during 2009. 
(6)  Mr. Schiefelbein joined the Corporation effective October 1, 2009, and was employed for three months during 2009. 
(7)  Stock options were awarded to Mr. Martin in 2010 in connection with 2009 events.  The options were not previously disclosed as they had not been
finalized by the filing date of our 2009 10K report.
(8)  Estimated fair value calculated as the closing trading price for the Company’s common shares on August 5, 2008, when a treasury order for the award
was delivered to the Company’s transfer agent, multiplied by the number of common shares awarded.  
Includes $28,570 paid as an expatriate housing allowance.  Ivanhoe reimburses Mr. Veith for the difference between the actual Canadian income taxes 
paid by him and the US income taxes that would have been paid if Mr. Veith had remained in the US.  This amount has not yet been determined for 2010.
(9)
88
INCENTIVE PLAN AWARDS 
To value stock options awarded to our NEOs, we used the Black Scholes option pricing model. The actual value realized 
on exercises may be higher or lower depending on our common share price at the time of exercise. 
 
Outstanding option-based awards at December 31, 2010
Name 
Robert M. Friedland 
 
David A. Dyck 
 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
 
David R. Martin 
 
Edwin J. Veith
Number Of Securities 
Underlying Unexercised
Options (#) 
1,000,000 
2,500,000 
200,000 
500,000 
130,000 
200,000 
130,000 
250,000 
130,000 
150,000 
158,000 
250,000 
70,734 
22,000
Option Exercise
Price 
($)
Cdn$2.28 
Cdn$1.61 
Cdn$2.28 
Cdn$2.51 
Cdn$2.28 
Cdn$2.51 
Cdn$2.28 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$2.28 
Cdn$2.22 
US$1.92 
US $2.70 
US $2.57 
US $3.06
Option 
Expiration
Date
Oct 28, 2017 
Mar 5, 2013 
Oct 28, 2017 
Oct 15, 2016 
Oct 28, 2017 
Oct 1, 2016 
Oct 28, 2017 
Apr 29, 2017 
Oct 28, 2017 
Sep 17, 2014 
Oct 4, 2012 
Jun 2, 2011 
Apr 18, 2011 
Mar 8, 2011
Total Value of Unexercised  
in-the-Money Options(1)
(US$)
3,232,456
194,048
99,739
57,511
274,928
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the December 31, 2010, closing market price of our common shares and the exercise price of the options, multiplied 
by the number of unexercised options. The value of options with a US dollar exercise price is calculated using the NASDAQ closing price of $2.72 per 
common share.  The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price is calculated using the TSX closing price of Cdn$2.72 per common share and 
converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2010, Bank of Canada closing rate. Where the exercise price exceeds the market value per common 
share, the value is zero.
Incentive plan awards – value vested in 2010
Name 
Robert M. Friedland 
David A. Dyck 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
David R. Martin 
Edwin J. Veith
Option-Based Awards
Value Vested During the Year(1)
(US$) 
960,699 
nil 
nil 
nil 
11,132
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the closing market price of our common shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the options, multiplied 
by the number of options vesting in the current year. The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price were converted to US dollars using the  
Bank of Canada closing rate on the vesting date. Where the exercise price exceeds the market price per common share, the value is nil.
89
PENSION PLAN
Employees of Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc. (the “Employees”) may participate in Ivanhoe’s 401(k) (the “Plan”).  The Plan 
is a defined contribution plan that includes Employee and Company contributions.  Employees may contribute up to the 
maximum amount established by the Internal Revenue Code and the Company may elect to make annual discretionary 
matching and profit sharing contributions. Employee contributions vest immediately and Company contributions vest after 
two years of service.  Investment decisions are made by the Employee from a variety of investment options.  
  
The  following  table  represents  the  value  of  accumulated  pension  assets  within  the  Plan  for  Messrs.  Martin  and  Veith.  
There were no above-market or preferential earnings provisions.
Name 
David R. Martin 
Edwin J. Veith
Accumulated Value 
at January 1, 2010
($) 
342,031 
282,345
Compensatory
($) 
22,000 
22,000
Non-compensatory
($)
27,559 
48,613
Accumulated Value at 
December 31, 2010
($) 
391,590 
352,958
TERMINATION AND CHANGE OF CONTROL BENEFITS  
The Company has written contracts of employment with Messrs. Dyck and Schiefelbein.  In the case of termination for 
cause or voluntary resignation, the employment contracts do not result in incremental payments, payables or benefits, and 
therefore have been excluded from the following discussion. Perquisites and other personal benefits totalling less than 
$50,000 have also been omitted.  
 
Estimated incremental payments are based on the individual’s annual salary as at December 31, 2010.  Any amounts 
payable in Canadian dollars have been translated to US dollars using the December 31, 2010, Bank of Canada closing 
rate. Unexercised stock options were valued using the December 31, 2010, closing market price of our common shares 
and stock options with a Canadian dollar exercise price were converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2010, Bank 
of Canada closing rate.  
 
David A. Dyck 
Mr. Dyck’s employment contract provides that:
(a)
(b)
in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages in a lump sum, cause all of the unvested stock options that would vest in the succeeding twelve months to 
vest immediately and generally remain exercisable for six months; 
in  the  case  of  termination  of  the  employment  contract  by  the  Company  within  twelve  months  of  a  change  of 
control,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months  wages  in  a  lump  sum  and  cause  all  stock  options  to  vest 
immediately and generally remain exercisable for six months; and
(c)  Mr.  Dyck  is  bound  by  a  confidentiality  clause  that  is  effective  for  three  years  after  the  termination  of  active
employment.
The  estimated  incremental  payments  to  Mr.  Dyck  in  the  above  scenarios  are  (a)  a  lump  sum  of  US$366,673  and 
accelerated vesting of stock options valued at US$167,655; and (b) a lump sum of US$366,673 and accelerated vesting 
of stock options valued at US$167,655.  
 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Mr. Schiefelbein’s employment contract provides that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
in  the  case  of  termination  without  cause  or  termination  upon  disability,  the  Company  must  pay  twelve  months 
wages in a lump sum, cause all of the unvested stock options that would vest in the succeeding twelve months to 
vest immediately and generally remain exercisable for six months; 
in  the  case  of  termination  of  the  employment  contract  by  the  Company  within  twelve  months  of  a  change  of 
control, the Company must pay twelve months wages in a lump sum and cause all of the unvested stock options 
to vest immediately and remain generally exercisable for six months; 
in  the case  that  Mr.  Schiefelbein does  not  continue  to  have  all  the  necessary  work permits  to  be  employed  in 
Canada and is unable to fulfill the role of CFO due to legal or regulatory requirements, the Company must pay six
90
months wages in a lump sum, vested stock options will remain generally exercisable for six months from the date 
that employment terminates, all unvested stock options will terminate immediately;
(d)  Mr.  Schiefelbein  is  bound  by  a  non-competition  clause  effective  until  the  later  of  twelve  months  after  the 
termination  of  active  employment  or  the  date  he  no  longer  receives  compensation  of  any  kind  under  the 
employment contract;
(e)  Mr. Schiefelbein is bound by a non-solicitation clause effective for twelve months after the termination of active
employment; and
(f)  Mr. Schiefelbein is bound by a confidentiality clause that is effective for three years after the termination of active
employment.
The estimated incremental payments to Mr. Schiefelbein in the above scenarios are (a) a lump sum of US$272,399 and 
accelerated  vesting  of  stock  options  valued  at  US$89,182;  (b)  a  lump  sum  of  US$272,399  and  accelerated  vesting  of 
stock options valued at US$89,182; and (c) a lump sum of US$136,200.
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION  
Each  non-management  director  other  than  Mr.  Abboud,  the  Lead  Director,  and  Mr.  Cabrera,  receives  US$40,000  per 
annum for acting as a director of the Company.  Mr. Abboud, as Co-Chairman and Lead Director, and Mr. Cabrera, as Co-
Chairman  and  Lead  Director  of  the  Company’s  wholly  owned  subsidiaries,  Ivanhoe  Energy  Latin  America  Inc.  and 
Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc., receive US$80,000 per annum.  Mr. Balloch receives an additional $10,000 for his duties as 
Chairman of the Nominating and Corporate Governance and Compensation and Benefits Committees.  Effective August 
1,  2010,  Mr.  Downey  receives  an  additional  $10,000  for  his  duties  as  Chairman  of  the  Audit  Committee. In  addition, 
directors receive $1,000 for each board meeting and committee meeting attended in person or by conference telephone.   
 
NON-MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR COMPENSATION TABLE 
The following compensation was earned by non-management directors in 2010.
Name 
A. Robert Abboud 
Howard R. Balloch 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
Fees Earned
($) 
100,000 
69,000 
53,667 
71,542 
49,000 
49,000 
27,000 
60,000
Option-Based 
Awards(1) (US$)
107,420 
107,420 
408,504 
107,420 
107,420 
107,420 
154,291 
107,420
Total           
($) 
207,420 
176,420 
462,171 
178,962 
156,420 
156,420 
181,291 
167,420
(1)  Estimated fair value of stock options on date of grant calculated using the Black Scholes option pricing model. Key assumptions are outlined in Note 9 to 
the consolidated financial statements. The value of stock options with a Canadian dollar exercise price was converted to US dollars using the Bank of 
Canada exchange rate on date of grant.
91
Outstanding option-based awards at December 31, 2010
Name 
 A. Robert Abboud
Howard R. Balloch
Carlos A. Cabrera
Brian F. Downey
Robert G. Graham
Peter G. Meredith
Alexander A. Molyneux
Robert A. Pirraglia
Number of Securities 
Underlying Unexercised
Options (#) 
50,000 
50,000 
480,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
200,000 
100,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
20,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
200,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
100,000 
150,000 
100,000 
80,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000 
50,000
Option
Exercise Price
($)
Option 
Expiration
Date
Total Value of Unexercised 
in-the-Money Options(1)
(US$)
Cdn$3.26 
US $2.69  
US $2.85 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66 
Cdn$2.30 
Cdn$3.12 
Cdn$2.00 
Cdn$2.63 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
US $2.69 
US $2.06 
US $2.80 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66 
Cdn$2.29 
Cdn$3.12 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
Cdn$2.66 
Cdn$1.68 
Cdn$1.52 
Cdn$2.63 
Cdn$2.22 
Cdn$3.26 
Cdn$1.51 
US $2.69 
US $2.06 
US $2.80
Apr 29, 2017 
May 29, 2013  
May 15, 2011 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
May 3, 2012 
May 4, 2011 
Jul 28, 2017 
May 18, 2017 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
May 3, 2012 
May 4, 2011 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
Mar 8, 2012 
May 4, 2011 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
Mar 11, 2013 
Dec 19, 2012 
May 18, 2017 
Sep 17, 2014 
Apr 29, 2017 
Apr 29, 2016 
May 29, 2013 
May 3, 2012 
May 4, 2011
1,500
84,959
153,831
95,328
150,312
349,387
49,266
95,328
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the December 31, 2010, closing market price of our common shares and the exercise price of the options, multiplied 
by the number of unexercised options. The value of options with a US dollar exercise price is calculated using the NASDAQ closing price of $2.72 per 
common share.  The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price is calculated using the TSX closing price of Cdn$2.72 per common share and 
converted to US dollars using the December 31, 2010, Bank of Canada closing rate. Where the exercise price exceeds the market value per common 
share, the value is nil.
92
Incentive plan awards – value vested in 2010
Name 
A. Robert Abboud 
Howard R. Balloch 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia
Option-Based Awards
Value Vested During the Year(1)
(US$) 
172,568 
82,554 
nil 
84,654 
102,951 
150,849 
nil 
84,654
(1)  Calculated as the difference between the closing market price of our common shares on the vesting date and the exercise price of the options, multiplied 
by the number of options vesting in the current year. The value of options with a Canadian dollar exercise price were converted to US dollars using the  
Bank of Canada closing rate on the vesting date. Where the exercise price exceeds the market price per common share, the value is nil.
ITEM  12:  SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Ivanhoe’s  common  shares  are  the  only  class  of  voting  securities.  Based  on  information  known  to  the  Company,  the 
following table shows each person or group who beneficially owns (pursuant to SEC Regulations) more than 5% of our 
voting securities as at March 4, 2011.
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner
Robert M. Friedland 
150 Beach Road 
#25-03 The Gateway West                                                                    
Singapore  189720 
Directors and Executive Officers as a group (17 persons) 
Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec 
1000 place Jean-Paul-Riopelle  
Montreal, Quebec, H2Z 2B3 
FMR LLC 
82 Devonshire Street 
Boston, Massachusetts 
USA 02109
Number of Shares Beneficially
Owned(1) 
53,411,725(2)
64,173,532(2)(3) 
19,442,822
19,025,800
Percentage of Class
15.22
18.29 
5.54
5.42
(1)  Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. 
Unissued common shares subject to options, warrants or other convertible securities currently exercisable or convertible, or exercisable or convertible 
within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of the person holding such convertible 
security but are not deemed outstanding for computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of any other person.   
Includes 48,794,620 common shares and 2,200,000 common shares issuable upon the exercise of common share purchase warrants held indirectly 
through  Newstar  Securities  SRL,  Premier  Mines  SRL  and  Evershine  SRL,  companies  controlled  by  Mr.  Friedland.  Also  includes  2,000,000  common 
shares issuable upon the exercise of stock options and 417,105 common shares held directly by Mr. Friedland. 
Includes 4,697,734 unissued common shares issuable to directors and senior officers upon exercise of incentive stock options and 2,210,500 common 
shares issuable upon the exercise of common share purchase warrants.
(2)
(3)
93
Security Ownership of Management 
The following table sets forth the beneficial ownership, pursuant to SEC Regulations, as at March 4, 2011, of our common 
shares by each of our directors, our executive officers and by all of our directors and executive officers as a group:
Name of Beneficial Owner 
A. Robert Abboud 
Robert M. Friedland 
Howard R. Balloch 
Carlos A. Cabrera 
Brian F. Downey 
Robert G. Graham 
Peter G. Meredith 
Alexander A. Molyneux 
Robert A. Pirraglia 
David A. Dyck 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Ian Barnett 
Patrick Chua 
David Martin 
Gerald Moench 
Michael A. Silverman 
Edwin J. Veith 
All directors and executive officers as a group (17 persons)
Amount And Nature of 
Beneficial Ownership(1)
(a) 
834,624
53,411,725(2)
300,000 
- 
224,707 
4,896,726
398,000(3) 
32,000 
515,929 
485,000 
50,000 
19,020 
202,318 
1,814,213 
290,151 
127,259 
571,860 
64,173,532
Percentage  
of Class
(b) 
0.24 
15.22 
0.09 
0.00 
0.06 
1.40 
0.11 
0.01 
0.15 
0.14 
0.01 
0.01 
0.06 
0.52 
0.08 
0.04 
0.16 
18.29
Incentive Stock  Options 
Included in (a)
(c)
100,000 
2,000,000 
250,000 
- 
100,000 
400,000 
350,000 
32,000 
200,000 
125,000 
50,000 
- 
148,000 
125,000 
200,000 
114,000 
503,734 
4,697,734
(1)  Beneficial ownership is determined in accordance with the rules of the SEC and generally includes voting or investment power with respect to securities. 
Unissued common shares subject to options, warrants or other convertible securities currently exercisable or convertible, or exercisable or convertible 
within 60 days, are deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of the person holding such convertible 
security but are not deemed outstanding for computing the beneficial ownership of common shares of any other person.   
Includes 48,794,620 common shares and 2,200,000 common shares issuable upon the exercise of common share purchase warrants which are held 
indirectly through Newstar Securities SRL, Premier Mines SRL and Evershine SRL, companies controlled by Mr. Friedland. 417,105 common shares are 
held directly by Mr.  Friedland.  
Includes 10,500 common shares issuable upon the exercise of common share purchase warrants.
(2)
(3)
Securities Authorized for Issuance under Equity Compensation Plans 
All of the incentive stock options and equity compensation awards the Company granted in 2010 were made under the 
Company’s Equity Incentive Plan. The Equity Incentive Plan is the only equity compensation plan the Company has in 
effect and is intended to further align the interests of the Company’s directors and management with the Company’s long 
term  performance  and  the  long  term  interests  of  the  Company’s  shareholders.  The  Company’s  shareholders  have 
approved the Equity Incentive Plan and all amendments thereto.  The following information is as at December 31, 2010:
Plan category 
Equity compensation plans approved by Security 
holders 
Equity  compensation  plans  not  approved  by 
Security holders(1) 
Total
Number of Securities to be 
Issued Upon Exercise of 
Outstanding Options
Weighted-Average          
Exercise Price of
Outstanding Options (Cdn$)
Number of Securities Remaining 
Available for Future Issuance Under
Equity Compensation Plans
16,877,275 
50,000 
16,927,275
2.24 
2.15 
2.24
4,589,957 
- 
4,589,957
(1)  50,000 stock options were granted as employment inducements and therefore were not granted under the Company’s stock option plan.
94
ITEM 13:  CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS AND DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENCE
RELATED TRANSACTIONS 
Ivanhoe is party to cost sharing agreements with other companies, some of which are wholly or partially owned by Mr. 
Friedland.  Through  these  agreements,  we  share  office  space,  furnishings,  equipment,  air  travel  and  communications 
facilities  in  various  international  locations.  We  also  share  the  costs  of  employing  administrative  and  non-executive 
management personnel at these offices. In 2010, our share of these costs was $2.0 million. 
 
In 2008, we agreed, as part of our cost sharing arrangements and in connection with Mr. Friedland’s position as Chief 
Executive Officer, to share the costs of operating an aircraft owned by a private company of which Mr. Friedland is the 
sole shareholder. Ivanhoe paid $1.2 million towards aircraft operating costs in 2010.  
 
A director of the Company, Dr. Robert Graham, was engaged to provide services through his private consulting company. 
In 2010, the Company paid $52,000 to his firm.   
 
Our  Board  of  Directors recognizes  that  related  party  transactions  present a  heightened  risk  of conflicts  of  interest  and 
therefore has a written policy that is part of our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. This policy prohibits activities that 
could  give  rise  to  conflicts  of  interest,  unless  they  are  specifically  approved  by  the  Board  of  Directors.  Directors  and 
officers  are  obligated  to  inform  us  of  any  related  party  transactions  and  any  proposed  related  party  transactions.  In 
addition, we present a summary of related party transactions to the Audit Committee on a quarterly basis for its review 
and approval.  
 
DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE 
We undertook a review of the independence of our directors and, using the definitions and independence standards for 
directors established under NASDAQ and Canadian Securities Administrators’ National Instrument 58-101, “Disclosure of 
Corporate  Governance  Practices.”  As  a  result  of  this  review,  we  determined  that  each  of  Messrs.  Abboud,  Balloch, 
Downey, Cabrera and Pirraglia is considered to be an independent director. 
 
ITEM 14.  PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 
In considering the nature of the services provided by Deloitte & Touche LLP (“Deloitte”), the Audit Committee determined 
that such services are compatible with the provision of independent audit services. The Audit Committee discussed these 
services  with  Deloitte  and  our  management  to  determine  that  they  were  permitted  under  the  rules  and  regulations 
concerning auditor independence promulgated by the SEC to implement the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as well as the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. In accordance with our policy, all of the services outlined below were 
pre-approved by our Audit Committee.
2010 
551 
93 
223 
242 
1,111
2009 
791 
119 
274 
86 
1,270
(Cdn$000s) 
Audit fees 
Audit related fees 
Tax fees 
Other fees
Audit fees in 2010 and 2009 include services related to the audit of our annual consolidated financial statements and the 
review of our interim consolidated financial statements. Fees were also incurred in 2010 and 2009 for the audit of internal 
controls related to requirements under the United States Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and similar Canadian regulatory 
compliance.
Audit related fees include services performed to translate the annual and quarterly consolidated financial statements into 
French as well as the reimbursement of the pro-rata share of annual fees charged to each audit firm by the Canadian 
Public Accountability Board.
Tax services performed by Deloitte, outside of normal audit procedures, consisted of tax compliance and tax planning and 
advice.  Tax  compliance  services  consisted  of  Federal,  state  and  local  income  tax  return  assistance,  preparation  of 
expatriate tax returns and assistance with tax return filings in certain foreign jurisdictions. Tax planning and advice was
95
rendered in connection with the structuring of intercompany transactions as well as proposed mergers, acquisitions and 
disposals. In 2009, additional tax assistance was provided in connection with the disposition of our US operations.  
 
Other non-audit fees in 2010 relate to services provided in connection with a common share prospectus and support for 
our transition to IFRS on January 1, 2011.  Both 2010 and 2009 include fees for a subscription to an accounting research 
tool and human capital salary information. 
 
AUDIT COMMITTEE PRE-APPROVAL POLICY  
The Audit Committee has adopted a pre-approval policy for services that may be provided by the Company’s auditors.  A 
description  of  the  services  expected  to  be  performed  by  Deloitte  in  the  following  fiscal  year  is  presented  to  the  Audit 
Committee for approval.  If services that were not pre-approved are required, approval may be granted by the Chairman 
of  the  Audit  Committee.  However,  the  Chairman  must  inform  the  Audit  Committee,  at  the  next  regularly  scheduled 
meeting, of any services that were pre-approved by him.  Additionally, the Audit Committee generally requests a range of 
fees associated with each proposed service.  On a quarterly basis, the Audit Committee reviews the status of services 
and fees incurred year-to-date against the original estimates and the forecast of remaining services and fees.
96
PART IV
ITEM 15.  EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES  
We refer you to  the consolidated financial statements and Supplementary Data in Item 8 of this Annual Report where 
these documents are listed. The following exhibits are filed as part of this Annual Report:
Description of Document
Articles of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. as amended to May 3, 2007
Bylaws of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. as amended May 15, 2001 and further amended 
March 8, 2007
Petroleum Contract for Kongnan Block, Dagang Oilfield of the People’s Republic 
of  China  dated  September  8,  1997  between  China  National  Petroleum 
Corporation and Pan-China Resources Ltd., as amended June 11, 1999
Petroleum Contract dated September 19, 2002 between China National Petroleum 
Corporation and Pan-China Resources Ltd. for Zitong Block, Sichuan Basin of the 
People’s Republic of China
Employees’ and Directors’ Equity Incentive Plan as amended April 28, 2010
Amended  and  Restated  License  Agreement  dated  December  8,  1997  between 
Ensyn Technologies Inc. and Ensyn Group, Inc. and as amended on February 12, 
1999
Incorporated by Reference
Form 
10-K
10-K
Filing Date/
Period End Date 
March 17, 2008
March 17, 2008
Exhibit Number
(if different)
-
-
20-F
February 28, 2000
3.15
10-K
March 19, 2003
S-8
10-K
August 20, 2010
March 15, 2006
10.12
-
10.12
10.16
10.17
10.1
10.2
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.24
Indemnification Agreements entered into during the first quarter of 2008 between 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and its executive officers and directors
10-K
March 17, 2008
Employment  Agreement,  dated  May  2,  2007  between  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc. and 
Michael Silverman
10-K
March 17, 2008
Asset Transfer Agreement dated July 11, 2008 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
Talisman Energy Canada
10-Q
August 11, 2008
Back-In  Agreement  dated  July  11,  2008  between  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  and 
Talisman Energy Canada
10-Q
August 11, 2008
Cdn$40  million  Promissory  Note  in  favour  of  Talisman  Energy  Canada  due    
July  11,  2011  and  convertible  at  the  option  of  Talisman  Energy  Canada  into 
12,779,552 common shares at Cdn $3.13 per share
Fixed  and  Floating  Charge  Debenture  of  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  in  favour  of 
Talisman Energy Canada dated July 11, 2008 in the principal sum of Cdn$67.5 
million
10-Q
November 11, 2008
10-Q
November 11, 2008
Pledge  Agreement  dated  July  11,  2008  between  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.  and 
Talisman Energy Canada
10-Q
November 11, 2008
10-K
March 16, 2009
English translation of Specific Services Contract dated October 8, 2008 between 
Ivanhoe  Energy  Ecuador  Inc.,  Empresa  Estatal  de  Petroleos  del  Ecuador, 
Petroecuador and Empresa Estatal de Exploracion y Produccion de Petroleos del 
Ecuador, Petroproduccion
English  translation  of  Contract  Modification  to  the  Specific  Services  Contract  
dated February 13, 2009 between Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc., Empresa Estatal 
de Petroleos del Ecuador, Petroecuador and Empresa Estatal de Exploracion y 
Produccion de Petroleos del Ecuador, Petroproduccion
Stock Purchase Agreement dated June 16, 2009 among Ivanhoe Energy Holdings 
Inc.,  Ivanhoe  Energy  Inc.,  Seneca  South  Midway  LLC  and  Seneca  Resources 
Corporation
10-K
March 16, 2009
10.25
10-Q
November 9, 2009
10.1
Exhibit           
Number
3.1
3.2
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
97
Exhibit           
Number 
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
20.1
21.1
23.1
23.2
31.1
31.2
32.1
32.2
99.1
Incorporated by Reference
Form 
8-K
8-K
S-8
Filing Date/
Period End Date 
November 17, 2009
May 24, 2010
August 20, 2010
Exhibit Number
(if different)
10.1
10.1
5.1
-
Description of Document
Employment Agreement dated October 1, 2009 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein
Employment Agreement dated October 1, 2009 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
David A. Dyck
Amended  and  Restated  Employees’  and  Directors’  Equity  Incentive  Plan  dated 
April 28, 2010
Employment Agreement dated March 15, 2007 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
Ian Barnett
Employment Agreement dated September 1, 2010 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
and Ian Barnett
Indemnification Agreement dated May 18, 2010 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
Carlos A. Cabrera
Indemnification Agreement dated May 18, 2010 between Ivanhoe Energy Inc. and 
Alexander A. Molyneux
Submission of Matters to a Vote of Security Holders
8-K
July 29, 2010
Subsidiaries of Ivanhoe Energy Inc.
Consent of GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd., Petroleum Engineers
Consent of Deloitte & Touche LLP
Certification  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  302  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Certification  by  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  302  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Certification  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Certification  by  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  Pursuant  to  Section  906  of  the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
GLJ  Petroleum  Consultants  Ltd.,  Report  on  Reserves  Data  by  Independent 
Qualified Reserves Evaluator or Auditor as of December 31, 2010
98
SIGNATURES 
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  the  registrant  has  duly 
caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on March 16, 2011. 
 
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
 
By: /s/ Robert M. Friedland  
Robert M. Friedland 
Executive Co-Chairman 
Chief Executive Officer 
(Principal Executive Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following 
persons on behalf of the registrant and in the capacities indicated on March 16, 2011. 
 
/s/ Robert M. Friedland   
Robert M. Friedland  
 
Executive Co-Chairman  
Chief Executive Officer 
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ A. Robert Abboud 
A. Robert Abboud 
Co-Chairman and Independent Lead Director
/s/ Howard R. Balloch 
Howard R. Balloch, Director
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein  
Gerald D. Schiefelbein   
Chief Financial Officer    
(Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ Carlos A. Cabrera 
Carlos A. Cabrera, Director
/s/ Brian F. Downey 
Brian F. Downey, Director
/s/ Robert G. Graham  
Robert G. Graham, Director 
 
/s/ Peter G. Meredith 
Peter G. Meredith, Director
/s/ Alexander A. Molyneux 
Alexander A. Molyneux, Director
/s/ Robert A. Pirraglia 
Robert A. Pirraglia, Director
99
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT made as of the 15th day of March, 2007
IVANHOE ENERGY INC., a corporation continued 
under  the  laws  of  the  Yukon  Territory,  having  an 
office  at  Suite  654  –  999  Canada  Place,  Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada, V6C 3E1
(the "Company")
Ian Barnett, of 111 Hudon Drive, Toronto, Ontario, M4T 2K4
(the "Executive")
BETWEEN:
AND:
WHEREAS:
A.
B.
C.
D.
the Company is an international oil and gas company;
the Executive has extensive experience in finance and Ivanhoe’s “HTL” technology;
the Company wishes to have the Executive serve as the Executive Vice President of 
Finance of the Company; and
the parties hereto wish to enter into this agreement to set forth the terms and conditions 
applicable to the employment of the Executive in such capacity.
NOW THEREFORE THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSES that the parties hereto, in 
consideration of the premises and of the respective covenants and agreements on the part of 
those herein contained, do hereby covenant each with the other as follows:
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
PART 1
Definitions
1.1                   In this Agreement, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed thereto:
“Agreement” means this agreement and all amendments made to it by written 
agreement between the Company and the Executive;
“Board” means the board of directors of the Company;
32226
- 2 -
“Business Day” means a day other than Saturday, Sunday or statutory holiday in 
British Columbia;
“Change of Control” means an event occurring after the Commencement Date 
pursuant to which:
(a)        a merger, amalgamation, arrangement, consolidation, reorganization or 
transfer takes place in which securities of the Company possessing more 
than 50% of the total combined voting power of the Company’s 
outstanding voting securities are acquired by a person or persons different 
from the persons holding those voting securities immediately prior to such 
event, and the composition of the Board following such event is such that 
the directors of the Company prior to the transaction constitute less than 
50% of the Board membership following the event;
(b)       any person, or any combination of persons acting jointly or in concert by
virtue of an agreement, arrangement, commitment or understanding  
acquires, directly or indirectly, 50% or more of the voting rights attached 
to all outstanding voting securities; or
(c)        any person, or any combination of persons acting jointly or in concert by
virtue of an agreement, arrangement, commitment or understanding  
acquires, directly or indirectly, the right to appoint a majority of the 
directors of the Company; or
(d)       the Company sells, transfers or otherwise disposes of all or substantially
all of its assets, except that no Change of Control will be deemed to occur 
if such sale or disposition is made to a subsidiary or subsidiaries of the 
Company.
“Disability” means a physical or mental incapacity of the Executive that has 
prevented the Executive from performing the duties customarily assigned to the 
Executive for one hundred and eighty (180) days, whether or not consecutive, out 
of any twelve (12) consecutive months and that in the opinion of the Board is 
likely to continue; and
Interpretation
1.2
For the purposes of this Agreement, except as otherwise expressly provided:
(a)
"this Agreement" means this Agreement, including the schedules hereto, 
and not any particular part, section or other portion hereof, and includes 
any agreement, document or instrument entered into, made or delivered 
pursuant to the terms hereof, as the same may, from time to time, be 
supplemented or amended and in effect;
32226
- 3 -
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
all references in this Agreement to a designated "part", "section" or other 
subdivision or to a schedule are references to the designated part, section, 
or other subdivision of, or schedule to, this Agreement;
the words "hereof", "herein", "hereto" and "hereunder" and other words of 
similar import refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular 
part, section or other subdivision or schedule unless the context or subject 
matter otherwise requires;
the division of this Agreement into parts, sections and other portions and 
the insertion of headings are for convenience of reference only and are not 
intended to interpret, define or limit the scope, extent or intent of this 
Agreement or any provision hereof;
unless otherwise provided herein, all references to currency in this 
Agreement are to lawful money of the United States of America and all 
amounts to be calculated or paid pursuant to this Agreement are to be 
calculated in lawful money of the United States of America;
the singular of any term includes the plural, and vice versa, and the use of 
any term is generally applicable to any gender and, where applicable, a 
body corporate, firm or other entity, and the word "or" is not exclusive and 
the word "including" is not limiting whether or not non-limiting language 
(such as "without limitation" or "but not limited to" or words of similar 
import) is used with reference thereto; and
all references to "approval", "authorization", "consent" or "direction" in 
this Agreement means written approval, authorization, consent or 
direction.
PART 2
EMPLOYMENT
Employment
2.1                   The Company shall employ the Executive and the Executive shall perform 
services on behalf of the Company as its employee as provided herein during the Period of 
Active Employment (as hereinafter defined).
Period of Active Employment
2.2                   In this Employment Agreement, “Period of Active Employment” shall mean the 
period beginning on the first date on which the Executive reports to work in Bakersfield, 
California, or other such location agreed by the President and CEO but in any case no later than 
March 31, 2007 (the “Commencement Date”) and terminating on the date on which the first of 
the following occurs:
(a)
three (3) years from the Commencement Date;
32226
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
- 4 -
the termination of the Executive’s employment by the Company for cause 
as provided in Section 6.1 hereof;
the resignation of employment by the Executive pursuant to Section 6.2;
the termination of this Employment Agreement pursuant to Section 6.3;
the Disability of the Executive; or
the death of the Executive.
PART 3
POSITION
Capacity and Services
3.1                   The Company shall employ the Executive as Executive Vice President of Finance 
of the Company.  As such, the Executive shall be subject to the supervision of the President and 
CEO and shall perform such duties and have such authority as may from time to time be 
assigned, delegated or limited by the President and CEO.  The Executive shall perform these 
duties in accordance with the charter documents and by-laws of the Company, the instructions of 
the President and CEO, Company policy, applicable law and the rules and policies of each stock 
exchange upon which securities of the Company may be listed from time to time.
Place of Employment
3.2                   The Executive’s place of work will be the Company’s offices in Bakersfield, 
California or other such location as approved by the President and CEO, but the Company may 
require the Executive to work at any place throughout the world on a temporary basis.  It is 
agreed that the Executive’s place of work will initially be Toronto, with a significant degree of 
travel.
Full Time and Attention
3.3                   The Executive shall devote one hundred percent (100%) of the Executive’s 
business time to the Executive’s duties hereunder.  The Executive may, however, serve as a 
member of the board of directors of another company if the Board, or an appropriate committee 
thereof, determines in its sole discretion that such membership is not adverse to the interests of 
the Company.
Conflicts of Interest
3.4                   The Executive agrees that as an executive officer of the Company, he shall refer 
to the President and CEO all matters and transactions in which a potential conflict of interest 
between the Executive and the Company may arise and shall not proceed with such matters or 
transactions until the Board's express approval thereof is obtained.  For purposes of clarification, 
this Section 3.4 is not intended to limit in any way the Executive's other fiduciary obligations to 
the Company which may arise in law or equity.
32226
- 5 -
PART 4
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
Compensation
4.1                   The base salary rate (“Base Salary”) of the Executive shall be US$185,000.00 per 
year, payable monthly on the last business day of each month.
Benefits
4.2                   The Company shall provide the Executive and his dependent immediate family 
members with the same comprehensive medical, dental, life, disability and related insurance 
coverage as are available to the other executive officers of the Company.
Incentive Stock Options
4.3                   Subject to all requisite corporate and stock exchange approvals, the Executive will 
receive incentive stock options exercisable to purchase up to 150,000 common shares of the 
Company pursuant to the Company’s Employees’ and Directors’ Equity Incentive Plan dated 
June 19, 2003 (the “Plan”) at a price per common share determined in accordance with the terms 
of the Plan. It is agreed that the Company will, on a best efforts basis, arrange for the strike price 
on the options to be set on or about March 21, 2007.  The Executive’s incentive stock options 
will vest and become exercisable in accordance with the following schedule:
(a)       options in respect of an initial 50,000 common shares will become
exercisable as of the first (1st) anniversary of the Commencement Date;
(b)       options in respect of an additional 50,000 common shares will become
exercisable as of the second (2nd) anniversary of the Commencement Date; 
and
(c)       options in respect of the remaining 50,000 common shares will become 
exercisable as of the third (3rd) anniversary of the Commencement Date.
Subject to earlier termination pursuant to the terms of the Plan, any of the Executive’s incentive 
stock options remaining unexercised as of the fifth (5th) anniversary of the Commencement Date 
will, as of that date, expire and cease to be exercisable. In addition to the incentive stock options 
referred to above, the Executive will also be eligible to receive additional incentive stock option 
grants from time to time whenever the Board’s compensation committee determines that it is 
appropriate to grant additional incentive stock options to the Company’s senior executive 
officers. All such grants will be made pursuant to, and in accordance with the terms of, the Plan.
Vacation
4.4                   The Executive is entitled to take four (4) weeks vacation per calendar year in 
accordance with the Company’s policies and practices in effect at the relevant time for senior 
executives and subject to the needs of the Company.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any 
vacation of greater than 10 consecutive Business Days in length shall require the approval of the 
President and CEO.   
32226
- 6 -
Expenses Incidental to Employment
4.5                   The Company shall reimburse the Executive in accordance with its normal 
policies and practices for the Executive’s travel and other expenses or disbursements reasonably 
and necessarily incurred or made in connection with the Company’s business. The Executive will 
furnish the Company with an itemized account of his expenses in such form or forms as may 
reasonably be required by the Company and at such times or intervals as may be required by the 
Company.
Bonus
4.6                   At the discretion of the Board and based on performance criteria determined by 
the Board, the Executive shall be eligible for an annual bonus in an amount determined by the 
Board and payable after the end of the Company’s fiscal year.
Relocation Allowance
4.7                    If required and as full reimbursement for the Executive relocating to Bakersfield, 
California, the Company will pay to the Executive a reasonable amount determined by the 
Board, but in any case not less than $50,000.00, towards his out-of-pocket relocation costs, such 
as housing related expenses, shipping, storage, temporary living expenses and incidental 
expenses.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND NON-COMPETITION
PART 5
Non-Competition
5.1                   The Executive acknowledges that the Executive’s services are unique and 
extraordinary.  The Executive also acknowledges that the Executive’s position will give the 
Executive access to confidential information of substantial importance to the Company and its 
business. During the Non-Competition Period (as hereinafter defined), the Executive shall not, 
either individually or in partnership or jointly or in conjunction with any other person, entity or 
organization, as principal, agent, consultant, lender, contractor, employer, employee, investor, 
shareholder or in any other manner, directly or indirectly, advise, manage, carry on, establish, 
control, engage in, invest in, offer financial assistance or services to, or permit the Executive’s 
name or any part thereof to be used by any business in any jurisdiction in which Executive 
knows or ought reasonably to have known that the Company is conducting business, that 
competes with the business of the Company, its parent, affiliated or subsidiary companies, or any 
business in which the Company, its parent, affiliated or subsidiary companies is engaged (the 
“Business”).  For purposes of this Agreement, “Non-Competition Period” means a period 
beginning on the date hereof and ending at the earlier of:
(a)
(b)
six (6) months after the end of the Period of Active Employment; or
the date on which the Executive no longer is receiving compensation 
pursuant to the terms of this Agreement.
32226
- 7 -
Other Executives
5.2                   The Executive agrees that during the period beginning on the date hereof and 
ending twelve (12) months after the Period of Active Employment, neither the Executive nor any 
entity with whom the Executive is at the time associated, related or affiliated shall, directly or 
indirectly, hire or offer to hire or entice away or in any other manner persuade or attempt to 
persuade any officer, employee or agent of the Business to discontinue or alter any one of their 
or its relationships with the Company.
Confidentiality
5.3                   Except in the normal and proper course of the Executive’s duties hereunder, the 
Executive will not use for the Executive’s own account or disclose to anyone else, during or for a 
period of three (3) years after the Period of Active Employment, any confidential or proprietary 
information or material relating to the Company’s operations or business which the Executive 
obtains from the Company or its officers or employees, agents, suppliers or customers or 
otherwise by virtue of the Executive’s employment by the Company or by the Company’s 
predecessor.  Confidential or proprietary information or material includes, without limitation, the 
following types of information or material, both existing and contemplated, regarding the 
Company or its parent, affiliated or subsidiary companies:  corporate information, plans, 
strategies, tactics, policies, resolutions, litigation or negotiations, financial information, including  
debt arrangements, equity structure, investors and holdings; operational and scientific 
information, technical information, and personnel information, including personnel lists, 
resumes, personnel data, organizational structure and performance evaluations (the 
“Confidential Information”).  Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, “Confidential 
Information” shall; not include information which (a) was in the Executive’s possession prior to 
the Commencement Date, (b) is or becomes publicly known, except for any such information 
that becomes publicly known because of disclosure by the Executive in violation of this 
Agreement, or (c) is required to be disclosed pursuant to judicial or regulatory action, law or 
similar process.
Return of Documents
5.4                   The Executive agrees that all documents of any nature pertaining to activities of 
the Company and to its parent and their respective affiliated, related, associated or subsidiary 
companies, including Confidential Information, in the Executive’s possession now or at any time 
during the Period of Active Employment, are and shall be the property of the Company and its 
parent, and their respective affiliated, related, associated or subsidiary companies, and that all 
such documents and all copies of them shall be surrendered to the Company whenever requested 
by the Company.
Invalidity
5.5                   If any court determines that any provision contained in this Agreement including, 
without limitation, a restrictive covenant or any part thereof is unenforceable because of the 
duration or geographical scope of the provision or for any other reason, the duration or scope of 
the provision, as the case may be, shall be reduced so that the provision becomes enforceable 
and, in its reduced form, the provision shall then be enforceable and shall be enforced.
32226
- 8 -
Acknowledgement
5.6                   The Executive acknowledges that, in connection with the Executive’s 
employment by the Company, the Executive will receive or will become eligible to receive 
substantial benefits and compensation.  The Executive acknowledges that the Executive’s 
employment by the Company and all compensation and benefits and potential compensation and 
benefits to the Executive from such employment shall be conferred by the Company upon the 
Executive only because and on condition of the Executive’s willingness to commit the 
Executive’s best efforts and loyalty to the Company, including protecting the Company’s right to 
have its Confidential Information protected and abiding by the confidentiality, non-competition 
and other provisions herein.  The Executive understands the Executive’s duties and obligations 
as set forth in this Agreement and agrees that such duties and obligations would not unduly 
restrict or curtail the Executive’s legitimate efforts to earn a livelihood following any termination 
of the Executive’s employment with the Company.  The Executive agrees that the restrictions 
contained in this Part 5 are reasonable and valid and all defences to the strict enforcement thereof 
by the Company are waived by the Executive.  The Executive further acknowledges that 
irreparable damage would result to the Company if the provisions of Sections 5.1 through 5.4 are 
not specifically enforced, and agrees that the Company shall be entitled to any appropriate legal, 
equitable, or other remedy, including injunctive relief, in respect of any failure or continuing 
failure to comply with the provisions of Sections 5.1 through 5.4.
Corporate Opportunities
5.7                  Any business opportunities related to the business of the Company which become 
known to the Executive during the period of his employment hereunder must be fully disclosed 
and made available to the Board by the Executive and the Executive agrees not to take or omit to 
take any action if the result would be to divert from the Company any opportunity which is 
within the scope of its Business as known to the Executive from time to time.
Passive Investment
5.8                   Notwithstanding anything in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall be 
deemed to prevent or prohibit the Executive from owning shares in a publicly listed company as 
a passive investment, so long as the Executive does not own more than five per cent (5%) of the 
shares thereof.
PART 6
TERMINATION AND RESIGNATION
Termination for Cause
6.1                   The Company may immediately terminate this Agreement at any time for cause 
by written notice to the Executive.  Without limiting the foregoing, any one or more of the 
following events shall constitute cause:
(a)      the Executive's appropriation of corporate opportunities for his direct or
indirect benefit or his failure to disclose any material conflict of interest;
32226
- 9 -
(b)     the Executive's failure to disclose material facts concerning his business
interests or employment by other than the Company;
(c)          any  of  the  following  acts  or  circumstances  of  the  Executive:  fraud,
illegality, breach of statute or regulation, or gross incompetence;
(d)        the Executive's breach of fiduciary duty to the Company;
(e)
(f)
(g)
the Executive's material breach of this Agreement or gross negligence in 
carrying out his duties under this Agreement;
the  failure  of  or  refusal  by  the  Executive  to  follow  the  reasonable  and 
lawful  directions  of  the  Board  or  to  comply  with  the  policies,  rules  and 
regulations of the Company (except to the extent that such policies, rules 
and regulations expressly conflict with the provisions of this Agreement);
any conduct which would materially impair or prevent the Executive from 
continuing  as  an  officer  or  director  of  the  Company  under  applicable 
corporate  or  securities  laws,  or  the  rules  and  policies  of  any  stock 
exchange or securities market upon which the Company's shares are listed 
from time to time; or
(h)
the Executive's plea of guilty to or conviction of an offence punishable by 
imprisonment.
If the Company terminates this Agreement for cause under this Section 6.1, the Company shall 
not be obligated to make any further payments under this Agreement, except for the payment of 
any Base Salary due and owing pursuant to Section 4.1 at the time of termination and reasonable 
expenses due and owing pursuant to Section 4.5 at the time of the termination. If the Company 
terminates this Agreement for cause under this Section 6.1,  all vested incentive stock options 
will remain exercisable for a period of six months from the date of termination and all unvested 
incentive stock options will immediately terminate.
Resignation by Executive
6.2                      The Executive shall give the Company not less than three (3) months notice of 
the resignation of the Executive’s employment hereunder.  The Company may waive or abridge 
any notice period specified in such notice, in its absolute discretion. If the Executive resigns the 
Executive’s employment and terminates this Agreement for any reason, the Company shall have 
no further obligations or responsibilities hereunder to the Executive, and nothing herein 
contained shall be construed to limit or restrict in any way the Company’s ability to pursue any 
remedies it may have at law or equity pursuant to the provisions of this Agreement. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all of the Executive’s vested incentive stock options will remain 
exercisable for a period of six (6) months from the date that the Executive’s employment 
terminates.
32226
- 10 -
Termination Without Cause
6.3                   The Company may terminate this Agreement at any time without cause or upon 
the Disability of the Executive by providing the Executive with a lump sum payment of an 
amount equal to three monthly payments of the Executive’s Base Salary.  The payments 
provided for in this Section 6.3 shall be inclusive of the Executive’s entitlement to notice and 
severance pay at common law or by statute. Notwithstanding the foregoing, those of the 
Executive’s unvested stock options that would have vested within one (1) year from the date that 
the Executive’s employment terminates will be deemed to have vested, and all of the Executive’s 
unexercised stock options that have vested or are deemed to have vested will remain exercisable 
for a period of six (6) months from the date that the Executive’s employment terminates.
Termination of Employment after Change of Control
6.4                   If a Change of Control occurs and this Agreement is terminated by the Company 
within twelve (12) months of such Change of Control, the Executive shall be entitled to receive a 
lump sum payment in an amount equal to an amount equal to twelve (12) monthly payments of 
the Executive’s Base Salary. The Company shall not be obligated to make any further payments 
under this Agreement, except for the payment of any reasonable expenses due and owing 
pursuant to Section 4.7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all of the Executive’s unexercised stock 
options, vested or unvested, will be deemed to have vested and will remain exercisable for a 
period of six months from the date that the Executive’s employment terminates.
Benefits on Termination
6.5                   If this Agreement is terminated in accordance with Section 6.3 or Section 6.4, the 
benefits provided to the Executive pursuant to Section 4.2 shall continue for the amount of 
months of Base Salary the Executive is entitled to following the termination of this Agreement 
pursuant to this Part or until the Executive commences alternative employment, whichever 
occurs first.
Results of Termination
6.6                   Upon termination or resignation of the Executive’s employment pursuant to this 
Part, this Agreement and the employment of the Executive shall be wholly terminated with the 
exception of the clauses specifically contemplated to continue in full force and effect beyond the 
termination of this Agreement, including those set out in Part 5.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
PART 7
No Breach
7.1                   The Executive represents and warrants to the Company that the execution and 
performance of this Agreement will not result in or constitute a default, breach, violation or 
event that, with notice or lapse of time or both, would be a default, breach or violation of any 
understanding, agreement or commitment, written or oral, express or implied, to which the 
Executive is currently a party or by which the Executive or the Executive’s property is currently 
bound.   
32226
- 11 -
Indemnity
7.2                   The Executive shall defend, indemnify and hold the Company harmless from any 
liability, expense or claim (including solicitor’s fees incurred in respect thereof) by any person in 
any way arising out of, relating to, or in connection with any incorrectness or breach of the 
representations and warranties in Section 7.1.
Right of Termination
7.3                   The Executive acknowledges that a breach of this Part by the Executive shall 
entitle the Company to terminate the Executive’s employment and this Agreement for cause.
Company Indemnity and Insurance 
 
7.4                    The Company shall defend, indemnify and hold the Executive harmless from any 
liability, expense or claim (including solicitor’s fees incurred in respect thereof) in any way 
arising out, relating to, or in connection with his performance of services for the Company, to the 
fullest extent permitted by applicable law.  The Company shall make reasonable efforts to ensure 
that the Executive shall fully participate as a covered insured under the Company’s directors’ and 
officers’ liability insurance policy with respect to the Period of Active Employment.
PART 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Rights and Waivers
8.1                   All rights and remedies of the parties are separate and cumulative, and none of 
them, whether exercised or not, shall be deemed to be to the exclusion of any other rights or 
remedies or shall be deemed to limit or prejudice any other legal or equitable rights or remedies 
which either of the parties may have.
Waiver
8.2                   Any purported waiver of any default, breach or non-compliance under this 
Agreement is not effective unless in writing and signed by the party to be bound by the waiver.  
No waiver shall be inferred from or implied by any failure to act or delay in acting by a party in 
respect of any default, breach or non-observance or by anything done or omitted to be done by 
the other party.  The waiver by a party of any default, breach or non-compliance under this 
Agreement shall not operate as a waiver of that party’s rights under this Agreement in respect of 
any continuing or subsequent default, breach or non-observance (whether of the same or any 
other nature).
Severability
8.3                   Any provision of this Agreement that is prohibited or unenforceable in any 
jurisdiction shall, as to that jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of the prohibition or 
unenforceability and shall be severed from the balance of this Agreement, all without affecting 
the remaining provisions of this Agreement or affecting the validity or enforceability of such 
provision in any other jurisdiction. 
32226
- 12 -
Notices
8.4                   Any notice, certificate, consent, determination or other communication required 
or permitted to be given or made under this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be 
effectively given and made if (i) delivered personally, (ii) sent by prepaid same day courier 
service, or (iii) sent by fax or other similar means of electronic communication, in each case to 
the applicable address set out below:
if to the Company, to:
Suite 654 
999 Canada Place 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
V6C 3E1 
 
Attention:  Corporate Secretary 
Fax: 
 
 
if to the Executive, to:
(604) 682-2060
Ian Barnett 
111 Hudson Drive 
Toronto, Ontario, M4T 2K4  
 
 
Fax: 416-792-3308
Any such communication so given or made shall be deemed to have been given or made and to 
have been received on the day of delivery if delivered personally or by courier service, or on the 
day of faxing or sending by other means of recorded electronic communication, provided that the 
day in either event is a Business Day and the communication is so delivered, faxed or sent prior 
to 4:30 p.m. (local time at destination) on that day.  Otherwise, the communication shall be 
deemed to have been given and made and to have been received on the next following Business 
Day.  Any such communication given or made in any other manner shall be deemed to have been 
given or made and to have been received only upon actual receipt. Any party may from time to 
time change its address under this Section 8.4 by notice to the other party given in the manner 
provided by this Section 8.4.
Time of Essence
8.5                   Time shall be of the essence of this Agreement in all respects.
Successors and Assigns
8.6                   This Agreement shall enure to the benefit of, and be binding on, the parties and 
their respective heirs, administrators, executors, successors and permitted assigns.  The Company 
shall have the right to assign this Agreement to any successor (whether direct or indirect, by 
purchase, amalgamation, arrangement, merger, consolidation or otherwise) to all or substantially 
32226
- 13 -
all of the business and/or assets of the Company provided only that the Company must first 
require the successor to expressly assume and agree to perform this Agreement in the same 
manner and to the same extent that the Company would be required to perform it if no such 
succession had taken place.  The Executive by the Executive’s signature hereto expressly 
consents to such assignment.  The Executive shall not assign or transfer, whether absolutely, by 
way of security or otherwise, all or any part of the Executive’s rights or obligations under this 
Agreement without the prior consent of the Company, which may be arbitrarily withheld.
Amendment
8.7                   No amendment of this Agreement will be effective unless made in writing and 
signed by the parties.
Entire Agreement
8.8                   This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties pertaining to 
the subject matter of this Agreement and supersedes all prior agreements, understandings, 
negotiations and discussions, whether oral or written.  There are no conditions, warranties, 
representations or other agreements between the parties in connection with the subject matter of 
this Agreement (whether oral or written, express or implied, statutory or otherwise) except as 
specifically set out in this Agreement.
Governing Law
8.9                   This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws 
of the Province of British Columbia and the laws of Canada applicable in that Province and shall 
be treated, in all respects, as a British Columbia contract.
Headings
8.10                 The division of this Agreement into Parts and Sections and the insertion of 
headings are for convenience or reference only and shall not affect the construction or 
interpretation of this Agreement.
Full Satisfaction
8.11                 The terms set out in this Agreement, provided that such terms are satisfied by the 
Company, are in lieu of (and not in addition to) and in full satisfaction of any and all other claims 
or entitlements which the Executive has or may have upon the termination of the Executive’s 
employment pursuant to Part 6 and the compliance by the Company with these terms will affect 
a full and complete release of the Company and its parent and their respective affiliates, 
associates, subsidiaries and related companies from any and all claims which the Executive may 
have for whatever reason or cause in connection with the Executive’s employment and the 
termination of it, other than those obligations specifically set out in this Agreement.  In agreeing 
to the terms set out in this Agreement, the Executive specifically agrees to execute a formal 
release document to that effect and will deliver upon request appropriate resignations from all 
offices and positions with the Company and its parent and their respective affiliated, associated 
subsidiary or affiliated companies if, as and when requested by the Company upon termination 
of the Executive’s employment within the circumstances contemplated by this Agreement. 
32226
- 14 -
[remainder of page intentionally left blank]
32226
- 15 -
Executive Acknowledgements
8.12                 The Executive acknowledges that:
(a)        the Executive has had sufficient time to review this Agreement
thoroughly;
(b)       the Executive has read and understands the terms of this Agreement and
the obligations hereunder;
(c)        the Executive has been given an opportunity to obtain independent legal
advice concerning the interpretation and effect of this Agreement; and
(d)        the Executive has received a fully executed counterpart copy of this
Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have executed counterpart copies of this
/s/ Ian Barnett 
IAN BARNETT
IVANHOE ENERGY INC. 
 
/s/ Joseph I. Gasca
Per:
  Name: Joseph I. Gasca
Title: President and CEO
Agreement.
Witness
32226
AMENDIN
NG AGREEM
MENT
This A
Amending Ag
reement date
ed effective t
the 1st day of
f September,
, 2010 (the “E
Effective Date
e”)
IAN BA
ARNETT, her
reinafter refer
rred to as “Em
mployee”
OF THE F
FIRST PART
HOE ENERGY
Y INC., herein
nafter referred
d to as “Comp
pany”
OF THE S
SECOND PA
ART
N:
AS:
IVANH
BETWEE
 
 
 
 
and 
 
 
 
 
 
WHEREA
 
he  Company
T
1. 
proprietar
y upgrading te
 
T
2. 
he  Employee
2007 (the 
 “Employmen
 
3. 
T
he  Company 
of Employee i
services o
the terms 
 of this Amend
 
NOW THE
Agreemen
acknowled
 
he  Company
T
1. 
responsib
ilities  set  fort
Schedule 
 “A” of this Am
 
IN  WITNE
Effective D
 
IAN BARN
 
 
/s/ Ian Bar
Executive
Business
EREFORE IN
nt,  and  other 
dged, the part
rnett 
 Vice Preside
Development
ESS  WHERE
Date.
NETT
y  is  engaged 
echnology;
e  entered  into
t Agreement”)
o  an  Employ
); and
wishes  to  co
n accordance
ding Agreeme
ontinue  to  re
e with the term
ent.
N CONSIDERA
  good  and  va
ties agree as
ATION OF th
aluable  cons
 follows:
in  the  busin
ness  of  oil  a
and  gas  deve
elopment  and
d  production
using
ment  Agreem
ment  with  the
e  Company  e
effective  Marc
ch  15,
tain  and  utiliz
ms of the Emp
ze  the  extens
ployment Agre
sive  expertise
eement, and
e  and  profes
in accordance
sional 
e with
he covenants 
ideration,  the
and agreeme
e  receipt  and
ents containe
  sufficiency  o
d in this Ame
of  which  is  h
ending 
hereby
y  and  the  E
th  in  the  Em
mending Agree
mployee  her
mployment  Ag
ement attache
reby  agree  t
reement,  and
ed hereto.
that  the  Emp
d  in  accordan
ployee  shall 
nce  with  the
continue  wit
  terms  set  fo
th  his 
orth  in
EOF  the  part
ies  hereto  ha
ave  duly  exe
ecuted  this  A
Amending  Agr
reement  as  o
of  the
DAV
VID A. DYCK
ent 
t
/s/ D
Pres
Chie
David A. Dyck 
sident and  
ef Operating O
Officer
2
SCHEDULE “A” OF AMENDING AGREEMENT
TERMINATION DATE
PART TIME/COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES
80% of annual base salary of $Cdn 263,626 = $210,900
l. 
 
The  Company  acknowledges  receipt  of  Employee’s  voluntarily  tendered  resignation  notice  as  of  the 
Effective Date, and the parties agree that the Employee’s Period of Active Employment with the Company 
shall terminate effective March 31, 2011 (the “Termination Date”). 
 
 
2. 
 
(a) 
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  the  Employment  Agreement,  during  the  period  of 
September 1, 2010 through to and including March 31, 2011 (the “Part-time Period”) the Employee shall 
only be required to devote a certain percentage of his time to the duties provided for in the Employment 
Agreement, as more specifically described below. 
 
During the Part-time Period, the Employee shall be paid a percentage of his annual base salary, in the form 
of semi-monthly instalments (subject to withholdings), in accordance with the following calculations: 
 
September 1, 2010 - December 31, 2010: 
                                                                        $210,900 divided by 24 = $Cdn 8,787.50 per pay period. 
 
January 1, 2011 - March 31, 2011:  
 
 
Should the employee be required to work additional hours beyond the percentages denoted above, then 
the Company will adjust the semi-monthly instalment payment accordingly to reflect the additional hours 
worked by Employee. 
 
(b) 
During  the  Part-time  Period,  the  Company  shall  reimburse  the  Employee  in  accordance  with 
Company’s  policies  and  practices  for  travel  and  other  expenses  or  disbursements  reasonably  and 
necessarily incurred or made in connection with the Company’s business. 
 
 
3. 
 
The Employee will work on duties and obligations set forth in the Employment Agreement Employee under 
the supervision and direction of the President and Chief Operating Officer of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
 
 
4. 
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Employment Agreement, the Employee is entitled to five (5) 
weeks  of  vacation  per  calendar  year  in  accordance  with  the  Company’s  policies  and  practices.    At  the 
Termination Date, the Employee shall be paid a cash settlement for any approved and outstanding carry
50% of annual base salary of $Cdn 263,626 = $131,813  
$131,813 divided by 24 = $Cdn 5,492.00 per pay period.
VACATION
SERVICES
3
STOCK OPTIONS
ANNUAL BONUS ENTITLEMENT
forward vacation entitlement for 2010, and for any unused vacation entitlement for 2011 accrued during the 
Part-time Period.  The vacation cash settlement shall be included on the final pay advice for the Employee. 
 
 
5. 
 
The  Employee  shall  hold  436,000  vested  stock  options  as  at  the  Termination  Date.    Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary in the Employment Agreement, all unexercised stock options that have vested or 
are deemed to have vested as of the Termination Date shall be exercisable for a period of ninety days (90) 
from  the  Termination  Date,  after  which  date  such  vested  stock  options  shall  be  non-exercisable  and 
deemed expired. All unvested stock options as of March 31, 2011 shall expire as of the Termination Date. 
 
 
6. 
 
The Employee shall be eligible for an annual bonus award for the 2010 fiscal year in accordance with the 
Company’s compensation policy, subject to the overall performance of the Company. Such bonus award 
will be prorated as appropriate and determined by the Board of Directors, in its discretion. 
 
 
7. 
 
During the Part-time Period, the Employee shall continue to fully participate in the group term-life, long-term 
disability,  SOS,  medical,  dental  and  extended  health  benefits  in  accordance  with  the  policies  of  the 
Company’s plan for Executives, which benefits shall terminate as of the Termination Date. 
 
 
8. 
 
The Employment Agreement may be terminated by the Company prior to the Termination Date and without 
notice, but in such event the Employee shall be entitled to receive payment in lieu of notice that will be 
comprised of base salary, benefits, any additional compensation due to Employee pursuant to Company 
incentive plans and policies, and reasonably incurred expenses, payable for the period between the early 
termination date and the Termination Date. 
 
 
9. 
 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Employment Agreement, the Employment Agreement and 
this Amending Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province 
of Alberta, Canada without giving effect to the conflict of laws provision thereof, and both agreements shall 
be treated as Alberta contracts.
GOVERNING LAW
GROUP BENEFITS
EARLY TERMINATION
4
NOTICES
10 
 
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  the  Employment  Agreement,  any  notice,  demand  or 
communication  required,  permitted  or  desired  to  be  given  under  the  Employment  Agreement  and  this 
Amending Agreement shall be made in writing and shall be deemed effectively given to the receiving party 
when personally delivered or couriered to the following addresses and individuals: 
 
 
COMPANY: 
Ivanhoe Energy Inc. 
2100, 101 – 6th Avenue SW 
Calgary, Alberta T2P 3P4 
Attention:  Mr. David Dyck 
 
11.
EMPLOYEE: 
Mr. Ian Barnett 
111 Hudson Drive 
Toronto, Ontario M4T 2K4
RATIFICATION
(a)
As of the Effective Date, the Employment Agreement, as hereby amended, and all rights
and powers created thereby is in all respects ratified and confirmed and remains in full force and effect.
(b)
(c)
This  Amending  Agreement:  (a)  shall  be  binding  upon  and  inure  to  the  benefit  of  the 
Company and Employee and their respective successors, assigns, receivers, trustees and heirs; (b) may 
be  modified  or  amended  only  in  writing  duly  signed  by  the  Company  and  the  Employee;  (c)  may  be 
executed  in  two  counterparts  and  delivered  via  email  pdf,  and  when  so  executed  and  delivered,  shall 
constitute an original instrument and one and the same agreement; and (d) embodies the entire agreement 
and understanding between the parties with respect to the subject matter amended hereby and supersedes 
all  prior  agreements,  consents  and  understandings  relating  to  subject  matter  amended  hereby.    The 
headings herein shall be accorded no significance in interpreting this Amending Agreement.
Terms used herein that are defined in the Employment Agreement, but not defined herein,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Employment Agreement.
INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made as of the 18th day of May, 2010,
BETWEEN:
IVANHOE  ENERGY  INC.,  a  corporation  governed  by  the  Yukon  Business 
Corporations  Act  and  having  its  corporate  offices  at  Suite  654  –  999  Canada 
Place, Vancouver, B.C. V6C 3E1
(the “Corporation”)
- and -
CARLOS  A.  CABRERA,  whose  address  is  556  Alice  Drive,  Northbrook, 
Illinois, USA, 60062.
(the “Indemnified Party”)
RECITALS:
A.
B.
C.
The  Yukon  Business  Corporations  Act  (the  “YBCA”)  permits  the  Corporation  to 
indemnify individuals who are or were directors and officers of the Corporation, or who 
act or acted at the Corporation’s request as directors or officers or in a similar capacity of 
an Other Entity (as defined herein);
It is generally agreed that, because of the uncertainties in relying upon an indemnity in a 
corporation’s  bylaws  and  because  liability  insurance  may  afford  the  parties  inadequate 
protection, it is desirable for directors and officers to obtain a contractual indemnity from 
the corporations they serve;
It is in the best interests of the Corporation to attract and retain responsible and capable 
directors  and  officers,  and  the  entering  into  of  an  agreement  containing  broad 
indemnification provisions of the kind contained in this Agreement is of vital importance 
to achieving these goals.  Accordingly, the Corporation and the Indemnified Party wish to 
enter into this Agreement, and in so doing affirm that they intend that all the provisions 
of this Agreement be given legal effect to the full extent not prohibited by applicable law; 
and
D.
The  Corporation  has  obtained  policies  of  insurance  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indemnified 
Party, which, subject to section 12.3, will be maintained in full force and effect.
NOW  THEREFORE  in  consideration  of  the  sum  of  $1.00  now  given  by  the 
Indemnified Party to the Corporation, the Indemnified Party’s agreement to become or continue 
as a Director or Officer of the Corporation, the mutual covenants and agreements contained in 
this Agreement and other good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of which 
are hereby acknowledged), the parties agree as follows:
1.
For the purposes of this Agreement:
- 2 -
1.1
1.2
“Agreement” means this Indemnification Agreement;
“Director”  and  “Officer”,  respectively,  means  an  individual  who  is  or  was  a 
director or an officer of the Corporation, as the case may be, or who acts or acted, 
at the Corporation’s request, as a director or an officer of or in a similar capacity 
in respect of one or more Other Entities, and the phrase “Director and Officer” 
means an individual who is or was either a Director or an Officer, or both.  For 
greater  certainty,  serving  as  a  director  includes  serving  as  a  member  of  one  or 
more committees of the board of directors;
1.3
“Costs” shall include:
1.3.1  subject  to  section  11,  an  amount  paid  to  settle  an  action  or  satisfy  a 
judgment, except in respect of an action to which section 6 is applicable 
unless and until approval of the Supreme Court of the Yukon Territory has 
been obtained;
1.3.2  a  fine,  penalty,  levy,  charge,  award,  damages,  settlement  payment, 
compensation or financial imposition paid to or imposed by any domestic 
or foreign government (federal, provincial, municipal or otherwise) or to 
any regulatory authority, agency, commission or board of any domestic or 
foreign government, or imposed by any court or any other law, regulation 
or  rule-making  entity  having  jurisdiction  in  the  relevant  circumstances 
(collectively,  a  “Governmental  Authority”),  including  as  a  result  of  a 
breach or alleged breach of any statutory or common law duty imposed on 
directors  or  officers  or  of  any  law,  statute,  rule  or  regulation  or  any 
provision of the articles, by-laws or any resolution of the Corporation or 
an Other Entity;
1.3.3  an amount paid to satisfy a liability arising as a result of the failure of the 
Corporation or an Other Entity to pay wages, vacation pay and any other 
amounts  that  may  be  owing  to  employees  or  to  make  contributions  that 
may be required to be made to any pension plan, retirement income plan 
or  other  benefit  plan  for  employees  or  to  remit  to  any  Governmental 
Authority  payroll  deductions,  income  taxes  or  other  taxes,  or  any  other 
amounts payable by the Corporation or an Other Entity; and
1.3.4  an amount equal to the per diem meeting fee paid by the Corporation to its 
directors  at  such  time,  for  each  day  spent  by  the  Indemnified  Party  in 
dealing  with,  responding  to  or  assisting  the  Corporation  with  the 
resolution  of  any  Proceeding  relating  to  the  Indemnified  Party.  The 
amount of the fee shall be pro rated for less than any full day spent, and 
shall  not  be  paid  in  respect  of  meetings  of  the  Board  of  Directors  or  a 
committee  thereof  attended  by  the  Indemnified  Party  for  which  he  is  so 
compensated by the Corporation;
1.4
“Expenses” shall include all expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified 
Party in connection with any Proceeding, and shall include, without limiting the
- 3 -
generality  of  the  foregoing,  legal  costs  on  a  solicitor  and  his  own  client  basis, 
together with retainers, court costs, transcripts, fees of experts, witness fees, travel 
expenses,  duplicating  costs,  printing  and  binding  costs,  telephone  and  facsimile 
charges, postage, delivery service fees and all other disbursements, costs, charges 
and expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified Party in connection with 
such Proceeding, including those incurred in interpreting, applying and enforcing 
the Indemnified Party’s rights under this Agreement;
The Indemnified Party shall be considered to be “involved” in any Proceeding if 
the  Indemnified  Party  has  any  participation  whatsoever  in  such  Proceeding, 
including merely as a witness or a person providing information;
“Other  Entity”  shall  include  a  body  corporate,  partnership,  joint  venture, 
association,  employee  benefit  plan,  trust  or  other  enterprise  or  organization  of 
which  the  Corporation  is  or  was  a  shareholder  or  creditor  and  for  which  an 
individual  acts  or  acted  as  a  director  or  officer  or  in  a  similar  capacity  at  the 
request of the Corporation, and includes an entity that becomes an Other Entity 
subsequent to the date hereof;
“Proceeding”  shall  include  a  claim,  demand,  suit,  action,  proceeding  or 
investigation  (civil,  criminal,  regulatory,  administrative,  arbitral  or  other), 
whether anticipated, threatened, pending, commenced, continuing or completed, 
and any appeal or appeals therefrom, and any other circumstance or situation, in 
respect  of  which  the  Indemnified  Party  reasonably  requires  legal  advice  or 
representation concerning the actual, possible or anticipated imposition of Costs 
or Expenses upon the Indemnified Party and arising at any time in whole or in 
part,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  Indemnified  Party  being  or  having  been  a 
Director or Officer, notwithstanding that the Indemnified Party denies liability for 
the possible Costs or Expenses or that the possible attempt to impose such Costs 
or Expenses is without merit;
Unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the singular include the 
plural and vice versa and words importing gender include all genders; and
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  references  to  sections  are  to  sections  in  this 
Agreement.
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.
Subject to sections 3 and 4, the Corporation agrees to the fullest extent not prohibited by 
law, promptly upon demand, to indemnify and save harmless the Indemnified Party and 
his heirs and legal representatives:
2.1
2.2
from  and  against  all  Costs,  charges  and  Expenses  incurred  by  the  Indemnified 
Party in respect of any Proceeding in which the Indemnified Party is involved or 
is subject by reason of being or having been a Director and Officer; and
from and against all liabilities, damages, Costs, charges and Expenses whatsoever 
that the Indemnified Party may sustain or incur as a result of serving as a Director 
and Officer in respect of any act, matter, deed or thing whatsoever made, done,
- 4 -
committed, permitted or acquiesced in by the Indemnified Party as a Director and 
Officer, whether before or after the effective date of this Agreement.
3.
The  Corporation  will  indemnify  the  Indemnified  Party  under  section  2  in  all 
circumstances  in  which  indemnification  of  a  director  or  officer  is  permitted  by  the 
YBCA,  which  at  the  date  hereof  provides  that  the  Corporation  may  indemnify  the 
Indemnified Party if the Indemnified Party:
4.
5.
6.
3.1
3.2
acted  honestly  and  in  good  faith  with  a  view  to  the  best  interests  of  the 
Corporation; and
in  the  case  of  a  criminal  or  administrative  Proceeding  that  is  enforced  by  a 
monetary  penalty,  the  Indemnified  Party  had  reasonable  grounds  for  believing 
that the Indemnified Party’s conduct was lawful.
The applicable provisions of the YBCA permitting indemnification are referred to in this 
Agreement as the “Standards of Conduct”.
Upon the Indemnified Party becoming aware of any Proceeding which may give rise to 
indemnification under this Agreement, the Indemnified Party shall give written notice to 
the Corporation, directed to its Chief Executive Officer or President or Chief Financial 
Officer, as soon as is practicable, provided however that failure to give notice in a timely 
fashion shall not disentitle the Indemnified Party to indemnification unless, and then only 
to the extent that, the Corporation suffers actual prejudice by reason of the delay.
The  Corporation  may  conduct  any  investigation  it  considers  appropriate  of  any 
Proceeding  of  which  it  receives  notice  under  section  4,  and  shall  pay  all  costs  of  that 
investigation.
In respect of an action by or on behalf of the Corporation or an Other Entity to procure a 
judgment in its favour to which the Indemnified Party is made a party by reason of being 
or  having  been  a  Director  and  Officer  of  the  Corporation  or  the  Other  Entity,  the 
Corporation shall:
(a)
(b)
(c)
first  determine,  acting  reasonably,  whether  the  Director  or  Officer  seeking 
indemnification has met the Standards of Conduct;
if satisfied that the Standards of Conduct have been met in accordance with (a) 
above, apply forthwith to the Supreme Court of the Yukon Territory pursuant to 
section  126(2)  of  the  YBCA  for  the  approval  of  the  court  to  indemnify  such 
Director  or  Officer  under  this  Agreement  in  connection  with  such  action, 
including the making of Expense Advances under section 7; and
notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  indemnify  the  Director  or  Officer  seeking 
indemnification only after such Director or Officer has applied to and received an 
order  approving  such  indemnification  from  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Yukon 
Territory under section 126(3) of the YBCA.
- 5 -
7.
The parties wish to facilitate the payment by the Indemnified Party of ongoing costs in 
connection  with  matters  for  which  indemnification  under  this  Agreement  is  provided. 
Accordingly, the parties agree as follows:
7.1
7.2
7.3
the Indemnified Party has the right to incur Expenses for the purpose of protecting 
his interests fully and effectively in any Proceeding;
the  Corporation  shall,  promptly  upon  demand,  make  advances  (“Expense 
Advances”) to the Indemnified Party for any Costs and Expenses for which the 
Indemnified Party seeks indemnification under this Agreement at any time after 
the  inception  of  Proceedings  and  up  to  the  final  disposition  of  the  relevant 
Proceeding. In connection with such demand, the Indemnified Party shall provide 
the  Corporation  with:  (a)  a  written  affirmation  of  the  Indemnified  Party’s  good 
faith  belief  that  the  Indemnified  Party  is  entitled  to  indemnification  hereunder, 
together with particulars of the Costs and Expenses to be covered by the proposed 
Expense Advance; and (b) a written undertaking to repay Expense Advances in 
the circumstances set forth in section 7.3 hereof; and
the  Indemnified  Party  shall  repay  to  the  Corporation,  upon  demand,  Expense 
Advances (a) if and to the extent that it is determined by a court of competent 
jurisdiction  that  the  Indemnified  Party  is  not  entitled  to  indemnification 
hereunder,  (b)  if  and  to  the  extent  that  the  Corporation  has  fully  performed  its 
obligations  to  the  Indemnified  Party  under  this  Agreement  with  respect  to  the 
advancement of Expense Advances and other matters bearing on the ability of the 
Indemnified Party to protect his interests fully and effectively in the Proceeding, 
and (c) subject to any right of counterclaim or set off in favour of the Indemnified 
Party.
Subject  to  section  9,  the  Indemnified  Party  has  the  right  to  appoint  and  instruct 
independent counsel to act on his behalf with respect to a Proceeding and all Expenses 
incurred  by  or  in  connection  with  such  appointment  and  engagement  shall  be 
indemnified,  advanced,  paid  or  reimbursed,  as  the  case  may  be  by  the  Corporation  as 
contemplated by sections 2 and 7.
The Corporation shall be entitled to participate, at its own expense, in the defence of the 
Indemnified Party in any Proceeding. If the Corporation so elects after receipt of notice 
of a Proceeding, or the Indemnified Party in that notice so directs, the Corporation shall 
assume control of the negotiation, settlement or defence of the Proceeding, in which case 
the  defence  shall  be  conducted  by  experienced  and  competent  counsel  chosen  by  the 
Corporation  and  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Indemnified  Party.  If  the  Corporation 
elects  to  assume  control  of  the  defence,  the  Indemnified  Party  shall  have  the  right  to 
participate  in  the  negotiation,  settlement  or  defence  of  the  Proceeding  and  to  retain 
counsel to act on the Indemnified Party’s behalf, and the fees and disbursements of that 
counsel shall be paid by the Corporation. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the 
Indemnified Party shall have the right, at the Corporation’s expense, to separately retain 
counsel of such Indemnified Party’s choice, in respect of the defence of any Proceeding 
in respect of which the Corporation has elected to assume control if: (i) the employment 
of  such  counsel  has  been  authorized  by  the  Corporation;  (ii)  the  Corporation  has  not
8.
9.
- 6 -
assumed the defence and employed competent and experienced counsel therefor promptly 
after receiving notice of such Proceeding; or (iii) counsel retained by the Corporation or 
the  Indemnified  Party  has  advised  the  Indemnified  Party  that  representation  of  both 
parties  by  the  same  counsel  would  be  inappropriate  for  any  reason,  including  for  the 
reason  that  there  may  be  legal  defences  available  to  the  Indemnified  Party  which  are 
different from or in addition to those available to the Corporation (in which event and to 
that extent, the Corporation shall not have the right to assume or direct the defence on 
such  Indemnified  Party’s  behalf)  or  that  there  is  a  conflict  of  interest  between  the 
Corporation and the Indemnified Party or the subject matter of the Proceeding may not 
fall within the indemnity set forth herein (in any of which events the Corporation shall 
not have the right to assume or direct the defence on such Indemnified Party’s behalf), 
provided that the Corporation shall not be responsible for the fees or expenses of more 
than one legal firm acting on behalf of the Indemnified Party in any single jurisdiction at 
any one time. The Indemnified Party and the Corporation shall cooperate fully with each 
other  and  their  respective  counsel  in  the  investigation  related  to,  and  defence  of,  any 
Proceeding and shall make available to each other all relevant books, records, documents 
and  files  and  shall  otherwise  use  their  best  efforts  to  assist  each  other’s  counsel  to 
conduct a proper and adequate defence.
10.
The indemnities in section 2 shall not apply in respect of any Proceeding initiated by the 
Indemnified Party:
10.1
10.2
10.3
against  the  Corporation  or  an  Other  Entity,  unless  it  is  brought  to  establish  or 
enforce any right under this Agreement;
against any Director or Officer unless the Corporation or the Other Entity, as the 
case may be, has joined in or consented to the initiation of such Proceeding; or
against  any  other  corporation,  partnership,  trust,  joint  venture,  unincorporated 
entity or person, unless it is a counterclaim in such Proceeding.
11.
The parties wish to encourage the settlement of any Proceeding. Accordingly, the parties 
agree as follows:
11.1
the  Corporation  may,  with  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Indemnified  Party 
(which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld  or  delayed),  enter  into  an 
agreement to settle any Proceeding;
11.2  no admission of liability and no settlement of any Proceeding shall be made by 
the  Corporation  without  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Indemnified  Party 
affected  (which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld  or  delayed)  unless 
such settlement includes an unconditional general release of the Indemnified Party 
from any and all liabilities arising out of such Proceeding without any admission 
of negligence, misconduct, liability or responsibility by the Indemnified Party;
11.3
the Corporation shall not be liable for any settlement of any Proceeding effected 
without  its  prior  written  consent  (which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably 
withheld or delayed);
- 7 -
11.4
the Indemnified Party shall have the right to negotiate a settlement in respect of 
any Proceeding, provided that if the Corporation, acting reasonably, declines to 
approve the settlement, the Indemnified Party shall pay any compensation or other 
payment  to  be  made  under  the  settlement  and  the  costs  of  negotiating  and 
implementing the settlement, and shall not seek indemnity from the Corporation 
in respect of such compensation, payment or costs; and
11.5
the settlement of a Proceeding shall not create a presumption that the Indemnified 
Party did not meet or would not have met the Standards of Conduct.
12.
The Corporation shall ensure that all liabilities of the Corporation under this Agreement 
and all of the actions of the Indemnified Party which fall within the Standards of Conduct 
are at all times covered by directors’ and officers’ liability insurance maintained by the 
Corporation in favour of the Corporation and the Indemnified Party with a responsible 
insurer. In this regard, the parties agree that:
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
the responsibility for obtaining, maintaining and obtaining for the benefit of the 
Indemnified Party such directors’ and officers’ liability insurance shall rest with 
the Corporation and shall be implemented by a senior manager of the Corporation 
who  shall  involve  an  insurance  broker  or  other  person  having  expertise  and 
experience in directors’ and officers’ liability insurance;
the Corporation shall provide to the Indemnified Party a summary of the material 
terms of each policy of insurance providing the coverages contemplated by this 
section 12 promptly after such coverage is obtained, and shall promptly notify the 
Indemnified Party if the insurer cancels or refuses to renew such coverage (or any 
part of such coverage);
such  insurance  coverage  need  not  be  obtained  by  the  Corporation  only  if  the 
coverage  is  not  available  from  responsible  insurers,  or  is  available  from  one  or 
more responsible insurers but at a cost which, in the opinion of the Corporation, 
acting reasonably and taking into account the financial condition and size of the 
Corporation,  the  nature  of  its  business  and  the  extent  of  the  risks  of  personal 
liability to which the Indemnified Party is or may be subject, is grossly excessive, 
in  which  case  the  Indemnified  Party  may  elect  to  terminate  his  position  as  a 
Director of the Corporation but the provisions of this Agreement shall remain in 
full force and effect for his benefit following such termination;
the Corporation shall not do any act or thing (including changing insurers), or fail 
to do any act or thing, that could cause or result in a denial of insurance coverage 
or of any claim under such coverage;
the Corporation shall give prompt notice of the commencement of any Proceeding 
to the insurers on the directors’ and officers’ liability insurance maintained by the 
Corporation, if any, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the respective 
policies. The Corporation shall thereafter take all necessary action to cause such 
insurers to pay, on behalf of the Indemnified Party, all amounts payable as a result 
of such Proceedings in accordance with the terms of such policies; and
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
- 8 -
12.6
in  the  event  of  any  reduction  in,  or  cancellation  of,  the  directors’  and  officers’ 
liability insurance maintained by the Corporation, the Indemnified Party’s rights 
to Expense Advances and indemnification shall not be affected by such reduction 
or cancellation.
Should  any  payment  made  pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  including  the  payment  of 
insurance premiums or any payment made by an insurer under an insurance policy, be 
deemed to constitute a taxable benefit or otherwise be or become subject to any tax or 
levy, then the Corporation shall pay any amount as may be necessary to ensure that the 
amount  received  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Indemnified  Party,  after  the  payment  of  or 
withholding  for  such  tax,  fully  reimburses  the  Indemnified  Party  for  the  actual  cost, 
expense or liability incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified Party.
Notwithstanding  the  date  of  execution  of  this  Agreement,  this  Agreement  shall  be 
effective as of the date on which the Indemnified Party first became a Director or Officer, 
except that the rights of the Indemnified Party with respect of insurance coverage are as 
stated in Section 12 of this Agreement.
This  Agreement  is  to  be  interpreted  broadly  and  purposively  so  as  to  provide  the 
Indemnified  Party  with  the  broadest  possible  entitlement  to  Expense  Advances  and  to 
indemnification except as and to the extent prohibited by applicable law as presently in 
effect  or  as  changed  after  the  date  of  this  Agreement,  whether  by  statute  or  judicial 
decision.
Each  of  the  provisions  contained  in  this  Agreement  is  distinct  and  severable  and  a 
declaration of invalidity or unenforceability of any such provision or part thereof by a 
court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other 
provision hereof. Should the content, or the application sought by the Indemnified Party 
of  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  be  found  to  exceed  the  scope  of 
indemnification  lawfully  available  to  the  Indemnified  Party  from  the  Corporation,  the 
affected provision is to be read down so as to be interpreted or applied with the smallest 
reduction  in  scope  consistent  with  the  applicable  law  and  with  the  purpose  of  this 
Agreement,  including  this  section  16.  To  the  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,  the 
parties  waive  any  provision  of  applicable  law  which  renders  any  provision  of  this 
Agreement invalid or unenforceable in any respect.
The Indemnified Party’s right to indemnification under this Agreement is in addition to, 
and  not  in  substitution  for,  any  rights  of  indemnification  in  favour  of  the  Indemnified 
Party  pursuant  to  any  provision  of  the  Articles  of  Incorporation  or  Bylaws  of  the 
Corporation,  any  agreement,  vote  of  stockholders  or  disinterested  directors,  applicable 
law or otherwise. No amendment, termination or repeal of any provision of the Articles 
of Incorporation or Bylaws of the Corporation, or any respective successors thereto, shall 
affect or diminish in any way the rights of the Indemnified Party to indemnification, or 
the  obligations  of  the  Corporation,  arising  under  this  Agreement,  whether  the  alleged 
actions  or  conduct  of  the  Indemnified  Party  giving  rise  to  the  necessity  of  such 
indemnification arose before or after any such amendment, termination or repeal.
- 9 -
18.
It  being  the  desire  of  the  parties,  notwithstanding  the  restrictive  provisions  of  the 
Limitation of Actions Act (Yukon Territory), the Limitation Act, 1996 (British Columbia) 
or  any  successor  legislation,  or  any  similar  legislation  of  any  other  jurisdiction  which 
may  be  applicable  in  any  action  brought  by  a  Director  or  Officer  pursuant  to  this 
Agreement (the “Limitation Acts”), to provide for the equivalent of a limitation period of 
six years from the conclusion of a Proceeding, the parties:
(a)
acknowledge  that,  in  the  Limitation  Acts,  the  limitation  period  currently 
prescribed for certain Proceedings under this Agreement by an Indemnified Party 
or  the  Corporation,  or  any  person  claiming  in  right  thereof,  may  be  two  years 
from  the  day  on  which  the  claim  was  discovered  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Limitation Acts; and
(b)
agree that if and when:
(i)
it is lawful for the parties to enter into an agreement to vary, exclude or 
waive the limitation period otherwise applicable under a Limitation Act, 
or
(ii)
a Limitation Act is amended to prescribe a longer limitation period, then:
this Agreement will be deemed to have been amended, with effect from the date 
of  the  relevant  change,  clarification,  or  amendment,  to  provide  that  any 
Proceeding  in  respect  of  a  claim  under  this  Agreement  must  be  commenced 
within six years from the conclusion of the pertinent Proceeding, or such longer 
period  as  may  be  prescribed  or  permitted  by  statute.  For  greater  certainty,  this 
provision  shall  apply  to  any  claim  which  would,  prior  to  such  date,  have  been 
statute-barred  but  where  the  pertinent  Proceeding  was  concluded  less  than  six 
years  before  such  date,  and  for  that  purpose  the  parties  agree  that  in  such 
circumstances  the  Corporation  shall  not  plead  and  does  hereby  waive  any 
limitation defence which would otherwise have been available to it in an action 
brought by a Director or Officer under this Agreement.
19.
20.
21.
Except  as  expressly  provided  in  this  Agreement,  no  amendment  or  waiver  of  this 
Agreement shall be binding unless executed in writing by the party to be bound thereby. 
No  waiver  of  any  provision  of  this  Agreement  shall  constitute  a  waiver  of  any  other 
provision hereof (whether or not similar), nor shall any waiver of any provision of this 
Agreement constitute a continuing waiver unless otherwise expressly provided.
The obligations of the Corporation under this Agreement shall survive its termination and 
continue in full force after the Indemnified Party ceases to be a Director or Officer of the 
Corporation.
This Agreement shall enure to the benefit of the Indemnified Party and the Indemnified 
Party’s heirs, personal and legal representatives, executors and administrators and shall 
be  binding  upon  the  Corporation  and  its  successors  (including  any  direct  or  indirect 
successor  by  merger,  consolidation  or  operation  of  law).  This  Agreement  shall  not 
otherwise be assignable by the Corporation or the Indemnified Party.
- 10 -
22.
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the 
Yukon Territory and the laws of Canada applicable therein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement.
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.
By:  /s/ Beverly A. Bartlett 
Name:  Beverly A. Bartlett 
Title:    Vice President & Corporate Secretary
/s/ Carlos A. Cabrera 
Carlos A. Cabrera
INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made as of the 18th day of May, 2010,
BETWEEN:
IVANHOE  ENERGY  INC.,  a  corporation  governed  by  the  Yukon  Business 
Corporations  Act  and  having  its  corporate  offices  at  Suite  654  –  999  Canada 
Place, Vancouver, B.C. V6C 3E1
(the “Corporation”)
- and -
ALEXANDER  A.  MOLYNEUX,  whose  address  is  1839  Four  Seasons  Place, 
Connaught Road, Central, Hong Kong.
(the “Indemnified Party”)
RECITALS:
A.
B.
C.
The  Yukon  Business  Corporations  Act  (the  “YBCA”)  permits  the  Corporation  to 
indemnify individuals who are or were directors and officers of the Corporation, or who 
act or acted at the Corporation’s request as directors or officers or in a similar capacity of 
an Other Entity (as defined herein);
It is generally agreed that, because of the uncertainties in relying upon an indemnity in a 
corporation’s  bylaws  and  because  liability  insurance  may  afford  the  parties  inadequate 
protection, it is desirable for directors and officers to obtain a contractual indemnity from 
the corporations they serve;
It is in the best interests of the Corporation to attract and retain responsible and capable 
directors  and  officers,  and  the  entering  into  of  an  agreement  containing  broad 
indemnification provisions of the kind contained in this Agreement is of vital importance 
to achieving these goals.  Accordingly, the Corporation and the Indemnified Party wish to 
enter into this Agreement, and in so doing affirm that they intend that all the provisions 
of this Agreement be given legal effect to the full extent not prohibited by applicable law; 
and
D.
The  Corporation  has  obtained  policies  of  insurance  for  the  benefit  of  the  Indemnified 
Party, which, subject to section 12.3, will be maintained in full force and effect.
NOW  THEREFORE  in  consideration  of  the  sum  of  $1.00  now  given  by  the 
Indemnified Party to the Corporation, the Indemnified Party’s agreement to become or continue 
as a Director or Officer of the Corporation, the mutual covenants and agreements contained in 
this Agreement and other good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of which 
are hereby acknowledged), the parties agree as follows:
1.
For the purposes of this Agreement:
- 2 -
1.1
1.2
“Agreement” means this Indemnification Agreement;
“Director”  and  “Officer”,  respectively,  means  an  individual  who  is  or  was  a 
director or an officer of the Corporation, as the case may be, or who acts or acted, 
at the Corporation’s request, as a director or an officer of or in a similar capacity 
in respect of one or more Other Entities, and the phrase “Director and Officer” 
means an individual who is or was either a Director or an Officer, or both.  For 
greater  certainty,  serving  as  a  director  includes  serving  as  a  member  of  one  or 
more committees of the board of directors;
1.3
“Costs” shall include:
1.3.1  subject  to  section  11,  an  amount  paid  to  settle  an  action  or  satisfy  a 
judgment, except in respect of an action to which section 6 is applicable 
unless and until approval of the Supreme Court of the Yukon Territory has 
been obtained;
1.3.2  a  fine,  penalty,  levy,  charge,  award,  damages,  settlement  payment, 
compensation or financial imposition paid to or imposed by any domestic 
or foreign government (federal, provincial, municipal or otherwise) or to 
any regulatory authority, agency, commission or board of any domestic or 
foreign government, or imposed by any court or any other law, regulation 
or  rule-making  entity  having  jurisdiction  in  the  relevant  circumstances 
(collectively,  a  “Governmental  Authority”),  including  as  a  result  of  a 
breach or alleged breach of any statutory or common law duty imposed on 
directors  or  officers  or  of  any  law,  statute,  rule  or  regulation  or  any 
provision of the articles, by-laws or any resolution of the Corporation or 
an Other Entity;
1.3.3  an amount paid to satisfy a liability arising as a result of the failure of the 
Corporation or an Other Entity to pay wages, vacation pay and any other 
amounts  that  may  be  owing  to  employees  or  to  make  contributions  that 
may be required to be made to any pension plan, retirement income plan 
or  other  benefit  plan  for  employees  or  to  remit  to  any  Governmental 
Authority  payroll  deductions,  income  taxes  or  other  taxes,  or  any  other 
amounts payable by the Corporation or an Other Entity; and
1.3.4  an amount equal to the per diem meeting fee paid by the Corporation to its 
directors  at  such  time,  for  each  day  spent  by  the  Indemnified  Party  in 
dealing  with,  responding  to  or  assisting  the  Corporation  with  the 
resolution  of  any  Proceeding  relating  to  the  Indemnified  Party.  The 
amount of the fee shall be pro rated for less than any full day spent, and 
shall  not  be  paid  in  respect  of  meetings  of  the  Board  of  Directors  or  a 
committee  thereof  attended  by  the  Indemnified  Party  for  which  he  is  so 
compensated by the Corporation;
1.4
“Expenses” shall include all expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified 
Party in connection with any Proceeding, and shall include, without limiting the
- 3 -
generality  of  the  foregoing,  legal  costs  on  a  solicitor  and  his  own  client  basis, 
together with retainers, court costs, transcripts, fees of experts, witness fees, travel 
expenses,  duplicating  costs,  printing  and  binding  costs,  telephone  and  facsimile 
charges, postage, delivery service fees and all other disbursements, costs, charges 
and expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified Party in connection with 
such Proceeding, including those incurred in interpreting, applying and enforcing 
the Indemnified Party’s rights under this Agreement;
The Indemnified Party shall be considered to be “involved” in any Proceeding if 
the  Indemnified  Party  has  any  participation  whatsoever  in  such  Proceeding, 
including merely as a witness or a person providing information;
“Other  Entity”  shall  include  a  body  corporate,  partnership,  joint  venture, 
association,  employee  benefit  plan,  trust  or  other  enterprise  or  organization  of 
which  the  Corporation  is  or  was  a  shareholder  or  creditor  and  for  which  an 
individual  acts  or  acted  as  a  director  or  officer  or  in  a  similar  capacity  at  the 
request of the Corporation, and includes an entity that becomes an Other Entity 
subsequent to the date hereof;
“Proceeding”  shall  include  a  claim,  demand,  suit,  action,  proceeding  or 
investigation  (civil,  criminal,  regulatory,  administrative,  arbitral  or  other), 
whether anticipated, threatened, pending, commenced, continuing or completed, 
and any appeal or appeals therefrom, and any other circumstance or situation, in 
respect  of  which  the  Indemnified  Party  reasonably  requires  legal  advice  or 
representation concerning the actual, possible or anticipated imposition of Costs 
or Expenses upon the Indemnified Party and arising at any time in whole or in 
part,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  the  Indemnified  Party  being  or  having  been  a 
Director or Officer, notwithstanding that the Indemnified Party denies liability for 
the possible Costs or Expenses or that the possible attempt to impose such Costs 
or Expenses is without merit;
Unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the singular include the 
plural and vice versa and words importing gender include all genders; and
Unless  otherwise  indicated,  references  to  sections  are  to  sections  in  this 
Agreement.
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.
Subject to sections 3 and 4, the Corporation agrees to the fullest extent not prohibited by 
law, promptly upon demand, to indemnify and save harmless the Indemnified Party and 
his heirs and legal representatives:
2.1
2.2
from  and  against  all  Costs,  charges  and  Expenses  incurred  by  the  Indemnified 
Party in respect of any Proceeding in which the Indemnified Party is involved or 
is subject by reason of being or having been a Director and Officer; and
from and against all liabilities, damages, Costs, charges and Expenses whatsoever 
that the Indemnified Party may sustain or incur as a result of serving as a Director 
and Officer in respect of any act, matter, deed or thing whatsoever made, done,
- 4 -
committed, permitted or acquiesced in by the Indemnified Party as a Director and 
Officer, whether before or after the effective date of this Agreement.
3.
The  Corporation  will  indemnify  the  Indemnified  Party  under  section  2  in  all 
circumstances  in  which  indemnification  of  a  director  or  officer  is  permitted  by  the 
YBCA,  which  at  the  date  hereof  provides  that  the  Corporation  may  indemnify  the 
Indemnified Party if the Indemnified Party:
4.
5.
6.
3.1
3.2
acted  honestly  and  in  good  faith  with  a  view  to  the  best  interests  of  the 
Corporation; and
in  the  case  of  a  criminal  or  administrative  Proceeding  that  is  enforced  by  a 
monetary  penalty,  the  Indemnified  Party  had  reasonable  grounds  for  believing 
that the Indemnified Party’s conduct was lawful.
The applicable provisions of the YBCA permitting indemnification are referred to in this 
Agreement as the “Standards of Conduct”.
Upon the Indemnified Party becoming aware of any Proceeding which may give rise to 
indemnification under this Agreement, the Indemnified Party shall give written notice to 
the Corporation, directed to its Chief Executive Officer or President or Chief Financial 
Officer, as soon as is practicable, provided however that failure to give notice in a timely 
fashion shall not disentitle the Indemnified Party to indemnification unless, and then only 
to the extent that, the Corporation suffers actual prejudice by reason of the delay.
The  Corporation  may  conduct  any  investigation  it  considers  appropriate  of  any 
Proceeding  of  which  it  receives  notice  under  section  4,  and  shall  pay  all  costs  of  that 
investigation.
In respect of an action by or on behalf of the Corporation or an Other Entity to procure a 
judgment in its favour to which the Indemnified Party is made a party by reason of being 
or  having  been  a  Director  and  Officer  of  the  Corporation  or  the  Other  Entity,  the 
Corporation shall:
(a)
(b)
(c)
first  determine,  acting  reasonably,  whether  the  Director  or  Officer  seeking 
indemnification has met the Standards of Conduct;
if satisfied that the Standards of Conduct have been met in accordance with (a) 
above, apply forthwith to the Supreme Court of the Yukon Territory pursuant to 
section  126(2)  of  the  YBCA  for  the  approval  of  the  court  to  indemnify  such 
Director  or  Officer  under  this  Agreement  in  connection  with  such  action, 
including the making of Expense Advances under section 7; and
notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  indemnify  the  Director  or  Officer  seeking 
indemnification only after such Director or Officer has applied to and received an 
order  approving  such  indemnification  from  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  Yukon 
Territory under section 126(3) of the YBCA.
- 5 -
7.
The parties wish to facilitate the payment by the Indemnified Party of ongoing costs in 
connection  with  matters  for  which  indemnification  under  this  Agreement  is  provided. 
Accordingly, the parties agree as follows:
7.1
7.2
7.3
the Indemnified Party has the right to incur Expenses for the purpose of protecting 
his interests fully and effectively in any Proceeding;
the  Corporation  shall,  promptly  upon  demand,  make  advances  (“Expense 
Advances”) to the Indemnified Party for any Costs and Expenses for which the 
Indemnified Party seeks indemnification under this Agreement at any time after 
the  inception  of  Proceedings  and  up  to  the  final  disposition  of  the  relevant 
Proceeding. In connection with such demand, the Indemnified Party shall provide 
the  Corporation  with:  (a)  a  written  affirmation  of  the  Indemnified  Party’s  good 
faith  belief  that  the  Indemnified  Party  is  entitled  to  indemnification  hereunder, 
together with particulars of the Costs and Expenses to be covered by the proposed 
Expense Advance; and (b) a written undertaking to repay Expense Advances in 
the circumstances set forth in section 7.3 hereof; and
the  Indemnified  Party  shall  repay  to  the  Corporation,  upon  demand,  Expense 
Advances (a) if and to the extent that it is determined by a court of competent 
jurisdiction  that  the  Indemnified  Party  is  not  entitled  to  indemnification 
hereunder,  (b)  if  and  to  the  extent  that  the  Corporation  has  fully  performed  its 
obligations  to  the  Indemnified  Party  under  this  Agreement  with  respect  to  the 
advancement of Expense Advances and other matters bearing on the ability of the 
Indemnified Party to protect his interests fully and effectively in the Proceeding, 
and (c) subject to any right of counterclaim or set off in favour of the Indemnified 
Party.
Subject  to  section  9,  the  Indemnified  Party  has  the  right  to  appoint  and  instruct 
independent counsel to act on his behalf with respect to a Proceeding and all Expenses 
incurred  by  or  in  connection  with  such  appointment  and  engagement  shall  be 
indemnified,  advanced,  paid  or  reimbursed,  as  the  case  may  be  by  the  Corporation  as 
contemplated by sections 2 and 7.
The Corporation shall be entitled to participate, at its own expense, in the defence of the 
Indemnified Party in any Proceeding. If the Corporation so elects after receipt of notice 
of a Proceeding, or the Indemnified Party in that notice so directs, the Corporation shall 
assume control of the negotiation, settlement or defence of the Proceeding, in which case 
the  defence  shall  be  conducted  by  experienced  and  competent  counsel  chosen  by  the 
Corporation  and  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Indemnified  Party.  If  the  Corporation 
elects  to  assume  control  of  the  defence,  the  Indemnified  Party  shall  have  the  right  to 
participate  in  the  negotiation,  settlement  or  defence  of  the  Proceeding  and  to  retain 
counsel to act on the Indemnified Party’s behalf, and the fees and disbursements of that 
counsel shall be paid by the Corporation. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the 
Indemnified Party shall have the right, at the Corporation’s expense, to separately retain 
counsel of such Indemnified Party’s choice, in respect of the defence of any Proceeding 
in respect of which the Corporation has elected to assume control if: (i) the employment 
of  such  counsel  has  been  authorized  by  the  Corporation;  (ii)  the  Corporation  has  not
8.
9.
- 6 -
assumed the defence and employed competent and experienced counsel therefor promptly 
after receiving notice of such Proceeding; or (iii) counsel retained by the Corporation or 
the  Indemnified  Party  has  advised  the  Indemnified  Party  that  representation  of  both 
parties  by  the  same  counsel  would  be  inappropriate  for  any  reason,  including  for  the 
reason  that  there  may  be  legal  defences  available  to  the  Indemnified  Party  which  are 
different from or in addition to those available to the Corporation (in which event and to 
that extent, the Corporation shall not have the right to assume or direct the defence on 
such  Indemnified  Party’s  behalf)  or  that  there  is  a  conflict  of  interest  between  the 
Corporation and the Indemnified Party or the subject matter of the Proceeding may not 
fall within the indemnity set forth herein (in any of which events the Corporation shall 
not have the right to assume or direct the defence on such Indemnified Party’s behalf), 
provided that the Corporation shall not be responsible for the fees or expenses of more 
than one legal firm acting on behalf of the Indemnified Party in any single jurisdiction at 
any one time. The Indemnified Party and the Corporation shall cooperate fully with each 
other  and  their  respective  counsel  in  the  investigation  related  to,  and  defence  of,  any 
Proceeding and shall make available to each other all relevant books, records, documents 
and  files  and  shall  otherwise  use  their  best  efforts  to  assist  each  other’s  counsel  to 
conduct a proper and adequate defence.
10.
The indemnities in section 2 shall not apply in respect of any Proceeding initiated by the 
Indemnified Party:
10.1
10.2
10.3
against  the  Corporation  or  an  Other  Entity,  unless  it  is  brought  to  establish  or 
enforce any right under this Agreement;
against any Director or Officer unless the Corporation or the Other Entity, as the 
case may be, has joined in or consented to the initiation of such Proceeding; or
against  any  other  corporation,  partnership,  trust,  joint  venture,  unincorporated 
entity or person, unless it is a counterclaim in such Proceeding.
11.
The parties wish to encourage the settlement of any Proceeding. Accordingly, the parties 
agree as follows:
11.1
the  Corporation  may,  with  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Indemnified  Party 
(which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld  or  delayed),  enter  into  an 
agreement to settle any Proceeding;
11.2  no admission of liability and no settlement of any Proceeding shall be made by 
the  Corporation  without  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  Indemnified  Party 
affected  (which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably  withheld  or  delayed)  unless 
such settlement includes an unconditional general release of the Indemnified Party 
from any and all liabilities arising out of such Proceeding without any admission 
of negligence, misconduct, liability or responsibility by the Indemnified Party;
11.3
the Corporation shall not be liable for any settlement of any Proceeding effected 
without  its  prior  written  consent  (which  consent  shall  not  be  unreasonably 
withheld or delayed);
- 7 -
11.4
the Indemnified Party shall have the right to negotiate a settlement in respect of 
any Proceeding, provided that if the Corporation, acting reasonably, declines to 
approve the settlement, the Indemnified Party shall pay any compensation or other 
payment  to  be  made  under  the  settlement  and  the  costs  of  negotiating  and 
implementing the settlement, and shall not seek indemnity from the Corporation 
in respect of such compensation, payment or costs; and
11.5
the settlement of a Proceeding shall not create a presumption that the Indemnified 
Party did not meet or would not have met the Standards of Conduct.
12.
The Corporation shall ensure that all liabilities of the Corporation under this Agreement 
and all of the actions of the Indemnified Party which fall within the Standards of Conduct 
are at all times covered by directors’ and officers’ liability insurance maintained by the 
Corporation in favour of the Corporation and the Indemnified Party with a responsible 
insurer. In this regard, the parties agree that:
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5
the responsibility for obtaining, maintaining and obtaining for the benefit of the 
Indemnified Party such directors’ and officers’ liability insurance shall rest with 
the Corporation and shall be implemented by a senior manager of the Corporation 
who  shall  involve  an  insurance  broker  or  other  person  having  expertise  and 
experience in directors’ and officers’ liability insurance;
the Corporation shall provide to the Indemnified Party a summary of the material 
terms of each policy of insurance providing the coverages contemplated by this 
section 12 promptly after such coverage is obtained, and shall promptly notify the 
Indemnified Party if the insurer cancels or refuses to renew such coverage (or any 
part of such coverage);
such  insurance  coverage  need  not  be  obtained  by  the  Corporation  only  if  the 
coverage  is  not  available  from  responsible  insurers,  or  is  available  from  one  or 
more responsible insurers but at a cost which, in the opinion of the Corporation, 
acting reasonably and taking into account the financial condition and size of the 
Corporation,  the  nature  of  its  business  and  the  extent  of  the  risks  of  personal 
liability to which the Indemnified Party is or may be subject, is grossly excessive, 
in  which  case  the  Indemnified  Party  may  elect  to  terminate  his  position  as  a 
Director of the Corporation but the provisions of this Agreement shall remain in 
full force and effect for his benefit following such termination;
the Corporation shall not do any act or thing (including changing insurers), or fail 
to do any act or thing, that could cause or result in a denial of insurance coverage 
or of any claim under such coverage;
the Corporation shall give prompt notice of the commencement of any Proceeding 
to the insurers on the directors’ and officers’ liability insurance maintained by the 
Corporation, if any, in accordance with the procedures set forth in the respective 
policies. The Corporation shall thereafter take all necessary action to cause such 
insurers to pay, on behalf of the Indemnified Party, all amounts payable as a result 
of such Proceedings in accordance with the terms of such policies; and
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
- 8 -
12.6
in  the  event  of  any  reduction  in,  or  cancellation  of,  the  directors’  and  officers’ 
liability insurance maintained by the Corporation, the Indemnified Party’s rights 
to Expense Advances and indemnification shall not be affected by such reduction 
or cancellation.
Should  any  payment  made  pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  including  the  payment  of 
insurance premiums or any payment made by an insurer under an insurance policy, be 
deemed to constitute a taxable benefit or otherwise be or become subject to any tax or 
levy, then the Corporation shall pay any amount as may be necessary to ensure that the 
amount  received  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Indemnified  Party,  after  the  payment  of  or 
withholding  for  such  tax,  fully  reimburses  the  Indemnified  Party  for  the  actual  cost, 
expense or liability incurred by or on behalf of the Indemnified Party.
Notwithstanding  the  date  of  execution  of  this  Agreement,  this  Agreement  shall  be 
effective as of the date on which the Indemnified Party first became a Director or Officer, 
except that the rights of the Indemnified Party with respect of insurance coverage are as 
stated in Section 12 of this Agreement.
This  Agreement  is  to  be  interpreted  broadly  and  purposively  so  as  to  provide  the 
Indemnified  Party  with  the  broadest  possible  entitlement  to  Expense  Advances  and  to 
indemnification except as and to the extent prohibited by applicable law as presently in 
effect  or  as  changed  after  the  date  of  this  Agreement,  whether  by  statute  or  judicial 
decision.
Each  of  the  provisions  contained  in  this  Agreement  is  distinct  and  severable  and  a 
declaration of invalidity or unenforceability of any such provision or part thereof by a 
court of competent jurisdiction shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other 
provision hereof. Should the content, or the application sought by the Indemnified Party 
of  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement,  be  found  to  exceed  the  scope  of 
indemnification  lawfully  available  to  the  Indemnified  Party  from  the  Corporation,  the 
affected provision is to be read down so as to be interpreted or applied with the smallest 
reduction  in  scope  consistent  with  the  applicable  law  and  with  the  purpose  of  this 
Agreement,  including  this  section  16.  To  the  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,  the 
parties  waive  any  provision  of  applicable  law  which  renders  any  provision  of  this 
Agreement invalid or unenforceable in any respect.
The Indemnified Party’s right to indemnification under this Agreement is in addition to, 
and  not  in  substitution  for,  any  rights  of  indemnification  in  favour  of  the  Indemnified 
Party  pursuant  to  any  provision  of  the  Articles  of  Incorporation  or  Bylaws  of  the 
Corporation,  any  agreement,  vote  of  stockholders  or  disinterested  directors,  applicable 
law or otherwise. No amendment, termination or repeal of any provision of the Articles 
of Incorporation or Bylaws of the Corporation, or any respective successors thereto, shall 
affect or diminish in any way the rights of the Indemnified Party to indemnification, or 
the  obligations  of  the  Corporation,  arising  under  this  Agreement,  whether  the  alleged 
actions  or  conduct  of  the  Indemnified  Party  giving  rise  to  the  necessity  of  such 
indemnification arose before or after any such amendment, termination or repeal.
- 9 -
18.
It  being  the  desire  of  the  parties,  notwithstanding  the  restrictive  provisions  of  the 
Limitation of Actions Act (Yukon Territory), the Limitation Act, 1996 (British Columbia) 
or  any  successor  legislation,  or  any  similar  legislation  of  any  other  jurisdiction  which 
may  be  applicable  in  any  action  brought  by  a  Director  or  Officer  pursuant  to  this 
Agreement (the “Limitation Acts”), to provide for the equivalent of a limitation period of 
six years from the conclusion of a Proceeding, the parties:
(a)
acknowledge  that,  in  the  Limitation  Acts,  the  limitation  period  currently 
prescribed for certain Proceedings under this Agreement by an Indemnified Party 
or  the  Corporation,  or  any  person  claiming  in  right  thereof,  may  be  two  years 
from  the  day  on  which  the  claim  was  discovered  within  the  meaning  of  the 
Limitation Acts; and
(b)
agree that if and when:
(i)
it is lawful for the parties to enter into an agreement to vary, exclude or 
waive the limitation period otherwise applicable under a Limitation Act, 
or
(ii)
a Limitation Act is amended to prescribe a longer limitation period, then:
this Agreement will be deemed to have been amended, with effect from the date 
of  the  relevant  change,  clarification,  or  amendment,  to  provide  that  any 
Proceeding  in  respect  of  a  claim  under  this  Agreement  must  be  commenced 
within six years from the conclusion of the pertinent Proceeding, or such longer 
period  as  may  be  prescribed  or  permitted  by  statute.  For  greater  certainty,  this 
provision  shall  apply  to  any  claim  which  would,  prior  to  such  date,  have  been 
statute-barred  but  where  the  pertinent  Proceeding  was  concluded  less  than  six 
years  before  such  date,  and  for  that  purpose  the  parties  agree  that  in  such 
circumstances  the  Corporation  shall  not  plead  and  does  hereby  waive  any 
limitation defence which would otherwise have been available to it in an action 
brought by a Director or Officer under this Agreement.
19.
20.
21.
Except  as  expressly  provided  in  this  Agreement,  no  amendment  or  waiver  of  this 
Agreement shall be binding unless executed in writing by the party to be bound thereby. 
No  waiver  of  any  provision  of  this  Agreement  shall  constitute  a  waiver  of  any  other 
provision hereof (whether or not similar), nor shall any waiver of any provision of this 
Agreement constitute a continuing waiver unless otherwise expressly provided.
The obligations of the Corporation under this Agreement shall survive its termination and 
continue in full force after the Indemnified Party ceases to be a Director or Officer of the 
Corporation.
This Agreement shall enure to the benefit of the Indemnified Party and the Indemnified 
Party’s heirs, personal and legal representatives, executors and administrators and shall 
be  binding  upon  the  Corporation  and  its  successors  (including  any  direct  or  indirect 
successor  by  merger,  consolidation  or  operation  of  law).  This  Agreement  shall  not 
otherwise be assignable by the Corporation or the Indemnified Party.
- 10 -
22.
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the 
Yukon Territory and the laws of Canada applicable therein.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement.
IVANHOE ENERGY INC.
By:  /s/ Beverly A. Bartlett 
Name:  Beverly A. Bartlett 
Title:    Vice President & Corporate Secretary
/s/ Alexander A. Molyneux 
Alexander A. Molyneux
Subsidiaries of Registrant
Name of Subsidiary
Dagang Resources Ltd.  
IELA Colombia Inc.  
IELA Mexico Pte. Ltd. 
IELA Singapore Pte. Ltd   
Ivanhoe Energy (Latin America) Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy (Middle East) Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Advisory Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Canada Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Canadian Holdings Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Colombia Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Ecuador Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Holdings Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy HTL (USA) Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy HTL Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy International Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy International Ventures Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Latin America Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy MENA Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Mexico IELA, S.A. de C.V. 
Ivanhoe Energy Mexico Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Mongolia Inc.  
Ivanhoe Energy Petroleum Projects Inc. 
Ivanhoe Energy Services Mexico IELA S.A. de C.V. 
Ivanhoe HTL Petroleum Ltd  
PanAsian Energy Ltd.  
Pan-China Resources Ltd.  
Shaman LLC   
Sunwing Energy Ltd.  
Sunwing Holding Corporation  
Sunwing Management Limited  
Sunwing Zitong Energy Ltd.
EXHIBIT 21.1
Jurisdiction of Incorporation or Formation
British Virgin Islands 
Barbados 
Singapore 
Singapore 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
Alberta 
Alberta 
Barbados 
British Columbia 
Nevada 
Nevada   
Nevada 
British Virgin Islands 
British Virgin Islands 
British Columbia 
British Columbia 
Mexico 
British Columbia 
Alberta 
Nevada 
Mexico 
Nevada 
Nevis 
British Virgin Islands 
Mongolia 
Bermuda 
Barbados 
Hong Kong 
British Virgin Islands
GLJ
Petroleum 
Consultants
EXHIBIT 23.1
Principal Officers: 
Harry Jung, P. Eng. 
  President, C.E.O. 
Dana B. Laustsen, P. Eng. 
  Executive V.P., C.O.O. 
Keith M. Braaten, P. Eng. 
  Executive V.P. 
 
Officers / Vice Presidents: 
Terry L. Aarsby, P. Eng. 
Jodi L. Anhorn, P. Eng. 
Leonard L. Herchen, P. Eng. 
Myron J. Hladyshevsky, P. Eng. 
Bryan M. Joa, P. Eng. 
Mark Jobin, P. Geol. 
John E. Keith, P. Eng. 
John H. Stilling, P. Eng. 
Douglas R. Sutton, P. Eng. 
James H. Willmon, P. Eng.
LETTER OF CONSENT
We hereby consent to the filing as an exhibit to the annual report on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. of our report dated 
January 13, 2011 on oil and gas reserves of Pan-China Resources Ltd., and our report dated February 11, 2011 on the oil 
reserves of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. relating to the Tamarack project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated:  February 11, 2011  
Calgary, Alberta 
CANADA
GLJ PETROLEUM CONSULTANTS LTD.
Bryan M. Joa, P. Eng. 
Vice-President
“Originally Signed by”
Yours very truly,
EXHIBIT 23.2
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS  
 
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statements No. 333-113054, 333-143029, 333-151943 and 
333-168964 on Form S-8 of our reports dated March 4, 2011, relating to the consolidated financial statements of Ivanhoe 
Energy Inc. (which report expressed an unqualified opinion and includes an explanatory paragraph regarding conditions 
and events that cast substantial doubt on the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern) and the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. for the year 
ended December 31, 2010.  
 
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Deloitte & Touche LLP 
Independent Registered Chartered Accountants 
Calgary, Canada 
March 4, 2011
CERTIFICATION BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER  
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
 
I, Robert M. Friedland, certify that:
EXHIBIT 31.1
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc.;
1. 
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a 
material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements 
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.  Based on  my  knowledge, the  financial statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this report,  fairly 
present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, 
and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over 
financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a – 15(f) and 15d – 15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)  Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to 
be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including 
its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the 
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)  Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability 
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)  Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this 
report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of 
the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)  Disclosed  in  this  report  any  change  in  the  registrant’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  that 
occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case 
of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting; and
5.  The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal 
control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of 
directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over 
financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, 
summarize and report financial information; and
(b)  Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
*    *    *
By:
/s/ Robert M. Friedland 
Robert M. Friedland 
Chief Executive Officer
Date:   March 16, 2011
EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION BY THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER  
PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
 
I, Gerald D. Schiefelbein, certify that:
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Ivanhoe Energy Inc.;
1. 
2.  Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a 
material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements 
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.  Based on  my  knowledge, the  financial statements,  and  other  financial  information  included  in  this report,  fairly 
present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, 
and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I  are  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  disclosure 
controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over 
financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a – 15(f) and 15d – 15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)  Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to 
be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including 
its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the 
period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)  Designed  such  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  or  caused  such  internal  control  over  financial 
reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability 
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)  Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this 
report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of 
the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(d)  Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred 
during the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an 
annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the  registrant’s 
internal control over financial reporting; and
5.  The  registrant’s  other  certifying  officers  and  I  have  disclosed,  based  on  our  most  recent  evaluation  of  internal 
control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of 
directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(e)  All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over 
financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, 
summarize and report financial information; and
(f)  Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant
role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
*    *    *
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Chief Financial Officer
Date:   March 16, 2011
By:
CERTIFICATION BY THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER  
PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
 
I, Robert M. Friedland, Chief Executive Officer, of Ivanhoe Energy Inc, hereby certify that:
EXHIBIT 32.1
(a)  our periodic report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2010 (the “Form 10-K”), fully complies 
with the requirements of Section 13(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and related 
interpretations; and
(b)  the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition
and our results of operations.
*    *    *
By:
/s/ Robert M. Friedland 
Robert M. Friedland 
Chief Executive Officer
Date:   March 16, 2011
CERTIFICATION BY THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER  
PURSUANT TO SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002  
 
I, Gerald D. Schiefelbein, Chief Financial Officer, of Ivanhoe Energy Inc., hereby certify that:
EXHIBIT 32.2
(a)  our periodic report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2010 (the “Form 10-K”), fully complies 
with the requirements of Section 13(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and related 
interpretations; and
(b)  the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition
and our results of operations.
*    *    *
/s/ Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Gerald D. Schiefelbein 
Chief Financial Officer
Date:  March 16, 2011
By:
THIRD PARTY REPORT ON RESERVES
Exhibit 99.1
By GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. - (Independent Qualified Reserves Evaluator)
This report is provided to satisfy the requirements contained in Item 1202(a)(8) of U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission Regulation S-K.  
 
The numbering of items below corresponds to the requirements set out in Item 1202(a)(8) of Regulation S-K. Terms to 
which a meaning is ascribed in Regulation S-K and Regulation S-X have the same meaning in this report.
i.  We have prepared an independent evaluation of the oil and gas reserves of Ivanhoe Energy Inc. (the "Company") 
for the management and the board of directors of the Company. The primary purpose of our evaluation report was 
to  provide  estimates  of  reserves  information  in  support  of  the  Company’s  year-end  reserves  reporting 
requirements  under  US  Securities  Regulation  S-K  and  for  other  internal  business  and  financial  needs  of  the 
Company.
ii.  We have evaluated the reserves of the Company as at December 31, 2010. The completion date of our report is
January 13, 2011 for the properties in China and February 11, 2011 for the properties in Canada. 
 
The  following  table  sets  forth  the  geographic  area  covered  by  our  reports,  proved,  proved  plus  probable  and 
proved plus probable plus possible reserves estimated using constant prices and costs, and the proportion of the 
total company that we have evaluated.
iii.
Location of Reserves 
Country 
Canada 
China 
Total Company
Company Net Proved Reserves 
Crude 
Oil 
Mbbl
Bitumen 
Mbbl
Mbbl
Equivalent
Oil
0 
1,738 
1,738
0 
0 
0
0 
1,738 
1,738
Oil
Equivalent
Company Net P+Pb Reserves 
Crude 
Oil 
Mbbl 
0 
2,530 
2,530
Bitumen 
Mbbl 
143,610 
0 
143,610
Mbbl 
143,610 
2,530 
146,140
Company Net 3P Reserves 
Oil
Crude 
Oil 
Mbbl 
0 
2,530 
2,530
Bitumen 
Mbbl 
177,305 
0 
177,305
Equivalent
Mbbl 
177,305 
2,530 
179,835
Our report covers 100% of the Company’s proved plus probable oil and natural gas reserves.
iv.
As noted in item iii., our evaluation covered all of the Company’s proved plus probable reserves. We carried out 
our  evaluation  in  accordance  with  standards  set  out  in  the  Canadian  Oil  and  Gas  Evaluation  Handbook  (the 
"COGE Handbook") with the necessary modifications to reflect definitions and standards under the U.S. Financial 
Accounting  Standards  Board  policies  (the  “FASB  Standards”)  and  the  legal  requirements  under  the  U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC requirements”).
Data  used  in  our  evaluation  were  obtained  from  regulatory  agencies,  public  sources  and  from  Company 
personnel and Company files. In the preparation of our report we have accepted as presented, and have relied, 
without independent verification, upon a variety of information furnished by the Company such as interests and 
burdens,  recent  production,  product  transportation  and  marketing  and  sales  agreements,  historical  revenue, 
capital  costs,  operating  expense  data,  budget  forecasts  and  capital  cost  estimates  and  well  data  for  recently 
drilled wells. If in the course of our evaluation, the validity or sufficiency of any material information was brought 
into question, we did not rely on such information until such concerns were satisfactorily resolved.  
 
The Company has warranted in a representation letter to us that, to the best of the Company’s knowledge and 
belief,  all  data  furnished  to  us  was  accurate  in  all  material  respects,  and  no  material  data  relevant  to  our 
evaluation was omitted. 
 
A  field  examination  of  the  evaluated  properties  was  not  performed  nor  was  it  considered  necessary  for  the 
purposes of our report. 
 
In our opinion, estimates provided in our report have, in all material respects, been determined in accordance with 
the applicable industry standards, and results provided in our report and summarized herein are appropriate for 
inclusion in filings under Regulation S-K.
As  required  under  SEC  Regulation  S-K,  reserves  are  those  quantities  of  oil  and  gas  that  are  estimated  to  be 
economically producible under existing economic conditions. As specified, in determining economic production, 
constant product reference prices have been based on a 12-month average price, calculated as the unweighted 
arithmetic  average  of  the  first-day-of-the-month  price  for  each  month  within  the  12-month  period  prior  to  the 
effective date of our report. As the project in Canada has not commenced production, the above described prices 
are based on posted benchmark prices and estimates of quality and transportation differences to the field. In our 
economic analysis, operating and capital costs are those costs estimated as applicable at the effective date of our 
report,  with  no  future  escalation.  Where  deemed  appropriate,  the  capital  costs  and  revised  operating  costs 
associated with the implementation of committed projects designed to modify specific field operations in the future 
may be included in economic projections.
vi.  Our report has been prepared assuming the continuation existing regulatory and fiscal conditions subject to the 
guidance  in  the  COGE  Handbook  and  SEC  regulations.  Notwithstanding  that  the  Company  currently  has 
regulatory  approval  to  produce  the  reserves  identified  in  our  report,  there  is  no  assurance  that  changes  in 
regulation will not occur; such changes, which cannot  reliably be predicted, could impact the Company’s ability to 
recovery the estimated reserves.
vii.  Oil and gas reserves estimates have an inherent degree of associated uncertainty the degree of which is affected 
by many factors. Reserves estimates will vary due to the limited and imprecise nature of data upon which the 
estimates  of  reserves  are  predicated.  Moreover,  the  methods  and  data  used  in  estimating  reserves  are  often 
necessarily indirect or analogical in character rather than direct or deductive. Furthermore, the persons involved in 
the  preparation  of  reserves  estimates  and  associated  information  are  required,  in  applying  geosciences, 
petroleum  engineering  and  evaluation  principles,  to  make  numerous  unbiased  judgments  based  upon  their 
educational  background,  professional  training,  and  professional  experience.  The  extent  and  significance  of  the 
judgments to be made are, in themselves, sufficient to render reserves estimates inherently imprecise. Reserves 
estimates may change substantially as additional data becomes available and as economic conditions impacting 
oil and gas prices and costs change. Reserves estimates will also change over time due to other factors such as 
knowledge and technology, fiscal and economic conditions, contractual, statutory and regulatory provisions.  
 
In  our  opinion,  the  reserves  information  evaluated  by  us  have,  in  all  material  respects,  been  determined  in 
accordance with all appropriate industry standards, methods and procedures applicable for the filing of reserves 
information under U.S. SEC Regulation S-K.  
 
A summary of the Company reserves evaluated by us is provided in item iii.
GLJ Petroleum Consultants Ltd. 
4100, 400 – 3rd Avenue S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta  CANADA  T2P 4H2 
Dated:  February 11, 2011 
 
 
 
   “Originally Signed by”    
Dana B. Laustsen, P. Eng. 
Executive Vice-President
v.
viii.
ix.