
MGC PHARMACEUTICALS LTD
ACN 116 800 269
CLEANSING PROSPECTUS
For the offer of 20 Shares in the capital of the Company at an issue price of $0.050 per Share 
to raise $1.00 (before expenses).
This Prospectus has been prepared for the purpose of section 708A(11) of the Corporations 
Act to remove any trading restrictions on the sale of Shares issued by the Company prior to 
the Closing Date.
IMPORTANT NOTICE
This document is important and should be read in its entirety.  If after reading this Prospectus you 
have any questions about the Shares being offered under this Prospectus or any other matter, 
then you should consult your stockbroker, accountant or other professional adviser.
The Shares offered by this Prospectus should be considered as speculative.
TABLE  OF C ONTE NTS
CORPORATE DIRECTORY ......................................................................................... 1 
IMPORTANT NOTES .................................................................................................. 2 
INDICATIVE TIMETABLE* .......................................................................................... 3 
DETAILS OF THE OFFER ............................................................................................. 4 
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER ...................................................................... 7 
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SHARES ................................................... 8 
RISK FACTORS ....................................................................................................... 10 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ................................................................................. 19 
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION ............................................................................... 27 
DEFINITIONS .......................................................................................................... 28
1. 
2. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
8. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13.
i
1.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Directors
Mr Brett Mitchell 
Executive Chairman 
 
Mr Nativ Segev 
Managing Director 
 
Mr Roby Zomer 
Executive Director 
 
Dr Ross Walker 
Non-Executive Director
Company Secretary
Mrs Rachel Kerr
Registered Office
Auditor*
PKF Mack 
4th Floor 
35 Havelock Street 
WEST PERTH WA 6005 
 
Share Registry*
Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited  
Level 11  
172 St Georges Terrace 
PERTH WA 6000
Solicitors
Steinepreis Paganin 
Lawyers and Consultants 
Level 4, The Read Buildings 
16 Milligan Street 
PERTH  WA 6000
ASX Code 
 
MXC
Level 7, 1008 Hay Street 
PERTH WA 6000 
 
Telephone: +61 8 9389 2000 
Facsimile: +61 8 9389 2099 
 
Website: www.mgcpharma.com.au  
Email: info@mgcpharma.com.au 
 
 
 
* These entities have not been involved in the preparation of this Prospectus and have not 
consented  to  being  named  in  this  Prospectus.    They  have  been  included  for  information 
purposes only.
1
2.
IMPORTANT NOTES
This  Prospectus  is  dated  6  September  2016  and  a  copy  of  this  Prospectus  was 
lodged with the ASIC on that date.  The ASIC and ASX take no responsibility for 
the  content  of  this  Prospectus  or  the  merits  of  the  investment  to  which  this 
Prospectus relates.
No Shares may be issued on the basis of this Prospectus later than 13 months after 
the date of this Prospectus.
No  person  is  authorised  to  give  information  or  to  make  any  representation  in 
connection with this Prospectus, which is not contained in the Prospectus.  Any 
information or representation not so contained may not be relied on as having 
been authorised by the Company in connection with this Prospectus.
The Offer is only available to those who are personally invited to accept the Offer.  
Applications for Shares offered pursuant to this Prospectus can only be submitted 
on an original Application Form which accompanies this Prospectus.
This  Prospectus  is  a  transaction  specific  prospectus  for  an offer of  continuously 
quoted securities (as defined in the Corporations Act) and has been prepared in 
accordance with section 713 of the Corporations Act.  It does not contain the 
same  level  of  disclosure  as  an  initial  public  offering  prospectus.    In  making 
representations  in  this  Prospectus  regard  has  been  had  to  the  fact  that  the 
Company  is  a  disclosing  entity  for  the  purposes  of  the  Corporations  Act  and 
certain  matters  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  known  to  investors  and 
professional advisers whom potential investors may consult.
2.1
Risk factors
Potential investors should be aware that subscribing for Shares in the Company 
involves a number of risks.  The key risk factors of which investors should be aware 
are set out in Section 7 of this Prospectus.  These risks together with other general 
risks applicable to all investments in listed securities not specifically referred  to, 
may affect the value of the Shares in the future.  Accordingly, an investment in 
the Company should be considered highly speculative.  Investors should consider 
consulting their professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Shares 
pursuant to this Prospectus.
2.2
Website – Electronic Prospectus
A copy of this Prospectus can be downloaded from the website of the Company 
at www.mgcpharma.com.au. If you are accessing the electronic version of this 
Prospectus for the purpose of making an investment in the Company, you must 
be  an  Australian  resident  and  must  only  access  the  Prospectus  from  within 
Australia.
The  Corporations  Act  prohibits  any  person  passing  onto  another  person  an 
Application  Form  unless  it  is  attached  to  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  or  it 
accompanies the complete and unaltered version of this Prospectus. Any person 
may  obtain  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  free  of  charge  by  contacting  the 
Company.
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form from a person 
if it has reason to believe that when that person was given access to the electronic 
Application Form, it was not provided together with the electronic Prospectus and 
any  relevant  supplementary  or  replacement  prospectus  or  any  of  those 
documents were incomplete or altered.
2
2.3
Forward-looking Statements
This Prospectus contains forward-looking statements which are identified by words 
such as ‘may’, ‘could’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘targets’, ‘expects’, or ‘intends’ and 
other similar words that involve risks and uncertainties.
These  statements  are  based  on  an  assessment  of  present  economic  and 
operating conditions, and on a number of assumptions regarding future events 
and actions that, as at the date of this Prospectus, are expected to take place.
Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and 
involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other important 
factors, many of which are beyond the control of our Company, the Directors and 
our management.
We  cannot  and  do  not  give  any  assurance  that  the  results,  performance  or 
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements contained 
in  this  prospectus  will  actually occur  and investors  are  cautioned not  to  place 
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
We have no intention to update or revise forward-looking statements, or to publish 
prospective  financial  information  in  the  future,  regardless  of  whether  new 
information, future events or any other factors affect the information contained in 
this prospectus, except where required by law.
These  forward  looking  statements  are  subject  to  various  risk  factors  that  could 
cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  the  results  expressed  or 
anticipated in these statements.  These risk factors are set out in Section 5 of this 
Prospectus.
3.
INDICATIVE TIMETABLE*
Action 
Lodgement of Prospectus with the ASIC and ASX 
Opening Date 
Closing Date*
Date 
6 September 2016 
6 September 2016 
5:00pm WST on 7 September 2016
* The Directors reserve the right to bring forward or extend the Closing Date at any time after 
the Opening Date without notice. As such, the date the Shares are expected to commence 
trading on ASX may vary with any change in the Closing Date.
3
4.
4.1
DETAILS OF THE OFFER
Offer
By  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  invites  investors  identified  by  the  Directors  to 
apply for up to 20 Shares at an issue price of $0.050 per Share to raise $1.00 (before 
costs) (Offer).
The Offer will only be extended to specific parties on invitation from the Directors.  
Application Forms will only be provided by the Company to these parties.
All of the Shares offered under this Prospectus will rank equally with Shares on issue 
at the date of this Prospectus.
Please refer to Section 6 of this Prospectus for further information regarding the 
rights and liabilities attaching to the Shares offered pursuant to this Prospectus.
The  Company  will  apply  to  the  ASX  for  the  Shares  offered  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus to be granted Official Quotation on ASX.
4.2
Objective
The  Company  is  seeking  to  raise  only  a  nominal  amount  of  $1.00  under  this 
Prospectus and, accordingly, the purpose of this Prospectus is not to raise capital.
The primary purpose of this Prospectus is to remove any trading restrictions that 
may have attached to Shares issued by the Company prior to the Closing Date.
Relevantly, section 708A(11) of the Corporations Act provides that a  sale offer 
does not need disclosure to investors if:
(a)
the relevant securities are in a class of securities that are quoted securities 
of the body; and
(b)
either:
(i)
(ii)
a prospectus is lodged with the ASIC on or after the day on which 
the relevant securities were issued but before the day on which 
the sale offer is made; or
a prospectus is lodged with ASIC before the day on which the 
relevant securities are issued and offers of securities that have 
been made under the prospectus are still open for acceptance 
on the day on which the relevant securities were issued; and
(c)
the prospectus is for an offer of securities issued by the body that are in 
the same class of securities as the relevant securities.
4.3
Application for Shares
Applications  for  Shares  must  be  made  by  investors  at  the  direction  of  the 
Company  and  must  be  made  using  the  Application  Form  accompanying  this 
Prospectus.
Payment for the Shares must be made in full at the issue price of $0.050 per Share. 
All cheques must be drawn on an Australian bank or bank draft made payable in 
Australian currency to “MGC Pharmaceuticals Offer Account” and crossed “Not 
Negotiable”.
4
Completed Application Forms and cheques must be mailed or delivered to the 
address set out on the Application Form, with sufficient time to be received by or 
on behalf of the Company by no later than 5.00pm (WST) on the Closing Date.
The Company reserves the right to close the Offer early.
If you require assistance in completing an Application Form, please contact the 
Share Registry on 1300 787 272 or the Company on +61 8 9389 2000.
4.4
Implications on acceptance
Returning  a  completed  Application  Form  will  be  taken  to  constitute  a 
representation by you that:
(a)
(b)
You  have  received  a  copy  of  this  Prospectus  and  the  accompanying 
Application Form, and read them both in their entirety;
You  acknowledge  that  once  the  Application  Form  is  returned  the 
application may not be varied or withdrawn except as required by law.
4.5
Minimum Subscription
There is no minimum subscription.
4.6
Issue
Issue of Shares under the Offer will take place as soon as practicable after the 
Closing Date.  Application moneys will be held in a separate subscription account 
until  the  Shares  are  issued.    This  account  will  be  established  and  kept  by  the 
Company  in  trust  for  each  Applicant.    Any  interest  earned  on  the  application 
moneys  will  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  Company  and  will  be  retained  by  the 
Company  irrespective  of  whether  any  Shares  are  issued  and  each  Applicant 
waives the right to claim any interest.
The Directors will determine the recipients of all the Shares.  The Directors reserve 
the right to reject any application or to allocate any Applicant fewer Shares than 
the number applied for.
Where the number of Shares issued is less than the number applied for, the surplus 
moneys will be returned by cheque as soon as practicable after the Closing Date.  
Where no issue of Shares is made, the amount tendered on application will be 
returned in full by cheque as soon as practicable after the Closing Date.  Interest 
will not be paid on moneys refunded.
4.7
ASX Listing
The  Company  will  apply  for  Official  Quotation  of  all  Shares  issued  under  this 
Prospectus within 7 days after the date of this Prospectus. If ASX does not grant 
Official Quotation of  the  Shares offered pursuant  to  this  Prospectus before  the 
expiration of 3 months after the date of issue of the Prospectus, (or such period as 
varied  by  the  ASIC),  the  Company  will  not  issue  any  Shares  and  will  repay  all 
application  monies  for  the  Shares  within  the  time  prescribed  under  the 
Corporations Act, without interest.
The fact that ASX may grant Official Quotation to the Shares is not to be taken in 
any way as an indication of the merits of the Company or the Shares now offered 
for subscription.
5
4.8
Overseas shareholders
The distribution of this Prospectus outside the Commonwealth of Australia may be 
restricted by law.
This Offer does not, and is not intended to, constitute an offer in any place or 
jurisdiction in which, or to any person to whom, it would not be lawful to make 
such an offer or to issue this Prospectus.
Residents of countries outside Australia should consult their professional advisers 
as to whether any government or other consents are required, or whether any 
formalities need to be observed should they wish to make an application to take 
up  Shares  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus.    The  return  of  a  duly  completed 
Application Form will be taken to constitute a representation and warranty that 
there has been no breach of such laws and that all approvals and consents have 
been obtained.
4.9
Clearing House Electronic Sub-Register System and Issuer Sponsorship
The Company participates in the Clearing House Electronic Sub-register System 
(CHESS).  ASX  Settlement  Pty  Ltd,  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  ASX,  operates 
CHESS.  Investors  who  do  not  wish  to  participate  through  CHESS  will  be  issuer 
sponsored by the Company.
Electronic  registers  mean  that  the  Company  will  not  be  issuing  certificates  to 
investors.  Instead, investors will be provided with separate statements (similar to a 
bank account statement) that set out the number of Shares issued to them under 
this Prospectus.  The notice will also advise holders of their Holder Identification 
Number or Security Holder Reference Number and explain, for future reference, 
the sale and purchase procedures under CHESS and issuer sponsorship.
Electronic sub-registers also mean ownership of Shares can be transferred without 
having to rely upon paper documentation.  Further, monthly statements will be 
provided to holders if there have been any changes in their security holding in the 
Company  during  the  preceding  month.  Shareholders  may  request  a  holding 
statement at any other time, however a charge may be made for such additional 
statements.
4.10
Enquiries
Any  questions  concerning  the  Offer  should  be  directed  to  the  Company 
Secretary, Mrs Rachel Kerr, on +61 8 9389 2000.
6
5.
5.1
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER
Purpose of the Offer
The primary purpose of this Prospectus is to remove any trading restrictions that 
may have attached to Shares issued by the Company prior to the Closing Date 
(including prior to the date of this Prospectus).  All of the funds raised from the 
Offer will be applied towards the expenses of the Offer. Refer to Section 8.8 of this 
Prospectus for further details relating to the estimated expenses of the Offer.
5.2
Effect of the Offer on capital structure
The  principal  effect  of  the  Offer  on  the  capital  structure  of  the  Company, 
assuming all Shares offered under the Prospectus are issued, no existing Options 
are exercised and no existing Performance Shares vest is set out below.
Shares
Shares1 
Shares on issue as at the date of this Prospectus  
Issued under the Offer  
Total Shares on issue on completion of the Offer
Number 
918,959,8552 
20 
918,959,875
Notes: 
1.
2.
The  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  the  Shares  are  summarised  in  Section  6  of  this 
Prospectus. 
Consisting:
a. 
b. 
c.
715,613,155 Shares (including 13,000,000 VHL ordinary shares); 
63,346,700 Shares escrowed until 23 February 2018; and 
140,000,000 Shares escrowed until 15 February 2017.
Options
Options 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.025 each on or before 30/06/17 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.04 each on or before 30/06/17 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.20 each on or before 30/06/17 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.30 each on or before 23/01/18 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.35 each on or before 23/01/18 
Unquoted exercisable at $0.40 each on or before 23/01/18 
Issued under the Offer 
Total Options on issue after completion of the Offer
Performance Shares
Number 
4,000,000 
8,750,000 
4,000,000 
1,000,000 
500,000 
500,000 
Nil 
18,750,000
Performance Shares on issue as at the date of this Prospectus1  
Issued under the Offer  
Total Performance Shares on completion of the Offer
Number 
100,000,000 
Nil 
100,000,000
7
Notes  
1.
Consisting  30,000,000  Performance  Shares  escrowed  until  23  February  2018  and 
70,000,000 Performance Shares escrowed until 15 February 2017.
5.3
Financial effect of the Offer
After paying for the expenses of the Offer of approximately $4,000, there will be 
no  net  proceeds  from  the  Offer.    The  expenses  of  the  Offer  (exceeding  $1.00 
raised from the proceeds of the Offer) will be met from the Company’s existing 
cash reserves and will not have any material effect on those reserves.
6.
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SHARES
The following is a summary of the more significant rights and liabilities attaching to 
Shares to be issued pursuant to this Prospectus.  This summary is not exhaustive and 
does  not  constitute  a  definitive  statement  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  of 
Shareholders.  To obtain such a statement, persons should seek independent legal 
advice.
Full  details  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  Shares  are  set  out  in  the 
Constitution,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  for  inspection  at  the  Company’s 
registered office during normal business hours.
(a)
General meeting and notices
Each member is entitled to receive notice of, and to attend and vote at, 
general meetings of the Company and to receive all notices, accounts 
and  other  documents  required  to  be  sent  to  members  under  the 
Constitution, the Corporations Act or the Listing Rules.
(b)
Voting rights
Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any 
class or classes of shares, at a general meeting of the Company every 
holder of fully paid ordinary shares present in person or by an attorney; 
representative  or  proxy  has  one  vote  on  a  show  of  hands  (unless  a 
member has appointed 2 proxies) and one vote per share on a poll.
A person who holds a share which is not fully paid is entitled, on a poll, to 
a fraction of a vote equal to the proportion which the amount paid bears 
to the total issue price of the share.
Where there are 2 or more joint holders of a share and more than one of 
them is present at a meeting and tenders a vote in respect of the share, 
the Company will count only the vote cast by the member whose name 
appears first in the Company's register of members.
(c)
Issues of further Shares
The Directors may, on behalf of the Company, issue, grant options over 
unissued shares to any person on the terms, with the rights, and at the 
times  that  the  Directors  decide.  However,  the  Directors  must  act  in 
accordance  with  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the  Constitution,  Listing 
Rules, the Corporations Act and any rights for the time being attached to 
the shares in any special class of those shares.
8
(d)
Variation of Rights
Unless otherwise provided by the terms of issue of a class of shares and 
subject to the Corporations Act, the rights attached to the shares in any 
class may be varied or cancelled only with the written consent of the 
holders of at least three-quarters of the issued shares of the affected class, 
or by special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of 
the issued shares of the affected class.
(e)
Transfer of Shares
Subject to the Constitution, the Corporations Act and Listing Rules, Shares 
are freely transferable.
The  Shares  may  be  transferred  by  a  proper  transfer  effected  in 
accordance  with  the  ASX  Settlement  Operating  Rules,  by  any  other 
method of transferring or dealing with Shares introduced by ASX and as 
otherwise permitted by the Corporations Act or by a written instrument of 
transfer in any usual form or in any other form approved by either the 
Directors or ASX that is permitted by the Corporations Act.
The Directors may decline to register a transfer of Shares (other than a 
proper transfer in accordance with the ASX Settlement Operating Rules) 
where permitted to do so under the Listing Rules. If the Directors decline 
to register a transfer, the Company must, within 5 business days after the 
transfer is delivered to the Company, give the party lodging the transfer 
written notice of the refusal and the reason for the refusal. The Directors 
must decline to register a transfer of Shares when required by law, by the 
Listing Rules or by the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
(f)
Dividends
The Directors may from time to time determine dividends to be distributed 
to members according to their rights and interests. The Directors may fix 
the time for distribution and the methods of distribution. Subject to the 
terms of issue of shares, the Company may pay a dividend on one class 
of shares to the exclusion of another class.
Each share carries the right to participate in the dividend in the same 
proportion  that  the  amount  for  the  time  being  paid on  the  share  (not 
credited)  bears  to  the  total  amounts  paid  and  payable  (excluding 
amounts credited) in respect of such shares.
(g)
Dividend reinvestment and Share plans
Subject to the requirements in the Corporations Act and the Listing Rules, 
the Directors may implement and maintain dividend reinvestment plans 
(under  which  any  member  may  elect  that  dividends  payable  by  the 
Company be reinvested by way of subscription for fully paid shares in the 
Company).
(h)
Capitalisation of profits
Subject to the Listing Rules and any rights or restrictions attaching to any 
class of shares, the Company may capitalise profits. Members are entitled 
to participate in a capital distribution in the same proportions in which 
they are entitled to participate in dividends.
9
(i)
Winding-up
Subject to the rights of holders of shares with special rights in a winding-
up and the Corporations Act, if the Company is wound up all monies and 
property that are to be distributed among Shareholders on a winding-up, 
shall be distributed in proportion to the Shares held by them respectively, 
irrespective of the amount paid-up or credited as paid-up on the Shares.
(j)
Shareholder liability
As the Shares issued will be fully paid shares, they will not be subject to 
any calls for money by the Directors and will therefore not become liable 
for forfeiture.
(k)
Alteration of constitution
In accordance with the Corporations Act, the Constitution can only be 
amended  by  a  special  resolution  passed  by  at  least  three  quarters  of 
Shareholders present and voting at the general meeting.  In addition, at 
least  28 days  written  notice  specifying  the  intention  to  propose  the 
resolution as a special resolution must be given.
7.
7.1
RISK FACTORS
General
The Shares offered under this Prospectus are considered highly speculative.  An 
investment in the Company is not risk free and the Directors strongly recommend 
potential  investors  to  consider  the  risk  factors  described  below,  together  with 
information  contained  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus  and  to  consult  their 
professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Shares pursuant to this 
Prospectus.
There  are  specific  risks  which  relate  directly  to  the  Company’s  business.    In 
addition,  there  are  other  general  risks,  many  of  which  are  largely  beyond  the 
control of the Company and the Directors.  The risks identified in this section, or 
other risk factors, may have a material impact on the financial performance of 
the Company and the market price of the Shares.
The following is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which the 
Company is exposed.
7.2
Company specific – growing facilities
(a)
Property for growing
The Company has entered into an agreement to lease farmland for its 
Slovenian  cannabis  growing  operations.  Although  the  Company  does 
not  require  vast  acreage  for  the  planting  of  its  cannabis  plants,  and 
depending on the size of the future MGC growing operations in Slovenia 
there can be no guarantee that the Company will be able to acquire all 
the necessary land on suitable terms although there is significant supply 
of suitable agricultural land available in Slovenia. In addition, there is no 
guarantee that the Company will be able to renew the lease it has been 
granted on suitable terms and if the lease agreement is not renewed on 
expiry of the term, the hemp license may be at risk of being terminated.
10
(b)
Agriculture risks
The  Company’s  business  involves  the  growing  of  medicinal  cannabis, 
which is an agricultural product. As such the business is subject to the risks 
inherent in the agricultural industry, such as insects, plant diseases, storm, 
fire,  frost,  flood,  drought,  water  availability,  water  salinity,  pests,  bird 
damage  and  force  majeure  events.  Although  the  Company  plans  to 
have  both  indoor  and  outdoor  growing  operations  under  climate 
controlled conditions and employ trained personnel to carefully monitor 
and manage the growing conditions there can be no guarantee that 
natural  elements  will  not  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  the 
production of the growing operations.
(c)
Key inputs for growing medicinal cannabis
The  key  inputs  include  raw  material  and  supplies  related  to  growing 
operation  as  well  as  electricity,  water  and  other  local  utilities.  Any 
significant  interruptions  or  negative  changes  in  the  availability  of 
economics of the supply chain for the inputs could materially impact the 
business, financial condition and operating results of the Company. Due 
to the nature of the product some of these inputs may only be available 
from single suppliers or a limited group of suppliers. Any restrictions on the 
ability to secure required supplies and services or to do so on appropriate 
terms could have a materially adverse impact on the business, financial 
conditions and operating results of the Company.
(d)
Production yields
Any Medical Cannabis company is inherently dependent on its ability to 
maintain a supply of specific plant genetics for the product it plans to 
produce. MGC has a similar inherent need to maintain supply of high CBD 
yield product from its growing and extraction operations.
The deciding factor ultimately is the mass of material produced per area 
cultivated and the percentage content of CBD in the final extract (in the 
case of MGC, consistently yielding +10% CBD from the cannabis Savita 
plants).
(e)
Product liability claims (Cosmetics, Food Supplements and Medicinal)
As a manufacturer and distributor of a range of cosmetic and medical 
cannabis  products  designed  to  be  applied  or  potentially  ingested  by 
humans  the  Company  faces  an  inherent  risk  of  exposure  to  product 
liability claims, regulatory action and litigation. These risks will arise if the 
Company’s medicinal cannabis is alleged to have caused significant loss 
or injury. In addition, the manufacture of medicinal cannabis involves the 
risk of injury to consumers due to tampering by unauthorised third parties 
or product contamination. Previously unknown adverse reaction resulting 
from human consumption of medicinal cannabis alone or in combination 
with other medication or substances could occur. The Company may be 
subject to various product liability claims, including among others that the 
Company’s products caused injury or illness, inadequate instructions for 
use or warnings concerning possible side effects. A product liability claim 
or regulatory action against the Company could result in increased costs, 
could  adversely  affect  the  Company’s  reputation  with  its  clients  and 
consumers generally and could have a material adverse effect on the 
Company’s results of operations and financial conditions.
11
(f)
Obtaining and maintaining licences
The  Company’s  ability  to  research,  develop  and  commercialise  its 
products  is  dependent  on  the  Company’s  ability  to  maintain  licenses 
relating to the cultivation, possession and supply of controlled substances 
in its area of operations. The Company’s operations are initially located 
in Slovenia. Initial licenses to cultivate cannabis and produce and export 
cannabis  products  need  to  be  obtained  for  each  operation  and  are 
granted  by  the  relevant  local  authorities.  MGC  Slovenia  has  been 
granted a license from the Slovenian Government to grow and process 
cannabis  sativa  L  (Hemp).  The  license  enables  MGC  to  establish  a 
growing operation in the region. The license also enables MGC to extract 
the  CBD  resin  from  the  Cannabis  Sativa  L  at  the  growing  facility.  The 
license  for  the  first  CBD  crop  issued  by  the  Slovenian  government  is 
required  to  be  renewed  with  each  new crop  that  is  planted,  and  the 
Company will make application at the appropriate time to ensure the 
correct  procedures  are  followed  for  renewal.  Although  the  Slovenian 
Government may have previously granted growing licenses historically, 
they may not do so in the future. If this is the case, MGC may not be in a 
position to carry on its research and development program in Slovenia.
Additionally,  any  proposed  growing  operations  that  are  developed  in 
any other European country will be subject to the licenses required and 
other applicable legislation and regulations enforced in the respective 
country  where  the  operations  are  based.  The  amount  of  medicinal 
cannabis  and  CBD  MGC  is  able  to  produce  in  any  of  these  countries 
could potentially be capped and ultimately this will restrict the amount of 
cannabinoids that can be sold.
In addition MGC will require a license from the Slovenian Government 
(and  any  other  European  country  where  MGC  may  have  future 
operations)  to  export  the  products  produced.  Prior  to  finalisation  of 
processing  CBD  resin,  MGC will  apply  for  further licenses  to  export  the 
products. There is no guarantee that these licenses will be granted or that 
they will be granted on satisfactory terms which may have a negative 
affect on the Company’s operations.
(g)
Controlled substance legislation
Controlled substance legislation differs between countries and legislation 
in certain countries may restrict or limit MGC’s ability to sell its proposed 
products.
Most  countries  are parties  to  the Single Convention on  Narcotic  Drugs 
1961, which governs international trade and domestic control of narcotic 
substances,  including  cannabis  extracts.  Countries  may  interpret  and 
implement their treaty obligations in a way that creates a legal obstacle 
to obtaining marketing approval for MGC’s proposed products in those 
countries.  These  countries  may  not  be  willing  or  able  to  amend  or 
otherwise modify their laws and regulations to permit MGC’s proposed 
products  to  be marketed,  or  achieving  such amendments  to  the laws 
and regulations may take a prolonged period of time.
(h)
Changes in laws and regulations
The Company’s operations are subject to a variety of laws, regulations 
and  guidelines.  The  medicinal  cannabis  industry  is  evolving  worldwide 
and in Australia and has been identified as possibly posing risks in relation 
to  law  enforcement  and  government  regulation.  It  is  likely  that 
12
governments worldwide, including Australia, will continue to explore the 
benefits,  risks,  regulations  and  operations  of  companies  involved  in 
medical  cannabis.  While  to  the  knowledge  of  management,  the 
Company is currently in compliance with all current laws, changes to laws 
and regulations due to matters beyond the control of the Company may 
cause adverse effects to its operations. The introduction of new legislation 
or amendments to existing legislation by governments, or the respective 
interpretation of  the legal  requirements  in  any  of  the legal  jurisdictions 
which  govern  the  Company’s  operations  or  contractual  obligations, 
could  impact  adversely  on  the  assets,  operations  and,  ultimately,  the 
financial  position  and  financial  performance  of  the  Company  and  its 
Shares. In addition there is a risk that legal action may be taken against 
the  Company  in  relation  to  commercial,  legal,  regulatory  or  other 
matters.
7.3
Risks to the Company’s business – products
(a)
CBD Resin
If MGC is unable to achieve a CBD resin or product of a sufficiently high 
purity to enable it to be marketable to the MGC’s joint venture partners 
or other third parties in an efficient and cost effective manner, it may be 
unable to produce CBD resin to provide to MGC’s joint venture partners 
or  other  third  parties  in  a  profitable  manner.  In  this  eventuality, 
subcontractors and vendors may be sourced in order to provide some of 
the  materials  committed  to  by  MGC.  These  occurrences  may  have  a 
detrimental effect on MGC’s financial performance.
(b)
Controlled substances
Some of MGC’s proposed products may contain controlled substances 
and their regulatory approval may generate public controversy. Political 
and  social  pressures  and  adverse  publicity  could  lead  to  delays  in 
approval  of,  and  increased  expenses  for,  MGC’s  products.  These 
pressures  could  also  limit  or  restrict  the  introduction  and  marketing  of 
MGC’s products. Adverse publicity from cannabis misuse or adverse side 
effects  from  cannabis  or  other  cannabinoid  products  may  adversely 
affect  the  commercial  success  or  market  penetration  achievable  by 
MGC’s products. The nature of MGC’s business attracts a high level of 
public  and  media  interest,  and  in  the  event  of  any  resultant  adverse 
publicity, MGC’s reputation may be harmed.
(c)
Development of products and counterparty risks
The MGC Group has entered into agreements with third parties for the 
development  of  cosmetic  and  therapeutic  products  as  well  as  the 
purchase of some of the CBD resin that the MGC Group produces. The 
MGC Group may also become party to other material agreements with 
third  parties.  The  financial  performance  of  the  MGC  Group  will  be 
exposed  to,  and  may  be  adversely  affected  by,  any  failure  by 
counterparties to these agreements to comply with the terms of those 
contracts. This risk is beyond the MGC Group’s control. In addition, there 
is a risk of financial failure or default by a participant in any joint venture 
or  collaboration  arrangements  to  which  the  MGC  Group  is  or  may 
become a party. There is also a risk of the insolvency or managerial failure 
by any of the contractors or other suppliers used by MGC in any of its 
activities, or that any of those agreements are terminated in accordance 
with their terms. Any of the above outcomes, could result in an adverse 
effect on MGC’s operations, financial position and performance.
13
(d)
Competition for products
The  medicinal  and  cosmetic  cannabis  products  industry  is  highly 
competitive  and  subject  to  rapid  change.  The  industry  continues  to 
expand  and  evolve  as  an  increasing  number  of  competitors  and 
potential competitors enter the market. Many of these competitors and 
potential competitors have substantially greater financial, technological, 
managerial and research and development resources and experience 
than MGC. Some of these competitors and potential competitors have 
more  experience  than  MGC  has  in  the  development  of  medical  and 
cosmetic  products,  including  validation  procedures  and  regulatory 
matters.  In  addition,  MGC’s  proposed  products  will,  if  successfully 
developed,  compete  with,  product  offerings  from  large  and  well 
established  companies 
that  have  greater  marketing  and  sales 
experience  and  capabilities  than  MGC  or 
joint  venture  and 
collaboration partners have. If MGC is unable to compete successfully, 
MGC may be unable to generate, grow and sustain its revenue.
its
(e)
Market price of products
If the Company achieves success leading to production of CBD resin or 
other cannabis based products, the revenue it will derive through the sale 
of  CBD  resin  or  other  cannabis  based  products  exposes  the  potential 
income of the Company to market price for those things. There is currently 
no  transparent  or  liquid  quoted  market  price  for  CBD  resin  or  other 
cannabis based products, prices are set  under off take contracts. The 
prices for CBD resin or other cannabis based products may fluctuate and 
may be affected by many factors beyond the control of the Company. 
Such  factors  include  supply  and  demand  fluctuations  for  CBD  resin  or 
other cannabis based products, technological advancements and other 
macro-economic factors.
(f)
Research and development activities
Research and development activities for products are expensive, time 
consuming and difficult to design and implement. Even if the results of 
MGC’s  research  and  development  activities  are  favourable,  some 
product development activities may be expected to continue for several 
years  and  may  take  significantly  longer  to  complete.  In  addition, 
regulatory authorities, including state and local, may suspend, delay or 
terminate research and development activities at any time, or suspend 
or terminate the registrations and quota allotments required in order to 
procure and handle controlled substances, for various reasons. Any of the 
foregoing  could  have  a  material  adverse  effect  on  MGC’s  business, 
results of operations and financial condition.
(g)
Dangerous products
If  any  of  MGC’s  proposed  products,  prior  to  or  after  any  approval  for 
commercial  sale,  cause  serious  or  unexpected  side  effects,  or  are 
associated with other safety  risks such as misuse, abuse or diversion,  a 
number  of  potentially  significant  negative  consequences  could  result, 
including:
(i)
(ii)
regulatory  authorities  may  interrupt,  delay  or  halt  product 
development;
regulatory authorities may deny regulatory approval of MGC’s 
products;
14
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
regulatory authorities may require certain labelling statements, 
such  as  warnings  or  contraindications  or  limitations  on  the 
indications for use, and/or impose restrictions on distribution;
regulatory authorities may withdraw their approval, require more 
onerous labelling statements any product that is approved;
MGC may be required to make material changes to products;
MGC’s relationships with joint venture and collaboration partners 
may suffer;
MGC could be sued and held liable for harm caused to product 
users; or
(viii)
MGC’s reputation may suffer generally.
MGC  may  have  to  voluntarily  suspend  or  terminate  research  and 
development activities if at any time they present an unacceptable risks 
to  consumers  or  if  preliminary  data  demonstrates  that  products  are 
unlikely  to  receive  regulatory  approval  or  unlikely  to  be  successfully 
commercialised.
(h)
Industry growth and competition
The  medicinal  cannabis  industry  is  undergoing  rapid  growth  and 
substantial change, which has resulted in increasing consolidation and 
formation  of  strategic 
this 
consolidation  and  strategic  collaborating  to  continue.  Acquisitions  or 
other consolidating transactions could harm MGC in a number of ways, 
including:
relationships.  The  Company  expects
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
MGC could lose strategic relationships if third parties with whom 
it  has  arrangements  with  are  acquired  by  or  enter  into 
relationships with a competitor (which could cause MGC to lose 
access to distribution, content, technology and other resources);
the  relationship  between  MGC  and  such  third  parties  may 
deteriorate  and  cause  an  adverse  effect  on  MGC’s  business; 
and
MGC’s  current  competitors  could  become  stronger,  or  new 
competitors could form, from consolidations. Any of these events 
could  put  MGC  at  a  competitive  disadvantage,  which  could 
cause  MGC  to  lose  research  and  development  facilities  or 
access to technology. Consolidation could also force MGC to 
expend greater resources to meet new or additional competitive 
threats, which could also harm MGC’s results.
7.4
General risks
(a)
Sufficiency of funding
The MGC Group’s business strategy will require substantial expenditure 
and  there  can  be  no  guarantees  that  the  Company’s  existing  cash 
reserves  and  funds  generated  over  time  by  the  MGC  business  will  be 
sufficient  to  successfully  achieve  all  the  objectives  of  the  Company’s 
business  strategy.  Further  funding  of  projects  may  be  required  by  the 
Company to support the ongoing activities and operations of the MGC
15
including
the  need
Group, 
research  and 
development,  enhance  its  operating  infrastructure  and  to  acquire 
complementary businesses and technologies.
to  conduct
further
Accordingly,  the  Company  may  need  to  engage  in  equity  or  debt 
financing  to  secure  additional  funds.  If  the  Company  is  unable  to  use 
debt or equity to fund expansion after utilising existing working capital, 
there can be no assurance that the Company will have sufficient capital 
resources for that purpose, or other purposes, or  that it will be able to 
obtain additional resources on terms acceptable to the Company or at 
all.
Any  additional  equity  financing  may  be  dilutive  to  the  Company’s 
existing Shareholders and any debt financing, if available, may involve 
restrictive covenants, which limit the Company’s operations and business 
strategy. If the Company is unable to raise capital if and when needed, 
this could delay or suspend the Company’s business strategy and could 
have a material adverse effect on the Company’s activities.
(b)
Protection of Intellectual Property Rights
The  MGC  Group  does  not  currently  have  any  patent  protection  of  its 
intellectual  property  and  it  is  not  yet  known  whether  it  will  be  in  fact 
possible to obtain any patent protection of the MGC Group intellectual 
property.  In  particular,  MGC  does  not  have  any  intellectual  property 
protection for the seeds that it holds. It may be difficult to prove ownership 
of the genetic and DNA code of the strain of cannabis which MGC owns 
seeds for as the seeds have been modified through hybrid plants and 
clones without tracing the original genetic codes. Accordingly, the MGC 
Group relies on its intellectual property being kept confidential within the 
organisation,  although  it  has  plans  to  register  its  relevant  intellectual 
property at the appropriate time, and jurisdiction, in the future. If the MGC 
Group fails to protect its intellectual property secrets, competitors may 
gain  access  to  its  know-how  and  technology,  which  could  harm  the 
business.
The Company may be required to spend significant resources to monitor 
and  protect  the  intellectual  property  acquired  through  the  proposed 
Acquisition of MGC. It may initiate or otherwise be involved in litigation 
against  third  parties  for  infringement,  or  to  establish  the  validity,  of  its 
rights.  Any  litigation,  whether  or  not  it  is  successful,  could  result  in 
significant expense to the Company and divert the efforts of its personnel.
(c)
Limited trading history
MGC has only been recently incorporated and whilst its management 
have significant experience in the industry, MGC has a limited trading 
history. Given this limited trading history, there is inherent uncertainty in 
relation to MGC’s business, and investors should consider the Prospectus 
in  light  of  this.  There  can  be  no  guarantee  that  MGC’s  research  and 
development initiatives will be successful, or even if they are successful, 
to be able to generate revenue.
(d)
Reliance on key personnel
The recent developments of MGC have been in large part due to the 
talent, effort and experience of its senior management team, in particular 
the leadership of Nativ Segev and Roby Zomer. Although these individuals 
have  entered  into  executive  services  agreements  with  the  Company, 
16
there is no assurance that such contracts will not be terminated. If such 
contracts are terminated or breached, or if these individuals no longer 
continue in their current roles, new personnel will need to be employed 
which  may  adversely  affect  the  business.  The  MGC  Group  is  also 
substantially  dependent  on  the  continued  service  of 
its  existing 
development  personnel  because  of  the  complexity  of  its  services  and 
technologies. There is no assurance that the MGC Group will be able to 
retain the services of these persons.
(e)
Research and development
The Company can make no representation that any of its research into 
or development of its delivery system technologies will be successful, that 
the development milestones will be achieved, or that the delivery system 
technologies  will  be  developed  into  products  that  are  commercially 
exploitable.  There  are  many  risks  inherent  in  the  development  of  new 
products,  particularly  where  the  products  are  in  the  early  stages  of 
development.  Projects  can  be  delayed  or  fail  to  demonstrate  any 
benefit, or research may cease to be viable for a range of scientific and 
commercial reasons.
(f)
Dependence on outside parties
The  Company  may  pursue  a  strategy  that  forms  strategic  business 
relationships  with  the  other  organisations  for  the  manufacture  and 
distribution  of  products  and  services.  The  manufacture  and  global 
distribution of products and services is important to the overall success of 
the Company. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able 
to attract such prospective organisations and to negotiate appropriate 
terms and conditions with these organisations.
(g)
Foreign exchange risks
The  Company  (inclusive  of  the  MGC  Group)  operates  in  numerous 
jurisdictions, including Slovenia. Consequently, it may generate revenue 
and incurs costs and expenses in more than one currency. Accordingly, 
the  depreciation  and/or  the  appreciation  of  the  Euro,  for  example, 
relative  to  the  Australian  Dollar  would  result  in  a  foreign  currency 
loss/gain.  Any  depreciation  of  the  foreign  currencies  relative  to  the 
Australian Dollar may result in lower than anticipated revenue, profit and 
earnings. MGC Group will be affected on an ongoing basis by foreign 
exchange risks and will have to monitor this risk on an ongoing basis.
(h)
Insurance coverage
liability
The Company faces various risks in connection with the MGC Group and 
may lack adequate insurance coverage or may not have the relevant 
insurance coverage. The Company maintains insurance coverage for its 
employees, as well as professional indemnity, product liability and third 
party 
it  does  not  maintain  business 
interruption  insurance  or  insurance  against  claims  for  certain  property 
damage. The Company will need to review its insurance requirements 
periodically.  If  MGC  Group  incurs  substantial  losses  or  liabilities  and  its 
insurance coverage is unavailable or inadequate to cover such losses or 
liabilities,  the  Company’s  financial  position  and  financial  performance 
may be adversely affected.
insurance.  However
17
(i)
Market conditions
Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company’s quoted 
securities  regardless  of  the  Company’s  operating  performance.  Share 
market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
general economic outlook;
introduction of tax reform or other new legislation;
interest rates and inflation rates;
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject 
to  varied  and  unpredictable  influences  on  the  market  for  equities  in 
general  and  technology  related  stocks  in  particular.  Neither  the 
Company  nor  the  Directors  warrant  the  future  performance  of  the 
Company or any return on an investment in the Company.
(j)
Economic and government risks
The future viability of the Company is also dependent on a number of 
other  factors  affecting  performance  of  all  industries  and  not  just  the 
medical  and  cosmetics  industry  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the 
following:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
general  economic  conditions  in  jurisdictions  in  which  the 
Company operates;
changes  in  government  policies,  taxation  and  other  laws  in 
jurisdictions in which the Company operates;
the  strength  of  the  equity  and  share  markets  in  Australia  and 
throughout  the  world,  and  in  particular  investor  sentiment 
towards the bio-medical sector;
movement in, or outlook on, interest rates and inflation rates in 
jurisdictions in which the Company operates; and
natural disasters, social upheaval or war in jurisdictions in which 
the Company operates.
7.5
Investment speculative
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced 
by the Company or by investors in the Company.  The above factors, and others 
not specifically referred to above, may in the future materially affect the financial 
performance  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the  Shares  offered  under  this 
Prospectus.
Therefore, the Shares to be issued pursuant to this Prospectus carry no guarantee 
with respect to the payment of dividends, returns of capital or the market value 
of those Shares.
18
Potential investors should consider that the investment in the Company is highly 
speculative  and  should  consult  their  professional  advisers  before  deciding 
whether to apply for Shares pursuant to this Prospectus.
8.
8.1
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Litigation
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  is  not  involved  in  any  legal 
proceedings and the Directors are not aware of any legal proceedings pending 
or threatened against the Company.
8.2
Continuous Disclosure Obligations
The  Company  is  a  “disclosing  entity”  (as  defined  in  Section  111AC  of  the 
Corporations Act) for the purposes of Section 713 of the Corporations Act and, as 
such, is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations.  Specifically, like all 
listed  companies,  the  Company  is  required  to  continuously  disclose  any 
information it has to the market which a reasonable person would expect to have 
a material effect on the price or the value of the Company’s securities.
This  Prospectus  is  a  “transaction  specific  prospectus”.    In  general  terms  a 
“transaction specific prospectus” is only required to contain information in relation 
to the effect of the issue of securities on the Company and the rights attaching to 
the securities.  It is not necessary to include general information in relation to all of 
the assets and liabilities, financial position, profits and losses or prospects of the 
issuing company.
This Prospectus is intended to be read in conjunction with the publicly available 
information in relation to the Company which has been notified to ASX and does 
not include all of the information that would be included in a prospectus for an 
initial public offering of securities in an entity that is not already listed on a stock 
exchange.  Investors should therefore have regard to the other publicly available 
information in relation to the Company before making a decision whether or not 
to invest.
Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such  enquires  as  are 
reasonable,  the  Company  believes  that  it  has  complied with  the  general  and 
specific requirements of ASX as applicable from time to time throughout the 3 
months before the issue of this Prospectus which required the Company to notify 
ASX of information about specified events or matters as they arise for the purpose 
of ASX making that information available to the stock market conducted by ASX.
Information  that  is  already  in  the  public  domain  has  not  been  reported  in  this 
Prospectus other than that which is considered necessary to make this Prospectus 
complete.
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act, states that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations;
copies of documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company 
(not  being  documents 
in  Section  1274(2)(a)  of  the 
Corporations Act) may be obtained from, or inspected at, the offices of 
the ASIC; and
referred  to
it will provide a copy of each of the following documents, free of charge, 
to any person on request between the date of issue of this Prospectus 
and the Closing Date:
19
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
the  annual  financial  report  most  recently  lodged  by  the 
Company with the ASIC;
any half-year financial report lodged by the Company with the 
ASIC after the lodgement of the annual financial report referred 
to  in  (i)  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  the 
ASIC; and
any continuous disclosure documents given by the Company to 
ASX  in  accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  as  referred  to  in 
Section 674(1) of the Corporations Act after the lodgement of 
the  annual  financial  report  referred  to  in  (i)  and  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
Copies of all documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company can be 
inspected at the registered office of the Company during normal office hours.
Details  of  documents  lodged  with  ASX  since  the  date  of  lodgement  of  the 
Company’s  latest  annual  financial  report  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this 
Prospectus with the ASIC are set out in the table below.
Date 
1/09/2016 
30/08/2016
29/08/2016 
26/08/2016 
23/08/2016 
12/08/2016 
11/08/2016 
28/07/2016 
20/07/2016 
13/07/2016 
27/06/2016 
24/06/2016 
23/06/2016 
15/06/2016 
31/05/2016 
30/05/2016 
27/05/2016 
27/05/2016 
25/05/2016 
23/05/2016 
20/05/2016 
16/05/2016 
16/05/2016 
16/05/2016
Description of Announcement 
Strategic Agreement signed with Epilepsy Action Australia 
Q&A  with  Nativ  Segev,  MGC  Pharmaceuticals  Managing 
Director 
Appendix 4E and Audited 2016 Financial Report 
Notice of General Meeting/Proxy Form 
Psoriasis and Acne Tests Advancing Ahead of Product Launch 
Appendix 3B – Issue of Consultant Shares 
Sale of Lingokoto and Bouroubourou Gold Exploration Assets 
June Quarterly Activity and Cashflow Report 
Q&A with Dr Ross Walker, MGC Pharmaceuticals Director 
Leading Epilepsy Expert Joins MXC Strategic Advisory Board 
First Revenues Received from Californian Cosmetics Deal 
Resignation of Director – Appendix 3Z 
Appendix 3B – Option Conversion 
MXC’s First Crops Planted at European CBD Production Farm 
Completion of Priority Offer Share Allotment – Appendix 3B 
Health Canada Approves MGC Derma CBD Cosmetics 
Appendix 3Y – Change of Director’s Interest Notice 
Chairman’s Update to Shareholders 
FDA Approval Granted and First US Distribution Deal Signed 
Trading Halt 
Shareholder Priority Offer Closed Early - Oversubscribed 
Appendix 3B – Prospectus Priority Offer 
Prospectus – Priority Offer 
Investor Presentation – May 2016
20
16/05/2016 
12/05/2016 
12/05/2016 
11/05/2016 
11/05/2016 
11/05/2016 
11/05/2016
11/05/2016
10/05/2016 
10/05/2016 
09/05/2016 
04/05/2016 
04/05/2016 
04/05/2016 
02/05/2016 
02/05/2016 
02/05/2016
27/04/2016
22/04/2016 
18/04/2016 
13/04/2016 
04/04/2016 
29/03/2016 
24/03/2016 
03/03/2016 
29/02/2016 
25/02/2016 
23/02/2016 
23/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016
Form 605 – Notice of ceasing to be a substantial holder x 2 
Priority Offer Timetable - Update 
Completion and Allotment of Placement Shares 
Appendix 3B Updated - Prospectus 
Supplementary Prospectus 
Appendix 3Y – Change of Director’s Interest Notice 
Appendix 3B – Option Conversion 
European  Commission  Approves  MGC  Derma  Cosmetics 
Products 
Reinstatement to Official Quotation 
ASX Approval of Panax Transaction and Capital Raising Update 
Senegal Gold Assets – Project Status Update 
Suspension from Official Quotation 
Prospectus 
MXC to Raise $5.0m - Capital Raising Oversubscribed 
Response to ASX Aware Letter 
Trading Halt 
March Quarterly Activity and Cashflow Report  
MXC  to  Acquire  Licensed  European  Medical  Cannabis 
Company 
Trading Halt 
Response to ASX Price Query 
Launch of Online Store – First Retail Sales of CBD Cosmetics 
MXC to Enter Australian Medicinal Cannabis Market 
MXC Publishes First Australian Med Cannabis White Paper 
MXC Secures First Cosmetics Sales Agreement 
Agreement with SipNose takes MXC into Global Epilepsy Market 
Half Yearly Report and Accounts 
Legalisation of Medical Cannabis Fast Tracks Aus Opportunity 
Investor Report by the Next Bio Tech 
Managing Director's Update to Shareholders 
Capital structure 
Securities trading policy 
Pro forma balance sheet as at 31 January 2016 
MGC Pharma (UK) Limited's account for 26/8/15 - 30/9/15 
Corporate governance statement 
Terms and conditions of Performance Shares 
Confirmations 
Appendix 1A and Information Form and Checklist 
Constitution 
Distribution schedule & Top 20 Holders
21
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
19/02/2016 
17/02/2016 
17/02/2016 
16/02/2016 
16/02/2016 
16/02/2016 
12/02/2016 
11/02/2016 
11/02/2016 
11/02/2016 
01/02/2016 
27/01/2016 
04/01/2016 
04/01/2016 
21/12/2015 
18/12/2015 
11/12/2015 
30/11/2015 
16/11/2015 
13/11/2015 
11/11/2015 
05/11/2015 
03/11/2015 
02/11/2015 
28/10/2015
Pre-reinstatement disclosure 
ASX Notice - Reinstatement to Official Quotation 
Reinstatement to Official Quotation (23/02/2016) 
Form 603 - Notice of initial substantial holder x 2 
Form 605 - Notice of ceasing to be a substantial holder x 2 
Appendix 3X - Initial Director's Interest Notice x 3 
Appendix 3Z - Final Director's Interest Notice 
Completion of Acquisition - Appendix 3B 
Managing Director's Update to Shareholders 
Supplementary Prospectus 
Issue of Supplementary Prospectus and Option Cancellation 
MGC Welcomes Medical Cannabis Legislation Change 
December Quarterly Activity and Cashflow Report 
Conditional Reinstatement Letter Issued 
Prospectus Offers Closed 
App 3B Issue of July 15 Unlisted Options 
MGC Pharmaceuticals - Shareholder Update 
Prospectus 
Change of Company Name to MGC Pharmaceuticals Ltd 
Results of Annual General Meeting 
Results of General Meeting 
Suspension from official quotation 
Investor Report by the Next Bio Tech 
MGC to Collaborate with Leading University of Sydney Faculty 
Trading Halt 
September Quarterly Activity and Cashflow Report 
Notice of Annual General Meeting/Proxy Form
ASX  maintains  files  containing  publicly  available  information  for  all  listed 
companies.  The Company’s file is available for inspection at ASX during normal 
office hours.
The  announcements  are  also  available  through  the  Company’s  website 
www.mgcpharma.com.au.
8.3
Market price of shares
The Company is a disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act and 
its Shares are enhanced disclosure securities quoted on ASX.
The highest, lowest and last market sale prices of the Shares on ASX during the 
three months immediately preceding the date of lodgement of this Prospectus 
with the ASIC and the most recent respective dates of those sales were:
22
Highest 
Lowest 
Last
Price 
$0.056 
$0.039 
$0.041
Date 
6 June 2016 
18 August 2016 
5 September 2016
8.4
Details of substantial holders
Based  on  publicly  available  information  as  at  5  September  2016,  no  persons 
(together with their associates) have a relevant interest in 5% or more of the Shares 
on issue.
In  the  event  all  Entitlements  are  accepted  there  will  be  no  change  to  the 
substantial holders on completion of the Offer.
8.5
Directors’ Interests
Other than as set out in this Prospectus, no Director holds or has held within 2 years 
preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, any interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  the  Company  in 
connection with
(i)
(ii)
its formation or promotion or
the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer,
and no amounts have been paid or agreed to be and no benefits have been 
given or agreed to be given to a Director:
(a)
(b)
as an inducement to become, or to qualify him as, a Director; or
for services provided in connection with:
(i)
(ii)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
the Offer.
Security holdings
The relevant interest of each of the Directors in the securities of the Company as 
at the date of this Prospectus is set out in the table below.
Director
Shares
%Interest
Options
Brett Mitchell  
Nativ Segev 
Roby Zomer 
Ross Walker
11,193,894 
40,000,000 
20,000,000 
Nil
1.22% 
4.35% 
2.18% 
Nil
5,800,0001  
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Performance
Shares
Nil 
20,000,000 
10,000,000 
Nil
23
Notes  
1.  Consisting 2,500,000 Unlisted Options exercisable at $0.25 each on or before 30 June 2017, 
2,500,000 Unlisted Options exercisable at $0.04 each on or before 30 June 2017 and 800,000 
Unlisted Options exercisable at $0.20 each on or before 30 June 2017.
None of the Directors will participate in the Offer.
Remuneration of Directors
The Constitution of the Company provides that the non-executive Directors may 
be paid for their services as Directors, a sum not exceeding such fixed sum per 
annum as may be determined by the Company in general meeting, to be divided 
among  the  Directors  and  in  default  of  agreement  then  in  equal  shares.    The 
maximum aggregate remuneration for non-executive Directors has been set at 
no more than $150,000 per annum.
In  addition,  a  Director  may  be  paid  fees  or  other  amounts  as  the  Directors 
determine where a Director performs special duties or otherwise performs services 
outside the scope of the ordinary duties of a Director.
The table below shows the total annual remuneration paid to both executive and 
non-executive directors and proposed directors in each of the past two financial 
years and the proposed remuneration for the current financial year.
Director
Brett Mitchell 
Nativ Segev1  
Roby Zomer2  
Ross Walker3
Notes:
Financial
year ending 
30 June 2015
$178,500
Nil 
Nil 
Nil
Financial year ending 30
June 2016
Proposed
Financial year 
ending 30 June
2017
$197,883 
$176,2344 
$145,9304 
$22,500
$199,0255 
$264,7225 
$220,2115 
$36,000
1.  Mr Segev was appointed on 15 February 2016. 
2.  Mr Zomer was appointed on 15 February 2016. 
3.  Dr Walker was appointed on 15 February 2016. 
4.  Based on an exchange rate on the date of transaction/payment 
5.  Based on an exchange rate of €0.674 and £0.574 as quoted on the Reserve Bank of Australia
website 31 August 2016
8.6
Interests of Experts and Advisers
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no:
(a)
(b)
(c)
person  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  performing  a  function  in  a 
professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity 
in  connection  with  the 
preparation or distribution of this Prospectus;
promoter of the Company; or
underwriter (but not a sub-underwriter) to the issue or a financial services 
licensee named in this Prospectus as a financial services licensee involved 
in the issue,
24
holds, or has held, within 2 years preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with the 
ASIC, any interest in:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in 
connection with:
(i)
(ii)
its formation or promotion or
the Offer; or
(c)
the Offer,
and no amounts have been paid or agreed to be paid and no benefits have 
been given or agreed to be given to any of these persons for services provided in 
connection with:
(a)
(b)
the formation or promotion of the Company: or
the Offer.
Steinepreis Paganin has acted as solicitors to the Company in relation to the Offer. 
The  Company  estimates  it  will  pay  Steinepreis  Paganin  approximately  $1,500 
(excluding GST and disbursements) for these services and other services relating 
to  the  Offer  generally.  During  the  24  months  preceding  lodgement  of  this 
Prospectus with the ASIC, Steinepreis Paganin has been paid fees totalling $1,500 
(excluding GST and disbursements) for legal services provided to the Company.
8.7
Consents
Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act imposes a liability regime on the Company 
(as  the  offeror  of  the  Securities),  the  Directors,  the  persons  named  in  the 
Prospectus  with  their  consent  as  Proposed  Directors,  any  underwriters,  persons 
named  in  the  Prospectus  with  their  consent  having  made  a  statement  in  the 
Prospectus and persons involved in a contravention in relation to the Prospectus, 
with  regard  to  misleading  and  deceptive  statements  made  in  the  Prospectus. 
Although the Company bears primary responsibility for the Prospectus, the other 
parties involved in the preparation of the Prospectus can also be responsible for 
certain statements made in it.
Each of the parties referred to in this Section:
(a)
(b)
does not make, or purport to make, any statement in this Prospectus other 
than those referred to in this Section; and
in  light  of  the  above,  only  to  the  maximum  extent  permitted  by  law, 
expressly disclaim and take no responsibility for any part of this Prospectus 
other  than  a  reference  to  its  name  and  a  statement  included  in  this 
Prospectus with the consent of that party as specified in this Section.”
8.8
Estimated Expenses of Offer
The estimated expenses of the Offer are estimated to be approximately $4,000 
(excluding  GST)  and  are  expected  to  primarily  comprise  ASIC  filing  fees  and 
prospectus  preparation  fees.  The  estimated  expenses  will  be  paid  out  of  the 
Company’s existing working capital.
25
8.9
Electronic Prospectus
ASIC has exempted compliance with certain provisions of the Corporations Act 
to allow distribution of an electronic prospectus and electronic application form 
on the basis of a paper prospectus lodged with the ASIC, and the publication of 
notices  referring  to  an  electronic  prospectus  or  electronic  application  form, 
subject to compliance with certain conditions.
If you have received this Prospectus as an electronic Prospectus, please ensure 
that you have received the entire Prospectus accompanied by the Application 
Form.  If you have not, please phone the Company on +61 8 9389 2000 and the 
Company will send you, for free, either a hard copy or a further electronic copy 
of the Prospectus, or both.  Alternatively, you may obtain a copy of this Prospectus 
from the Company’s website at www.mgcpharma.com.au.
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form from a person 
if it has reason to believe that when that person was given access to the electronic 
Application Form, it was not provided together with the electronic Prospectus and 
any  relevant  supplementary  or  Prospectus  or  any  of  those  documents  were 
incomplete or altered.
8.10
Privacy Act
If  you  complete  an  application  for  Shares,  you  will  be  providing  personal 
information  to  the  Company.    The  Company  collects,  holds  and  will  use  that 
information  to  assess  your  application,  service  your  needs  as  a  Shareholder, 
facilitate  distribution  payments  and  corporate  communications  to  you  as  a 
Shareholder and carry out administration.
The  information  may  also  be  used  from  time  to  time  and  disclosed  to  persons 
inspecting  the  register,  bidders  for  your  securities  in  the  context  of  takeovers, 
regulatory bodies, including the Australian Taxation Office, authorised securities 
brokers, print service providers, mail houses and the Company’s Share Registry.
You can access, correct and update the personal information that we hold about 
you.  Please contact the Company if you wish to do so at the relevant contact 
numbers set out in this Prospectus.
Collection,  maintenance  and  disclosure  of  certain  personal  information  is 
governed by legislation including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (as amended), the 
Corporations Act and certain rules such as the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.  
You  should  note  that  if  you  do  not  provide  the  information  required  on  the 
application for Shares, the Company may not be able to accept or process your 
application.
26
9.
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION
This Prospectus is issued by the Company and its issue has been authorised by a 
resolution of the Directors and Proposed Directors.
In  accordance  with  section  720  of  the  Corporations  Act,  each  Director  has 
consented, and as at the date of this Prospectus has not withdrawn his consent, 
to the lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
_______________________________ 
Mr Brett Mitchell 
Executive Chairman 
Signed for and on behalf of 
MGC PHARMACEUTICALS LTD
27
10.
DEFINITIONS
$ means Australian dollars.
Applicant means an investor who applies for Shares pursuant to the Offer.
Application means an application for Shares made on an Application Form.
Application  Form  means  an  application 
accompanying this Prospectus.
form  either  attached
to  or
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX means ASX Limited (ACN 008 624 691) or the financial market operated by it 
as the context requires.
ASX Listing Rules means the Listing Rules of the ASX.
ASX  Settlement  Operating  Rules  means  the  settlement  rules  of  the  securities 
clearing house which operates CHESS.
Board means the board of Directors unless the context indicates otherwise.
Business Day means Monday to Friday inclusive, except New Year’s Day, Good 
Friday, Easter Monday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and any other day that ASX 
declares is not a Business Day.
CBD means cannabidiol.
Closing  Date  means  the  closing  date  specified  in  Section  3  of  this  Prospectus 
(unless extended or closed earlier).
Company  or  MXC  or MGC  Pharmaceuticals  means MGC  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd 
(ACN 116 800 269).
Constitution  means  the  constitution  of  the  Company  as  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Directors means the directors of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
MGC means the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, MGC Pharma (UK) Ltd a 
company incorporated in the United Kingdom.
MGC Group or MGC Group Companies means the MGC and MGC Slovenia.
MGC  Slovenia  means 
the  Company’s  wholly  owned  subsidiary  MGC 
Pharmaceuticals  d.o.o  an  entity  incorporated  in  Slovenia,  company  number 
6255108000.
Offer means the offer of up to 20 Shares at an issue price of $0.050 for the purpose 
of removing any trading restrictions on the sale of Shares issued by the Company 
prior to the Closing Date.
Official Quotation means official quotation on ASX.
Opening Date means the opening date specified in Section 3 of this Prospectus.
Option means an option to acquire a Share.
28
Performance  Share  means  a  performance  shares  issued  on  the  terms  and 
conditions  set  out  in  section  14.2  of  the  Company’s  Prospectus  dated 
18 December 2015.
Prospectus means this prospectus.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
Shareholder means the holder of a Share.
WST means Western Standard Time as observed in Perth, Western Australia.
29