This book has been optimized for viewing
at a monitor setting of 1024 x 768 pixels.

Also by Barth Anderson
THE PATRON SAINT OF PLAGUES

THE

MAGICIAN
FOOL

AND THE

BARTH ANDERSON

B A N T A M

S P E C T R A

B O O K S

TM

®

THE MAGICIAN AND THE FOOL

A Bantam Spectra Book / April 2008
Published by Bantam Dell
A Division of Random House, Inc.
New York, New York
This is a work of ﬁction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either
are the product of the author’s imagination or are used ﬁctitiously.
Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events,
or locales is entirely coincidental.
All rights reserved
Copyright © 2008 by Barth Anderson
Book design by Lynn Newmark
Bantam Books and the Rooster colophon are registered trademarks
and Spectra and the portrayal of a boxed “s” are trademarks of
Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Anderson, Barth.
The magician and the fool / Barth Anderson.
p. cm.
eISBN: 978-0-553-90393-5
1. Tarot—Fiction. 2. Retired teachers—Fiction.
3. Homeless men—Fiction. I. Title.
PS3601.N46M34 2008
813'.6—dc22
2007043433
www.bantamdell.com
v1.0

Acknowledgments

Tarot scholar Ron Decker originally posited the connection between Key I (The Magician) and the Egyptian god
Khnum.
Thanks to Mark Teppo for allowing me to cross over
brieﬂy into his world created in “The Oneiromantic
Mosaic of Harry Potemkin” (online at www.farragoswain
scot.com).
Thanks to writers in Clarion ’98, the Ratbastards, and
Karma Weasels for looking at this story over the years.

THE MAGICIAN
AND

THE FOOL

1

N

icaraguan roosters never need the excuse of a sun to
start screaming. A prowler startles one, or maybe
it’s a pair of headlights or another chicken, but with one
loud cluck, that lone rooster sets off a chain reaction of
shrieking across Managua. Nicaraguans never seemed to
notice; to a local, a crying rooster was like a taxi horn to a
New Yorker. You tuned it out or you never slept. Tonight,
they started at 3 a.m. This was only his second night in
Managua, and Rosemont hadn’t learned to ignore them
yet. He unwrapped himself from the sleeping priest and
slid from bed.
After stepping into sweatpants, he walked around to
the main gate leading into the Casa Evangelista courtyard.
Enfolded in amniotic darkness, a broad-leafed tree nodding overhead in the night’s sultry breeze, he sat by the

2

Barth Anderson

bookcases in the open-roofed atrium where he could see
through the front security gate into the street. Rosemont
liked this hostel. He’d been backpacking south from
Mexico and this was the fanciest place he’d stayed in since
Costa Rica. Meals of gallo pinto (beans and rice), a hardboiled egg, and a little cheese. Fans in the rooms. Showers
with no warm water, but no one wanted it. Travelers from
all over the world intersected here, some coming with
church groups to offer aid, some to see the volcano south
of Managua.
From the atrium, Rosemont could hear the Australian
couple having noisy sex in the bathroom. Just that afternoon they’d been arguing bitterly, and just as loudly. He
could also hear the group of European students drinking,
ﬂirting, and lamely trying to be quiet in one of their rooms.
After translating for the hostel’s cook, who had a crush on
one of the French women, Rosemont had left that party a
couple of hours ago.
Mentioned in most of the backpack travel guides, Casa
Evangelista was an oasis after the trip that Rosemont
had taken down from the Segovia region in northwest
Nicaragua on Saturday. In exchange for food and board,
he’d been picking coffee in that frontier for weeks. The
harvest was over now, it was May, so he followed one of
the shipments of beans south to market. Hopping aboard a
wide wooden ﬂatbed used for transporting one-hundredpound bags of green coffee, he left the cloud-rinsed farms
of the high Isabel mountains. Unfortunately for him, just
before reaching the arid, middle regions of the country,
Rosemont lost his hat when standing to hand a bottle of
rum to a fellow hitchhiker. The man laughed, watching it
spin along the dirt road behind the truck, and saluted it.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

3

“Go with God, hat!” Rosemont had laughed too. But
when the sun vaulted to midheaven less than an hour later,
he was baking like the wet coffee beans drying on wide,
concrete patios that they passed along the road—nothing
between him and the pounding Nicaraguan sun.
Around noon, as the mountain road stepped down into
the deserts outside Matagalpa, his breakfast rum-buzz had
worn off and Rosemont realized he was in trouble. He
drank all the water in his one water bottle. He traded
places to take advantage of what little shade he could get
from the ﬂatbed’s crossbeam. He draped a T-shirt from his
pack over his head, but he was already near heatstroke,
dehydrated from rum and sun, and his whole body rumbled in a fevery hallucination of bouncing farm trucks,
leafy boughs of coffee growing out of the stuffed burlap
bags around him, and his landed-gentry grandparents back
in the States scolding him that he’d never secure tenure for
himself this way. When the truck stopped in Matagalpa at
Cecocafen Coffee cooperative’s ofﬁces, his fellow traveler
had taken pity on him and bought him a couple of bottles
of water, offering them with a wry smile, saying, “Vaya
con dios, Señor Sin Sombrero.” Go with God, Mr. Hatless.
While Rosemont sat in the back of the truck, drinking
water and waiting for the driver, a little boy had approached him with his palm out. From his sickbed of coffee bags, Rosemont looked down into that hand, and in his
delirium, it had seemed the boy was holding a broken
shellﬁsh, offering it to Rosemont. He looked into the boy’s
face for an explanation.
“¿Por favor?” said the boy. Rosemont looked back and
realized that the hand had only three ﬁngers.
What we do to kids in this world.

4

Barth Anderson

Rosemont nodded at the boy’s ﬁngers. “How’d that
happen?”
The kid shrugged one shy shoulder. Then he managed,
“Angels.”
Rosemont hadn’t understood, nor was he certain what
he’d put into that hand, but it was the last two bills he had
in his pocket. “Steer clear of angels, okay?”
The kid took the money, and as Rosemont’s truck
pulled away from the curb, he bafﬂed Rosemont by saying,
“You’re the one who should watch out for angels.”
The smooth highway to Managua had soon droned the
strange warning from Rosemont’s mind, and the bottles of
water helped drown his thundering headache. By the time
he’d reached Managua, well after sundown, the shirtsoaking humidity of the Paciﬁc was almost a relief. With
the help of a Finnish cab driver, Rosemont had made his
way from the bustling terminal coffee market to the only
hostel whose name he knew: Casa Evangelista. He was
wary of the religious name—evangelista basically meant
Protestant—but the Casa’s reputation among travelers was
sterling. He was greeted in the maroon-tiled atrium by the
hostel’s proprietor, who introduced himself as Aurelio,
though he was obviously American.
“Budget-trail traveler, caught in the desert without a
hat,” guessed Aurelio. His blue linen shirt was open at the
collar, revealing coarse, white chest hair. He took Rosemont’s pack and slid it next to the front desk. “German?”
He got that a lot. Rosemont smiled, feeling dilapidated.
“Not too many of us down here, but I’m American.”
Aurelio laughed and looked him over again. “To quote
the Bard,” he said, “you do look all horse-piss.” Aurelio
took Rosemont’s hand in both of his and then led him

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

5

through the Casa’s courtyard, where dark palm fronds
bobbed, and to the guest rooms. The room that Aurelio
assigned to Rosemont had an engraved door, painted
with a rough portrait of bespectacled and goateed Carlos
Fonseca. He said, “For you, Fonseca, my favorite room.”
He smiled affectionately. “We have a Sunday service tomorrow morning with Communion. You’re invited but not
expected to come.”
Hector, the bellman and guard, had arrived a moment
later with Rosemont’s bags, slid them into the room,
turned on the electric fan, and set a big dispenser of water
on the dresser, ﬂashing a winning smile as he departed.
“I won’t attend,” said Rosemont over the loudly oscillating fan, again wondering if he’d made a mistake selecting this hostel. “I’m not feeling very well, and—”
“So sleep in,” said Aurelio, smiling and stepping back
from Rosemont.
An Australian couple came to stand behind Aurelio,
just outside Rosemont’s room. They were quarreling over
money.
Their dissonance wore on him. The welcome ﬁrmness
of Aurelio’s hand had reminded Rosemont how long it had
been—weeks—since he’d even touched another human being. He wished that the couple would ﬁnd a gentler way to
speak, that the man wouldn’t go.
“Perhaps I’ll check back on you later tonight?” Aurelio
said. “See how you’re feeling?”
It begins, thought Rosemont. He should have said that
wasn’t necessary, but he was not himself. “Yes, do that.”
As it happened, Aurelio did not come back to check on
him, and Managua’s roosters had woken Rosemont early
that ﬁrst night. The headache he suffered in the Matagalpa

6

Barth Anderson

desert was gone, though he’d drifted in and out of a sunburnt sleep, drinking from his water bottle, dreaming of
plump red coffee berries and relieved to have the fan aimed
at him.
Hours later, hand bells woke him, announcing the
church service. Rosemont ﬁgured what the hell, and put on
his last clean shirt, a blue and brown plaid shirt with yellow stripes.
The Casa was set up like a big oval, with the atrium
and gate at the front and the “church” at the back. Really,
the church was just twenty chairs set before a makeshift altar. Guests walking from the rooms on the right side of the
oval to the dining tables and kitchen on the left kept passing behind the congregation of Nicaraguans and international guests who’d risen early to hear the old Anglican
priest.
Much of Aurelio’s sermon was lost on Rosemont, who
slouched into a folding chair and leaned back against the
wall. He didn’t understand the passages from Ezekiel, the
obscure quotations from modern church fathers. But when
Aurelio began talking about Rome, Rosemont leaned forward. “Saints Peter and Paul were executed,” Aurelio said,
preaching in English for the international crowd, “each according to their class. Paul was a citizen of Rome, and
accordingly he was beheaded—a quick and merciful execution. But Simon Peter, a Jewish nobody, met a nobody’s
end, tortured to death by cruciﬁxion—just like his nobody
Jewish rabbi, Jesus, for sedition, conspiracy, and terrorism
on the fringes of the empire.”
After the service, Rosemont and Aurelio ate lunch
together and walked through the dismal neighborhood.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

7

Aurelio told him that the Anglican Church was preparing
to kick him out for his politics and “other practices.”
Rosemont wished the man would take his hand. Do it.
Go on. Do it.
They stood facing each other, but Aurelio would not
look Rosemont in the eye. Then, as if Rosemont were being taken from him, Aurelio admitted, “I would like to
hold your hand.” He raised dark eyes to Rosemont. “But
in this culture, that’s a dangerous line to cross.”
They bought a couple of Cokes, drank them standing
outside the bodega. Strolling back to the Casa, Rosemont
put an arm around Aurelio’s shoulders. A block later, he
took the older man’s hand.
Aurelio went rigid under Rosemont’s embrace, though
he looked with want and fear at the younger, taller man.
“Don’t worry. You’re safe.” Rosemont justiﬁed doing
this by telling himself that he needed helpers now. He had
little money, the coffee season was over, and he was still
sick from the heat and sun. He had already erased a line
between the French girl and the cook, pressed them together to create a cozy bed of good, compliant feeling in
the Casa. The bickering Australian couple had spent the
rest of Saturday evening apparently making up, because
they were all whispers and coy laughter now, and the
sound was soothing to Rosemont, actually relieved his
headache. He hadn’t interfered like this, not once, since
leaving the United States when he’d promised himself
never to do so again. But I need something good. A nest.
Something that feels like home, Rosemont told himself.
Just till I get better. Before anyone noticed that something
was happening, he would move on.

8

Barth Anderson

“Trust me,” Rosemont had said, smiling down into the
priest’s eyes. “I’ll handle everything.”
That night, sitting near the Casa’s wrought-iron gate,
Rosemont turned the priest over in his mind. The oceanic
night air cradled him as he sat, exulting in his body’s sated,
satiated, and saturated warmth. The peak of gray hair on
the old man’s chest. The strapping shoulders that seemed
to crack at the crucial moment. The salty tang of Aurelio
lingered in Rosemont’s mouth, and the sermon came like a
breeze looking for him through the Casa’s barred gate.
On the fringes of empire.
For the ﬁrst time since leaving America six months
ago, Rosemont looked backward at the height from which
he’d fallen. Poverty here was not like poverty in the States.
No one had money except the impossibly rich, while threeﬁngered boys begged in the streets. Untethered from a
tenure track as an art historian, a respectable neighborhood, and his family, Rosemont had willfully abandoned
prosperity and a promising future and had fallen down,
down, as if draining from America into Mexico’s high
plains, Chiapas, Guatemala, Honduras, falling in line behind a trail of migrant coffee workers and hidden jungle
farms. Now he had ﬁnally landed here, in a destitute neighborhood and a radical priest’s bed. Rosemont wondered
what was beyond this fringe, if anything could possibly be
beyond it. Looking back at the height from which he’d
fallen he could see, far above him in the north, America, an
immense and ridiculous bird, spreading vast wings pinioned with personal computers, telephones, modems, rearwindow defrost, CD players, cable TV, talking cars, and
jumbo decaf cappuccinos. Ivy-covered brownstones. University scufﬂes. Reputation and status; betrayal and sabo-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

9

tage. It all seemed so arbitrary from here; Rosemont
wanted nothing to do with that bird. He wanted this road.
He wanted it to take him farther into the fringes of the empire, and beyond, if he could ﬁnd a place where someone
like him might belong.
A burst of laughter came from the partyers in the
French room. Rosemont closed his eyes. Listening to the
mood of the hostel was deeply soothing.
“That’s it! Forget it! I’m canceling my trip. I want to
stay here forever,” someone shouted in English.
“Me too,” the French girl shouted. “I’m here for good.”
“Good!” the Nicaraguan cook was yelling back. “We’ll
start a new city, here, inside the Casa. Our city won’t join
wars like Bush’s. We’ll populate our new city with Nicas
and Euros. Where’s Rosemont? If I could—”
A crash of metal on metal and another hysterical burst
of group laughter.
Rosemont turned in his chair as he heard several pairs
of footsteps rapping down the unlit road outside the
Casa. A man appeared, pressing himself against the bars of
the gate, eyes scanning the atrium and focusing down the
hall to the light of the kitchen. “¡Ayudame!” he shouted.
“¡Ayudame!” Help me.
House rules said that he couldn’t open the gate for a
nonguest after midnight—Aurelio’s hostel was located in a
very rough neighborhood. The man looked frantic as the
young guard, Hector, appeared from his ofﬁce, where he
had been listening to his shortwave radio. Glancing back
the way he had come, the man fell quiet and looked suddenly dead-eyed with fear. Just then, two running men appeared, and each shoved him hard against the gate as they
passed again out of sight, down the street. It was almost as

10

Barth Anderson

if they were playing a game of late-night tag, and the man
was safe, touching these iron bars.
Hector watched them go and stared at the man, waiting
for an explanation or a departure, perhaps.
Still clinging to the gate, the man wore a nice dress shirt
beneath a suit jacket, a fashion one didn’t usually see in
Managua’s tropical bake. Both jacket and shirt were ﬁlthy.
“I’m in trouble,” he whispered in Spanish to Hector.
“I’m sorry. I am not allowed to open this gate,” said
Hector. “Gangs in this neighborhood make it unsafe here.”
“It’s not your gangs I’m worried about. Say, can you
give me some food?”
“No, sir. You have to come back in the morning.”
“I’m just going to stay here for a moment,” the man
said, leaning against the wrought-iron bars.
“You can stay there as long as you like,” said Hector.
He turned and noticed Rosemont sitting in the shadows.
He beamed and tipped his baseball cap. “I didn’t see you
there, Señor Rosemont. Good evening!”
Rosemont smiled sleepily at Hector, unsure if he was
breaking house rules by sitting in the atrium this late. He
made to get up, saying, “I’m sorry. I just needed to get out
of bed for a bit. This heat—”
Hector shook his head frantically side to side. “Stay out
here as long as you like.” He smiled again, then gave the
man at the gate one last scrutinizing look before walking
back to the ofﬁce and his blaring shortwave radio.
At the gate, the man watched Hector disappear, and
from down the hall and the bathrooms came sounds of the
Australians orgasming operatically. He sat listening for a
moment, as if to music, then his eyes drifted over to
Rosemont in the shadows. “I have a message for you.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

11

Rosemont pressed back slightly in his chair, surprised
by both the man’s words and his use of English. “What did
you say?”
“He called you ‘Rosemont’?” said the man. “You’re
Jeremiah Rosemont?”
Sitting perfectly still, his body nonetheless broke a
sweat. Rosemont laughed a small syllable of disbelief.
“Yes, that’s me.”
The man reached into his suit coat pocket and removed
a business-sized envelope, pristine and white, a stark contrast to the condition of his clothes. He offered it through
the bars of the gate. “Here.”
No one from his previous life in the shadow of the
ridiculous bird knew that Rosemont was in Nicaragua, let
alone in this city or staying at this hostel. Rosemont was
near enough that he could see the envelope in a strong
splash of light from Hector’s room. The letter was addressed to Jeremiah Rosemont, Casa Evangelista, Room
Fonseca, Managua, Nicaragua. “That’s impossible,” said
Rosemont, gripping the arms of his chair hard to keep
from shaking. “I didn’t know I was coming here myself until Saturday night. Who sent you?”
“Don’t act like a child.” The man held out the envelope
with an impatient shake of his wrist. “I’ve made sure it arrived to you clean, just as the rules prescribe. Now take it.”
“What the fuck are you talking about?” said Rosemont,
standing like a marionette jerked to its wobbling feet. He
stepped forward and took the envelope. “Who sent it?
Who are you?”
The man released his grip on the gate and stepped back.
“I did my part,” said the man. “I don’t know anything
more.”

12

Barth Anderson

Rosemont pushed the envelope back through the gate.
“Tell me what this is about. Please?”
“Read the message,” said the man, backing away from
the envelope and Rosemont. “I imagine that your questions will be—” He looked down the street in fright. “Jesus
Christ!” Then he turned and ran back the way he’d come,
without looking at Rosemont again.
A moment later, a dappled white and tan horse appeared from the opposite direction, barreling up the street
after the man. Two ﬁgures were crouched and spooned
on the galloping horse, and the one behind held what appeared to be a spear. Rosemont threw himself forward
against the gate but only managed, before they disappeared out of his view, to glimpse the messenger looking
frantically over his shoulder and the horse’s tossing tail illuminated by a streetlight.
Shaken, Rosemont stepped away from the gate. He had
to remind himself not to crush the envelope in his sweaty
hands. When he felt he could walk without his knees giving way, he turned and went down the hall to his room,
holding the letter level as if it were a tray of nitroglycerin.
“Rosie!” shouted one of the French girls in English as
he passed their room, making him jump. “You have one
last drink?”
“One last drink,” parroted the cook’s assistant in
English, though he didn’t speak it. His eyes were glazed.
“One last drink!”
Rosemont looked in at the ring of drinkers—French,
Nicaraguan, a German kid, and an older Swedish woman—
and even though he’d been sitting in that ring earlier, the
doorway into the room now seemed a portal into a parallel
dimension. He couldn’t imagine passing into it. “Thanks.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

13

No,” he muttered, walking to his room and shutting the
door.
After ﬂipping on the nightstand lamp, Rosemont sat on
the bed and opened the envelope, half expecting an explosion. Inside, however, was a plane ticket for a ﬂight from
Managua to Rome and a note that simply said, Come,
Rosemont. Your opinion is needed.
Rosemont let the letter, ticket, and envelope slip to the
ﬂoor, and lay back ﬂat on the hard bed with his hand on
his brow. He remained like that through the night, unable
to close his eyes or sleep, listening to Nicaragua’s roosters
scream.

2

O

n a hunt for a nice suit, the Boy King leaned forward over his steering wheel as if Lyndale Avenue
were pulling him forward. Between Thirty-second and
Thirty-fourth, there was an alley that ran parallel to the
named streets. On the east side of the alley stood a nice
apartment building where mostly young people working
downtown lived, and on the west side was a Jewish nursing home. The Dumpsters here were cornucopias, and it
had been a whole week since his last harvest.
As he steered his van into the alley, the bumper scraped
the high sidewalk. The Boy King needed to sell off some of
his junk; it was loading him down. He toed the accelerator,
the van lurched toward the Dumpsters, and the Boy King
felt an almost adolescent surge of glee as he saw them overﬂowing with bags and boxes.

16

Barth Anderson

Pristine Dumpster diving. “My suit is here,” the Boy
King said.
There were many ways to Dumpster dive, and the Boy
King employed them all at different times according to his
needs and wants. Zen trolling: drive and dive. Strategize:
gear up, ﬁnd targets, dig, deal with authority, escape with
the loot. The freegan method: think globally and eat very
locally (grocery stores always threw out perfectly good
produce). Fix-and-resell turned Dumpster diving into a
proﬁtable venture—Boy King had a vintage 1923 sewing
machine in the back of his van that someone threw out
thinking it was useless, but the bobbin was merely knotted
with thread. He ﬁgured it was worth hundreds of dollars,
based on his many years of repairing such discarded antiques.
And then there was Boy King Style, which the Boy King
himself used only in rare moments. It worked like this: picture the need, go and ﬁnd it. It was a scary door to open,
since often other unbidden events, characters, and conﬂicts
might pass through the aperture of an opened Dumpster
lid. Successful Boy King Style depended on how great the
need truly was and a vivid imagination to picture it fulﬁlled.
Today, the need was truly great. He’d landed a job, but
the Boy King had been wearing threadbare khakis for
nearly two years straight. He dearly needed a new suit.
Eight boxes sat neatly beside the row of garbage cans,
more like boxes ready to be loaded into a moving truck
than discarded trash, but the Boy King didn’t hesitate to
park the van and investigate.
Fumbling with his left hand, he opened the top box.
Books. He hated books. They were heavy, they took up

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

17

space, smelled like mold, and rarely earned him more than
a quarter apiece. He folded the top box neatly and shoved
it aside.
The next box was more promising: CDs. Boy King
was lucky to get here before LuLu and the Pipehead Unit.
They rarely scored anything but CDs. There were some
good ones here too, mostly grunge from the early nineties,
with some other alternative titles thrown in. Nirvana, of
course. Soundgarden. REM. Lemonheads. Blue Mountain.
Jayhawks. Down at Cheapo they’d give a buck each for
white-boy music like this, the Boy King calculated, loading
the box into his van. Slacker music. Someone—roommate,
landlord?—apparently had gotten fed up with an aging
slacker, chucked his books and CDs into the alley. Breakup,
decided the Boy King. An inﬁdelity. With a close friend.
The woman’s sister. Oops. Boy King laughed as he slid the
box of CDs under the end table he’d found an hour before.
Yes, the sister, that was right, though he hadn’t intended to
picture it all so vividly. This stuff had been thrown more in
anger toward the sister’s betrayal than the hapless slacker
whom the woman was ready to leave. The Boy King stood
facing the bay of his van and the odd collection of items
there—the furniture, vintage sewing machine, bike with
training wheels—his hands on either side of the box of
CDs, picturing this breakup, transﬁxed. The guy didn’t
know that his belongings were out here, trashed. He would
come looking for his things. Damn. He’d miss the Lemonheads especially, which would remind him of the heady,
better days of this love affair, back when the two of them
took road trips to Duluth to hang out with the woman’s
sister. The Boy King shoved the box as far into his van as it
would go, making room for more. He was a sentimentalist,

18

Barth Anderson

this slacker man, who lingered on old relationships like an
alcoholic nursing warm beer. He would be doing this guy a
favor, taking these mementos. It wasn’t a rationalization.
He could hear the rumor of this future like a song through
apartment walls. If the guy came home and found these
CDs outside in the alley, the Boy King ﬁgured, he’d plunge
himself into a music-induced depression, savoring the pain
of how he’d hurt this girl for many years. That was the music from one future. From the other, the Boy King could
hear this guy running downstairs in his Nike Airs to recover the items that the girl had discarded in anger. But the
boxes would be gone. The guy would of course be furious.
He’d storm out of this relationship, slamming the door on
it in indignation. The girl, satisﬁed by her revenge, would
move on, and so would the guy, anger cauterizing both
wounds.
A happy ending. All thanks to the Boy King.
The third box was marked “study” but contained old
Playboys, and the fourth box contained a scattering of
junk: a tangled mobile of silver seagulls, broken Star Wars
action ﬁgures, glob-tipped Bic pens, cracked and halfburned candles.
The Boy King neatly restacked the boxes—always leave
the trash better than you found it—made a cursory inspection of the apartment’s garbage cans, then looked across
the alley at the line of nursing home Dumpsters.
He had mixed feelings about diving these. On one
hand, they never failed to yield a bountiful crop. That’s because (on the other hand) they were the ﬁnal resting place
for items left behind by residents who died in the nursing
home. Most ground-scores were expensive canes, telephones for the blind, hearing aids, glasses with dense lenses.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

19

Such items were often in excellent shape and could be
resold for a lot of money, relative to the prices that other
Dumpster-dived items earned him.
But even more lucrative and disturbing were the personal
effects. The music box that played three different Cole
Porter songs. The Art Deco mirror. Ancient, black-andwhite photographs of grandparents or European relatives—
nicely framed. A gold-plated menorah. Diaries, letters, and
even jewelry. With no family in the next generation to
catch these items, they fell into the Dumpster, not even
boxed up like the slacker guy’s books were. The Boy King
always wondered why the nursing staff didn’t take these
things. Maybe it was too much for them to scavenge from
men and women for whom they had offered so much care
and companionship. Or maybe they took only the best
treasures, and then only from the clients they didn’t know
well, leaving the rest for divers like the Boy King to claim.
He lifted the ﬁrst Dumpster lid and found nothing but
cafeteria scraps. The next three Dumpsters held old ﬁles.
He picked up one piece of paper. An admission form from
1974. Someone apparently had ﬁnally converted the old
archives onto disc.
The last Dumpster was it. The Boy King’s need would
be answered there. He could tell the suit was waiting for
him like a punch line to a practical joke, and suddenly he
wasn’t sure he wanted to get a pie in the face. The universe
could be a cruel jester when one indulged in Boy King
Style. He approached the Dumpster and opened the lid, almost wincing as he saw the suit laid out in its plastic cover,
just for him.
It wasn’t any old suit. It was a ﬁne double-breasted
black silk jacket with ﬂashy pinstripes and matching pants.

20

Barth Anderson

Forty-two regular, the Boy King noted, inspecting the jacket’s
tag through the plastic. Perfect. Thirty-six-inch waist on
the pants. Even the shoes, in a shopping bag, were the correct size, eleven D. Way too perfect.
Unsure if he should accept such a ﬁne harvest, the Boy
King laid his left hand ﬂat on the suit cover and realized
that this was the suit that the nursing staff had not selected
for burial. The suit they’d chosen for the funeral was less
ﬂashy. The man who’d died was quiet and polite. None of
the staff had expected to ﬁnd such a gangster-looking suit
in the old fellow’s closet. Instead, they’d selected the sober,
charcoal-gray suit and a plain white shirt. It was how they
remembered him dressed for Sabbath on Fridays for the
last three years.
It would have been a crime, though, to bury this beautiful suit in a landﬁll, let alone to refuse it after speciﬁcally
asking for it, so Boy King removed the suit from the
Dumpster. He unzipped the cover and, holding the hanger,
checked the suit’s pockets with his right gloved hand, not
wanting to take more personal effects from the dead man
than necessary. He found two theater ticket stubs placed
neatly in the breast pocket like a kerchief: Chanhassen
Dinner Theatre, Guys and Dolls, 1988. The Boy King
smiled. This fellow had dressed the part to see the show.
When he checked the back pocket of the pants, however,
his smile faded. His mouth dropped open, and the Boy
King almost let the hanger slip from his ﬁngers.
On a folded 81 ⁄2-×-11-inch piece of paper was a symbol
drawn in pencil. It was neatly done, the letter of a curious
alphabet or a character in a childish code.
Just as the Boy King had seen it for the ﬁrst time twelve
years ago.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

21

Frightened, he looked at the suit. Who could that man
possibly have been? How could an old Jewish fellow in
Minnesota know to draw such a heinous thing? And if he
didn’t draw it, then where in the world had he gone in this
suit that he would casually place that ancient symbol in his
back pocket with less ceremony than a pair of ticket stubs?
Ready to march into the nursing home to start asking
the staff questions, the Boy King took three steps in that direction and stopped. No. The explanation was not so literal and probably had little to do with this man or his suit.
It was the Boy King’s own doing, he realized. He had
asked for the suit, and, as he well knew, when he asked for
doorways to open, even Dumpster lids, frightening things
came through in the wake of such requests.
But this. Had he known. Letting this wrecking ball
swing back into his life? He shook his head. He did not
need a job nor suit this badly, but too late. Here it was.
Club music pulsed in a passing car, the creamy April
sun emerged from behind a cloud, and Boy King put the
suit in the back of his Econoline.

3

T

he cab driver pulled up to the curb and shouted something in Italian. Rosemont ﬁgured it was either here it
is or get out. It turned out, after a clutch-screaming car ride
from Rome International, that the address he wanted (written on the back of the airline ticket) was in the darkwindowed street-maze of Rome’s famous Jewish ghetto.
Looking at the row of cramped and unmarked buildings sardined together before him, Rosemont called back
to the driver, “This is 24 Vìcolo il Bambinello?”
But the driver, having been paid, merely waved at the
nearest door and stomped on the accelerator, cutting off
three guys on motorinos. Cursing and horn honking trailed
off down the street.
Though a small business district thrummed just a few
blocks away, here, crumbling houses were piled one on top

24

Barth Anderson

of another. These tall narrow stone houses were pockmarked with square holes for beams that once supported
wooden neighbors, long gone now. Climbing up a tall
stoop of stairs to the nearest door, Rosemont ﬁgured any
one of these houses was centuries older than America.
He knocked, but the door was ajar, so Rosemont
slipped inside and found himself in an unlit atrium. Down
a long hall before him, he could see a dim rectangle of light
shining around a door. The hall smelled of dust and mold,
but of sautéed onions, too.
Fearing that he was stepping into someone’s apartment,
he gingerly walked to the door at the end of the hall, a
ready apology on his lips.
“What is this place?” he said into the dark.
Rosemont knocked on the door. He could hear people
on the other side talking quietly, the sizzle of frying. When
the door jerked open, Rosemont started back in fright. A
middle-aged Italian woman with frizzed hair and a greasy
apron stood there staring at him.
“¡Lo siento!” Rosemont said, apologizing in Spanish
out of reﬂex. “Estoy buscando—”
The woman said something rapid and demanding to
him in a low whisper. Behind her in a cramped kitchen, an
older, grandmotherly woman was caramelizing onions on
an ancient gas stove. “What are you saying?” the younger
woman said in Italian.
He handed her the envelope given to him by the strange
messenger yesterday in Managua and shifted to Italian. He
was better with Renaissance-era Italian, but he managed to
ask, “Miss, do you know this address?”
She scanned it and then showed him a face of resignation, maybe pity. Over her shoulder she said something de-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

25

risive to the older lady, who snorted her agreement with a
contemptuous toss of her head and said what sounded like
Whore.
Rosemont tried again. “I’m looking for a hotel. I think
I am, anyway. Do you know this address?”
The woman handed him the envelope and then wiped
her hands on the dirty apron, as if she’d ridded herself
of something. “Come. Come.” She stepped away from the
door and waved him in. He entered and felt his stomach shy
from the claustrophobic reek of onions, gas, and garbage.
“Through there,” she hissed at him in a loud whisper, and
pointed to a blanket covering a doorway.
“What’s through there?” he asked in English.
“Go, go,” said the aproned woman, turning back to a
cutting board of chopped green peppers.
Rosemont squeezed against the old woman to reach the
blanket, wondering where he was being sent, and lifted
the hem.
On the other side was a room with three beds and
sleeping bodies in each one, snores sighing in the darkness.
Rosemont shook his head angrily and turned back, but
both women were already waving him forward.
“We don’t want you here. Go. Through there!”
“But they’re sleeping. I don’t—”
“Shh shh.” The old woman hushed him and turned his
shoulder with a rough push of her hand. “Don’t you wake
them. Go.”
Rosemont passed beneath the blanket, feeling stupid,
confused, but hopeful this might take him to the street on
the other side of the block, so that he could shake off the
smell of the onions and gas. He tiptoed past the sleepers to
the doorway beyond, stopping only to discern the sound of

26

Barth Anderson

a foreign news service chittering about Iraq from a discarded Walkman on the ﬂoor. The room smelled sour, like
unclean clothes and sweating bodies, and Rosemont negotiated between the beds, stepping over piles of books and
magazines in the smothering dark. He opened the door beyond and quickly shut it behind him, so as not to wake the
smelly sleepers, and passed into an open-air courtyard.
The fresh air, warm as it was, felt good on Rosemont’s
face. He looked up and saw white linen and undershirts
bobbing overhead on laundry lines sagging between high
windows.
Four doors opened onto this sunlit courtyard, and
one of them stood ajar with warm light spilling outside.
Rosemont could hear American voices through the door. It
was marked Hostelry of the Tyros in English and Italian,
but there was no address.
“A hostel,” Rosemont said to himself as he walked to
the door. “This has to be the place.”
Inside, the hostelry was a typical check-in room with
a pretty woman in a thick purple sweater behind a pressboard desk, a computer buzzing blue light at her face, and
a wall full of Roman street maps behind her. The young
couple standing in line ahead of Rosemont at the check-in
looked ragged and sunburned. Rosemont watched them
closely, listening, and wondering if they would give him a
clue as to why he had been called to this place.
They seemed tired yet eager, these two, but managed a
forced jaded attitude of kids mimicking European travelers
with far more miles behind them. “We need a room for the
next three nights,” the boy said, leaning on the desk, trying
to talk sense to the desk clerk.
The woman behind the desk didn’t look away from her

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

27

computer screen, where she was losing a game of hearts,
and she sounded angry. “No.”
Rosemont straightened and looked over the boy’s
shoulder at the desk clerk. By her tone, it didn’t sound like
occupancy was the issue.
The American girl looked at her partner like he had the
necessary key in his pocket and gave him a nod of encouragement.
“Look,” said the guy, still leaning. “We ran into someone named Etienne in Prague who told—”
The clerk looked away from her computer for the ﬁrst
time and withered the boy’s voice to silence with a toxic
stare.
The young woman took up the cause. “This Etienne
told us that we could get a room here. We really need a
place to stay.”
“No. You don’t.” The desk clerk looked back at her
game as if the couple had already headed out the door.
“We—”
“You might know the right things to say for whatever
random reason,” interrupted the clerk. Her voice was
haughty, but her eyes remained cool, kind. “There’s absolutely nothing desperate about you, however. No. You’re
tourists. You have everything you need in your ridiculous
Lands’ End backpacks, and you have a thousand phone
numbers in your Fodor’s Rome current edition. If you
know to say that you spoke with Etienne, then you also
know that this hostel is not for vacationers. Or budget
travelers. Or backpackers of any kind. Yes?”
The two were clearly disappointed to the point of
anger, and the girl in particular didn’t want to give up. “We
know something’s going on here. We know this is—”

28

Barth Anderson

“Yes, I’m about to shoot the moon and you’re messing
me up,” said the desk clerk, rolling up her sweater’s sleeves.
She leaned to her left and suddenly made eye contact with
Rosemont around the boy’s hip. “Come. Come. You need
a room?”
The Americans looked over their shoulders at him.
Then with a reluctant sidestep, the boy made room for
Rosemont at the desk, giving him a bafﬂed head to toe.
Rosemont readjusted his backpack but couldn’t hide
the Lands’ End label from anyone in the room. “Um. Good
evening. Hello,” he said in English. His eyes darted left and
right as he stepped between the Americans, unsure what
was expected of him now. The letter merely said to come to
this address and to get a room. It didn’t say anything about
Etienne or the proper thing to say. “I’m here to—”
“We’ve got singles and dorms.” She unrolled the sleeves
of her sweater again, reduced her game of hearts, and pulled
up a spreadsheet. “Two singles left.”
“Um,” said Rosemont with a nervous laugh and glance
at the boy. “I’ll take a single.”
“Why does he get a room and we don’t?” the girl demanded, and Rosemont could picture her at three making
the same face during a tantrum. “We’d take a single.”
The desk clerk ﬂipped her bobbed, black hair away
from her face as if she were accustomed to having longer
hair. “He needs us. You don’t. Take it up with President
Bush. Okay?”
“Actually, I was told to come here,” Rosemont said.
This seemed important to point out for some reason and
hoped it might elicit an explanation.
“By Etienne? Do you know Etienne?” asked the girl.
“Who is Etienne?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

29

The clerk blinked her eyes as if to say ignore them.
“Name?”
The American couple backed away from the desk and
huddled with loud stage-sighs as Rosemont unshouldered
his pack, reddened from Nicaragua’s ubiquitous volcanic
dust. “Rosemont. Jeremiah Rosemont.”
He went through the typical check-in ritual, but when
it came time to present his passport, she waved it away.
“We’re not registered with the government,” she said. “All
we need is your signature.”
Rosemont jerked his head back in surprise. “No money
up front?”
“You don’t have any money, eh?” the desk clerk said.
He shook his head. “Not really. Just Nicaraguan
currency.”
She presented him with a clothbound ledger to sign.
“Keep it,” she whispered. “We’re here for you, Signore
Rosemont.” In her Italian accent, his name sounded like
rosa-moan-ta. “Here’s your key. Your room is on this ﬂoor,
down that hallway.”
The American couple was standing in the courtyard
now, and Rosemont could hear them arguing. He turned
back to the desk clerk and said, “Can you tell me one
thing?”
She’d gone back to her game of hearts but looked at
Rosemont as if he’d snapped her concentration from an involved phone call. “What do you want?”
“Do you know what I’m doing here?”
The woman frowned at him, almost in disgust. Then
she leaned forward, with a sideways glance at the door
where the American couple could still be heard. “No, but
I’ll give you some advice.”

30

Barth Anderson

Rosemont nodded and leaned toward her.
“Don’t admit your ignorance like that anymore.”
“My ignorance?” A surge of anger knotted his ﬁsts,
and he glowered at her, snapping, “How could I be anything but ignorant in a situation like—?”
“Shh! You’re here for a reason, and I guarantee you
know what it is,” she said in a rushed whisper. Rosemont
had the distinct feeling she was trying to tell him something before someone arrived to silence her. “I don’t care
about you one bit. I’m just a volunteer. I don’t care why
you’re here. It probably has something to do with academics, I’d bet. But listen, it’s not my job to care. Or give advice.” She looked at his hands. “Research, maybe? Are you
a historian?”
Her voice lost its irritated edge. She suddenly sounded
intrigued by him.
Rosemont said, “Yes. I was an art historian for years.
How did you know?”
“It doesn’t matter. I don’t care what you were.” The
woman closed her eyes and shrugged one shoulder. Her severe bob made her look controlling and precise, but her
haughty demeanor had dissolved. “Besides, they all are academics. Or used to be. Or wish they had an academic
track.” She looked at him helplessly. “You have to stop
beating this information out of me. You have information
or expertise that someone wants. There. I said it.”
“I do? Maybe,” said Rosemont. He wasn’t beating information out of her, of course, but understood that sometimes people felt this way when he wanted something from
them.
Rosemont’s academic track had evaporated two years
ago—seemed like decades now, for all it mattered to him.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

31

That Rosemont—the wunderkind who’d papered, at the
tender age of twenty, newfound sketches of noted tarot
artist Beneﬁcio Bembo, and who, as a result of the attention, came to value reputation and prestige so dearly—that
Rosemont was gone from the world. Everything had been
stripped from him, beaten out of him, literally, by two men
who didn’t appreciate the compelling effect he had on
the unsuspecting, like this desk clerk. That Rosemont had
laid his precious burdens down in Austin, Texas, on an
emergency-room gurney, with a fractured skull, a broken
collarbone, and a scary, scary loss of blood. This Rosemont
had been happy to leave that one behind but old habits
were hard to break. “I don’t know what anyone might
want of me,” Rosemont said, coaxing the desk clerk.
“That’s all. Someone wrote me and I came.”
“Yes, you came. You came,” she said, as if he were tearing the words from her. She glanced at the Americans out
in the courtyard and whispered, “You ﬂew to Rome willingly, is that it?”
“That’s right.”
“For no good reason.” She gave him a little frown with
her eyebrows, encouraging him to speak. “Why would you
do that?”
Rosemont laughed. “It wasn’t even a question,” he
said. In Managua, he hadn’t even debated with himself
whether or not to take the tickets and ﬂy to Rome. He
looked at the desk clerk hard. She seemed careful and
trustworthy, so he said, “It’s the opposite for me. Standing
still is the dilemma—that’s when troubles always ﬁnd me.”
“I see. Fan clubs form around you, eh?” she said.
“Little cults of personality?”
He nodded, staring at her, wondering if she’d sensed

32

Barth Anderson

that he had deliberately compelled her to speak. “Sometimes.”
People always noticed eventually that there was something strange about Jeremiah Rosemont, that things were
not as they should be. They always identiﬁed him as the
catalyst, the hot coal under the bed of leaves causing
ﬂames to leap suddenly. The disappearances and reappearances of children. Visitations from the dead. Strange personalities overtaking people. In those moments of crisis
and anguish, some people, especially students, used to turn
to him—while some turned on him. That’s what happened
with those two rednecks in Austin. Rosemont’s magnetism
simply repelled instead of attracting, soothing them, and it
had been about to happen again in the Casa Evangelista in
Managua, a repeat of shocking events in Estelí, Kansas
City, Des Moines, Austin.
“So this is a safe haven for people like me?” Rosemont
said.
Her face was serene and kind as she looked at
Rosemont. “It’s more like a gate you’re passing through. I
don’t think you’ll be back.” She lifted her hand for him to
leave or be quiet, and said in her imperious voice, “It’s just
my advice. I don’t know you from a hole in the street, I
don’t care, and that’s the way I like it. Now go. I have to
get rid of the queen.”
Rosemont decided he shouldn’t press, though she’d
clearly been compelled to speak and answer his questions
and could have answered more. “Thank you. Thank you.”
He turned his back on the desk clerk and looked down
the hall she’d indicated. From a high, circular window at
the far end, washed-out sunlight reﬂected on linoleum in the
dark hallway, and he wondered who else was staying in

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

33

this bizarre little hostel. He was safe here, she said, but he
wondered what her deﬁnition of safe was.
Rosemont was about to head down the hall to his room
(he was still wearing the same clothes he’d worn on Sunday
in Managua) when something feathery and magenta ﬂashed
by the window of a nearby door. He looked back at the
clerk but she was absorbed in her game and hadn’t seen it.
He opened the door and stepped out into a little winding
street. The door, on a spring, slapped shut behind him. He
glanced up the street, which was narrow and curved up a
low hill. Running up the middle of it was a man or woman
in high-heel boots and ﬁshnet stockings, a blazing magenta
feather boa trailing behind. Uphill, the little street bent out
of sight behind high buildings. Here, where Rosemont
stood, the buildings were cramped together so that the sky
was just a long crack of dark blue overhead. He hadn’t
seen the hill when the taxi let him off, and the buildings
here looked newer, yet somehow old—from another era.
Rosemont couldn’t tell where he was. Hadn’t he just come
around to the other side of the building?
He looked back at the door but could only see a wall.
“Hey.”
Rosemont put his hand on the wall and ran it over the
dusty surface but couldn’t ﬁnd hinge, seam, or latch.
Stepping back from where the door should have been, he
scanned the wall up to the eaves. No windows. No balconies. Just a broad, ﬂat, red-brick wall.
“Hey!”
Walking toward him, an old couple, the man holding a
chaise longue, glared at him.
“Is this . . . ?” He was about to ask if the Hostelry of the
Tyros was nearby, but recalled the desk clerk’s conversation

34

Barth Anderson

with the American couple. It was a safe house of some kind.
Even if this couple knew about it, they wouldn’t talk.
“Good evening,” he said in English.
As she passed, the brittle old woman made an inscrutable gesture at Rosemont. It didn’t look friendly.
You’re safe here, the desk clerk had said. It may be the
only place you’re safe.
Rosemont hung his head and leaned back against the
blank brick wall. He looked down into his hand and realized he was still holding his room key. It had the number
ﬁve scratched into it.
“Rome,” he said, slipping the key into his pocket. “I’m
in Rome.”

4

T

he Boy King’s van cut through the shadows of palatial mansions on Franklin and came to a stop at the
intersection with Hennepin Avenue. While he waited for
green, the ancient sigil that he’d just found in the pinstriped suit ﬁlled his mind’s eye. His van idled in anticipation, and he took comfort knowing that the whole
continent was at his whim from this red light.
He could turn left and get onto Highway 94, head east
through St. Paul, into the wildernesses of Wisconsin. A
beautiful hiding place, Wisconsin, but someone like the
Boy King would be all too trackable out there. Wild and
remote, but not remote enough. Or, from 94, he could veer
south on Highway 35, which bifurcated the country and
connected to the Intercontinental Highway in Mexico, and
hide out in a bigger and better urban tangle like Mexico

36

Barth Anderson

City. Or, I could go north, he thought, looking up Hennepin
where the wide boulevard bled into Highway 94 ﬂowing
west. Make for the wastes beyond Fargo, and continue
west to Seattle or even press northward to Winnipeg, and
away.
But any of those escapes would mean starting over,
and, while it had taken him years to do it, he’d ﬁnally
created something here. Corrections. Connections. Then
rhythm. He dared not call it home or even think the word,
but this city protected him now, and it didn’t make sense to
sacriﬁce it quite yet.
So instead, the Boy King’s van rumbled east on
Franklin, then down Lyndale, past the bustling Wedge
Co-op and its conﬂation of urban tribes and landed gentry,
through a bouquet of boutiques, past Lake Street. When he
ﬁrst came to this city, Lyndale and Lake was a heroin hot
spot. Grunge bands wailed into the frozen Minnesota nights
from grimy ﬂats. Now it was all Merlot and money—far
more want than need.
The Boy King checked his watch for the date. Thursday.
Lara would be drinking bourbon at the Dream Machine today, and she once asked him to come see her before making
any decisions about leaving town.
Older than the Khemet mud, he thought, hypnotized
by the ﬂow of trafﬁc as he drove. Why here? Why now?
Dream Machine Laundromat was a scummy slot of
washers and dryers located north of his warehouse on the
West Bank, and it was here that Boy King had ﬁrst met his
best friend, Lara, several weeks ago. He didn’t know Lara’s
last name, didn’t particularly think they had much in common, but he’d grown to rely on seeing her once a week at
the Laundromat, and he liked that. After sliding his van

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

37

into a parking stall, Boy King peered through the plateglass window. There was Lara, sitting cross-legged on a
washing machine, and her two roommates, Gitana and
Jackie, perched across from her on dryers in grafﬁtied
leather jackets. A bottle of Beam sat between them.
“Hello, you washwomen.”
They looked up at the Boy King and his craggy face as
he let the Dream Machine door swing shut behind him.
“Shut up!” Lara laughed and hit him on the arm with a
ﬂap of her hand. “I was just talking about you.” She
leaned backward, seemingly to swing her light brown hair
away from her face, but she was giving him an appraising
look under drunk eyelids. “Gitana, get a Dixie cup.”
He liked these kids. They never turned their noses up at
him, even though he knew he smelled perennially of stale
beer and cigarette ashes from diving. “I found my suit.”
“Cheers.” Gitana handed him a Dixie cup of bourbon.
“Now you’re ready for your gig, right?”
Gig. Ready. The words scared Boy King, but he tried to
smile at Gitana as he took the drink.
“I got him that job at the restaurant!” Lara said. “And
I think it’s fuckin’ right on that you’re gonna stay in town
this winter, Boy King!”
Gitana caught Boy King’s glance and winked at him.
“We’ve been here since ten this morning.”
The Boy King leaned against the washing machine next
to Lara and self-consciously folded his right, gloved hand
into his pocket. It was nice to join them, to have some
friends. This circle had developed very recently, Lara and her
pals from the art school, none of whom seemed to mind how
low to the ground he lived or the fact that he squatted in
a warehouse. Sometimes he even met them and their barﬂy

38

Barth Anderson

buddy Garbus for drinks at the Wiggle Room Saloon. If he
wanted, he could choose to hear a note of condescension in
Lara’s comment about him wintering in Minneapolis, his
migrant life—the twang of smug magnanimousness that
sounded in the voices of people with means—even small,
modest means. But Lara couldn’t help it. She was drunk,
and her effusion genuine, he knew, so Boy King chose not
to be bothered. It had been a long time since he spent
enough time in one place, where people recognized him,
smiled at him, put a drink in his hand. The fact that he
looked and smelled like some sort of mad street pirate
didn’t seem to matter to Lara, Gitana, or Jackie.
The bourbon tasted sweet and sharp and he paused,
looking down in the cup, then past it, at his gloved and
broken right hand. The smell of bourbon always took him
to crazier times. He forced a smile. “Here’s to some
fucked-up shit.”
Gitana and Jackie raised their cups, mouths wide with
a tandem laugh. “Fucked-up shit!”
“So you found your suit,” said Lara, emptying her cup
and holding it out to Jackie to reﬁll. “You start the gig at
Dona Mia soon. Everything’s good.” Lara gave him a
vampy look, about as smoky as anyone could look while
sitting on a washing machine. “And yet . . . you came to see
me.” She lowered her voice even more. “On Dream
Machine Thursday.”
The Boy King spread his hand as if he’d been caught in
the act. “So true. I’m here for the magic.”
“Something’s not good?”
The memory of the symbol made Boy King wince. He
took another little sip of whiskey and put the cup in his left
hand. “I need some answers.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

39

Lara took off her leather jacket, covered with her handwriting in white paint, and sat in just her tank top and
jeans. Lara wore tank tops even in winter, deliberately exposing the tiger tattoos on her shoulders. With one pale
hand, she reached into her pants’ thigh pocket and removed her tarot deck. She patted the washing machine behind him. “Up here.”
Biting the cup of bourbon, Boy King joined her atop the
washing machines. Across from him was a wall-length
mirror. He blocked it out, afraid of the maddening reﬂection he knew lurked there.
“Jackie, be a thang and fold my whites?” said Lara, unknotting the silk tie that bound her cards.
Jackie clearly didn’t like the idea. She had sharp, pixie
features that made her look demonic when angry. In a
snotty singsong, she said, “ ‘Jackie, drive me to the war
protest. Jackie, do my laundry.’ Diva.”
Lara shufﬂed the cards and plunked them down in
front of the Boy King, then immediately picked them up
with a hasty apology. “Oops! I forgot! You don’t like
touching them.”
The Boy King wrapped his hands around the paper
cup, as if warming himself, but really he was just ﬁnding
something to do with them. For safety reasons, he handled
his own tarot deck only, but he’d been about to pick up her
cards. In the mirror on the other side of the Laundromat,
Boy King could feel his reﬂection looking at him.
“Don’t worry,” she said. “I’ll absorb the evil for you.”
Lara dealt ten cards facedown, placing six in a cross and
four alongside in a column—the arrangement she always
used whenever the Boy King asked her for a reading.
There was a lot of drama in the way Lara read, which

40

Barth Anderson

was ﬁne with Boy King. After dealing the cards, she
stopped and closed her eyes, summoning strength or peace
of something, he ﬁgured, and she held her splayed ﬁngers
over the cards for a long, quiet moment. The Boy King
didn’t believe this mumbo jumbo was necessary, but Lara
was a very accurate reader, so if she needed to cut open a
chicken beforehand, he’d sit patiently and wait for the
squawking to end.
Finally Lara ﬂipped over the ﬁrst two cards, which were
crossed at the center of the spread. She looked at them the
way she might look at a couple on whose conversation she
was eavesdropping. “Yours is a story of hiding and discovery. Here’s what I mean. First? You were a bullied disciple.
Then? You were a warrior surrounded by all his favorite
weapons. This is a transformation of chopped wood to billows of dark smoke. But we’re not concerned with that—
for now. This is merely the swinging bat and sailing ball,
not the ﬁnal score. Does this make sense to you?”
It made no sense whatsoever. “Yes, of course.”
Gitana opened a dryer and started hauling out black
skirts and black pants. “You two are insane.”
Boy King nodded and smiled to encourage Lara. He
was waiting for that tenth card—the ﬁnal score. “Go on.”
Lara ﬂipped over the next four so that a larger cross of
cards was now revealed. “You can’t go far from your past,
ever, though you constantly strain at its leash like a frightened, beaten dog.” It went on like this, card after card,
with Lara scattering her surreal pearls, most of which
rolled past him ungrasped, but some of which struck him
with startling resonance: “The sleuth who almost caught
you many years ago never had a chance, did he?” and,
“The danger with camouﬂage is forgetting your own, true

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

41

skin.” Lara’s readings were a bit like randomly spinning
the tuner on a radio, which is how he’d recognized what
she was, sitting in this Laundromat a few weeks back, listening to her dole out mad readings to her eager and easily
mystiﬁed friends. But she always accessed a channel, heard
something that others couldn’t—it just meant patiently
waiting through opaque oracles like, “Dead animals lying
unburied are vexing you,” or, “We daily taste the most
acrid hope,” and, “You dangle from the sky like noon.”
“These last four cards,” Lara said, “speak to the intangibles in your situation—what you must know but cannot
now see, nor face—what you dread and long for. Understand?”
She said this part every time. “Oh yes. Yes, I do.”
“There’s a telescope aimed at a distant star. You know
it’s aimed correctly, but you cannot see the star, no matter
how long you stare through that telescope.”
That much might have been true—in an obscure,
metaphorical way. He had the strange Egyptian image in
his own pocket but didn’t understand what it portended,
and he couldn’t get it out of his thoughts. “What do you
advise?”
Gitana was folding a black knit top. “She doesn’t do
advice, Boy.”
“Not my department. Sorry,” said Lara, decanting
some more bourbon. “Now shut the fuck up. I got the ﬁnal
score.”
Boy King clenched his teeth, bracing himself.
“You will never see what is right in front of you,” Lara
said, slurring her words a bit, “until you realize something
salient about that sleuth’s case.”
The Boy King shrugged. “And that is?”

42

Barth Anderson

“That you aren’t the sleuth.”
“I’m not the sleuth,” repeated the Boy King, oblivious
to what she meant. He waited for clariﬁcation, but Lara
answered by ﬁnishing her little drink. He prompted her,
saying, “I’m not the sleuth?”
“No, you’re not. You will never ﬁnd the Holy Grail.”
“I’m not in the grail business.”
“That’s good, because the sleuth is still on the case.”
“I thought you said I wasn’t on the case.”
“No, I said you weren’t the sleuth.”
The Boy King gritted his teeth. Maybe he’d gotten here
too late in the day for a coherent reading. “What are you
talking about, Lara?”
“I never said there wasn’t a sleuth.”
Boy King reworked the sentence in his head, as if translating. “Okay,” he said vaguely. “So who is the sleuth if
I’m not the sleuth?”
“See? I told you! You don’t see what’s right in front of
you!” She signaled touchdown. “Vindicated!”
Boy King shouted. “How am I supposed to see what’s
in front of me?”
“You can’t see what’s in front of you.”
“Not with a reading from you! If I’m not the sleuth,
then who am I?”
“God, you two,” said Gitana, shaking her head.
“You,” said Lara, scooping up the cards, “are the
Grail.”
The Boy King was about to argue with her and send
this Abbott and Costello card-reading into yet another
pass, but he suddenly stopped. He wondered if this was
more random Dada poetry, or her eerie channel of truth.
The Boy King put his hands ﬂat on either side of him, as if

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

43

to keep the washing machine that he was sitting on from
ﬂying into the air. “What did you just say?”
Lara righted the cards and then tied the silk tie around
them again, making a little Windsor knot with her fumbling ﬁngers. “Did I fucking stutter? You’re the goddamn
Grail, okay?”
The Boy King felt the distinct urge to grab Lara and
wring something cogent out of her. He ﬁgured he wasn’t
going to get the answers he wanted so he said, “Are you
saying that this sleuth is after me?”
“You tell me.”
“No, you tell me.”
“No, you tell me!”
He looked at her warily. She might have even planted
the Egyptian symbol in that suit, laid it out for him to ﬁnd.
She looked up at him, caught him staring, and seemed to
start. Something could have overpowered her, manipulated
her into leaving that symbol where he could ﬁnd it. But no.
Lara didn’t have any lies in her, he could tell. What she was
saying had merit, whether she understood the implication
of her words or not, and that was usually the way with
readings from the uninitiated. “There’s something who
wants something from me,” he said in a low, rushing whisper to Lara, “and it will kill me to get it. So if you know
something concrete that will help me.”
Lara turned her face to him, and he could see she ﬁnally
realized that he was scared, that her words had frightened
him. He could also see that the oracular moment was over.
Her eyes were too glassy with booze and they held a little
spark of fear for her friend. “Do you need a place to stay?”
she asked. “Are you in danger?”
A place to stay. He almost spat at her. No lies in her,

44

Barth Anderson

maybe, but the yawning gulf that surrounded Lara was so
wide she couldn’t see people clearly, couldn’t see Boy King
as anything but homeless, helpless, tragic. Do you need a
place to stay? Can I give you a crust of bread, so I won’t
feel so guilty for knowing you? If it weren’t for that receiver inside her that plugged Lara into signals beyond her
gulf, her do-gooder reﬂexes would dominate, and she and
Boy King would have no friendship at all.
“Yes, I’m in danger,” said Boy King, all but snarling.
“That’s why I wanted this reading, to see if I’m safe or
not.”
“Who’s after you, Boy?”
He decided it was time to ﬁnd out if Lara was truly
friend or foe. Boy King removed the piece of paper that
he’d found in the suit just an hour before and laid it on the
washing machine. Across the way, his reﬂection was waving in the mirror, trying to get his attention. Boy King
closed his eyes and said to Lara, “Have you seen this before?”
“What is it?” Lara picked it up and examined it.
“Looks like an animal, maybe.”
He’d hoped that seeing it would bring in something
more coherent through whatever spooky channel she accessed, but no. Her expression was sincere, ignorant, and
she had no access to the people who revered this sigil. Boy
King took the paper back and slipped it into his pocket. All
the hiding had gotten him nothing. Walling off that past,
burying the names and stories from that time, and freeing
himself had simply delayed the inevitable. As soon as he
decided it might be safe to accept a job, to ﬁnd a suit to
wear for his ﬁrst day, the Boy King announced his pres-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

45

ence, stuck up his head—and, voilà, a warning from Our
Lord the Spinning Wheel.
“Boy, what is this thing?”
“It’s a symbol,” Boy King told Lara, “of a very old cult.
Egyptian, but not really. Older than that civilization. Older
than the Khemet mud, as we used to say.”
Lara frowned and gave him a slow, besotted blink.
“But what does all that mean?”
His lips twitched into a little smirk. Now look who’s
asking for clarity? The Boy King lifted his eyes to her. “It’s
a calling card from the sleuth. I found it in the pocket of
the suit that I just Dumpster dived. Someone is letting me
know that they’re after me.”
Lara frowned. “That doesn’t make sense.”
“No. But it’s true.”
“I believe you that something weird is going on, Boy.
But I mean, if someone was after you, why would they
alert you?”
“Hmm.” Boy King straightened. He hadn’t thought of
it that way. “They like to toy. To terrorize. But you’re
right.” The symbol ﬁlled his vision for a moment, and he
saw it as he had ﬁrst seen it, cast in gold on a chain around
the neck of the six-hundred-year-old man. He blinked rapidly. “There’s nothing good that comes with this symbol.
That’s all I know. I think I need to get out of town. I think
I should get in the van and—”
“Look,” Lara said, grabbing his gloved hand.
He ﬂinched and yanked it away. “Don’t!”
She held up her hands, placating him, but she looked
frightened. Boy King glared at her furiously and knew she
was trying to decide if he was so bonkers that she should

46

Barth Anderson

cancel his Dona Mia’s gig for him. The moment passed,
and her shoulders went from squared to whiskey languid.
“If someone wanted to kill you they’d just do it, Boy. They
wouldn’t put a note in a suit and leave it in a Dumpster
that you might or might not ﬁnd,” she said, her voice still
hot, “right?”
Boy King didn’t understand much of why things happened the way they did, but maybe Lara was right. Maybe
the symbol of the ancient cult portended something other
than a visit from the old man. Maybe things had changed.
Boy King certainly had. “Could be.”
“Dona Mia’s is expecting you to come.”
“I know.”
“So you can’t run off now.”
“I don’t know. Might be the best time, Lara.”
“After all I’ve done for you?” She was teasing, but she
wasn’t kidding. “How long has it been since you had an
address, a phone?”
“I don’t need those things.”
“A van that runs good? A visit to a doctor? Being able
to pee somewhere other than an abandoned lot?”
The pat answer was that he didn’t care about those
things, either. But he stared at her and wondered if he did.
“Just hang tight, Boy,” Lara said. “I think you’re wigging out because you’re afraid of this job and the change.
That’s what I think is going on.”
He grimaced. More of her slumming art student crap.
She could leave this world of homeless people, war
protests, and shitty Laundromats anytime she pleased. He
wondered what she would say if he told her what he was
really afraid of—the casual, bizarre cruelty, the laughing
torturers, the warning he’d been issued twelve years ago

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

47

while his lover sprawled on a machine shop ﬂoor. They’re
coming for you. You have to escape!
But she’d said the right word. Afraid. He allowed himself a rare look at his reﬂection, the image of himself there.
At least it looked like him now. It didn’t used to, and
maybe that meant things were changing for the better, becoming less dire. That’s how the game operated, after all.
Those who thrived on power lusted for acquiescence, surrender, and fear. Their lives were streamlined into the hunt
for ever greater pools of it, drinking deep from them; the
mere fact that he’d been in a state of panic in the hour since
he’d found the symbol might have done more to announce
Boy King’s location than a ﬂare shot straight overhead and
exploding over the city.
For the longest time, Boy King had adhered to the
motto that if he had nothing to lose he had nothing to fear.
During those early days of homelessness, his reﬂection was
a horror, a reminder of the horrors from which he was running. But that was different, now, and maybe nothing to
lose equals nothing to fear was the wrong strategy. Maybe
if he bolstered his life with a little muscle and stopped living it so close to the bone . . . Maybe Lara’s world was safer
because of its smug fearlessness and confounded belief in
itself. Did hope trump fear? It could. It might.
“Okay. Me and my suit will be at Dona Mia’s tomorrow. Like I said.”
Lara grinned. “Cool.” She held the bottle of Beam over
his cup without pouring. “Promise?”
Boy King smirked at himself. Was he going to live in
abandoned buildings his whole life? It was time. He’d been
on the fringes of ﬁrelight for too long. Time to rejoin the
human tribe. “Hit me.”

48

Barth Anderson

She poured. “Gitana, he’s actually going to read tomorrow. Wait till you get a Boy King reading. It’s ﬁve-alarm
yikes.”
Gitana was buttoning down the collar on a dress. “I’ll
draw up a press release.”
This was so brazen, so needlessly forward after all these
years of careful solitude. But it was done, he’d promised,
so he drained the bourbon. “In for a penny, in for a pounding,” he said, and edged the empty cup across the washing
machine for one more.

If urban planners had been paying attention, they might
have noticed that the tail end of River Boulevard, the halfblock that jutted toward Highway 35 like an accusing ﬁnger, began disappearing from records about a decade ago.
Street maps of Minneapolis started shaving off that little
ﬁnger, that 650-foot stretch of road, where an abandoned
blond-stone warehouse from the last century and two
Edwardian duplexes sagged against each other. Just as well
that no one noticed. Most families didn’t want houses so
close to the highway, and enterprising businesses couldn’t
use the tiny Bryce & Waterston livery that didn’t have a
parking lot or modern loading docks; development would
cost them more than it was worth. Or, at least, that was the
thought that made their eyes drift away from this amputated section of River Boulevard.
Five families of Hmong and Eritrean immigrants lived
in one of the Edwardian mansions-turned-duplexes. The
other was occupied by a squatting theatrical collective in
the bottom ﬂat and a prostitute named Farah in the top.
Neither the immigrant families nor the theatrical collec-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

49

tive, nor the Boy King, paid rent. In fact, only Farah was
connected to civic commerce in any palpable way.
The Bryce & Waterston livery made the other households nervous, so the Boy King had the building to himself.
Pulling in from Thirtyﬁvedub, he parked his van up River
Boulevard, well away from the warehouse but still within
view, and walked a circuitous path through an abandoned
lot of thistle and quack grass. Entering through a side window where he’d leaned a plywood board, he was home.
It was April, so the chilly warehouse was invigorating
when he left the warm sun outside. Boy King stayed here in
spring and fall but in the cruel Minnesota winter, and the
very hottest pit of summer, he lived either in the Econoline
or in the shelter on Twenty-eighth if he could get in. Now,
Boy King stood in the center of the ancient loading bay and
took in the cool, moist air of the warehouse. He loved it
here, but for the ﬁrst time he was considering staying in
Minneapolis year-round, and that meant a change. With
the prospect of a job like the one that Lara got him, he
found himself thinking about things like an apartment.
Could he earn that much money? A telephone? Maybe a
desk and a room where he could put books that he would
buy with his earnings. Bryce & Waterston was too cold
and wet past September for such plans.
Boy King had just placed his hand on the wall, ready to
ascend the railless stairs, when something on the loadingbay ﬂoor caught his eye. A rock, he thought at ﬁrst, or a
brick. The building was crumbling, and the occasional
scattered brick on the ﬂoor wasn’t unusual.
But this brick had eyes. Like a turtle? Didn’t it? It was
hard to see, nestled in an unnaturally dark nook of shadows below the stairs.

50

Barth Anderson

Boy King stood with his back to the rough, blond brick
of the warehouse wall, and the cool dampness of it chilled
the backs of his bare arms. He dared not move, trapped in
a silence shattered by geese barking overhead and trafﬁc
rivering along the highway. Slowly, a square of sunlight
elongated, drifted across the ﬂoor, and swallowed the ﬁgure in light.
Now he could see it clearly. Not a turtle, but a tiny car.
A van.
His van.
Boy King turned his head ever so slightly, cranking his
gaze sidelong so that he could look through the open doorway at his van. Still there, on River Boulevard. Doors shut.
Windows rolled up, snug as an Econoline bug.
Now that natural light had been thrown on the model,
Boy King could see that it was more than just a clever rendering—it was an exact replica, complete with slightly
hanging forward bumper and a dented cargo door. It was a
marker. Someone was watching him. Someone was here
and had found him despite Boy King erasing the paths that
such searchers used. He couldn’t ﬁght the force that was
coming. No, it wasn’t coming—it was here. Had it been
the decision he’d just made? Did these things happen that
quickly? Had the promise to Lara alerted a spy? Or was
this some older trap ﬁnally springing? In the old days, he’d
discounted Khnum as a complete joke, but he never would
again.
You’re the goddamn Grail, okay?
Lara’s words scared him deeply. It wasn’t revenge, recovery, justice, or hate that compelled the “sleuth,” as Lara
put it. It was him. Doesn’t matter what I have or what I

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

51

give it, he thought, looking up at the top of the stairs that
led to his secret home.
Stepping toward it, Boy King traced BK on the roof of
the miniature van with his ﬁnger. It was made from mud.
Nile mud, he knew. He told the van as he picked it up, “I
renounced my power over an evil world a long time ago.”
He paused. “But I’m back in it now.”
He walked to one of Bryce & Waterston’s shattered
windows and released the replica into the air like a trapped
bird. It broke away from Boy King’s hands and sailed east,
as though it were just another goose or duck making for
the Mississippi, where river mud would meet river mud.
“I’m not a grail. I’m just my own self.”

5

A

round him, the winding Roman street was ﬁlling
with what seemed to be festival-goers. Smiling people with lawn chairs and blankets strolled up and down the
street with an air of anticipation. A few wore wild and garish makeup, above their staid collared shirts and casual
skirts. Nearby, someone was lighting off bottle rockets.
Rosemont scrutinized the wall again. He’d been waiting for some time to see if a traveler would arrive and open
the secret door. But maybe it only opened out and the indifferent desk clerk had simply let him walk out without
warning him. He hoped he could walk around to the front
and pass through the kitchen of angry ladies and the dormitory to ﬁnd the hostel again. He ﬁgured he should do
that soon, but now he could smell meat grilling somewhere
down the block and his stomach led him away from the

54

Barth Anderson

wall. He hadn’t eaten anything since the little Salisbury
steak on the ﬂight into Rome.
Rosemont set off down the narrow street in the direction of the enticing smells. As he walked, though, he
remembered that he didn’t have any money. He had
Nicaraguan currency, but the corona was so devalued he
couldn’t even exchange it at Rome International. How was
he going to eat in one of the wealthiest cities in Europe?
The thought made him anxious—and hungrier.
“Oh, God. What the fuck are you doing here?” a voice
said in English.
Rosemont turned his head this way and that, trying to
ﬁnd the speaker’s voice, which resonated as if from inside a
garbage can.
“Jeremiah? This is . . . Oh, this is just fucking rich. Ow.
God, that hurts my . . . Wipe that idiot look off your face
and come here!”
Rosemont glanced at a parked Volvo and saw that the
trunk was open, cracked just a bit, but held in place with
bungee cord. Someone was in there, stuck in the trunk.
Rosemont reached for the cord to unhook it, but the voice
hissed at him.
“Stop that! There’s no time. You have to help me. You
have to trust me, okay? I know it doesn’t make sense, but it
will.”
“Who are you?”
“You don’t know who I am?”
Rosemont said, “No.”
“No?”
“No, I don’t know who you are!”
“Then, um.” The man in the trunk stiﬂed laughter,
coughed, and then collected himself. “Let’s save that mo-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

55

ment of joy, shall we? You see that building there? That
one with the steps and the blue door?”
Rosemont saw it. It was less than thirty feet away, atop
a short stoop. There was a group of young discotheque
boys smoking on the steps wearing glistening fairy wings
on their backs, a funny contrast with their muscle shirts.
“Yes, I see it . . .”
“You have to walk up there. Go in, and on the desk
by the marble staircase is a red three-ring binder. You have
to grab it and walk out here and then you have to let me
out of this trunk, and then we’re going to run like hell.
Got that? It’s got to be quick, clean, and you have to act
totally—”
“I’m not walking into a stranger’s house,” Rosemont
snapped.
“Look, shut up.”
“I’m not stealing anything. Not for some guy in a
trunk.”
“They’re going to kill me if you don’t help me. They’re
not supposed to, but they will. And you’re not exactly sitting pretty, either. You got a message, right? A spooky
dude in the middle of the night? A letter addressed to you
with a plane ticket in it, probably?”
Rosemont pulled his hand back from grabbing the
bungee cord and bent over, saying, “Yeah. Yes, what is this
about? Can you—”
“Don’t talk into the trunk, you fucking moron! Christ,
act like you don’t know I’m in here!”
Rosemont stood straight and leaned against the Volvo,
looking down the street at the revelers. “How did you
know about that? Why am I here? Who was that? Who
sent him?” Though he was supposed to be acting cool, at

56

Barth Anderson

that moment there wasn’t a nonchalant bone in his body.
The more that his questions spilled out of him, the more he
scooped the air with his hands, shouting, “You have to tell
me something—none of this makes sense! I mean, I came
all the way from Nicaragua! Who was that guy? How did
he know where to ﬁnd me?”
“Now, don’t go William Shatner on me,” the man in
the trunk said. “I’ll tell you everything I know if you help
me out. Deal? Look, it’s a cakewalk. They all left after they
threw me in here. There’s no one in that house. It’s unlocked. I know, because I left it unlocked. Walk right the
fuck in there and grab the red binder—you’ll see it, I swear
to God—and come back here.”
Rosemont shook his head as he walked away from the
Volvo. “I can’t believe this. I can’t. I can’t do this.” He
started down the street, walking away from the man in the
trunk. Then he stopped and pressed his ﬁngertips against
his forehead as if keeping his thoughts or his brains from
spilling onto the street.
“Rosemont? You have to! Where are you going? Ah,
God, I’m in a pool of windshield wiper ﬂuid or something!”
Still shaking his head, Rosemont turned back to the
building with the blue door and looked at the young men
in fairy wings and wraparound sunglasses sitting and
drinking on the stoop. They didn’t seem like they lived
there—just partyers parked on available stairs. Maybe he
could walk in. Maybe they wouldn’t stop him. Maybe he
could get some answers.
“Rosemont? Come on! Cowboy up. Let’s go.”
The man in the trunk knew about the crazy letter deliv-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

57

erer. He knew about the plane ticket. It didn’t make sense,
but walking away now, after coming halfway around the
planet, didn’t make sense, either.
Rosemont shouldered his backpack and marched
toward the cluster of men on the steps.
As he approached, they parted for him and he walked
up the stairs, reaching into his pocket as if for keys and trying to look like he belonged here—as best as an itinerant
traveler with Nicaraguan mud on his work boots could. He
blocked the lock with his body, mimed unlocking it, and
prayed that the freak in the trunk wasn’t lying.
A breath later, he was inside.
Standing in a high-ceilinged foyer with thin diagonals
of white daylight illumining a pale marble staircase before
him, Rosemont felt a desperate sense of panic. For whatever reason, he’d pictured that this would be a set of
ofﬁces, that he would be taking something from a receptionist’s desk.
But no, this was someone’s private residence. Cheap
picture frames ﬁlled with shots of the same ﬁve members of
a bespectacled family lined the walls. A pile of folded laundry on the bottom step of the stairs. Stacks of books on the
ﬂoor, awaiting shelves or cardboard boxes. Two teddy bears
in a toy wagon waited for a child to come play with them.
A valiant neatness barely staving off clutter. Rosemont
hadn’t stood in a house like this in many years, a house
with so much life and loneliness.
On the ﬂoor, at the foot of the stairs, he noticed a perfectly round dot. Rosemont stepped closer and looked
down at it. Black and gleaming like paint. He knew what it
was a second before he touched it, but he couldn’t stop

58

Barth Anderson

himself from letting the dot turn his ﬁngertip red. The
blood was already starting to congeal, making a circle of
darker red upon the wood ﬂoor.
Rosemont winced and wiped his ﬁnger clean on his
boot. He was about to back away but he saw another
black dot before a shut door beside the stairs.
“Don’t do this,” he told himself as he reached for the
knob.
Rosemont slammed the door shut a quickened heartbeat after he’d opened it, a perfect photograph of what
he’d seen in the little bathroom emblazoned in his mind’s
eye. He leaned against the banister, looked down at his
chest, and realized he was starting to hyperventilate. He
took a few deep breaths and coaxed himself to think
clearly.
“Okay. Lot of blood in there. That’s the way it is.
Okay.”
He nodded, then shut his eyes hard, scrunching them
tight, but the last thing he’d seen, the person’s hand with a
piece of wood nailed to it, was getting the better of him.
The nail had driven a piece of paper against the wood, an
impossibly clean, white piece of paper against all the red in
the room.
Rosemont’s eyes rolled heavenward. “Oh, don’t do it,
man, don’t do it, don’t do it, don’t do it.”
But a second later, he was opening the door and shutting it again, almost immediately.
Standing in the foyer on unsteady knees, Rosemont
clamped his palms over his eyes. “Aw, shit.”
A big woman, rumpled and housewifey in her way.
Jeans and cheap tennis shoes. On the piece of wood nailed
to her hand were written characters from an alphabet that

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

59

he didn’t recognize, and on the white paper he’d seen
the typewritten words “Your presence is requested” and
“Rome,” before hastily shutting the door.
A copy of the very same letter that he himself had received in Managua.
Rosemont took two steps toward the stairs and leaned
his full weight against the banister, breathing deeply
through his mouth and exhaling hard through his nose.
“Sure.” The blood-and-feces smell behind the door had
been strong, clinging. “It’ll be a lark. Why not take that
ticket,” he said between breaths, “and just ﬂy to Rome?”
So there were more people who had received the same
letter, being called here. But someone wanted the recipients
gone in a pretty ritualistic way. Was it really a match to his
own letter? Maybe he hadn’t read it correctly. A sickly, low
laugh rattled from his chest. He couldn’t open that door
again.
He was about to push himself away from the banister
and slip out the door when he saw, under a stack of mail
on an oak secretary by the stairs, a red, three-ring binder.
In front of it, a bandana was folded neatly on the shelf.
A dizzying nausea made the print on the bandana—the
vaguely familiar paisleylike ﬂowers—rise from the cloth
and dance upon his retina. He grabbed the red binder and
bandana and shoved them into his backpack. He wanted
to vomit and rid his body of the vision of that poor
woman, but before he zipped his backpack shut, he looked
at the cover of the binder and read the computer-generated
label there:
Dr. John C. Miles
Ligget & LaSalle University

60

Barth Anderson

Rosemont put a hand over his mouth, staring down at
the name of the author. He pulled the binder out of his
backpack and a shower of the tiny paisley bandana ﬂowers
fell to the ﬂoor as he opened the binder to the ﬁrst page
and the title there:
THE REFUTATION OF ROSEMONT

Rosemont’s head jerked back.
Immediately, he shut the binder and looked at the cover
again. John C. Miles. Rosemont opened it again and glanced
at the beginning of the manuscript but realized it was written as a letter to the editor. The manuscript was addressed
at the top to Antiquities Journal Monthly, a magazine to
which Rosemont had regularly contributed years ago. But
the letter had a title, The Refutation of Rosemont, as if it
were an article.
Dear Sir,
Did you know that Jeremiah Rosemont picks his nose?
In his sleep, he picks his nose . . .
What the hell was this? A slanderous attack on him?
Rosemont’s eyebrows furrowed in anger as he tried to make
sense of the article, wondering if it had actually seen print
in Antiquities Journal Monthly. He continued reading.
Dear Sir,
Did you know that Jeremiah Rosemont picks his nose?
In his sleep, he picks his nose. Did you know that? I

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

61

have no beef with you. To sell copies of your ludicrous
magazine, you frequently publish the excitable dithering of Dr. Jeremiah Rosemont, he of the undercover
pick, the somnambulant harvest, and I don’t bite my
teeth at subscribers of Antiquities Journal Monthly
(AJM), either. Though, for the duration of this letter, do
your best to keep up with the smart kids, ok, Gentleminded Readers?
That was Miles, all right. His irascible, irresponsible
attacks—his patented blend of jest and bile. Was it possible? Rosemont’s head turned toward the front door. The
Volvo. Was the man in the trunk John C. Miles? Rosemont
should have recognized that voice of all voices, one that
went with Austin, the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow, the highest
and lowest moments of Rosemont’s life. Miles could never
have disguised his voice well enough. Rosemont scanned
down the page.
No occult origins for tarot, eh? Rosemont, Rosemont,
Rosemont. I’m surprised AJM and its high premium on
adventure (!) and mystery (!!) bought your tidy little
turd of an article.
Rosemont shut the binder just as he’d shut the bathroom door, blocking his eyes and his mind from the
much too much. The reemergence of his own personal demon, John C. Miles, and the afterimage of that impossibly
white paper surrounded by blood swam nauseatingly
through his belly, paisley ﬂowers prickling the corners of
his sight.

62

Barth Anderson

“This is happening,” he muttered, and shook his head
hard to keep his vision from tunneling. “I’ve got to get up
on this. I’m not on top.”
He slid the binder back into his backpack and started in
fright at a sudden noise, before realizing that it wasn’t gunﬁre but an air conditioner kicking to life.
Rosemont walked over to the long, narrow ﬂoor-toceiling windows that ﬂanked the front door and looked
out. Two men were stepping away from the Volvo, walking toward the stoop and the blue door. Rosemont stepped
back from the window, retreating into the warm shadows
of the house, but kept his eyes on the men—one hunchshouldered and canine, the other balancing an ugly cinderblock skull on a thick neck—until he was sure they were
coming to this house. Which they were.
Rosemont hunched down and, barely aware of what he
was doing, scooped up the many paisley ﬂowers that had
scattered from the bandana’s ﬂoral print and then lunged
to the bathroom door, shutting it a moment before the
front door opened.
“It’s not here,” said a high, tense voice. They were in
the foyer now.
Japanese, thought Rosemont, standing in the bathroom.
The woman on the ﬂoor looked Japanese to Rosemont and
her makeup was beginning to stand out garishly against
her blanching skin. Rosemont was unable to step over the
woman’s body, unable to move or pull himself away from
the voices in the foyer.
“Not here?” said the other. “What do you mean?”
“I mean, look. It’s gone. So’s his bandana. Gone.”
Hide, you idiot, Rosemont told himself as the sounds of
mad rustling and crumpling of paper came from the foyer.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

63

The bathroom was actually quite large, with a sunken
bath, a pale blue bidet, and a shower. Gold appointments
everywhere, and a small plaster statue of a cherub reclined
next to the tub. A large linen closet looked promising as a
hiding place, but the hamper inside would have to be removed, and there was no time for that. To the left of the
bathroom door was the shower stall with a sliding door.
Once inside, standing under a drip from the showerhead,
he tried inching the sliding door shut, but it grabbed in its
track. Rosemont jerked his hand back, terriﬁed that touching the door might make too much noise, and clutched his
backpack to his chest.
“Fuck. Fuck!”
“The Iranians must have doubled back after they threw
him in the trunk,” said the deeper, calmer of the two
voices, “and—I don’t know. Somehow—”
“But it was right here!”
“Bene. Relax. No sense crying over it now. The
Iranians or the Blackleafers have it.”
“Fuck!”
“But we have Miles. Look, I said relax. We’ll get it out
of him or he’ll lead us to the monk. We have something else
to take care of.”
The more high-strung voice let out an exasperated sigh.
“Let’s just leave her.”
The deeper voice laughed, and then the sound of the
bathroom doorknob jiggling sent a shock through Rosemont’s heart. The door was opening.
“At least we stopped one.” The high, tense voice
seemed calmer now, but the nearness of it, reverberating in
the bathroom, shook Rosemont. “That’s worth something,
isn’t it?”

64

Barth Anderson

Rosemont’s whole body went stiff. He pressed back
hard against the wall of the shower and tried not to think
about the woman and her normal, everyday sneakers. The
strange code written upon the plank. The nail. The guys
who did this. God, they’re right here in the room. They’d
ﬁnd him in a second, and then, and then, and then.
“As long as the connection isn’t fused yet,” the deeper
voice said. “Yeah, that’s good.”
“Okay. Let’s do this thing.”
Rosemont shut his eyes and listened, half expecting the
sound of sawing or dismemberment. But it sounded like
the men were hunkering down or sitting on the bathroom
ﬂoor next to the woman. A moment later, they were whispering. Rosemont strained to hear what they were saying,
but they whispered together in a rush, both of them, speaking so low and fast as if racing to some ﬁnish. Rosemont
couldn’t make out individual words or even the language,
and the whispering carved little patterns in the air, symbols
that also seemed to speak in little whispers to Rosemont.
Like the muttered prayer, say, of a remote tribesman hunkering in the desert, examining day-old caravan tracks,
and wondering if they were the footprints of gods; an
echoing temple, with robed eavesdroppers huddled beneath a ceiling painted lavishly with boats, listening to the
dark-skinned tribesman pray, far away, on the sands. Their
words, which were not words as Rosemont thought of
them, seemed to speak to him on their own accord. Free us
from this place, the eavesdroppers’ words begged, this
abomination to loam and water, this spy house of whores.
Free us from the diseased prisons of your masters and
carry us—

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

65

Just then the wall at Rosemont’s back gave.
Glancing over his shoulder, Rosemont saw that the
shower wall had gone transparent, insubstantial, and dark.
He looked again. Is an animal’s body moving in the shadows of the wall? A horse. No, there’s fur. Wool? Rosemont
gave a small gasp.
The whispering in the bathroom stopped.
Rosemont looked up. Listening. Eyes scanning the scene
outside the shower, nothing in the bathroom seemed to
have changed. The lavish room looked just as it had, with
its sunken tub, plaster cherub, bathroom sink, and vanity
mirror.
But in the mirror he could see the two men, and one
was looking up at Rosemont in the mirror, crouching, as if
ready to leap.
Rosemont started back in fright and his back hit hard
against the wall.
“What is that?” asked the shorter of the two, everything about him small and blunt. “Is that real?”
Through the mirror, Rosemont could see that the body
of the Japanese woman was gone, the tiled ﬂoor was clean,
and the larger of the two men, while staring intently at
Rosemont, looked glassy-eyed, drunk. “Could be,” he
said. “Can’t tell. Is that John C. Miles?”
“Are you John C. Miles?” the shorter man said into the
mirror.
Rosemont was stunned silent, bewildered by what they
were asking.
The shorter fellow stood, and his vicious little eyes
ﬂashed between hate and perplexity. Rosemont waited for
the man to lunge at him in the shower stall, ﬁguring he

66

Barth Anderson

could use his backpack as a shield if the short fellow had a
knife. But both men continued to stare at Rosemont’s reﬂection as though peering at something miraculous through
mist.
“It’s a doppelgänger,” the shorter man said, backing
out of Rosemont’s view of him through the mirror. “It’s a
projection from Miles. Or someone more—”
“Lemures can’t do that,” the larger man said. Staring
balefully up at the mirror, he scooted backward too, showing Rosemont the crown of his great white head. “I’ve
never heard of a lemure doing that,” he said when he was
out of view. “We go. Let’s go. Now.”
A moment later, the bathroom was silent. Rosemont
listened but he didn’t hear the door open, nor were there
footsteps in the foyer. Nothing. He peered through the mirror but could only see the wall to his right outside the
shower. After the wall had seemed to give way and go
dark, Rosemont had no idea if he was truly safe, if he
could trust his eyes or his senses. Had the wall really given
way? Had this really happened?
Finally, he stepped out of the stall on unsteady legs,
holding on to the shower screen and looking down where
the body of the Japanese woman had been. There was
nothing there but clean, rose-colored tiles. Rosemont listened a bit longer, and then opened the door to the bathroom. But there was no one in the foyer, either.
Rosemont closed the door and lunged across the bathroom to the sink, needing to feel something real. Water.
Cold water on his hands and face. He was about to turn on
the faucet, but he froze and panic jolted through him as he
stared into the vanity mirror.
A gathering of many colored planes representing the

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

67

angles and curves of his face stared back at him. The face
in the mirror, though, was not Rosemont’s, not remotely. It
seemed reptilian, and it opened its mouth independently of
Rosemont’s mouth and his other movements—or lack
thereof, for Rosemont stood perfectly still, gripping the
sink, staring at the turning image in horror and disbelief.
One moment, his reﬂection looked reptilian or birdlike,
but then, as the face turned, it seemed suddenly simian,
and then the polychromatic mosaic of planes and surfaces
frowned into a yawning circle of ﬂower petals, before the
light in the bathroom shifted, and the visage became reptilian again.
It was incomprehensible, all of it. He could feel the
muscles of his face spreading, contorting in abhorrence at
the tortured woman’s body, her disappearance, and the vision of the animal in the shower wall, but his reﬂection
would not mirror him. He wished he would faint so that he
could stop staring at the thing. Where was he? Where were
his own brown eyes? His backpack hit the ﬂoor but his legs
stayed strong, and Rosemont and the reptile-man opened
their mouths in dread at each other.

6

M

idcigarette, Boy King stood outside Dona Mia’s
front door. He hadn’t smoked in years, but he had
a fresh pack in his book bag, and he was pufﬁng this cigarette down to the ﬁlter. He watched as a party of twelve
snaked its way to the maître d’s podium within, bumping
against a party of eight that was leaving brunch in a giddy
haze of mimosas and Bloody Marys. A man at the tail of
the entering queue nodded at Boy King, then reached into
his own suit coat pocket for a pack. Cigarette suddenly between index and middle ﬁnger, he gestured with it, just a
lifting of the cigarette. Light?
There was no wind, so Boy King held out his lighter,
stiff armed, and ﬂicked it. The man slipped the cigarette
into his mouth, leaned, and pursed his lips at the lighter.
He and Boy King exhaled together.

70

Barth Anderson

“God, I hate birthday parties,” the man said.
Boy King ﬂicked ashes with the man, agreeing, then
dropped the lighter back into the pocket of his baggy
pants. He used to smoke without a thought to such vaults
past overture, the sharing of kind silence, and smoking’s
cabal of hands and breath. But he was back in the real
world now. And all of it was coming back. “Why’d you
come?”
The man said, “My friend Lara told me there was a
fortune-teller.”
Boy King didn’t look at him. “Okay.”
The heavy silence that followed told Boy King that he’d
be hearing more, very soon, so he dropped his cigarette
butt and stepped on it with the ball of his foot. He gave the
man his farewell by way of a glance, got a curt nod in return, and then stepped inside the restaurant.
The atrium cleared as the waiting party ﬁled toward its
brunch table, and Boy King entered, stood alone at the
podium. He could feel people turning to watch him. He
was dressed in a black turtleneck beneath the doublebreasted suit he’d Dumpster dived. Along with his burnedtan face, beaten posture, razor-hewn black hair, and
pin-striped suit, he knew he looked more like a hobo in
search of a gangster ﬁlm than anyone who belonged in a
restaurant like this. But it was as close as he was going to
get to passing.
Which was important; it was a nice restaurant now.
Not long ago, Boy King had ground-scored organic strawberries from behind this place, which, until recently, had
been the last hippie café on the West Bank. But what had
once been unﬁnished wood benches, chalkboards, and a

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

71

sign that read U.S. Out of [Fill in the Blank] (with a nail to
hang words like Minnesota or My Uterus) were now white
tableclothes, Italian baroque menus, and warm yellow
walls sponged with maroon paint. The crowd was a promising mix for Dona Mia’s grand opening too. Lots of gray
ponytails falling over Ralph Lauren suits sitting beside new
suburban money that had ventured into the city in pleated
pants and ﬁne black leather. The restaurant was loud with
bubbling conversation, three band members of Boiled in
Lead stood on a little stage, unpacking their guitars and
mandolins and uncoiling black cords, and orange mimosas
sparkled in ﬂutes on passing drink trays.
From the kitchen, Lara appeared. “Enter the dragon,”
she said and chuckled under her breath at him.
He realized he was gawking. In a purple silk blouse
with oriental collar and clunky black shoes that seemed
more Uptown than West Bank, she had transformed.
Lara ﬂipped a neat sheet of brown hair off one shoulder. “What?”
“You’re wearing long sleeves,” teased Boy King.
“Yeah? You’re wearing a suit.”
Boy King bowed.
“So we’re both incognito. In the old place, I probably
could have showed tat, but not here,” she said with a bent,
ironic grin.
“I guess this is what you’ll look like on Sundays from
now on.”
“The family biz.” Lara rolled her eyes. “Come on, I’ll
set you up.”
She led him across the restaurant to a standing screen in
the corner and as they walked past a bank of decorative

72

Barth Anderson

mirrors by the kitchen, Boy King saw his reﬂection standing there, glaring at him with arms crossed. He averted his
eyes quickly and followed Lara.
“You hungry? I asked the chef to put goat cheese
omelets on the menu today.”
When she’d told him several weeks ago that her father
was getting her a job at the restaurant, Boy King pictured
Lara washing dishes with her tattooed arms bare, shit
kickers wet with suds, her hair in a frizzy bun. But she had
control over the menu and could hire a tarot reader. He felt
naive. “Goat cheese, huh? No. I don’t need anything.”
A sign on the screen in Lara’s handwriting said Tarot
Readings. In the corner, two chairs sat at a small table with
no tablecloth. A standing wooden screen provided privacy
and a tall altar candle burned next to an ashtray. Lara said,
“Good?”
A hook on the wall showed that whatever had been
there had been removed. Boy King blew out the candle and
handed it to Lara. “Good.”
She shook her head and took it. “I didn’t think you
could be a gypsy and a minimalist.”
“Thanks for the ashtray.” Boy King put down his book
bag, which contained his cigarettes and a tarot deck
wrapped in silk. “You look rough today.”
“Feeling pretty rough. After Dream Machine, we cruised
over to the Wiggle Room to see Garbus. Shouldn’t have
done that.” Lara leaned a hip against his table and
slumped a bit. “Thanks for doing this, Boy,” she said. “Remember, you got people here. Gitana’s waiting tables. Did
you see her?”
Gitana was ﬂirting with a thick-shouldered busboy,
a standing-room-only crowd ﬁzzing in the café section

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

73

around her. This was good. Having even a small nest of
goodwill like this would be crucial if Boy King might need
to protect himself. The crowd seemed innocuous, but if a
tyro were here, Boy King might never detect it. A Chaldean
tyro had once masked himself as an entire seminary of alchemists when local mobs came to kill him, after all. He’d
heard that the Blackleaf occultists could mute whole cities,
knock them into heightened dream states for generations.
But the cults of the ram-headed Khnum were the most
frightening tyros of all—their powers had never been fully
documented, so a spy, hook, or drain could be hidden in
this dense mass for all Boy King knew.
“Hey. Incoming transmission.” She snapped her ﬁngers
to get his attention. “Are you okay?”
He chuckled at himself. The new policy of fearlessness
wasn’t gelling yet, apparently. “I’m here, ain’t I?”
“By the way,” she said, putting on an overly enthusiastic voice, “there’s a cheap apartment across the street. Did
I tell you this at Dream Machine?”
“No.”
“The landlord is an old buddy of my dad’s. I could get
him to waive security deposit, and, geez, in two Sundays,
you’d have ﬁrst month’s rent and then some.”
Wonderful. I’m her “project” now. The Boy King
glanced at the sunﬂower-faced clock over the bar. Five to
ten. The deal was that Boy King would throw cards from
10 a.m. until 3 p.m. for anyone who wanted a reading, and
the restaurant would pay him ﬁve hundred dollars cash.
Plus tips, it was a princely sum for Boy King, and he
couldn’t deny he’d been thinking about an apartment. But
he didn’t like Lara’s babysitter routine, the note in her
voice that made her sound like a cheerleader at the Special

74

Barth Anderson

Olympics. “I don’t know, that might interfere with my
plan of blowing the wad on hookers and crack, Lara.”
She laughed, which helped, and after she retreated to
the maître d’ station, he ﬁshed out his cards and unwrapped
them. He stared down at the deck for a moment, trying to
conjure the old thrill this deck elicited. Nothing. Time was,
he had felt about tarot the way some felt about a good,
hard pharmaceutical, one that reorganized and simpliﬁed
life around itself. He’d once welcomed all the little sacraments and ceremonies that came with the cards back
then—the silk cloth, the wooden box in which the deck
was kept, and the necessary music (disc two of Miles
Davis’s Bitches Brew, Maggot Brain by Funkadelic, or
nothing). But tarot had not kept pace with the traditions
and obsessions learned later in his life. Looking at the
cards now, idly ﬂipping through his deck, Boy King felt
certain that tarot had been concocted with sheer optimism
that anything hidden might be revealed. Tarot was designed as if the artist understood tarot’s lame optimism,
too, with its cartoonish approximations of the mystic (The
Magician) and the profane (The Fool). For his gig today,
Boy King had chosen the Rider-Waite deck; the stark line
drawings and bold colors of this deck worked well on people who didn’t know tarot. For Boy King, though, this
deck was light fare. What had been Miles Davis now felt
like Steve Miller. Smack into beer. Tarot didn’t scratch the
itch anymore.
Boy King picked up his deck, shufﬂed it once, then
ﬂipped over the top card. It showed a king in red robes
holding an ankh scepter, with rams’ heads on the arms of
his throne. They weren’t Khnum’s rams as depicted in the
symbol he’d found, but even the inexact radar of tarot got

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

75

things right sometimes. In fact, once in a blue moon, tarot
could be mockingly accurate in its messages.
The Emperor. King of kings and lord of lords. For a
homeless man on the ﬁrst day of his new job.
You’re watching me, again, aren’t you? he said to the
cards.
The day began with a handsome woman in her ﬁfties.
She appeared at his wooden screen with sky-blue eyes,
white hair in a French braid, and no ring on her hand. The
neckline of her sundress plunged quite low for a woman
her age. Generalities could be made from these details, and
Boy King had learned which details were truly telling.
“I’ve never had a reading before. Are you psychic?” she
asked. “Is this part of your belief system?”
“Go ahead and shufﬂe the cards.”
When she was done, he took six off the top and tossed
the cards on the table. Without really looking at them, he
said, “Your question is about love, and there’s a lover you
want to know more about. He’s younger than you are.”
The woman smiled enigmatically, but her eyes ﬂashed,
telling him he was on the right track.
As the morning sped on with no Egyptian gods in sight,
Boy King let himself relax. Soon lumbering deductions unhinged from mere physical detail (scent of an unsmoked cigar and a hospital wristband with the words birthing
center on it; deeply tanned hands but white where a wedding ring had been; jittery ﬁngers, tight lips, double checking if the readings were free, followed by a little sigh of
relief) and gave way to more stunning inductions catapulted from the business end of metaphors. That’s how a
tarot reading worked, if it worked at all. Keep talking in
metaphor until you found the vein and truth spilled out.

76

Barth Anderson

(“Ten of Wands reversed is like cancer in remission”—and
the client’s cancer was in remission). All the while Boiled in
Lead stirred their Celtic potions. Boy King threw his
spreads and knocked back the readings as fast as he could,
as though racing their violins and fast guitars.
This was the groove. After the twelfth reading, he knew
what cards would appear for people the moment he
touched eyes with them. You have sorrow written all over
you. Nine of Swords. Cocky little man aren’t you? Six of
Wands. As the sun swung past noon, he saw Dona Mia’s
crowd whole, past and future, like an aerial photograph of
a river, where they ﬂowed, where they were ﬂowing, where
they would ultimately empty themselves. He saw one
woman’s legal battles burning with no end in sight after
consuming her ﬁnances for years. He saw that a man had
cheated his business partner, that his guilt would devour
him before he saw a decent proﬁt. A reconciliation with a
son. A young man bound for Iraq. Luscious affairs and
hidden strengths. Psychology, logic, and synchronicity
plodded somewhere below Boy King on the paths of pedestrian trafﬁc, while he soared in a jet stream in which he
hadn’t sailed since Rome.
With his pulse tapping away in his body, effervescent
and sharp, he gestured for the next client, and from behind
the screen, his smoking pal appeared, accompanied by a
woman. Boy King stood and they both ducked their heads
at him, like little bows. “Hello, hello,” they were murmuring as they took seats at the table.
Boy King sat down too, and was about to offer them the
deck when he saw a sudden, sweeping view of their lives, as
if someone had snatched back a curtain to reveal a canyon
with frightening depths. He tried not to physically recoil. It

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

77

was like the feeling he’d had before ﬁnding the suit in that
third Dumpster, but so strong, so dizzying, he wondered if
he would black out.
Hands ﬂat on the table, on either side of the cards, he
said to them, “Readings are free today.”
“We know,” said the woman. “That’s wonderful of
Dona Mia’s to—”
“But I want money from you.”
The man’s expression was somber as a shut church
door, and he nodded as if expecting this, respected it.
“How much do you want?”
Boy King’s nostrils ﬂared. He wondered if they understood what they were doing here or if they were completely oblivious. Either way, it was time to draw some
well-deﬁned, protective circles around himself and to feint,
buy time, and get a bead on what they wanted from him.
“Whatever’s right,” he said, eyeing the man. “You tell me.”
The woman watched her husband as he took out his
wallet and put ten twenties on the table.
Boy King stared at the pile of money. Could he holler
for Lara?
The man was watching him. “Isn’t that enough?”
They were seemingly on a hunt of some kind. By the
ease with which they parted with money, Boy King deduced that they’d done this many times before in a vain effort to ﬁnd answers about the staggering depth of that
canyon.
“We heard about you,” the man said. He didn’t look at
the money, didn’t appear to care how much was there.
“Lara says you did a reading for her, says you changed
her life,” the woman whispered, “that you really spoke
to her.”

78

Barth Anderson

“She usually reads for me, actually.” Boy King noticed
that his own hands were still ﬂat on the table, that he
wasn’t scooping up the money. If he picked it up, he stood
to earn more in one day at Dona Mia’s than he’d earned in
the last three months of diving.
“She says you’re something special.”
“We need something special,” the woman said.
Braggarts were the ones who got drained. “I’m nothing
special. I’m just what I am. I just say what I see,” said Boy
King. It was coming, whatever it was. If he didn’t stop this
right now, they were going to spill their guts to him and a
continent in the sky would slip, slide down, and crash
against him. He opened his mouth to speak, to send them
away, tell them to take their money and go to hell. But he
couldn’t deny it: he felt for them. That view of this territory like a river seen from above—they were in the ﬂow
and so was he. He’d hung out his shingle, put out the welcome mat to anyone who wanted a peek at the other side.
It was a promise that he’d do it, an intrinsic one. Even
though he didn’t live by any Code of Card Readers, he
didn’t break promises, especially not to people in need.
“We have a question that we have to ask you,” the
woman said. She wasn’t pretty but she was all put together
in a jade necklace, green ﬁngernails, and green pumps.
A slight green tint to her eye shadow. Expensive watch
matched expensive earrings. Boy King wished he would
stop noticing. She said, “Do you recognize us?”
It wasn’t a question he was anticipating. He looked at
the two again. The man’s nails were manicured, his teeth
were capped, which was odd, because he wasn’t goodlooking enough to be an actor or a movie star or a news
personality, and there was a casual carelessness about him

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

79

that said such efforts and looking this good didn’t really
matter. “No, I don’t,” Boy King said. “Should I?”
The man nodded with approval. “No.”
It didn’t matter. This school was strange, but everyone
was so nice to her. She could go by this name now. It didn’t
really matter.
Boy King ﬂinched.
“What is it?” the man said.
“Quiet,” the woman said, “he knows.”
“Shh,” Boy King hissed at her angrily, sitting down ﬁnally and leaning forward and low on the table as if bullets
were tracing over his head. “I don’t ‘know’ anything.”
The man inched forward to the edge of his chair, and
the cool smoking rituals of understatement and silence
evaporated in a panic. “You know where she is?”
Boy King leaned back in his chair now, feeling sick,
wondering if he would lose it all over the ﬂoor.
“Can you help us ﬁnd her? Because if you can do—”
“I don’t! I’m sorry, I don’t know anything, and I can’t
see anything,” Boy King said, his voice a croak of nausea.
The couple didn’t move. They were watching him expectantly, the set of his shoulders, his brow, reading him.
“God, Lara was right about you. You have to tell us if you
can see her. Come on, you look green.”
Boy King snapped his mouth closed. He shut his eyes,
shook his head. No, he didn’t know a thing, just like
they didn’t know a thing. He didn’t know, just by looking at them, that they carried their guilt and shame like
frightened tourists holding valises close to their bodies in
a dangerous city they shouldn’t be in. That their selfconsciousness said more than their eager imploring. That
down to the shine on the husband’s shoes and the sheen on

80

Barth Anderson

the woman’s perm, they were trying to make an impression
ﬁrst, ﬁnd a daughter second. One could hardly blame the
poor fellow—he was out of his depth and ﬂailing. He
didn’t know how to grasp the horror, and neither did she
by the choice of her mall-bought earrings, as if this was
just another Sunday brunch in the city for a suburban couple. Who could possibly know how to behave? Were there
guidebooks available to tell one how to dress while searching for a child who’d been missing for over a year?
And all that was from the deductions, from simply having thrown a thousand tarot spreads, which put him on
par with old therapists and conﬁdence men in being able to
read a perfect stranger. How could he say what had induced itself into him from a day of reading cards, his
opened senses, and the vantage from which he gazed down
on his little realm? How could he tell them that their
daughter was gone because of their insipid neglect? Their
belts and bracelets and shiny, nice manners said they might
be willing to believe anything he told them, that she’d been
hit by a car on a dark boulevard and that her body would
turn up in a remote culvert or alleyway. His answer was irrelevant; they just wanted him to speak with authority.
The Ellings had been advised to look their best to get
invited back on that TV show. It cost a lot to look this
good, but they’d do anything, said their tanning bed tans,
mortgage anything, said her necklace, and enlist anyone
willing to help, even if it only meant ratings to those people
at the network.
And Boy King knew. He did know. Little Tanya Elling
had been drifting away in a childhood without mooring of
any kind and had meandered out. No. That wasn’t true.
Someone had found a way in.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

81

Exposure. Air time. Keep the story in the media eye.
Tough to compete with war coverage. Do whatever you can.
He was heartbroken and furious. The nerve. The unmitigated gall they had to come asking for his help and
looking for answers. Leaving her alone by herself at night
while they went drinking with friends, or letting her stay
overnight with people who were barely acquaintances.
They didn’t see how their own hands were covered in shit,
would never allow themselves to see.
Sometimes the metaphor came ﬁrst, and details came to
him from the other side of it. Blue canvas sneakers and
white knee socks in a Dumpster. A receipt for new clothes
from Old Navy. A voice sweet and imploring that ﬁrst
night away from Mom and Dad, too sweet for the Boy
King to suffer it. But it got easier and easier the longer she
was away. That’s how it worked with kids.
Leave me alone. Don’t show me this, is what he wanted
to say, but then he realized what was happening.
Someone had gotten in, gotten at their daughter, yes,
but someone got inside the parents too, inside their very
hearts. A master, one of the powerful ones, did this terrible
thing, or at least allowed a monster to exploit a weakness.
But the tyro had yoked Mr. and Mrs. Elling with a sly, ominous force that suddenly made the Boy King feel as though
the very walls of Dona Mia’s were teeth of a shutting trap,
and these parents and their unignorable tragedy, the bait.
“I’m so very sorry,” the Boy King said. He slumped into
his chair, feigning exhaustion though he was wired and
jumpy and wanted to sprint from the restaurant. “All my
spirit-sights have gone misty. No totems or crystals have
come to me. I need to do a guided candle meditation or
something. It wouldn’t be right to take your money.”

82

Barth Anderson

The man nodded sympathetically. They’d clearly heard
this sort of explanation before.
But the woman was buying none of it. “You,” she said
succinctly, “saw something.”
Boy King picked up the two hundred dollars and
handed it to the man.
“Not until you tell us,” said the woman, taking the bills
from her husband and slapping them back down on the
table. “You’re a good man. We both see that. You can’t not
tell us if you know where Tanya is.”
The man, following his wife’s lead, leaned across the
small table and put his hand on the Boy King’s shoulder.
Boy King felt severe pity, compassion, regret—but knew he
couldn’t show them any of that. It wouldn’t help, would
only serve to encourage them. Instead, he shoved the man’s
hand away.
The man ignored the gesture. “Do you know where her
body is?” he said.
Such a willfully stupid question, Boy King thought. As
if humans didn’t have a single volt of instinct left, as if the
animal in this man couldn’t sense what had happened to its
young. They were better off in this pretentiously saintly
state, not knowing what they had allowed to happen.
Whoever yoked these people had them tuned to a snowy
channel, and in his anger, he wanted to psychically yoke
them himself and frog-march them to face their own role
in this, face how it had been their own pathetic weakness
that carried them to this moment.
He was about to yoke them, about to steer the two of
them, together, side by side, beneath the ancient arch, the
place humans—kings, beggars, sinners, and gurus—could
be leashed like dogs, where these two had obviously been

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

83

yoked already. He was ready to make them his for the purpose of setting them free, could even hear the crying hue of
the mysterious gathering that was ever drawn together
about that dreadful arch.
But he couldn’t. Not even to help. No yoking ever
again. He wanted no more broken souls on his soul.
Besides, there were other ways to snap the bonds of
power.
“As if you don’t know,” Boy King hissed at the Ellings
in his most menacing voice. “As if you hadn’t been bleeding over that poor girl her whole life.”
Both faces went blank. Not even a note of horror or bewilderment on their faces. The man’s cell went off but he
didn’t move.
“That’s right, send yourselves away. Some more,” said
Boy King. “But listen. You won’t ﬁnd her. Not anytime
soon. New last name, new city. New school and new
friends. It’s all normal now.” Speaking truth in mockery. It
was the only way, though it was like a jagged edge across
his own heart to even say those words. Then, to make sure
the man would stand, help his wife to her feet, and quickly
make for the door, Boy King added, “Want to hear the
kicker? She tells her new dad that she loves him.”
Just as the Boy King hoped, the man stood. But instead
of helping the woman to her feet as he predicted, he leaned
on the table, lunged forward, and, faster than Boy King
could block the punch, a supernova of pain exploded in his
face.
Boy King spilled from his chair, arms ﬂailing like limbs
falling from a broken mannequin. Slumped on the restaurant ﬂoor, feeling his nose open like a faucet, he thought a
long time was passing, but then he realized the wife was

84

Barth Anderson

still staring at him in furious astonishment. The man was
still straightening from throwing the punch, rubbing his
knuckles in pain.
Boy King smiled up at him drunkenly, his mouth wet
and warm with blood. “That’s the spirit.”
“Crazy motherfucker,” the man hissed at the Boy King.
The wooden screen concealing them from view suddenly teetered, toppling to the side, and a second later, Lara
and Gitana were hauling the man back from the little table
by suit jacket and belt. Frog-marching him, Boy King noted.
“Crazy motherfucker!”
Lara was telling him to shut up, while Boy King experimented with getting to his feet, but it felt like he was on a
listing ship. He seized the table as if it were about to slide
across the ﬂoor, but a second later, the busboy that Gitana
had been ﬂirting with came rushing out of the gawking
crowd and tackled Boy King, knocking the wind out of
him hard as they hit the ﬂoor.
“Winn! What? Get off!” Lara was shouting.
A sharp blow jerked Boy King’s jaw to the left and
scrambled his mind into nonsense and randomness. More
screaming, some four-letter words, but it was all drowned
out by the workmanlike grunting of the gorilla on top of
him, raining blows on Boy King. What the hell was this
guy doing?
“The hell are you doing?” Lara shouted. “What the
hell? Stop!”
Distantly, Boy King was aware that the voice of the lost
girl was still in his head, singing the song she’d sung to
soothe herself that ﬁrst night. All he wanted was to get it
out of his head, get away from it, away from the beating he
was taking, and a second later, he was standing next to her,

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

85

the lost daughter, an ordinary girl with stringy auburn hair.
They were standing together in a farm ﬁeld, with swaths of
white snow on black earth, and the tan stubble of cornstalks poking through. Prairie wind whistled at them, and
her sailboat-print pajama dress wasn’t nearly enough to
protect her from its bitter bite.
“What’s happening?” she asked Boy King.
A red-winged blackbird chirruped in the marshy distance.
He touched his nose. It was straight and unhurt. “You
must have brought us here.”
She hugged her elbows and bent her knees, shivering.
“Geez, it’s freezing.”
Boy King could hear church bells echoing across the ﬂat
land. “I had a different thing. Tarot. I used to make up
tarot stories at my grandparents’ house.”
He looked over his shoulder and could see two ﬁgures,
small in the distance, running at them in a menacing,
straight line. Their whipping, lion-colored robes shot fear
through Boy King. He’d hidden from them for twelve
years, and they’d found him, here of all places. Trackers.
Desert sprinters. Murderers. They needed very little water
or rest when hunting down rival cults to rub them out and
could bound across time, through dreams.
The girl was suddenly across the ﬁeld, standing with an
isthmus of snow between her and Boy King, her voice low
in his ear. “You better go.”
He didn’t think this was a dream, or anything “real,”
but felt certain the desert runners were quite real. “Yeah, I
think that’s a good idea. But how? How do I ‘go’?”
“Thanks for trying to help my parents,” she whispered.
“Are you going to be okay?”

86

Barth Anderson

From the other side of the restaurant, looking at the
backs of the bystanders and listening to the clattering of
silverware on the ﬂoor, the cries of confusion, Boy King began walking backward toward the front door. Each step
left a blazing red footprint on the pretty ceramic tiles of the
restaurant ﬂoor and it ﬁlled him with misery to look at
them.
I hope so, he thought, answering the girl. Do whatever
you can to get the hell out, Tanya Elling.
No time to do anything about the footprints. He was
lucky to be out of that melee in the corner.
“Where is he? I fucking had him!”
“Winn, would you snap out of it? Christ, what’s wrong
with you?”
None of these people would see the tracks anyway, so
before the trackers found him here, he moved quickly
across the Dona Mia ﬂoor, leaving a line of ﬁre-engine red
steps and then, ﬁnally, turned and sprinted, barreling out
the front entrance.

7

I

t was above and behind him. He could feel it, there, like
ﬁre crawling up the bathroom wall. Rosemont sat on
the toilet with the lid down, his head bowed almost to his
knees so that he couldn’t see the mirror, and wished he
were back in the Hostelry of the Tyros. The house outside
the bathroom was silent, and some small part of his brain
that was still his, still rational, scolded him to get out while
he could. But he wasn’t certain he could stand, wasn’t certain that the mirror-thing wasn’t staring down at him, right
now. If he looked over his shoulder, would it still be there,
waiting to meet his eye, gaping its ugly mouth at him? How
did it get in there? Was it really there? Did it come from
him? It wasn’t him. It’s not me. It’s not any part of me.
Something else was happening, he told himself. It was
happening and he had to clear his head, think this through.

88

Barth Anderson

The two chanting men had thought the thing was John C.
Miles, but why in the world would they conclude that?
Rosemont jerked his head to the left and stole a look
over his shoulder at the mirror, but all he could see was a
ﬁsh-shaped water stain on the ceiling, reﬂected from across
the room. He sucked in a breath of relief and let it out.
With the thing gone for the moment, Rosemont blocked
the mirror’s view of his backpack, hunching over it with
his body, and removed the red binder. His hands were still
shaking terribly, but he ﬂipped open the cover and thumbed
past The Refutation of Rosemont, looking for clues about
what Miles might have to do with the thing in the mirror.
But the binder simply held copies of old documents, photocopies, and even a few mimeographed sheets. Thready
ﬁbers in old manuscripts tended to stand out with an almost sandy quality, Rosemont knew, when photocopied;
some of the copies here had to be of primary, original documents. Did John C. Miles’s name on the cover mean that
he had compiled these documents, or that they were compiled for him, or about him for some reason? Other pages
in the binder looked like simple letters; there were even
handwritten notes on hotel bar napkins, though none in
Miles’s jabbing, childish hand. Nearly all of them were
copies. Is this what those two men were willing to kill and
torture for? Copies of old documents?
Rosemont had forgotten about the mirror for a moment. He threw a frightened glance over his shoulder. Just
ceiling. Nothing else. Maybe it never happened. Maybe the
men had been hallucinations, tricked by another hallucination. Rosemont sighed. He told himself he might be safe
now and continued ﬂipping through the binder. It calmed
him to feel the dry paper in his ﬁngers.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

89

After the copied texts, he found what looked like an interview that Miles had conducted with a woman named
Priscilla, some medical transcriptions, a few news clippings, and then an article slipped out from the back pages.
There were no hole punches and the pages looked clean,
new. It was titled:
Chemical and Fiber Assay
Dr. Johanna Ingebretsen
Guelph Institute

A ﬁber assay. A simple, dreary-as-dust ﬁber assay.
Rosemont gratefully fell upon the familiarity of academic
routine, the logical rhythm of the report, the scientist’s
workaday prose. The organic composition bar graph
showed considerable deciduous and coniferous tree matter.
Infrared chemical analysis revealed a high rate of copper.
The pH balances were lovely in their boring simplicity. As
he absorbed the graph on decay rates, he noticed his hands
had all but stopped shaking.
Guelph was a premier lab; whatever was being examined was getting gold standard treatment. The eccentric
John C. Miles wasn’t necessarily that brand of academic,
though. Miles was more your drink-all-week-and-call-itresearch scholar for an analysis of this caliber.
Wiping sweaty hair from his brow and scanning the
report again, Rosemont tried to determine what was being authenticated, but he still couldn’t tell. Carbon dating
showed that the inks (were they from a text, a painting?)
were just over one thousand years old, placing them somewhere between AD 925 and 950. Probably sourced from
the apothecary/artist guilds in northern Italy at the time,

90

Barth Anderson

Rosemont surmised, looking at the high amount of copper
in the inks and paints. Fibers in the provided sample were
consistent with the mashes of crude, early papermaking in
Europe, and the mashes—the wet pulp that eventually became paper—were traced to hard deciduous wood of varieties typical of northern Italy too. The assay placed them at
the same age as the inks: AD 950.
For the art historian in Jeremiah Rosemont—that part
of him that he’d abandoned, left for dead in Texas years
ago—this was as bafﬂing as a letter in the Managua night,
or startling visions in Roman mirrors. The carbon date
was way too early. The question about what was being
tested was secondary to the mere fact that someone had
discovered anything made of paper in 950 Europe. The
Chinese, who’d invented the art of papermaking, had kept
it a secret till late in the ﬁrst millennium. The secret only
slipped out in one place, when Muslim Persia had sacked a
western Chinese city and a few Chinese paperers were
taken hostage. But 950? In northern Italy? At that time,
the secret was just arriving in what is now Iraq, with the
ﬁrst papermaking facilities appearing in Baghdad in—
Rosemont’s teeth clenched, biting down on a thought.
The word tarot had been sprinkled throughout Miles’s letter to the editor, and Rosemont had seen it in a few of the
other transcripts too. Was this a tarot? A deck made in
950? If so, the ramiﬁcations would ripple beyond tarot
scholarship. Paper wasn’t manufactured in Europe until
1150. The game of Tarocchi, for which tarot cards were
speciﬁcally designed, wasn’t played for three hundred
years after that. It was like ﬁnding an automobile in
Shakespearean England.
An argument with John C. Miles from three years ear-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

91

lier came back to Rosemont. More, huge swaths of his life
snapped, by degrees, into crystalline focus as he considered
how that rather characteristically odd argument might
relate to the Guelph report and disappearing corpses,
chanting men, desert visions, and disturbing, disorienting
reﬂections. Maybe this very concussion to reality that he’d
just suffered was causing new thoughts to sprinkle from
Rosemont’s mind, forcing him to reconsider that the random ﬁght at the conference on Albanian Renaissance art
in Atlanta was not random at all, nor were the events that
sprung from it. Had Miles been trying to tell him something back then? He might have known that something
was up at the time, but so much about Miles had always
been haphazard, from the way he dressed to the way he
walked into a room that, at the time, Rosemont had simply
regarded his old friend as too much undergraduate and not
enough grown-up, someone who’d failed to shake off the
waywardness and deﬁance of a youth spent in the overindulgence of Austin, Texas. Miles’s mortician’s tails. His yellowlensed sharpshooter glasses. The stalking, Groucho-esque
walk. The immature contrarian streak. His seeming inability to tell time when even important dates had to be kept.
“Sorry!” His loud, sudden entrances were nearly always
made with an apology, whether entering a dive cowboy
bar or a conference room ﬁlled with colleagues. “Sorry!
Couldn’t be helped. Sorry.” Miles was already muttering
when he entered Conference Room A, where some ﬁfty
people and a consortium of Renaissance art historians
were waiting for him. “A Nazi. Sorry. There was a Nazi,
though.”
From the panelists’ table in Conference Room A,
Rosemont watched Miles track through double doors

92

Barth Anderson

practically at a run, circling the audience and making for
the panelists’ table with his black messenger bag bouncing
on his hip and one hand making excuse-gestures in the air.
“Right outside the hotel! Can you believe it? A real, live
Nazi.” The waving excuse-gesture became a thumb that
jerked over his shoulder. “A cop, I mean.” The hand went
back to waving at the crowd. “I was innocently buying
jumper cables from a guy, but it turns out you shouldn’t
tell a cop he’s interfering—oh, you didn’t start without me!
Hi. Hi.”
Back when Miles was merely ﬁve minutes late for the
panel, the moderator, one of the conference organizers,
had asked the audience if they wanted to begin without
him, but it was just a rhetorical question. This audience
had come to hear Miles ﬁght with Rosemont, so after a
murmur of no’s and some general head-shaking, the crowd
had settled into arm-crossed waiting. Now that Miles was
here, many smiled or rolled their eyes at crazy ol’ John C.
Miles, as though they were in on a delicious joke, and it
irritated Rosemont. As if the man weren’t already overindulged. As if this debate would be of any consequence.
Even Dr. Vincent Abernathy, who’d been sent by a French
museum to make Rosemont an offer that he had no intention of refusing, seemed eager to be entertained.
From the dais, Rosemont glowered at the smilers, willing them not to encourage Miles, then slid his microphone
closer. Rosemont’s dry voice boomed in the room. “Oh,
good, the ﬂoor show has ﬁnally arrived.”
Miles was waving at the three panelists now. “Look,
there’s Harvard. Hi, Sarah Lawrence. Hi, Jeremiah. Look
at you. You’re already pissed at me.”
“Thank you for making it, John,” the moderator said

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

93

happily. Rosemont gave him a dirty look. He was probably
the one who arranged this little tête-à-tête.
Miles stood behind the open chair and the paper tent
with his name on it. “Down here?” Then he pointed at
Rosemont, touched the tip of his nose, pointed again.
“Would people mind?” He looked at the moderator and
the other two panelists—Ted Fitz from Sarah Lawrence
and Denise Olivetti from Harvard, both of whom ﬂanked
Rosemont—saying, “I should really have been seated next
to Jeremiah.”
The moderator frowned. “John, let’s get started. We’re
twenty minutes into a sixty-minute slot. Let’s—”
“Harvard. Hup! Swap with me!”
Denise gave him a pained smile, but a moment later, she
lifted from her chair like a marionette.
Meanwhile, Ted Fitz was organizing his talking points
on the Shadow Caliphate’s inﬂuence on tarot. Rosemont
smiled. As if he’s actually going to get a chance to speak.
“While our scholars get resettled and reacquainted, let
me remind everyone that the name of this panel is—”
“Do you need water? Jeremiah? Thirsty?” Miles lifted
the pitcher of ice water after ﬁlling a glass for himself.
“Don’t get up. I’ll just bring it down.” He smelled the
pitcher and shrugged. “You know, man, I read your paper
on Moakley in Orbis Tertius Hermeticus, and there’s a few
problems that we really have to go over.” He and Denise
passed each other behind the moderator, Miles raising his
glass and pitcher high. Denise continued to smile, struggling to look game.
“What did you need jumper cables for, Miles?” someone in the back shouted.
Miles ﬁlled Rosemont’s glass. “They were so cheap. I

94

Barth Anderson

don’t think the guy knew how cheap he was selling them
for,” he answered, shielding his eyes from the ceiling lights
and peering into the crowd. “Was that Everett? Hey, man.”
Great, Rosemont thought. He’s got a posse.
Arms were uncrossing. Bodies were shifting forward on
their seats. The world of art historians was not a world of
artists, though most of them embraced what Miles had labeled faux-hemia. This Renaissance-obsessed sliver of the
art history world was small, well heeled, and unobtrusive,
a well-tended copse of polite little trees. In Austin, Texas, a
loudmouthed dude in mortician’s coat barely turned heads
among fey punk cowboys, Butthole Surfers, Texas separatists, neo-hippie Zendyks, and other desert-scorched
freakery. At the conference on Albanian Renaissance art,
however, he was a marquee event, ready to thumb his nose
at straight academic Jeremiah Rosemont—hence a crowd
of ﬁfty in a conference of only two hundred total participants.
Miles leaned his elbows on the table and, looking at
Rosemont to his right, said sidelong into his microphone,
“Let’s have a show of hands. Who here read Jeremiah’s article in Orbis Tertius Hermeticus? The one where he body
slammed me.”
“God,” Rosemont sneered, “no one body slammed you.”
About two thirds of the audience raised their hands.
“Miles,” said Rosemont. He knew that the exasperation in his voice would make him the heavy, but he
couldn’t help it. He wanted to body slam Miles now. “I referenced you, I didn’t attack you. I admired your research
into the triumphus—”
“Admired? You teed off on me! You didn’t even address my thesis about occult origins.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

95

Rosemont couldn’t believe that’s what this was about.
“And?” he said. “So? My article was about the correlation
between Mardi Gras and tarot, Miles. I speciﬁcally said
that I didn’t see any occult origins for tarot. I never—”
“Aha!” A long, bony ﬁnger appeared in Rosemont’s
face.
Rosemont ﬂinched. “What?”
“You admit it!”
“That there are no occult origins?”
“That’s right!” shouted Miles.
“Of course, I admit it. What is your point?”
“My point?” Miles rolled up his sleeves and wiped his
mouth. Rosemont knew that gesture. It meant Miles was
nervous talking to Rosemont about this, and Rosemont’s
heart lifted to him, wished he could say something to calm
his old friend. But this was a boxing match, apparently, not
a chat between pals, not a lively exchange at Trudy’s or the
Circus of Inﬁnite Wow. Rosemont was on the wrong side
of Miles’s line in the sand; his old friend wouldn’t hear
friendliness now. Miles dropped his hand from his mouth,
and the moment passed. “I agree with everything you said
in your tidy little turd of an article,” he said. “Yes, tarot
has its roots in Renaissance Lent parades, which in turn
have roots in ancient Rome and the triumphal rites honoring victorious generals.”
“As does modern Mardi Gras,” Rosemont said, looking
at Abernathy. “The ﬂoats built by soldiers for Titus’s triumph in AD 71 after his Jerusalem campaign and—”
There was a resounding thump. Miles feigned nodding
off on the microphone, and then his snore thundered
through the room. “The problem,” he barked, head snapping up, “is that you can’t have it both ways. You can’t

96

Barth Anderson

mention the triumphal rite without mentioning its occult
purpose.”
“Occult purpose?” Ted said, his slight English accent
creeping into the Monty Python register. “A general?
Returning to Rome to gloat? What occult purpose could
there possibly be in a military parade?”
“Well, I sure am glad you asked,” Miles said, face
spreading in a big Texan grin. “How did the triumphus
end, Ted? What happened after the triumphator marched
clockwise through the streets of Rome, driving the enemy
in chains before him?”
“Great sex?” Ted mused. The audience laughed appreciatively.
“You don’t know? It’s okay to admit it. It’s only a jury
of your peers,” Miles said, hand waving at the audience.
Ted cleared his throat, lifted his chin, and scratched his
throat. “My expertise is the Egyptian inﬂuence on tarot,”
he said, “actually.”
“Egypt. If you didn’t have tenure,” Miles said, voice
soaked in contempt, “that would be adorable.”
“John, that’s enough. As facilitator here, I need to ask
you to refrain from—”
“Blood sacriﬁce!” shouted Miles into his microphone.
“A blood cult! A spilling of blood, and boy was there a
bloody lot of bloody blood. Did I mention the blood?
Why? Anyone? God, this panel is falling to pieces.” He
stood, mic cord snaking through his other ﬁst, a singer
ready to rock. “Everett? You still here, man? You take a
swing at why they conducted a blood sacriﬁce at the end of
a military parade.”
“For the continued glory of Rome,” Everett yelled, his

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

97

voice sounding a thin counterpoint to Miles’s shouting
through the mic.
“Wrong! I mean, sure, that, but, come on, let’s take ’em
to school,” Miles said, voice calling out like a preacher.
“Who else was there? Who was waiting for that victorious warrior at the climax of this show, at the Temple of
Jupiter? Go! Say it!” said Miles, pointing into the audience.
“A haruspex!” Everett shouted back.
“Yeah. A goddamn motherfucking haruspex,” shouted
Miles, spitting on the P and making the crowd jump as the
consonant exploded in the room.
“And what’s a haruspex? Ted? Everett? Never mind.
This is where it gets good.” Miles said, stepping up on his
chair. “They read entrails, Jeremiah!” Miles yelled. Then,
with horror-show relish, he growled down at Rosemont.
“Livers! They were ‘reading’ the bull’s red-hot liver. Get it?
Not unlike tarot readings? Well, they were taking this
‘reading’ because every Roman secretly believed that their
mighty city was on the verge of plunging into eternal
chaos. Someone ask me why Rome believed that. Why did
Romans think they were on the verge of plunging into eternal chaos?” Miles said, eyes on Rosemont. He paused and
watched him expectantly as if Rosemont might ignite and
burst into gorgeous ﬂames.
At the time, Rosemont hadn’t understood Miles’s signiﬁcant look or the hidden implications of the rant that followed, but thinking back now, from the Roman bathroom,
with the binder open to The Refutation of Rosemont on his
thighs, he knew. He knew.
Everett shouted from the audience, “Rome’s foundation myth said they were doomed!”

98

Barth Anderson

“Goddamn it!” Miles shouted into the crowd, irritated.
“Everett, shut up! Yeah, okay, that’s totally right. But why
were they doomed?” He paused, as if to give Rosemont
one last chance to speak. “Because the city, according to its
own creation story, was born from a crime—a horrible
murder. So occultists were on hand to read the signs and
see if divine justice would ﬁnally come falling on Rome.”
“Murder?” Ted said. “Who was killed?”
“Rosemont knows,” Miles answered, eyes still consumed with Rosemont. But when Rosemont refused to respond, Miles answered, “Remus.”
“Remus?” said Ted. “Of Romulus and Remus?”
Rosemont shut his eyes tight. Miles’s argument, his preoccupation with those days in Austin, his mortician tails,
and Romulus and Remus—it was all so damn agonizing in
its childishness.
“Romulus killed his own brother in cold blood,” Miles
continued. Rosemont thought he could feel Miles looking
at him. “Did you know that? Most people only remember the she-wolf that suckled them. But Romulus killed
his brother and claimed kingship over their new city, even
named it after himself. That’s how Rome was born, and
Remus was all but forgotten.” Seeing nothing like ﬂames
or even comprehension from Rosemont, Miles had seemed
to deﬂate, his head of steam dissipating away behind him.
“That’s what the rite was for. To remember that lost
brother.”
At the time, Rosemont the panelist had simply returned
Miles’s stare with dead eyes, letting him see how unimpressed and angry he was with his friend for showboating and making a mockery of him. Especially in front of
Abernathy, who held the keys to a future of inﬂuence and

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

99

status for Rosemont in European circles. How could he do
this to me? Rosemont the panelist had thought, looking up
at his friend standing on the chair like a drunken boor.
Why doesn’t he shut the fuck up?
But the Rosemont still trembling in the bathroom,
struggling to make sense of what he’d seen in the mirror,
felt he ﬁnally understood the odd ﬁght that Miles had
picked with him all those years ago. God, that was our
myth, his and mine, Rosemont thought. The name Remus
in Miles’s voice, pronounced correctly as Ray-moos,
should have sent a shudder through him back then, as it
did now recalling how passionately Miles had spoken. I
didn’t give him squat. I just stared at him like he was insane. Like I didn’t know what he was talking about.
Best friends. They were so tight, back then, they could
ﬁnish, hell, start each other’s sentences, could hold whole
conversations just by showing single tarot cards to each
other—the Calvino Method it was called—and one fortune teller would throw a spread for a client, while the
other interpreted it blindfolded. There was no border between their minds. Drawing a dedicated clientele of fortyyear-old housewives, lost girls looking for strangeness, and
hipster fans from the burgeoning cool class of Austin,
Miles and Rosemont became minor celebrities. But how to
explain the genuine strangeness? How to explain the fortune tellers’ telepathy to people who wouldn’t take “love”
for an answer? Miles and Rosemont didn’t understand it
themselves, but, lo, a story came unto them after consulting the Oracle of Shiner Bock, a story of two cosmic babies, one carried down the Colorado River in a reed
basket, the other down the mighty Pedernales in styrofoam, each wrapped in tiny Republic of Texas ﬂags. Some

100

Barth Anderson

said they’d come from the clan of archangels who’d built
the railroads, while others said their parents were time
travelers who’d abandoned the children here before escaping into the Forty-second Dimension. Regardless, the babies were saved separately and raised together by Mexican
free-tailed bats, that’s right, raised by bats in the wilds beneath the Congress Avenue Bridge. These two young boys
learned the arcane language and secret mysteries of the bat
colony, Miles told clients waiting for their readings, an occult knowledge that fated the boys to become the greatest
prophets since the Alamo days. Romulus and Remus were
their top secret names, and though an older story was often told that another Romulus killed a different Remus for
leaping across the unﬁnished walls of Rome-to-be, the better story was that the twins were alive and well and
dwelling in the sacred light of Austin’s Moon Towers.
Bullshit. Silliness. It didn’t even matter anymore—
lies told at a maniacal postmodern circus, that’s what
Rosemont the panelist would have thought, if he’d managed to remember the story at all. A link between tarot
cards and Romulus and Remus? Please. That’s as much
thought as he gave Miles. Down the panelists’ table,
Denise and Ted were performing a duet of eye rolling. A
few audience members were too. Some had zipped up
briefcases, making for the door at the end of this absurd
performance. Abernathy looked ready to fall asleep.
Rosemont smiled blandly and said, “It’s a very interesting idea, Miles.”
But Miles would have none of that from Rosemont, apparently, and stepped off the chair with a scowl. “Are you
even listening to the words coming out of your mouth?
You see that they were occultists? You see the roots that

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

101

tarot has in the occult, in that story, and that’s all you can
say? ‘Interesting’?” The look on Miles’s face was one of betrayal, but thinking back, Rosemont imagined there was
probably sorrow, too.
Rosemont had wanted Miles to shut up so he could go
have a drink with Abernathy.
“God, you won’t even let me agree with you?”
Rosemont had said. He didn’t feel outraged or incredulous. He simply wanted to get away from Miles. Rosemont
glanced at the crowd as if checking a clock.
“It’s just ‘interesting’ to you? You used to be a different
person. This isn’t just a story, a myth—it’s so much more.”
He gave Rosemont a pleading, angry look. “See what I’m
getting at? Something was preserved. Almost three thousand years old. It’s what you and I were looking for back in
Austin when—”
While Miles spieled, Rosemont’s eyes had drifted to
Abernathy, who was looking decidedly unimpressed with
this panel. He was politely stiﬂing a yawn while simultaneously eyeing the door, and suddenly Rosemont feared the
man would leave without bringing Rosemont the offer
from France, a lucrative deal to consult on an exhibit of
early playing card industries in Renaissance France. Voice
hardening, Rosemont cut Miles off. “So write a paper.”
Miles stared dumbly at Rosemont. “A paper?”
“It is interesting. So refute me. Find a publisher and get
your great big idea in print.” Rosemont slipped his notes
into his briefcase. “Until then, this is just so much mental
masturbation.”
Miles gave Rosemont the same contemptuous head
shake that he’d given Ted when he mentioned Egypt. “I
can’t believe you. I thought if I laid it out, if I handed it to

102

Barth Anderson

you, you’d at least wake up enough to remember what
you—”
Rosemont ﬂicked off his mic and stood with a sideways
glance at Abernathy. “Ted, Denise.”
Miles muttered at Rosemont, looping the strap of his
bag over his head. “Keep pretending you’re normal,
Jeremiah. Keep rejecting yourself. But this isn’t just about
tarot, and there’s more where this came from.”
In the Roman street fair, a tuba chugged outside the
quiet house. Before him, the showerhead dripped in the
stall. Rosemont hadn’t given too much weight to that argument with Miles subsequently, or those last words that at
the time had seemed to be a limp, parting taunt. Another
random scene with John C. Miles that went nowhere.
But something had changed. It was all different. All rearranged somehow, he knew, looking up at the gleaming
mirror.
There’s more where this came from.
Rosemont now ﬁgured that Miles was the one who’d
sent the letter to him in Managua. Miles couldn’t have
known where Rosemont was, but the two chanting men
seemed to attribute powers to Miles far beyond tracking
down old friends in other countries. Doppelgänger. The
thing in the mirror. They thought it was Miles. Was it?
Miles had been trying to tell him something, convince him
of tarot’s occult origins for some reason. It wasn’t enough
that Rosemont simply agree with him. Rosemont knew it
must have something to do with their old hunts and haunts
in Austin, days that he’d simply put behind himself for a
career, status, and a name. But Miles hadn’t. This isn’t just
about tarot. Something had happened to Miles, changed
him into something that Rosemont didn’t understand.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

103

Rosemont opened the red binder again and thumbed
back to The Refutation of Rosemont.
You curators and collectors are too busy bidding on
moldy bones, so you probably aren’t familiar with my
work at Ligget & LaSalle University, where I created the
Department of Urban Mythology. To be clear, I don’t use
the word “myth” to describe calciﬁed morality tales,
Joseph Campbell’s self-help bliss-chasing, or cute fables.
Though Jeremiah Rosemont used his authority and
status to liberate me from my tenure at Ligget & LaSalle,
and the burden of the salary that went with it, my life’s
work is still a search for living, modern myths that make
sense of the world—but more, that literally make the
world. To not tell a “true myth” is to submit to madness,
and conversely, to tell a true myth is to work one’s ﬁngers
into the warp and weft of reality. You used to agree with
me on this, once upon a time, Rosemont.

“The stupid narcissist thinks I got him ﬁred,” Rosemont
said to himself. Bender after bender on the university meal
ticket and he blames me? Selling psilocybin mushrooms to
his students? Rosemont scanned the article until he found
this:
Jeremiah, I can just imagine your lips tightening in
anger. I can just see you saying, “Perhaps, Miles,” which
would actually mean something vicious like, John Miles is
a bipolar freak who shouldn’t mix his meds with alcohol.
Maybe you’ve abandoned your investigations into awe
and passion, but as for me, I can see that you’re holding
these very typewritten pages and sneering down into these

104

Barth Anderson

as-yet-unpublished words. You’re wearing the shirt, the
brown and blue shirt I bought, the one with the mustard
yellow stripes. You’re sitting in a bathroom, aren’t you?
There’s a mirror behind you. Currency from a Central
American country is in your jacket pocket. You need a
shave.
Oh, look, you just read that last paragraph. Don’t
look so stupid. I made the jump we dreamed about in
Austin, while you chose static safety. In your world, the
academic world, I’m a disgrace. But in mine, I’m up and
over and out and away.

“Hello?” came a man’s voice.
Rosemont started in fright. With the bathroom door
open, he was sitting almost in full view of the foyer, he realized. He closed the binder silently and slipped it into his
backpack.
“Jeremiah?”
Any steadiness that he’d received from sitting quietly
and reading was shattered hearing his name called from
the other room and reading Miles’s words. How had Miles
known? Mirror. Bathroom. Central American currency.
Rosemont’s whole body was quaking again as he looked
down at his brown and blue shirt with mustard stripes.
Rosemont leaned forward to look out of the bathroom.
The man in the atrium was a tall fellow, standing with his
back to Rosemont, craning his neck to look into a far parlor room. The man from the trunk. It had to be. He had
short-cropped black hair, and his voice was surprisingly
welcome to Rosemont in the battering strangeness of recent events.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

105

Rosemont stepped into the bathroom doorway and realized that someone else was there. Deathbed haggard,
with ﬂashing dark eyes in sunken, waxen sockets, the
woman looked like something from a 1930s Universal
Studios horror picture with her killer widow’s peak.
“Miles,” she said, noticing Rosemont.
The man turned, and there indeed was John C. Miles in
his yellow-tinted sharpshooter specs, his long curly hair
shorn stubble short. He was jowlier and more tired looking. But there he was, whatever he was.
Rosemont was still feeling rattled deep in his blood by
what he’d read and everything he’d seen, but he managed,
“In all the Volvo trunks in all the towns in all the world . . .”
“Not bad.” Miles laughed. “You recognize me now?
You don’t look so great, buddy. What just happened?”
Rosemont could tell his eyes were darting as his brain
scurried for an answer. “I’m not sure.”
Miles and Vampirella looked at each other in concern.
“This is Priscilla, Jeremiah. She’s okay.”
It hadn’t truly occurred to him that she might not be,
but now he wondered. For that matter, was Miles “okay”?
With people being maimed, killed, and disappeared, was
Rosemont okay in any sense of the word? He could
scarcely trust his own mind in this situation, let alone other
human beings, but he swallowed hard and said, “There
were two men. In the bathroom, there. They were chanting
something bizarre and the wall—”
“Here?” Miles took a step toward Rosemont. “You
saw them?”
“Through the mirror,” Rosemont said, stumbling a little on the word.

106

Barth Anderson

Both Priscilla and Miles recoiled slightly, as if in sympathy. “Mirrors. None of us like looking in mirrors,” Miles
said.
“But who were they?” said Rosemont.
Priscilla visibly relaxed. “They’re gone?”
“Yes. They took—they and a body went . . .”
“A body?” said Miles. “Was there a, um, nail?”
Rosemont blinked rapidly and turned his head as if
from the sight of that body before him. “Yep.”
“They killed another authenticator, then,” Priscilla
said. Then she whispered, almost imploring him, “We’re
down to you, Mr. Rosemont.”
Rosemont looked at the woman, at her cargo pants
and black T-shirt. Just another budget road traveler? An
artist slouching in Rome, maybe? He thought she sounded
resigned, rueful, but her accent and manner were pronounced, so he couldn’t read her very well. Was she
Pakistani? Afghan? Rosemont said, “What do you mean,
she was an authenticator? Am I an authenticator?”
Priscilla stepped toward him, as though prepared to
hand him something precious. “You, Mr. Rosemont, have
what—”
“Wait,” Miles said. “First things ﬁrst. Did you get the
binder? It’s not on the desk.”
Priscilla’s shoulder straightened and she glanced at
Miles with a look of contempt that dissolved into a nod,
appreciating his words.
“No,” Rosemont said, hoisting his backpack. He
looked at the desk too. “No, I never found it. They—”
“They have it?” Priscilla said with venom in her voice.
Her eyes were slicing Miles to ribbons. “They have your

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

107

binder, and all your work.” She laughed and it sounded
metallic like coins falling on steel.
Miles all but collapsed against the front door. He
looked helplessly at Priscilla. “I couldn’t do anything
about it. The Iranians jumped me. I’m lucky they didn’t—”
“Stop,” she told him. Her cold laugh softened into a
chuckle.
“We have to get it. It’s everything I’ve worked for,”
Miles said. “Everything I wanted to show Marni. The
Guelph report.”
“Look, you’re a complete idiot, as I’ve pointed out before, so it’ll be easy for you to forget it,” Priscilla said,
pushing him away from the front door and grabbing one
shoulder in a friendly but domineering way. “We have
Rosemont. We have an authenticator. That’s all we really
need.”
Rosemont watched the two carefully, feeling so shaken
that he couldn’t be sure this wasn’t an act for his beneﬁt.
But, no. He knew Miles well enough to see that he was
truly overwhelmed, confused. Rosemont felt awful for lying to him, but he’d give the binder back as soon as he’d
read some more, learned more about what was happening,
and what Miles had become.
“We have to get to the templum. It’s almost nightfall,
Jeremiah Rosemont,” Priscilla said. It sounded stilted in
her voice as if she’d been waiting to say his name for a long
time. “We are going to run very, very fast now. Fast by
modern standards, anyway. Are you well enough to run?”
Rosemont got his backpack into position over both
shoulders. “Yes.”
But Miles looked ready to vomit.

108

Barth Anderson

“Miles? Come now. Come. Time to let it go. It was only
half a decade’s work. Put it in perspective.”
“I know. This is the game. I knew it was going to be like
this.”
Priscilla put her hand on the doorknob.
“It’s just words,” Miles was saying in his quick murmur. “They’ve been trying to rub out our proof for years.
Just one more kick in the mouth, eh? Okay. I know we
should go. I’m ready.”
“As soon as I open the door,” she looked at the two
men in turn, “run like devils are behind you. Because they
are, and they’re coming for us.”
Then she ﬂung the door open.

8

T

he leather feet of his ghosts were padding about the
upper stories, again, pacing and chasing each other,
nails scritching on the stone and wood. He could hear
them, their ambling gaits, their bouncing playfulness cut
short by unnerving shrieks and howling. Boy King sat
curled in a shadow on the bottom ﬂoor of Bryce &
Waterston, a night rain falling in straight, thick sheets outside. He’d invited the ghosts for protection, but they were
given to bursts of violence, so he stayed down here in the
dark, drinking himself numb.
The ﬁrst night after the debacle at Dona Mia, a member
of the Hmong family next door had followed Boy King
into Bryce & Waterston to see if he was all right. A normal person would hear nothing, see nothing but a frightened man with a broken nose cowering in the nooks and

110

Barth Anderson

crannies of the warehouse. The grafﬁti was just grafﬁti and
the rain was just rain. With blood sprayed down the front
of his suit and his nose sagging against his face like a scrotum, he clearly needed help. “You need me to call a doctor?” the fellow, James, asked Boy King.
Boy King had reached into his pocket and pulled out
the last of his money, two twenties, and held them out to
James. “Get me all the booze you can get.”
James was a kind-faced young man who looked worried for Boy King right now. Fingering the bills, he said, “I
know a doctor.”
“For forty dollars?” Boy King said.
“Maybe. It’s my uncle’s best friend. Military doctor, but
he won’t be shipped out. He sees us on Sundays free of—”
“No. Sunday? No, no. Gotta ﬁx my nose tonight.
Gotta get drunk fast. Please, just whatever’s cheap, okay?”
James had heard far stranger requests from Boy King—
fencing the pound of hashish Boy King had found in
a Dumpster; going to the cops to tell them about that
body by the river—so a trip to the liquor store for medicinal purposes must have seemed downright reasonable.
He even stayed with Boy King while he sucked down the
rum as fast as he dared, but James politely made his apologies when Boy King declared he was ﬁnally drunk enough
for the “straightening.”
After that, Boy King remained submerged in a pool of
drunkenness, and he was grateful for it. Pain hovered in
the periphery of consciousness as he slowly whittled at the
rum, and he kept the pain at bay the next day too, breaking into the second bottle of four. No food. No water. Just
rum and fear. He’d been on these benders before so his

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

111

body snapped into the rhythm of it like a dancer picking
up an old number. Nursing bottle number two for the better part of the day, he began to see that ecstatic, mad place
where the magic was, like a ceiling he was ﬂoating toward.
So he kept going, and by the second night, he’d busted into
bottle number three.
The rain was welcome. It wept from the booze-fog in
Boy King’s mind and washed the city in a mild confusion
so that beat cops steered the wrong way down familiar
one-way streets and kids forgot the rules to games they
loved. Where his rain fell, he could hear the splashing footsteps of those desert trackers as they stalked through the
city’s abandoned, mislaid, and broken corners, the dead
rail yards and mills, the weedy waterfronts, and baseball
ﬁelds turned gravel lots. Boy King drank some more, listened for them, and arranged his traps for the desert
hunters. The priests of Khnum, Khemet’s creator god,
searched for random ﬁres of magic to snuff out. In the days
when humans were barely human, Khnum’s hunters had
continually extinguished the earliest glimmers of clans becoming something more than clans, when pre-Egyptian
culture sparked in its ﬁrst and faultiest quickenings.
Eventually, the ﬁre had raged out of control, according to
their cult, and they regarded the contemporary world as
dead, thoroughly burned. These hunters were adepts at
making certain the embers, the Boy Kings of the world,
didn’t reignite into anything uncontrollable. His traps were
for them.
By the time he hit the third bottle, Boy King was past
mere mortal concerns of hangovers, headaches, and the
throbbing pain of a broken nose that he’d straightened

112

Barth Anderson

himself. So when it came, the phantom, a slight ﬁgure,
androgynous in ﬁtted black that rendered it all but invisible in the night warehouse, Boy King couldn’t even be
certain if what he was seeing was real. Stepping into the
window frame that Boy King always entered through, just
a few feet away from him, it might have been another
ghost. Boy King caught his breath. He froze and waited for
it to make a sound, to be certain it wasn’t a hallucination
or one of his own traps.
Black against an iron-gray sky, the silhouette’s head
turned this way and that, but did not seem to acknowledge
Boy King, who stood in full view, close enough to see the
visitor’s creased and dusty black leather shoes. Black
gloves. Little black backpack like those carried by fashionable young girls. His Cardin jacket.
Oh my God. It wasn’t a desert tracker. It was worse.
How did you ﬁnd me here?
Boy King’s left hand wanted to touch his right, to protect it all over again, so palpable was the memory of the
raised hammer, the sour breath of his torturer. This man
wasn’t the one who’d hurt Boy King, but he was there that
day, and while Boy King knew this man only as Transom,
the man’s gait and the hang of his arms were as familiar as
the comforting pressure of the tight black glove on Boy
King’s own hand.
Through Boy King’s snarls and misdirects, Transom
stepped lightly across the warehouse ﬂoor, nosing, ferreting. Boy King dared not move for fear of calling attention
to himself, so he stood still as the steel door beside him and
followed the visitor with his eyes. Transom came to stand
within three feet of him, so close that Boy King could see
Transom’s doughy face.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

113

“This has to be it,” Transom said quietly, speaking as if
to someone standing behind him. “The desert men, that’s
who. Their tracks led here and then vanished.”
His mind had been turned inside out by so much rum
for so many days, but even Boy King could appreciate
the cleverness of that ploy, tracking the trackers. Maybe
he could steal a page from Transom’s playbook. He stood,
experimenting with balance. Transom took a step forward, and Boy King followed on unsteady feet, the two
walking across the old loading bay of the warehouse together.
Upstairs, a ghost screamed but Transom didn’t react.
His cult was immune to the cries of the ghosts of Remus.
“To the teeth,” Transom was saying, sounding nervous.
“So, no, I don’t intend to tangle, believe me.”
Brazen with rum, Boy King matched him step for step.
He imagined that Transom was speaking to Visconti, the
hammerer. Visconti was probably listening from a safe,
remote location—a Denny’s maybe, having crappy coffee
and listening in on Transom. As long as Visconti stayed
away, Boy King felt he could handle this situation. The
bully was probably ready to appear at a moment’s notice,
though, and the very thought sagged into Boy King’s stomach, made his left knee wobble.
Transom stopped and turned as if he’d heard a footfall.
Boy King stopped. He crossed his arms over his chest,
embracing himself, and inhaled his fear, hiding it from
Transom deep in his body.
“He might be,” Transom said, “but I don’t think so.
Not for a while.”
Transom adjusted his backpack and walked to the
stairs. Boy King followed, still hugging himself. As Transom

114

Barth Anderson

passed the syllables that Boy King had spray painted on the
walls years ago, he touched them with a ring ﬁnger, ever so
lightly.
“Yes, but it’s just grafﬁti.”
Boy King nodded. Just grafﬁti. That’s it. Keep walking. But to Boy King’s dismay, when Transom passed
these sigils and signs, the power in them dimmed and
blinked out.
The second ﬂoor was where Boy King kept his secondrate Dumpster scores; items he might need, sell, give away,
or eventually junk. The gardening tools, antique kitchenware, bikes with bashed-in spokes, broken printers, a
bookshelf. Boy King had been careful to make all these
things look like they’d been thrown about haphazardly
over years, and he kept a judicious amount of real trash
heaped about too. Transom began rummaging through the
collection, and Boy King realized that he wasn’t looking
for general evidence of Boy King or even clues about who
lived here necessarily. He seemed to be foraging with a certain verve and purpose.
Oh, shit. He knows I have it.
“How should I know?” Transom said, after kicking
over a box of old teapots. “It’s a landﬁll in here.”
Boy King’s bedroom, so to speak, was on the third ﬂoor
where the howling ghosts were, accessible only by taking
the hooked pole that lay under a water-stained mattress on
the second ﬂoor and unlatching a trapdoor in the ceiling.
In his years of squatting here, he’d seen many visitors wandering downstairs. A few homeless folks had broken in
through the old coal chute, as he had originally, and a
troupe of teenage kids got high up here several times a

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

115

week for about six months straight. But no one had ever
discovered the third ﬂoor.
Transom inclined his head and looked right up at the
trapdoor as if it had called for him. “There. Up there.”
Boy King picked up one of the broken bricks that cluttered the ﬂoor everywhere in Bryce & Waterston. He
hefted it till it felt good in his hand, till he could imagine
opening Transom’s skull before the bastard ever knew that
Boy King was there. He had vowed long ago never to
manipulate, control, or yoke another human being again,
and in light of that, he wondered if he could instead kill a
person—even this loathsome specimen. Yes, he decided.
He could do it easily. Transom had been the one to lead
Visconti to the Boy King, after all. All those years ago, he’d
guarded the room while Visconti hammered the spike
through Boy King’s right hand. Killing was far better than
merely yoking him, and best of all, Boy King was drunk
enough to actually do it.
Transom kicked through the heaps of trash, scanning
for something with which to reach the trapdoor. Then he
found the mattress and pulled up one corner. “Here we
go,” he said, ﬁnding the hooked pole.
Transom ﬁshed at the ceiling for a moment, swaying
back and forth trying to catch the leather strap. When he
got it, he gave a little shout in surprise as the trapdoor
opened and the ladder ratcheted down loudly into place. A
moment later he was clambering up—the Boy King right
behind him, still holding the brick in one hand.
When he reached the top of the ladder, Boy King saw
the circle of ghosts, gold eyes burning in the light of
Minneapolis’s skyline, backing away as if in obeisance to

116

Barth Anderson

Boy King’s arrival. Quite a joke, that. Three years ago,
they’d arrived at his call and pounced him in his sleep for
three nights, their leathery pads and claws tearing real
wounds in him. After the violent afternoon at Dona Mia’s,
Boy King had invited the ghosts here again, for protection.
But their loyalties were tenuous at best.
Transom turned away, and when his body seemed to
rear back with an almost startled lift of his shoulders, Boy
King knew what he’d found. So did the ghosts. He could
hear their scufﬂing, their urgent grunts.
The stack of cardboard boxes.
Transom stood before the cardboard boxes while the
Boy King scrambled up the ladder, getting leverage on the
brick to swing himself unsteadily into the room. There
were hardcover books piled atop the treasures within each
box, to say nothing of the lead crystal ashtrays he’d stuck
there too. He hoped it was enough.
“Maybe?” Transom was whispering. “Maybe, there.
I’m nervous to go poking all of a sudden.”
Smart man, thought Boy King. Now just go. Get on
and get.
But Transom was always more curious than smart, and
he put his hands on the top cardboard box, bent his knees,
and hoisted it from the stack.
The brick felt deadly in the Boy King’s hand. If I do it,
then there’s a body. But if I only knock him out and drag
him down to the river, then he’ll just come back. But if I
kill him, then someone follows to ﬁnd out what happened.
If I set the ghosts on Transom, though, then—then Vis— . . .
the man whose name begins with V will know that Remus’s
disciplines are practiced here. And he’ll bring more than
desert trackers—and more and more.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

117

Boy King had only yoked three people in his life, and
the last yoke had cracked the mind beneath his hand. That
yoking had ﬁlled Boy King with such horror and guilt it
had shot him from the last fringes of sane civilization and
into these nether zones, hiding in the fringes where he
could remain neither himself nor a danger to others, to
dwell in the silent contemplation of getting away with
far more than murder. But this. This agent of whimsical
horror. This mome rath, this slithy tove. Here he was,
Transom, riﬂing closer and closer to the dusty cardboard
boxes, and death wasn’t good enough to stop him.
Putting down the brick, Boy King stood behind
Transom and placed his hands on the man’s shoulders so
there would be neither disconnect nor retreat, and then
they both raised their faces to the high stone arch that appeared before them in the rooﬂess, indigo sky.
“See that?” Boy King said, slurring.
Transom’s chin bobbed upward and his eyes almost
globed from his head. “What in the name of fuck is that?”
Keeping one hand on the man’s shoulder, Boy King
stepped forward and marched Transom toward the marble
arch, the bright red veins shooting through the white
stone. The ghosts ﬂed in a scampering retreat, and very
near, beyond the structure, they dissolved into a deafening
crowd that cheered and jeered in so many different languages that the tumult was nonsensical. All Boy King could
see beyond the arch, though, was not the crowd, but his
own back as he marched Transom forward.
Boy King nodded solemnly as they walked. “So simple,” he said. “Socks me in the face how simple.”
A moment later, Transom was sitting cross-legged before the cardboard boxes of Boy King’s hopes and horrors.

118

Barth Anderson

Yoked. His eyes were empty pools, and he sat with the
backs of his hands on the ﬂoor. City light shone against
clouds and illuminated this upper ﬂoor, and Boy King removed Transom’s backpack.
“I need that,” Transom said absently.
“Shh,” scolded Boy King. “No, you don’t.”
“Take it, then.”
Inside, Boy King found what he was looking for—a
simple three-ring binder. It held the errata of proofs and
corroborating documents that validated a tyro’s irrational
beliefs. Little bibles for madmen, a tyro had explained
to Boy King. All tyros carried them and Boy King had
seen several, had even attempted to keep one of his own
a number of times. In the end, though, his concern had
always been to divest himself of power, not to amass it.
Besides, the obsession for citation, notation, and authority
was lost on him after years in straight academia; that all
seemed like posturing on this side of the rainbow. Evidence? Proof? He had all the proof he needed that the
world was lousy with the inexplicably gifted, the insatiable, and the stupefyingly wondrous. Nonetheless, most
tyros swore by these collections, needed them to justify
their premeditated forays into madness. Some, the No
Lanterns, descendants of the rag-and-bone men of London,
made their way in subterranean urban mazes of ducts
and utility ways, surfacing only to steal documents from
“sunlit tyros” and retreating to absorb and digest the
stolen knowledge. Boy King supposed he fell into that
camp now.
There were whole schools of thought too on whether
documents should be placed chronologically, alphabetically, by subject, by author, or by systems that the tyro cre-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

119

ated for him- or herself. Flipping open the binder, Boy King
found that Transom ordered his documents with the most
recently acquired on top: a transcript dated two months
ago in this case. He skimmed through it, ready to riﬂe
through the thick sheaf of documents within, but then he
saw his name, so he doubled back and read more closely,
his drunken gaze bumping over the words.
Medical and Psychological
Transcription Services, Inc.
Date: 3/3/02
Patient Doe. Admitted 9/3/92. No records previous
to admission. Ward of state.
Interviewer: Dr. Dale De Vore, consulting
Cherryvale Institute
PT: I can’t fend it off forever. The drugs actually
help. I think I need them back.
DR: What are you fending off?
PT: A terrible— You—you don’t know me, right?
DR: Should I?
PT [laughs]: I don’t know. I just had a ﬂash of
doubt.
DR: It’s this holiday from the drug regimen.
Normalcy is an altered consciousness for you.
Impressive. Quite a med schedule they have you
on. Never mind. I’ll represcribe after our
meeting, don’t worry.
PT: Makes it hard. Where is President Bush? I’m
fencing.
DR: I don’t see a sword in your hand.

120

Barth Anderson

PT: All up here. And in my gut. It’s always
knocking on my heart and I can feel its
knuckles. Bump-bump. Bump-bump. Bumpbump. Bump-bump.
DR: What is? Can you tell me? What is it? . . . Your
primary tells me you believe that a god is after
you.
PT: I never said that. Not me. Not a god.
DR: You don’t think a god is after you?
PT: I mean it’s not—no, I don’t think that.
DR: Good. Might feel like a god, but . . .
PT: You know, I really don’t like this lack of
control. You need to kill me or put me back on
the drugs.
DR: No, no. Don’t talk that way. Come on.
You were about to say that they’re not after
you, right? They’re after someone else, aren’t
they?
PT: . . .
DR: And they won’t stop until they get it. Is that it?
Is that what you wanted to say?
PT: . . .
DR: Do you have any idea how many different
powers you’re up against right now? How many
powers you deﬁed in Rome?
PT: You said Rome never happened.
DR: Really? I didn’t say that. Your primary may
have said it, but I didn’t. Come, let’s cut to the
chase. Where’s the Remurian? The lemure. The
lemure? No? Okay, then, where’s the prophetess?
Come on. Who is helping you?

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

121

PT: This shouldn’t be, right? Is this happening
because I’m not on my pills?
DR: I want to help. I know all about you. I know
about Priscilla. I know she was close to her goal
of re-creating her city in Madison.
PT: . . .
DR: Ah. You didn’t know that. Revolution was in
the air, back then, but no one knew what sort.
Heh.
PT: This can’t be. You’re a part of me.
DR: More than you know. We all want the same
thing. We all want Our Lord the Spinning
Wheel’s lessons. We all want to avoid his cattle
slaughter. I don’t know what you want, but I can
help. I need the paintings to help protect you.
PT: I’ve been protecting myself.
DR: I know you have. You made a deck with
pictures cut from magazines. Your primary sent
me color copies. They are exquisite and you are
very resourceful.
PT: I’ve been shielding the warehouse where he
squats, but then someone got to him, I think.
DR: Warehouse? Warehouse? What warehouse?
PT: . . .
DR: Is he a tyro ﬁnally?
PT: I don’t know. The Boy King—but he’s hidden.
Even from me now.
DR: A boy king? A pharaoh?
PT: He’s too frightened to leave.
DR: . . .
PT: I shouldn’t have—

122

Barth Anderson

DR: Shouldn’t have what?
PT: . . .
DR: Are you okay?
PT: . . .
DR: You know he has the deck. You know he’s
got it.
PT: . . .
DR: You didn’t know that, did you? He does. He
stole it. Do you remember any of this?
PT: . . .
DR: Where is the warehouse?
PT: I’m . . . I’m not.
DR: Where is the goddamn warehouse?
PT: What warehouse?
DR: The warehouse you told me he was in.
PT: I told you who was in a warehouse?
DR: You said that a boy king was—
PT: . . .
DR: Was in a warehouse.
PT: Oh. Ah—
DR: What warehouse?
PT: No. No. I don’t remember saying that. Where
is Bush?
DR: Son of a bitch. You said warehouse! Now
concentrate!
PT: It’s all. All George Bush. All this fencing.
DR: I’m going to order you back on your regimen
and then we’ll try again. Son of a bitch.
Boy King slumped down on his rump, hard. He sat
cross-legged facing Transom, binder open in his lap, the
little wet mouths of the ghosts smacking nearby. A breeze

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

123

had picked up and the whole warehouse smelled like the
rain, clean for a change. The cardboard box of his hopes
and fears was at Boy King’s back, and simply reading a
reference to its contents made him want to open it, gaze
again upon the images there, recharge them with a human spark, and learn, learn, learn. But he hadn’t done
so in years, and it would be foolish to attempt without
months of preparing, masking, hiding. Masters, slaves,
and lunatics all over the country now knew of his whereabouts.
Boy King reread the transcript, but his reeling mind
slipped and slid across the words, until ﬁnally he lifted
his head and said, “Is that you interviewing the Patient
Doe?”
Transom was sitting primly, yoked, ready to attend Boy
King’s every whim. “No. That is Duke Visconti posing as a
psychiatrist.”
Boy King’s mouth tightened around the name. Tarot’s
original ﬁnancier and the Etruscan Discipline’s great Judas.
“Visconti.” More to the point for Boy King: the hammerer.
“Is he coming here?”
“As soon as I report back, he’ll be interested in speaking with you. As will others. Probably. I would guess.”
Transom gave his vampire grin.
“Others? What others?”
“I can’t say.”
Boy King felt like he’d been slammed in the nose again.
“What did you say to me?”
“I said,” Transom said, sounding dead and afraid now,
“ ‘I cannot say,’ Exalted One.”
“You know I can strip you down to nothing. Like you
just did to my warehouse, and I’ll laugh while I do it.”

124

Barth Anderson

“Yes,” Transom intoned. “I know. But sadly for you
there is a greater power . . .”
Oh my lord, thought Boy King, staring at Transom’s
slack expression. He’d never come across this before,
didn’t know how to handle such a thing. He’s refusing my
yoke? “Who is it?”
Transom shook his head in one forlorn shake. “Three
letters.”
“What do you mean? You received three letters?”
Transom closed his eyes, shook his head.
Boy King wanted to do it. He wanted to strip Transom’s
personality down to nothing. He felt certain that by yoking
Transom, he’d grabbed a monster by the tail, because now
he couldn’t simply release him, couldn’t let go. The entity
that had yoked Transom, the three-lettered thing, was
thrashing and turning toward him, out there, somewhere
in the dark.
“Does Visconti know you’re yoked by someone else?”
said Boy King.
“Yoke him yourself and ask,” Transom said. “Exalted
One.”
“Okay, well,” the Boy King mustered. “I need you to
go to Visconti, Transom, you heinous little fuck. I need you
to go to him right now, and as soon as you get to him, tell
him that you found nothing here. You got that? Do everything in your power to convince him and your other master that I’m not here and don’t hold back.”
Transom nodded, eager to please, now that he was satisfying Boy King again. “Anything else, Exalted One?”
Boy King looked down at the transcript, scrambling for
any information that might help him. “Yes.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

125

“What, oh my glorious and exquisite dark lord?”
“Stop that. This shit about Priscilla,” Boy King said,
glowering down into the big binder. “Was that true? Or
was that Visconti blufﬁng?”
Transom’s quick grin was like a snake slithering out of
a hole. Boy King was ﬁghting two other yokes to maintain
control of Transom. “Oh, no. Very, very true,” Transom
said, apparently enjoying Boy King’s discomfort.
“What was she doing in Madison?”
Transom eyed him suspiciously. “You didn’t know she
was there? I wonder why. Madison was a pivotal point in
the reemergence of your disgusting religion.”
“It’s not a religion.”
“Oh, I’m sorry. Your ‘Etruscan Discipline.’ I was there,
you know. Visconti was charged with tracking down a
lemure, Rebecca, and anyone that she—”
“Who?”
“Rebecca Goldblatt. She went by the name Thyme
back then.”
Boy King caught his breath. “Thyme Goldblatt?”
Again, Transom gave him his evil little eye. “You knew
her?”
Boy King was about to answer, but simply glared at
Transom. Jesus, they didn’t know I was there. He’d said
too much. He’d told Transom something key, that he knew
Thyme, and there was no sucking the words back into his
mouth.
The ghosts’ laughter snicked in the dark.
Priscilla had been watching Madison. Thyme was
somehow connected to the Etruscan Discipline. It all rearranged his view of his childhood and himself. It was as if

126

Barth Anderson

he had just transformed into a different person and could
now look into two pasts, at both the person he’d imagined
himself to be and the person that Transom said he was.
It felt oddly comforting. Almost a relief. The Etruscan
Discipline would call this divining—not telling the future,
but ﬁnding one’s self in accord with the forces of the universe. He had the odd sense that in his life being reorganized this way, he was seeing it as it should have always
been seen. Not “true,” per se, but directed, funneled, and
bent upon an end. Divined.
But he had to be sure. He glanced at the cardboard boxes
that Transom had come frighteningly close to opening.
“Time for you to go, Transom,” Boy King said, getting
unsteadily to his feet. “I got something to do.” He steered
the man down to the ﬁrst ﬂoor and toward the doorway.
Then, much the same way that he’d marched Transom beneath the white marble arch, he gently pushed him forward, got him walking toward the dark wall of rain before
them. Boy King had him thoroughly subjugated, now.
Transom nodded thickly, about as fuzzy-headed as Boy
King was. “Ask a question?”
“Go ahead,” said Boy King.
“Why were the ancient throngs deriding me?”
Boy King said, “They weren’t.” He wondered what the
ghosts would do now that he, an agent of Remus, had
acted as Romulus, subjugating an enemy like this. “They
were deriding me.”
“Oh. Okay, then. Is there time for soup?”
Boy King could feel that the evil little weasel had
snapped for good. The cockiness and the evil grin were
gone; he felt surprisingly distressed to see them disappear.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

127

Boy King was just protecting himself—Romulus’s famous
excuse.
“Yes. Go get soup,” he said to Transom. “Hurry. I bet
you’re starving.”
“Sure am. Some soup. Good gosh, it’s bright today.”

9

T

he roving blur of Rome’s Aventine Hill neighborhood spiraled around Rosemont in great smears of
buttressed walls and domes, cupolas, blue shutters on
crimson facades, and crumbling slices of the great city,
here, on the lesser of the two central Roman hills. In that
shifting, dissolving run of hers, Priscilla took Miles and
Rosemont through the tableau of the festival, frozen in
place as it was so that here the blob of a man’s dripping ice
cream hung like a pendant in the air and there a pigeon’s
wings seemed ready to applaud or pray for the runners as
they skipped like stones across this still lake, stepping in
and out of Rome and across it too.
Until ﬁnally Rosemont came to stand next to Priscilla
and Miles in a curious little piazza, where three cobblestone streets emptied into a chapel’s courtyard. The chapel

130

Barth Anderson

had seen more ecclesiastic days apparently. It was now a
coffee shop, or perhaps a private apartment—judging by
the gentle casualness of the woman drinking espresso at
the lone table. There was a line of garbage cans, one at the
end turned upside-down. Candy-striped awnings leaned
over ﬂowered vines spilling from windowsills, park
benches sat at the four corners of the piazza, and a modest
fountain with a little gargoyle spurted water from thick,
pursed lips. A whiff of sewage was on the air. “Here it is,”
Miles said. “The center of my universe.”
Rosemont stepped with him. He liked feeling Miles
near after all the whirling confusion in the apartment.
“This?” Rosemont said. “Seems too quaint and cheery to
be the center of your universe.”
“Yeah, not exactly Oil Can Harry’s in Austin,” Miles
drawled. He watched as two cats pounced on something
behind the garbage cans on the other side of the piazza. “It
doesn’t live up to its history, that’s for sure.”
“What is it?” Rosemont asked.
Priscilla said, “There’s Marni. Let’s go.”
As they walked across the square toward the older
woman drinking espresso, she stood and embraced Priscilla.
“I’ve missed you intolerably,” she said, but her face remained impassive, as if she hadn’t spoken. She was maybe
in her eighties, but very hale, with an aristocratic, angry
posture that said old age was an inconvenience that she
wasn’t bearing well. She wore a blue peacoat with a sauce
stain on the lapel. Like Priscilla, this woman Marni was
hard for Rosemont to place. Was she Iranian? Miles had
said something about Iranians. Or Russian? She said to
Priscilla, without looking at Miles or Rosemont, “Who are
these men? Which one is John C. Miles?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

131

Miles raised a hand in greeting. “Hi, I’m Miles. I’m
very honored indeed, ma’am.”
Rosemont looked sidelong at Miles. He’d never heard
him sound like Eddie Haskell before.
“I just saw the Moroccan walking through on his way
to the celebration. I think it’s ofﬁcial, now,” Marni said,
still without looking at Miles. She ﬂicked at the dried stain
on her coat’s lapel. “You have every major sect after you.”
Miles nodded, then grinned his best smile at her. “Not
every one.”
Now Marni looked at him straight on with glinting
brown eyes. “Oh?”
“There’s still you.”
Her face never broke its stiff blankness, but she
laughed. “Ek tariana ek coo.”
“I’m sorry.” Miles shook his head. “I’m still learning
your language.”
“It means, ‘That’s the problem about my skull,’ I would
say,” she said. Her hands slipped into the pockets of her
dark blue coat.
Miles frowned, apparently decided he was supposed to
laugh, and forced a chuckle, but he sounded mystiﬁed.
“All right, then.”
“We’re almost ready,” Marni said. “Sit with me. It will
just be a moment.”
They sat, four around the table, but no one came to
serve them. The silence was awkward. Rosemont wanted
Miles or Priscilla to introduce him to Marni, discuss the
contents of the red binder, or tell this Marni person about
the chanting men and their disturbing lusts and powers.
But Priscilla and Miles remained quiet, staring down at the
table, as if waiting for Marni’s permission to speak.

132

Barth Anderson

A moment later, Rosemont inadvertently caught Marni’s
eye. The old woman pointed her gaze across the piazza and
then looked back at Rosemont. He followed her eyes and
saw two men in white coveralls hauling between them an
unconscious Italian soldier, recently home from Kuwait,
judging by the desert fatigues. They dragged him past the
gargoyle fountain, his combat boots making a stuttering,
scufﬁng noise on the cobblestones, and placed him on one
of the park benches, folding his legs up on the seat before
marching off.
Miles and Priscilla didn’t seem to notice.
Another pair of men in white coveralls arrived from
one of the other streets, dragging an unconscious woman.
They seemed more aware of the strangeness of their situation, looking this way and that for reactions from people
in the square. But passersby kept about their business,
walking past the little fountain as perhaps they did every
day, to and fro on their well-worn trails. Were these men in
white invisible to them? Or was this just another day in the
big city with experienced Romans avoiding unnecessary
eye contact?
Finally four unconscious people were lying on benches
at the four corners of the piazza, and Rosemont recalled
the dormitory through which he’d passed in order to enter
the hostel. He said to Miles, “Do those sleepers form some
kind of boundary?”
All three people at the table turned their attention on
him with such ferocious, urgent expressions that Rosemont
slid a hand over his mouth.
“Too smart for his own good,” Marni said to Miles.
“Or,” Priscilla said, “he’s becoming sensitized.” Her
brow wrinkled in apparent worry beneath that dramatic

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

133

widow’s peak, and again she gave Rosemont a stare that
made him feel she was about to hand him or tell him something.
Miles whispered to Rosemont, “Just hold tight, buddy.
I think you’ll get some answers in a sec.”
Marni took a deep breath, nostrils ﬂaring, and nodded
as if she were enjoying sweet music that she alone could
hear. She actually smiled then, and was quite stately and
beautiful, Rosemont thought, when she did. “This is delicious,” she admitted, eyes drifting about the square. “This
is very delicious, friends.”
Miles sighed heavily, seemingly in stunned relief, and
looked across the table at Priscilla. “I was hoping you’d
think so.”
Priscilla nodded, watching the older woman. “Documentation is lacking. But I told Miles that shouldn’t
matter.”
“You say how old?” Marni asked Miles after a long
pensive moment.
“It’s a guess,” he said. “But I think it’s almost three
thousand years old.” Revealing this information seemed to
lift a weight from Miles’s shoulders. His voice was lighter,
happier. “Does it feel familiar to you, Marni? Bring back
any memories of the, er, old country?”
Maybe it was the recent war in the Gulf, but she looked
Kuwaiti to Rosemont. He looked at her again closely.
Arabic? Armenian?
She breathed in through her nose, seeming to revel in
the mysterious ocean breeze or meadow or mountain rain
that she alone could smell. “It’s a terribly strong templum.
It reminds me of places where our watermen used to scry
the minds of previous generations. You can still feel the

134

Barth Anderson

sharp edges of those invisible squares, if you know where
to walk.” She glanced around at the awnings. The popcorn
stand. The stray cats eating now. “Here of all places. Who
built it? Do you know?”
“A descendant of yours,” Miles said.
“Of mine?”
“Of Wilusija’s, yes.”
Rosemont almost jumped as he recognized the name.
He’d wondered how it was pronounced when he chanced
across it in the red binder, scanning a transcript of an interview between Miles and Priscilla. Were Marni and Priscilla
from the same place? This Wilusija? Was it a country? A
city? A castle? He’d never heard it before.
“Who built it? Who are you talking about, Miles?”
Marni said. Whatever she had experienced with the templum seemed to have softened her. “How on earth did you
ﬁnd it?”
Miles was all but crawling up on his chair with excitement. “I’ve been eager to meet you and discuss it. Priscilla
helped me. She had certain information that I didn’t have,
while I had information she didn’t have. We met in
Sarajevo a few years back.”
“Sarajevo?” Rosemont said. “You were in Sarajevo?”
Miles looked at Marni. “Do you think we’re safe to
talk about this?”
“Oh, we’re very safe here,” she said, looking at the
sleepers. “Besides, I think it’s good that he knows.”
Priscilla said to Rosemont, “I met Miles while he was in
Sarajevo, gathering evidence for his theories on urban
mythology.”
“Speciﬁcally, I was studying a twelve-step Alcoholics

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

135

Anonymous occult sect,” Miles said to Rosemont. “I was
researching it for the—for an article I was writing.”
Rosemont swallowed a smile. He felt certain Miles had
been about to say that he was researching The Refutation
of Rosemont. “An occult twelve-step program?” Rosemont
laughed through his nose, then realized Miles wasn’t kidding. “Are you for real?”
Miles returned Rosemont’s stare, but then his face broke
into that grin. “None of your lip or we’ll take you back to
that bathroom and leave you in there with the mirror.”
Marni chuckled.
“I had the same reaction you did, Rosemont, when I
came across this sect. But the twelve steps are thoroughly
occult, if you think about it,” Miles said. “ ‘Admitting one
is powerless before God as you understand Him.’ ” He
raised his eyebrows, cocked his head, selling the idea to
Rosemont. “Or how about this? ‘Made a decision to turn
one’s will and one’s life over to the care of God.’ But here’s
the big step, the most supernatural of the twelve where I
was concerned. Step number three: ‘Came to believe that a
power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity.’ ”
Rosemont was about to say that if those were occult
maxims, then born-again Christians were palm readers. But
Priscilla spoke ﬁrst, saying to Marni, “That’s how Miles
discovered me. The founder of the Sarajevo Alcoholics
Anonymous understood what Miles was after and brought
him to me. We came here six months ago, looking for the
lost twin. Remus.”
Priscilla kept talking but Miles suddenly turned to
Rosemont and whispered, as if not to disturb Priscilla.
“Rosemont.”

136

Barth Anderson

Rosemont blinked at him in confusion. “What?”
Priscilla watched the two of them out of the corner of
her eye as she spoke to Marni, shifting into a language that
Rosemont didn’t recognize.
“Hey,” Miles said, kindly. “Hi.”
Rosemont narrowed his eyes, scrutinizing him. He
chortled. “Hi, Miles.”
“I’m glad you came,” Miles said. He sighed deeply, a
shiver in his breath, and put his hand on Rosemont’s leg.
“Isn’t this the best time you’ve ever had?”
Overly familiar and inappropriate as always, and always welcome. Rosemont put his hand on Miles’s hand.
“This surreal shit? Dead bodies? People vanishing into thin
air? You can’t be serious.”
“Yeah, it’s so fucked,” Miles said, smiling, nodding.
The hand slipped out from under Rosemont’s and the odd,
affectionate moment blinked out. “Fascinating shit, that
dude in Sarajevo. He was the one who told me it was ancient, didn’t even call it twelve steps, even though their
gatherings were meetings where raging alcoholics and
long-recovered addicts get together and they’re free to talk
about whatever they want. But all in this language of ‘defending the city’ and ‘raising walls of protection’—the language of a discipline that had come out of a destroyed
Bronze Age city, I came to realize, was a myth and a rite.”
Miles was quoting their old formula for whether a story
was a true myth or just an old fairy tale: story plus ritual
equaled myth. Miles laughed. “A living goddamn myth.”
So often, talking to Miles was like trying to hold eight
conversations at once. Still trying to parse the meaning of
Miles’s hand on his leg, Rosemont said, “Are you serious?
You found a cult that had survived since the Bronze Age?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

137

“Preserved in the twelve steps like amber.” Miles
grinned. “Man, I’ve been wanting to talk to you about this
for years.”
Rosemont felt himself give a frowning smile. “What’s
the rite?”
“Disciplina etrusca. The Etruscan Discipline. The
Etruscans built reality out of the smoking heaps of a
chaotic world because the city they survived from had been
destroyed. That was the Discipline’s expressed mission—a
postapocalyptic rite, you know? To create a place for the
culture, the city to survive. Twelve-step meetings are now
where their creation story is told person by person—a creation of self, sanity, and shared reality—which is what
every creation story is. And what I was after. And I found
it in the modern disciplina etrusca. But, oh, that’s not all,
boy, because—”
“Wait.” Rosemont put his ﬁngertips on his brow, concentrating. Miles had this effect on him. Rosemont didn’t
know where to begin questioning him about what he’d
just said, how to backtrack and seize upon the thread
of Priscilla’s comment (Remus? They were looking for
Remus? Our Remus?), or to eavesdrop on Marni and
Priscilla who were deﬁnitely speaking the language that
Marni had spoken previously, or how to interpret Miles’s
sudden show of affection, and then the disappearance of it.
Walls of protection? Shared reality? A postapocalypse in
the Bronze Age? It was like meeting Miles for the ﬁrst time
all over again, in the sideshow tent at the Circus of Inﬁnite
Wow and that swift engine of Miles’s fecund theories, supernatural ponderances, surreal musings, and rambling
asides, and Rosemont realized he had to grab on right now,
jump aboard, or get left behind. So he grabbed on for the

138

Barth Anderson

second time in his life. “Wait a minute. Bronze Age city
and Etruscans?” said Rosemont, glancing at Marni. Good
lord, he can’t mean what I think he means. “What city?”
Miles smiled in appreciation. “You always zero in. It’s
like talking to a bird of prey, talking to Jeremiah Rosemont.
That’s right. E-truscans,” whispered Miles, breaking up
the syllables. “Ex-Trojans. Romulus and Remus were
ex-Trojans. Descendants of them anyway. Descendants of
Marni’s culture. Charged with the task of rebuilding her
city after the Trojan Diaspora, and that rebuilding effort is
alive and well in Sarajevo. The wall-spell has been recovered. The city is still waiting to be built.”
Hearing the names Romulus and Remus in Miles’s
voice shocked Rosemont into silence. Was Miles talking
about their ridiculous myth, with babies saved from Texas
rivers? No. He seemed completely serious. The names of
the twins paralyzed him as if he’d been caught naked in a
spotlight, and he immediately faced Priscilla to see if she’d
heard what Miles had said. Priscilla had stopped conversing with Marni and sat listening to Miles, nodding, eyes
cast sidelong at the older woman. He realized that Priscilla
was gauging Marni’s reaction, the way Rosemont was
gauging hers.
Maddening, thought Rosemont. If it weren’t for the
two other people at the table who clearly regarded his old
friend as an authority of some kind, Rosemont might have
taken a deep breath and let loose on Miles for his absurd,
soft-brained fantasy. Romulus and Remus were exTrojans? He might as well have said they were raised by
bats in the wild, descended from highway-building angels.
But Rosemont couldn’t speak, couldn’t challenge, ask,
rant, nor mock, couldn’t move his own mind to respond,

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

139

because he couldn’t explain anything that had happened to
him since arriving in Rome. Of all things, why should
Miles’s irresponsible scholarship outrage him?
What is that? Is that real? the shorter of the two men
had said, crouching, looking up at Rosemont’s reﬂection in
the mirror. He’d seen it, both men had, and they’d ﬂed, not
understanding what they were looking at, seemingly no
more aware of what was happening than Rosemont. The
only person who seemed to think they had a grip on this
situation was John C. Miles.
Just hold tight, buddy, Miles had said a moment ago. I
think you’ll get some answers in a minute here. For the
love of God, if these were answers, Rosemont thought he
was better off running blindly into the streets to get away
from this gibbering maniac.
But Marni obviously liked what she was hearing from
Miles. She was warming to him. He had this magnetic effect on people—they either loved him or were repelled by
him—and their decisions often turned on a dime. Rosemont
knew because it was the same effect Rosemont had on
people.
“I think we should drink a few drinks and eat while we
discuss what Miles has shown us. Wouldn’t that be diverting?” said Marni.
“Hell, yeah,” Miles muttered, upper body bobbing in
agreement.
Rosemont’s stomach bobbed in agreement too. He still
didn’t know what to make of Miles’s wild theories, but he
hadn’t eaten since the plane ride. “I’d like that.”
“Um, ekta?” Priscilla said, crossing her arms. “It’s not
a good idea.” Her eyes were on Miles. “No drinking.”
“I get this from the twelve-steppers,” Miles said, making

140

Barth Anderson

a wild-eyed face at Rosemont. “I apparently give off an
‘addict vibe.’ ”
A waiter arrived just as Rosemont was about to ask if he
could borrow some Italian currency from Miles. Everything
about the waiter, even his mustache, looked pinched and irritated. On his tray were four plates of plain pasta and
Collins glasses full of Campari. “The cheapest meal on the
menu,” he sighed, “all around.”
Marni put her hand on the younger woman’s arm.
“You have been outvoted, apparently.”
Priscilla smirked and picked up her fork. “You’ll see.”
For his part, Rosemont didn’t care how the waiter
knew to bring the meals or what drinks to pour. He pulled
the plate close, twirled his fork in the pasta, and the
rosemary-ﬂavored olive oil drizzled over the plate smelled
nourishing, ﬁne.
Marni took another deep breath of the templum and
said, “Before I agree that my traditions may have roots in
Priscilla’s and yours, Dr. Miles, I’ll need proof. If it’s as old
as you say, how could no other tyros have seen this templum?”
“Because it was hidden in plain sight. That’s the unique
power of Remus, the magician who created it,” Miles said
as he picked up his fork, “and if my work hadn’t been
stolen, I could show you hard evidence of that.” Miles
bared his teeth in a frustrated smile, and then went on.
“But there are three proofs that this templum is Remus’s.
The ﬁrst is the Lemuria, which—”
“That was a Roman ritual honoring the dead, ekta,”
Priscilla said.
“Ach. I know what the Lemuria is,” snapped the old
woman and she put down her drink. Her gay mood had

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

141

ﬂipped on itself with Priscilla’s comment, and her wrinkled
face seemed to darken with anger. “But how can that possibly be a proof? It’s not a ritual anymore. Just a quaint
custom.”
“The name itself is a proof,” Priscilla said. “L’s and R’s
were interchangeable. Lemuria is Remuria, meaning, that
which belongs to Remus.”
Marni’s creased lips pursed as she sipped from her
glass. She set it down with a nod. “You called me from
Istanbul for this?”
“But it was a ritual, once,” Miles said. “This piazza
was an ancient site of the Lemuria for honoring the dead
twin, because it’s the place where Remus read his augury
for—well, in my notes, I have collected archaeological reports from the Museum of—”
“You have no proof ?” said Marni with a disappointed
scowl. “I’m supposed to simply believe you that there’s a
connection between Roman, Etruscan, and Trojan traditions? Because of etymology? What next? Genetics? My
dears, evidence of cult and ritual are what I want and all
that matters.”
Staring at the old woman, Miles’s jaw worked like he
was chewing.
Priscilla caught his eye and rolled her hand in the air as
if to say Get on with it.
They’re looking for a cult? A Remus cult? Rosemont
feigned total, famished absorption in his pasta, but he was
hanging on every word in this conversation. He wondered
if this was what Miles was trying to tell him in Atlanta,
that he’d found something powerful, unexplainable. A
cult. An occult practice of some kind. There’s more. There
is so much more, Jeremiah.

142

Barth Anderson

Still staring at Marni, Miles coughed, swallowing a
snide comment, Rosemont imagined. “Well, I suppose that
brings me to proof number two,” Miles said. Seated on the
corner of his chair in a pose of beseeching, Miles faced
Marni with one knee up and the other bent, almost like
a medieval ambassador entreating a powerful queen.
Rosemont had never seen Miles so conciliatory, so appeasing. The smart-ass at the Atlanta conference, battering
down his colleagues and grandstanding, was long gone. He
was appealing to Marni for some reason, wanted her conﬁdence, and obviously didn’t like her scowling at him. “Do
you know the story of Romulus and Remus, ekta? Or
more speciﬁcally, how it ends?”
“Yes. It was told widely by the Romans themselves,”
Marni said in confusion and disgust. She lifted a gnarled
hand as if offering something ridiculous to the air. “They
used to brag that their founding hero killed his own
brother. Immoral, from the beginning.” She wiped her
hands on her napkin. “The Greeks especially couldn’t understand why Romans chose to tell such a horrible story
about themselves.”
“The best stories are too painful to ignore,” Miles said.
“Romans told this one because something strange happened the day Romulus killed Remus and they puzzled and
worried over it for centuries.”
Marni lifted her chin. “What happened?”
He hooked her, Rosemont thought with a smile.
“It happened the day of Rome’s birth,” Miles said.
“Romulus and Remus were augurs, diviners, and they had
held a contest to see who could determine the best place
to build their new city. Romulus won the contest and began building a perimeter wall by cutting a circular trench

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

143

around the tallest of Rome’s seven hills,” Miles said. “Well,
Remus crossed that trench. He deliberately jumped across
the trench that his brother was cutting with a plow.”
“Yes,” Marni said, “I’d always heard they were arguing
about where the wall should be built.”
“But, ekta, listen again to what Miles is telling you,”
Priscilla said, leaning forward and steepling her ﬁngers. “A
city founded by divination. A plow. A circle cut in the earth
by a magician.”
Marni’s eyes remained impassive, but then they ﬂashed.
“Oh my.” The old woman looked thunderstruck, ﬁngertips lighting upon her chin. “It never occurred to me. I
can’t tell you how many times I heard that story. It never
occurred to me what Romulus was doing.”
“No one did,” Priscilla said, “because no one was intended to know.”
“What was he doing?” asked Rosemont, noodles
draped over fork tines.
“He was casting the same spell cast the day that
Wilusija—Troy—was founded,” Miles said. “Romulus
and Remus were members of the same occult sect that
Priscilla belongs to, the Etruscan Discipline, which preserved the city-building magic of Troy, a cult dedicated to
the construction of gates, walls, streets, and sewers,” Miles
said. “Romulus was resurrecting Troy.”
Rosemont imagined he could feel mountain air, for
a moment. Cool, invigorating breezes. The templum, he
thought. Rosemont looked across the piazza at the sleepers
on their benches. I feel it.
Marni nodded in appreciation, but then her scowl returned. “You still haven’t told me. What is the strange
thing that happened to Remus?”

144

Barth Anderson

“The strange thing that happened?” Miles said. “Nothing happened. When Remus jumped that magic circle, it
should have killed or cursed him. But he survived.”
“But neither did he destroy the Wilusijan spell by crossing the circle,” Marni said.
“That wasn’t his intent,” Miles said. “Remus was simply showing his brother that he was protected by this templum.” Miles hooked his ﬁnger and pointed at the ground.
Then he crossed his arms. “He was showing him that he
was the stronger magician.”
“All right,” Marni said. “I’ll eventually want to see
proof, but I’m stirred by your claim.”
Rosemont couldn’t believe it: Miles was bowing. He was
bowing and averting his eyes. “Thank you, ekta,” he said.
Rosemont was beginning to see it. It had all been rushing past him, at ﬁrst, too fast to organize it in his mind. But
now he was beginning to see a piece of this whole mad
conversation, because he understood how Miles had come
to this conclusion. It was their story of Remus. The Remus
who had found a way out. In those days, Miles and
Rosemont were seekers, looking for a peek behind the curtain of reality, unsure if they ever really could, but seeking,
throwing cards, imagining—and Remus was the hero they
invented, the would-be magician who’d leapt from this stiﬂing world and into the unknowable beyond.
Rosemont understood what Miles was getting at when
he’d said that tarot’s imagery and structure had its roots in
the occult purpose of the ancient triumphal parades of
Rome. Those parades were all for Remus. Remus was being
remembered, whether Romans realized it or not. Remus
was being remembered in tarot, too, whenever the cards

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

145

were shufﬂed, whether New Agers realized it or not. It all
made sense now.
More, Rosemont had the distinct impression that Miles
was standing on a cliff, a brink, and, with one step, he’d
fall away from this mundane world. He was certainly further along than Rosemont, who’d run from the strangeness
that followed him his whole life, seeking normalcy, not
mysticism, not mystery. Miles was offering a hand to
Rosemont, offering to pull him along, despite Rosemont’s
denial and embarrassment as a Very Important Scholar.
“So. How did you ﬁnd it?” asked Marni. “How did
you know the templum was here?”
Miles coughed uncomfortably and glanced at Rosemont.
“I’m an occultist. I live with my eyes wide open. Always.”
“Many do. That doesn’t explain.”
Miles said, “That brings us to my last proof. What I
have to tell you now should really be kept conﬁdential.
Between us three,” he said, pointing to Marni, Priscilla,
and himself.
Rosemont sat back in his chair as if shoved. “What is
this? Why?”
“Look,” said Miles, “it’s nothing personal, but you’re
here to be an impartial authenticator. It would defeat the
purpose if I told you everything I have to tell Marni.”
Rosemont had just been about to come clean. He’d ﬁnally felt he was getting some answers, and he’d been getting
ready to reach down to get his backpack, remove the binder,
and hand it to Miles ﬁnally. Now he felt betrayed, pissed,
vindictive. “Sure. I’ll just go powder my nose, is that it?”
Priscilla said, “Why can’t he stay? We’re all going to see
the deck when—”

146

Barth Anderson

Miles shushed her. “Because the Monk asked me to be
discreet.”
“What monk?” Rosemont stared at Miles in disbelief.
“What if I refuse? What if I stay here? What then?”
“You will eventually be vulnerable to Visconti and his
toady Transom, the men who came for you in the apartment,” Marni said, glaring at Rosemont, “because the
sleepers will wake and the sacred templum will go back to
being a little corner of Rome. We’ll all be unprotected then.
Let’s get on with this.”
Rosemont gave Miles his dirtiest look and then his
chair scraped loudly as he stood up fast. “Unbelievable.
Un—believable.”
He took two long strides away from the table when he
heard Marni hissing at him. He turned back and saw she
had picked up his backpack and was offering it to him
with a pointed look.
“Take this with you, while we discuss the Monk?” she
said, and when he grabbed one shoulder strap, she held on
just a little longer and said, “Thieves everywhere, you
know.”
He smiled at her. “Yes. There are,” he said. “Okay.”

10

T

he cardboard boxes of his dreams and horrors were
open. Boy King had opened them himself, but after
twelve years sealed, simply seeing the boxes undone quickened his pulse and jumbled his brain with fright.
Rippled sunlight fell around Boy King, cast down
through antique glass. He’d let the rain go, let the morning
sun come. A car door slammed—Farah coming home with
a client (he could tell which one by the sound of the car
door: the middle-aged introvert with the acne scarring.
“Born to Run” would begin its nonstop cycle soon). For a
long time, Boy King sat listening, making certain the
wooden stairs hadn’t squeaked, that no one was below the
third-ﬂoor trapdoor, trying to open it.
A few moments later, when the E Street Band started its
classic crash, Boy King decided things were normal, and

148

Barth Anderson

from a leather bag produced a mirror and a red-and-black
Mexican wrestling mask. Even touching mirrors made him
nervous, but it was time to look at last into the crystal ball.
Time to clarify what Lara couldn’t, and do it before Visconti
came knocking.
Boy King placed a chair at an angle, facing the wall,
and then leaned the mirror upright in front of the chair, so
that he could see the ground at a right angle through the
mirror. Then he sat down and rested a wooden Art Deco
poster for Riemann Hardware against his knees and
dragged the cardboard box of his dreams and horrors in
place on the other side of the poster. Deep breath. Deep
breath. Then Boy King tugged the mask over his face, fabric stretched painfully across his broken nose. By reaching
around the poster with both arms in a sort of embrace, he
could look at his hands in the mirror and see the box. But
he couldn’t see the contents with his own eyes, not even in
his peripheral vision—only in the reﬂection. The poster
was in the way, so he couldn’t see his trembling hands, and
he was careful not to look at his own face, his own reﬂection.
Across the lot, Farah was shouting over Springsteen.
“Dude! Dude! Aw, dude! Dude!”
Boy King removed the ﬁrst small painting, hermetically
sealed in its clear plastic casing, and showed it to himself in
the mirror.
The workbench. The baker’s hood. The unformed
dough.
Or, from another point of view: the con man’s table.
The swooping hat of a deceptive foreigner. A piece of cloth
covering something before him.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

149

And from yet another: a ram-headed lord with long,
wavy horns and two half-formed wads of soon-to-behuman clay on his potter’s bench.
Boy King removed more paintings, also sealed. A
hunter with his orange dogs; the skygazer and her beautiful twin stars; the delirious horseman—each still blazing in
Boy King’s mind from the day the Mad Monk had shown
them to him.
Boy King raised another painting and looked at it
through his angled mirror. The Arch. This image was the
most terrifying of the thirteen ancient paintings, because
whoever had painted it knew. Maybe the painter knew it
from the triumphator’s vantage, passing beneath the arch
into his city, or from the point of view of the trumped, that
is, the captured enemy driven before the victor in abject
humiliation. But the artist knew what it meant to yoke and
be yoked. Red veins shooting through the arch’s white
marble like an old man’s skin. Cruel, imperious sun overhead. Romulus’s trench, dug by his plow for the spell and
the wall to be. The raised shovel. The fallen brother.
Spilled, innocent blood.
But what of the potter? How did that ﬁt?
The con man?
Your consciousness can march only one thought at a
time through the luminous doorway of your mind. To live,
you assume that you must eliminate some thoughts or
make a smear of them all into one manageable thought.
One person with a single ﬁle of thoughts. One arch. That’s
the way of the human mind. But it’s not our way.
Boy King kept the paintings in the cardboard box and
gazed at them through the mirror so that they were framed

150

Barth Anderson

within a frame. Narrowed. Controlled. Each painting was
a point of power, a “lifting of the plow,” to quote the
Monk, a spot in the furrow where Romulus’s wall would
not be but a doorway would. These paintings were doorways, breaks in the ancient spell of Romulus the conqueror. Each painting, each card, was an image gazing out,
just as Boy King was an image gazing in through the doorway at an image of himself gazing out—as a nine-year-old
boy.
Madison, Wisconsin, is what he saw. He could see a
woman walking up Broom Street’s row of duplexes and
ﬂophouses, a nine-year-old boy in hand. Boy King knew
those houses. He knew that street. He’d been hoping for
answers about Visconti’s plans or the whereabouts of those
desert trackers, but this was welcome. Boy King hadn’t
known this woman as an adult, so to slip through the door
of the ancient paintings and the doorway of this woman’s
mind was a precious gift. A treasure it was to scry his
mother’s mind.
She was holding her son’s hand, praying for Vacancy
signs, and Boy King could tell that Anita was absorbing
how Madison had knuckled under. A tension seemed to be
in people’s bodies, she was thinking, not in the streets anymore. That curious mix of hairy veteran and hairy freak
used to galvanize even casual encounters on the street corner back in the day, when his mother used to come here on
weekends from Racine. She longed for that, he could tell.
The students she passed now were altogether tidy, walking
with purpose and edge, looking at the sidewalk before
their feet, and never meeting her eye. The people here
seemed less wild than the Madison she remembered of

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

151

1968, and the wildness was why she’d come, Boy King
could tell.
Boy King sat staring in awe. He realized now that he
hadn’t had a mental image of his mother. He’d looked into
her thoughts before, but not into her eyes, her face. Boy
King liked how ﬁerce she seemed, as she stood in front of a
sprawling 1910 house holding her little boy’s hand, reading a hand-printed sign.
COME TO VALHALLA COMMUNE. WE’RE A
HOUSE OF 20–25 MEMBERS (AND 3 RADICAL
CATS!) DEDICATED TO ALTERNATIVE LIFESTYLES,
SMASHING PATRIARCHY, ANARCHICAL FOOD
SYSTEMS, TOTAL GENDER EQUALITY, AND
KIBBUTZ-STYLE LIVING.

“What’s a commune?” asked her son, reading the sign.
He was known as Finn back then, but he would have
twenty different names before his time on Earth was done.
Anita pulled Finn up the stairs to the front door before
he could ask about anarchic or kibbutz too. “It’s a place
where people work hard to change the world.”
Finn sounded skeptical. “Here?”
For Boy King, this was the only place that ever truly felt
like home and to see it now, feel it through his mother’s
pores as well as his own, was delicious. A playground within
a playground, Valhalla was a beacon for dedicated nonsense and for young people seeking, like Finn’s mother,
to shuck off the pinching uniformity of their childhood
homes. A child in this world was unique—not freak show
unique, but cherished, fawned over. And Boy King could

152

Barth Anderson

feel it, even from Bryce & Waterston. Young Finn had
a never-ending supply of playmates who saw in the boy
an avenue into pure whimsy that Madison’s grown-up
strangeness of toga parties and goofball, collegiate alcoholism only lamely approximated. Thyme was his favorite.
She was an earnest young feminist who played “tarot stories” with Finn, making up involved, rambling tales about
characters depicted in the cards.
As for Anita, her studies kept her busy to the point of
exhaustion, and Thyme willingly took care of Finn in her
absence. But, as Boy King watched, Anita’s afternoons of
reading Chaucer at Helen C. White Library eventually
stretched into evenings of throwing pots at the campus art
lab (after quick calls back to the house to ask if someone
could put Finn to bed). The grown son, scrying his mother,
hated and admired her for it. She was getting ready, after
all, readying to take her next step: Racine, Madison, then
away. Why shouldn’t she? Why should this strong young
woman tie herself down when late hours at the art lab
could be allowed to stretch into real camaraderie like
she’d never experienced before? Cigarettes and bottles of
Point beer at the 602 Bar or the State Street Inﬁrmary
were waiting for her. Fellow students called her talented,
praised her artwork, her politics, and asked her opinion
on matters of the day, and part of Boy King felt that, after
a decade of being chained to a cash register and a son
in Racine, Anita should walk through whatever doors
opened to her. But his brain was a blur of fury and panic
watching her retreat unfold, as she followed bands on
short road trips to Iowa City and Chicago, sleeping with
the more tender morsels that came her way, and leaving
her boy behind. On those trips, when she rode alone in

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

153

her dilapidated Maverick, chasing a van or pickup loaded
with ampliﬁers and drum kits, Boy King saw that she
sometimes passed a ﬁgure on the darker highways, a character carrying a khaki backpack that she repeatedly saw
on the hem of her headlights, standing still on the shoulder
of the road.
Was it a ghost? A man? Was it waiting for her? If so, it
wasn’t clear why. Understanding these events and images
in the ancient paintings wasn’t like watching a DVD. To
simply comprehend who the lurker along the cornﬁelds
was, Boy King had to stare through the painting’s doorway
until his brow and face dripped with sweat and the
wrestling mask clung like a vise to his broken nose, making
his whole face throb in agony.
When the truth came to him, ﬁnally, he saw, striding
forward in the blast of light from his mother’s headlights,
Priscilla. The black V of her widow’s peak was unmistakable, and she looked no younger than when he’d last
seen her in Rome. Headlights blinked out, engine silent,
Priscilla threw her backpack into the footwell and slipped
into the passenger seat, the two women side by side in the
perfect darkness of the car.
“It’s over. The ram has found Valhalla,” Priscilla said to
Anita. “It’s only a short while before they realize it’s not
Thyme who’s at the center of things, Anita. You have to get
out of there.”
Anita cracked a window and lit a cigarette. “Anyone
watching me thinks I’m a boozing student. It’s perfect
cover in that town.”
“Good. But they’ve an alliance with federal agents
who—”
“The circle is being cut, Pris. A couple biodynamic

154

Barth Anderson

back-to-landers out in Blue Mounds started it two weeks
ago.” As Anita spoke, she exhaled smoke through her
nose. “Do we resurrect Jerusalem and create a place where
the messiah will be born? Or hope the messiah will come
and help us resurrect the city?”
“I hate your Sunday school analogies.” Priscilla said
nothing for a long stretch of darkness. Then she whispered, “Finn is watching us right now. Did you know?”
Boy King’s hands almost let go of the painting.
Anita’s cigarette curled smoke into the air. “How could
that possibly be? Has Thyme—?”
“Probably. Or she will. But I don’t know how,”
Priscilla said. She angled the rearview mirror, gazing about
the car’s interior with her scimitar brows arched, but her
eyes never met his in the mirror. “Maybe it’s another fragment of his self, but he is certainly here.” Her hand drifted
from the mirror and settled in her lap. “It doesn’t matter.
He won’t understand the language we’re speaking, anyway.”
But through these paintings, Boy King could understand, and, coupled with Transom’s revelation that he’d
been tracking Thyme back in the seventies, Boy King realized with a burgeoning dread that his own connection to
the Khnum cult was older and deeper than he’d ever
known. They’d been tracking him his whole life.
“Do you see what has to happen?” Priscilla hissed. “If
this alliance between these federal kings of America and
the ram ﬁnds you two together, Anita, and determines who
you are, they’ll understand what he’s capable of. Then,
everything Thyme brought from Europe will be snuffed
out.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

155

Anita looked at the glow of her cigarette and ﬂicked
ash out her window. “And if they don’t ﬁnd us together?”
“Then, they’ll think they’re saving a normal little boy,”
Priscilla said, as if this were the best and obvious course.
“They’ll make him into that because that’s what they’ll
think he is.”
Anita shook her head in seeming resignation. “Fuck
that.”
“What they think is immaterial, ekta,” Priscilla whispered. “Tell me what you think you should do.”
Anita’s words never came or maybe they were stolen
from her by the silent highway’s swallowing darkness.
Boy King could count on one hand the number of times
he’d looked into these paintings, and every time he did it,
his tyro mind was pried open a little more. But every time
his mind was so opened by the templum and aperture
of a painting, ﬂocks of maddening questions ﬂew in,
whirling and batting inside his skull. His mother wasn’t a
boozing student? That was just “cover”? For whose beneﬁt? The Khnum cult’s? Boy King’s? The government’s? And
if it was all an elaborate ruse, could he trust anything that
he was seeing that couldn’t be corroborated with his own
memory? So thrilling and bafﬂing, this drama, this world.
The women spoke a bit more about the Czechoslovakian plow that the farmers were using to cut the “circle
spell,” until ﬁnally, Priscilla slipped from the car, dissolved
into the ponds and pools of shadow that lay across these
ﬁelds, and Anita drove away as she did from each of these
uncanny encounters, returning to Madison, back to class,
to syllabi, textbooks, house meetings, and her all-too-real
life with Finn. She was changed by these meetings with

156

Barth Anderson

Priscilla, Boy King could tell, irreparably, like a chameleon
that couldn’t quite shift back to her original hue. Until
eventually, after one of these departures into the country,
she simply didn’t come home.
Her son never saw her again. Boy King remembered
waking that morning to ﬁnd her bed still made and no one
in it. He’d called for Thyme, who’d become something like
a second mother to him, and she came padding in to help
him get ready for school. Rebecca Goldblatt, Boy King
thought, watching her. Both Transom and Priscilla implied
she was something more powerful than the gentle young
woman who came in that morning to soothe Finn, lay out
their cards and tell “tarot stories.”
It wasn’t that unusual for Anita to stay out well past
Finn’s waking hour, but when that ﬁrst morning turned to
night, and the ﬁrst day became the second, everyone in
Valhalla realized that something was terribly wrong.
Meetings were held and unbeknownst to them, the students and members of the house were being worked over in
classic tyro fashion. Boy King knew it, understood that
Thyme was using them to stonewall the circling forces that
were on their way to Valhalla. He had always thought the
houseful of wannabe Black Panther and communist students was simply overwhelmed by the task of what to do
with an abandoned nine-year-old. But not so. He saw now
that Thyme had engineered a tactical stand against the
child welfare agents who came knocking with ram’s heads
embossed on briefcases and yoked police ofﬁcers shambling through Valhalla’s backyard at night. But it didn’t
take long for Finn’s once idyllic childhood to come to an
end after that. As if a last wall had ﬁnally collapsed, armed
federal agents raided Valhalla and stormed through the maze

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

157

of the old sorority-turned-fraternity-turned-commune—
demanding young Finn and threatening everyone in the
house with reckless endangerment of a child. To Boy King’s
own recollection, it seemed like a hazy movie montage,
though he had one clear memory of a female agent in aviator sunglasses entering his room with two armed agents behind her, FBI blazoned in white across their blue jackets
and T-shirts.
The boy was whisked away and all but airlifted to his
grandparents’ home where he was given a new name, his
ﬁrst of many aliases—and Valhalla Commune, tarot stories, Thyme, the Everybody Room, and the little candle of
his Madison blinked dark.
Boy King wasn’t quite ready to let his mother go, though.
He understood her now less than he ever had before, so he
turned his mind to a last comforting image of her, an image
he enjoyed, at any rate. He presumed it was the night she
was thinking of leaving. She was young and stern-looking,
a serious woman sitting in the Crystal Corner on Willy
Street, alone at the bar in a cocoon of cigarettes and pensiveness, “Interstellar Overdrive” by Pink Floyd thrumming on the house system (hammering drums, hammering
drums), eight C.C. Riders in leather regalia just outside the
front door, loudly hassling a passerby. That’s the last Boy
King could ever see of Anita, through the reﬂection of the
painted Arch, a somber, quiet woman, nodding her foot to
Floyd on the night that she just didn’t come home to her
boy, and never would again.
“You’re still there,” Boy King said into the mirror, to
the Arch. “I can feel you through the plastic frame.”
As Boy King watched, the colossal presence that
dwelled in these paintings rushed toward him. He hadn’t

158

Barth Anderson

beheld this presence since Rome, hadn’t dared to let it see
him. Was it a god from the place where that arch had been
constructed? Or perhaps a city loaded with gods, all of
them yearning toward him now, with the swelling of a
forward ﬂowing tide? His mind wanted to scurry away
and hide under something dark and heavy, but there was
no retreat from this. He would see it ﬁnally. The presence
had followed him his whole life, followed the golden
thread that seemed to draw Boy King forward—to here
and this. A boy that the world had discarded, sitting as a
grown man in a hidden, forgotten warehouse, the waxing
presence seemed to say. But I never forget, and I never
discard.
“Are you Khnum?” Boy King said. “What are you?”
The great salvager. The mighty junk pile. Lord of recycling and reminding, in a world that prizes neither. I equalize your rubies with rubbish, raise your rubbish to rubies.
Your world despises me. En ego dimidium vestri parsque
altera voti.
“Who is coming for me?” Boy King asked in desperation. “Do you know? Someone more powerful than
V? Can you tell me without symbols and metaphors and
riddles?”
Boy King leapt at the sound of a clash, as if cymbals
had crashed here in the third ﬂoor of his warehouse. The
ghosts skittered back from him, retreating into the damp
shadows and then, out and away.
Like that, it was gone, the presence in the old paintings washed away, a storm blowing itself into disquieting
silence.
Boy King sat in the ghostless dark, wondering what had

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

159

happened and how safe he was, wondering over the vision
he had just seen. Broom Street and Thyme. That Madison
was so gone, and he longed for it, but he wasn’t certain
why, he realized.
Because it wasn’t his.
It wasn’t his Madison.
It wasn’t his childhood memory.
Like a house painted upon a glass, that memory had
been in his foremind for so long, but it didn’t take much in
the jarring, crashing wake of that enormous presence to
see the transparent image for what it was.
Lies. Madison didn’t happen to me. None of that. My
mother’s name wasn’t Anita. Where did this painful, pretty
childhood come from, whose was it, and why do I think
it’s mine?
He tried to see past the painted glass, but he couldn’t
see his own parents or childhood friends. How had this
happened? Had his look into the paintings all those years
ago cracked his mind and created this false childhood?
Had Rome done this to him?
It wasn’t completely false, though. There was something, someone familiar in this vision: Priscilla, the woman
he’d last seen in Rome over a decade ago. But what was
she doing, haunting that Illinois highway like a ﬁgure from
an old Midwest ghost story, talking to that false mother
Anita in her car and then vanishing again? The familiar
face wasn’t reassuring to Boy King. The image of her
standing along dark cornﬁelds was unsettling and put a
quiver of anxiety in his chest. A piece of Rome here. The
vision of a strange childhood there. It was all jumbled and
scrambled like too many jigsaw puzzles dumped together.

160

Barth Anderson

Boy King looked at Transom’s oversized binder, wondering if the stack of paper within held remedies, possibilities.
“Christ,” he said, opening it. “It’s like Rome all over
again.”

11

R

osemont sat in the restaurant’s restroom stall, backward on the closed commode, facing the crackedplaster wall. He had Miles’s red binder open on the tank,
using it as a little desk. Presuming the templum protected
him from the two men whom Marni had called Visconti
and Transom, Rosemont took time to absorb information
from Miles’s binder. Marni had mentioned that she,
Priscilla, and Miles would discuss someone called “the
monk” while he was gone; so Rosemont thumbed through
the pages until the word caught his eye in a translated journal. It was accompanied with a fax marked by four coffee
cup rings.

162

Barth Anderson

FAX
Prof. John C. Miles
Room 648
Hotel Garibaldi
5 pages to follow
February 6, 2003
Miles,
I found this document in an archive dump that Ligget
& LaSalle acquired from Milan’s Biblioteca Mansutti
(a library devoted to the history of insurance in Italy!
Amazing what gems Europe has in its collections of
garbage). I think you’ll ﬁnd this one especially interesting. As you suspected, Visconti betrayed the Mad
Monk (whose name is di Trafana). This is also the
earliest reference we’ve found regarding di Trafana’s
deck.
In this fax you’ll ﬁnd copies of both the three original diary pages written in April of 1425 by a contracted ofﬁcer-for-hire (condotierre) and a translation
conducted by Dr. Rita Boris at the University of
Nottingham.
By the way, your last letter arrived opened. Future
correspondences should be faxed if possible.
Sincerely,
Everett

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

163

THE CONDOTIERRE’S JOURNAL
April 8—I have come to believe that the astrologer, di
Trafana, is plotting some hardship upon our beloved
Duke. Chieﬂy, I believe di Trafana is the papal spy that F.
warned me about.
I cannot convey how suspecting this warms the cellars
of my cold, old heart.
April 17—The astrologer received my gifts and letter, as
I’d hoped. My plan is to seek his advice about a costume
for the Duke’s approaching March of the Triumphs.
No one knows very much about this foreigner with a
Milanese name (di Trafana), though I have asked about
him extensively among Duke Visconti’s other condotierri.
He apparently comes from Rome, but he does not share a
Roman’s typical love of the Vatican.
April 25—The astrologer has agreed to help me with my
costume for the March of the Triumphs, which is a great
ease to my mind, since he has actually read Petrarch, whose
poem Il Trionﬁ will be the inﬂuence for this festival, and I
cannot stomach modern poetry. But more important, he
has the complete conﬁdence of Visconti, and I must ingratiate myself to the Duke.
Questions before me: Does the Duke suspect this di
Trafana of intrigue as I do? The astrologer is the logical
candidate, as he is a foreigner. If the Duke does not suspect him, why does he not? Perhaps the Duke knows
nothing of the Holy See’s moves against him. Could I be
so fortunate?

164

Barth Anderson

April 26—Last night di Trafana received me in his
chambers—in the very Citadel of Milan where dwells
Visconti himself, and I experienced a most startling
evening.
My ﬁrst indication that the visit would proceed
strangely was the complete absence of halbardiers or partisans. We would be speaking alone—a highly unusual occurrence in the Citadel, the Duke’s castle of a thousand
eyes. Di Trafana’s chambers were ﬁlled with books and
charts, but also works of art, blocks of wood for making
woodprints, pots of paint and ink, and other such frivolities.
He is indeed a curious man. Petulant and easily annoyed, di Trafana could turn in a moment and wax Jovian
the next. This irregular demeanor was apparent from the
start. When I arrived, di Trafana invited me to ingest an
intoxicant that he called simply murm, but I declined.
Then he asked if I might like to dance while he sang.
Again, I made an excuse. I wondered if this were madness,
but as our initial conversation progressed into more familiar matters, I determined this behavior indicated military
genius, conducting himself with unpredictability in order
to keep me, a rival in the Citadel’s game of inﬂuence, unbalanced and unsure.
When matters turned to the ball and Il Trionﬁ, di
Trafana said that selecting a costume would say as much
about me as selecting armor or heraldry might. Parlor
games for women and bored courtiers, to be sure, but I
yearn to impress, so I bid him tell me more.
At this juncture, he interrogated me: “Which is more
important, wisdom or power?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

165

Thinking that he was either seeking to ﬂush out a traitor on the Duke’s behalf or interviewing a potential conspirator, I decided to test him. “Power leads to wisdom as
a course of nature,” said I. “One need only examine a line
of men like the Viscontis for proof.”
At this, di Trafana grew agitated. “The most powerful
are typically unknowing and darkened of mind, I have at
last come to understand.”
I asked him if he were referring to Duke Visconti.
Di Trafana said that the line of the Viscontis was
weak, that the current Duke was revealing himself to be a
shortsighted man. I found it extraordinary that the astrologer would unveil his mind to me thusly, as he was a
foreigner and his position in Milan precarious, even if he
currently enjoyed the love of the Duke. Seeing a potential
ally against our common benefactor, I asked him if he was
considering leaving the Duke’s service.
Di Trafana said no, he hoped to yet convince the
Duke to embrace what di Trafana called “the legacy of
Rome.”
I thought that at last, here was the conspiracy, so I
asked if this “legacy” weren’t a papal scheme. “Has an inﬁltrator from the pontiff arrived in the Citadel, then?”
A conspiracy of the order that di Trafana then described, I had never dreamed upon. “You think power
sits in the Vatican,” di Trafana said to me. “Even as you
rebel against that ofﬁce, you northerners hand the pontiff
power. But I refuse. I refuse to see that ofﬁce as anything
but mine.”
The statement was incredible. “You wish to be the
pontiff?”

166

Barth Anderson

“I am the pontiff,” said he. “The pope is nothing but
an impostor. Long before the coming of the Christians
and their Hanged God, I was pontifex—‘the sacriﬁcer on
the bridge’—and I was responsible for reminding Rome of
its legacy. I threw little boys made of bulrushes down into
the Tiber River so that all might remember what we’d
lost, what we’d become. Do you know who was thrown?
Do any now recall?”
I said that I knew the old nursemaid tales as well as
any. “Romulus and Remus, the babies who were saved
from the Tiber River and nursed by a she-wolf.” To show
I understood the signiﬁcance, I said, “The founders of
Rome.”
“Romulus,” di Trafana said in contempt. “He was in
no need of being remembered in our rituals, for his name
is synonymous with Rome. But the other boy—Remus.
He we gave back to the water in memory. He was the
greater magician, reader of lightning, and seer. Even in
death, he proved himself so. To embrace this legacy is to
upend the Vatican, the pope, and to rock the walls of
Romulus.”
But the breadth and scope of this endeavor, a conspiracy to break the twin lock of Rome and Vatican upon the
northern city-states, left me breathless in my contemplation of it. “How might we ‘rock the walls of Romulus,’ astrologer?”
“By ﬁnding the lost twin who hides in plain sight.
There lies our power and wisdom.” Di Trafana then removed from a richly carved, dark wooden box a small
pile of cards, neatly stacked. I know cards for playing games of chance among my Turkish mercenaries, of
course, but there seemed to be a mere ﬁfteen or so in to-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

167

tal. What game could be played with them? They were
drawn with almost a cleverness that one might call artistic, I suppose, and exceedingly beautiful, or so it would
appear to my eye. “Behold, the legacy of Rome. Remus is
here,” he said, holding the cards facedown, “and fools
and magicians are made with a mere glance, herein—and
new humans too.”
I presumed he meant that in the cards a code for communicating with conspirators had been secreted. F. told
me last month in Venice that the Holy See fears Duke
Visconti’s control of water (fresh supplies and ease of navigation, both) in northern Italy, so di Trafana’s open slander against the Duke and the Vatican made sense to me,
but I was ruminating over his claims of long life and
“creating humans” too. Had he spoken metaphorically
when he said that his life and this secret society were ancient? Perhaps he did not mean himself literally, but the
cause, the endeavor. Though it also could have been that
the astrologer was making sport of a doltish condotierre. I
decided to ignore that part of his story in hopes of learning what resources di Trafana had at his disposal for accomplishing his titanic plot.
“I have been looking for unleashed, free humans all
my long life in a thousand cities that have risen and fallen.
And I thought it would be now, in this lawless era, one of
the Dukes or daughters of this line, the Viscontis.” The astrologer said that he prized fearlessness, a certain darkness of spirit, and an unfettered joy in life that years ago
the Viscontis exhibited to the astrologer but that has been
otherwise bred out of humankind. “This duke,” he said,
and I realized by the way he slurred his words that the astrologer was perhaps intoxicated by the murm. “This

168

Barth Anderson

Filipo Maria. The only thing dark and unfettered about
him is his unchecked lust for murder. He has joined with a
wicked cult of foreigners, the Chanoume, who seek to
erase the legacy of Rome.” Di Trafana then showed me a
profane symbol carved upon an old piece of wood and
that dangled from a necklace.
I was being swept up into something larger than I had
ever imagined, a conspiracy older than the Vatican, older,
it seemed, than Rome. “Perhaps I could be a student of
yours,” I said, using what I assumed were his code words
for conspirators. “I wish to be a magician in the service of
the legacy of Rome.”
Di Trafana looked at me hard and laughed. “You are
ridiculous. You don’t have any notion what such a statement might mean.”
I bared my mind to him and I said that I was prepared
to move against Visconti, that I had partisans who could
be called up at a moment’s notice. If Visconti had foreign
allies, I had stout Italians to face them.
Di Trafana laughed again and said, “You are absurd.
You elect to see what’s remembered in the cards? You
want to see why Romulus slew Remus?” I assured him
that I did, that I was worthy of his secret society’s conﬁdence. He laughed at me again and turned the top card
over, showing me the ﬁrst pictorial message, that of a
shepherd gazing at a star. I found it potent, as if the lines
with which it was drawn were etched upon my mind as I
looked. But then I saw that it was not a shepherd as I’d
ﬁrst thought, but a picture of the pope in his red robes,
holding keys and standing before two acolytes. I asked the
astrologer what trick this was. He said nothing and sim-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

169

ply watched my reactions like an old soldier watching a
younger try his ﬁrst ale. But now that I write these words,
I am struck anew. I wonder now if what I saw were not a
completely different picture, that of a ram standing upright like a man with horns not unlike the one that the astrologer had shown me.
If this was the power of the legacy of Rome, then I was
convinced, I told di Trafana, and I was dazzled, and I told
him that if any attempt to stop us were . . .
April 27—Fowl, the very smell of fowl. Herein to be the
uppermost then. Teas of loss and shipwrecked faith. Will
that penis pierce the sun? If only I could see you once
more in your capes of wanton lizard scales. Suppress the
olive trees and lay ﬂat the canals and undo the word as it
was spoken then to Carthage and Jupiter and wafts of castles washed over with milk and orange.
(What follows are seven or eight entries written over
one another in different colored inks over many months,
all in the same handwriting as the earlier entries. So the
condotierre’s journal ends.—Everett.)

Rosemont wanted to keep reading, but he was beginning to feel conspicuous about how much time he was
spending in the restroom. Oddly, looking at the one page
of scribbling, mad journal entries that Everett had sent
Miles made him feel for the ﬁrst time that he had a grasp
on the situation, slight and shaky as it might be, that he at
least understood what these people believed was at stake
with the Mad Monk’s deck: the legacy of Rome. He didn’t
completely understand the ancient grudges, why Miles

170

Barth Anderson

had asked him to leave when talk turned to the monk or
whether the Visconti in this centuries-old journal was the
same Visconti whom Rosemont had seen in the apartment.
But the deck in question sounded wondrous, ominous, and
he understood why these people would be intrigued by it.
Now Rosemont felt like he had enough of a peek behind
the curtain to go back, join the table, and play dumb if he
had to. He wanted to see this deck of di Trafana’s, if that’s
what they wanted him to see. He wanted to see how this
puzzle fell together, if it did at all.
Hoisting his backpack onto one shoulder, Rosemont
stepped out of the stall and moved toward the door, holding up one hand to shade his eyes against the twisted
thing that continued to seethe and stare at him from the
mirror. He considered pausing to wash his hands, but
didn’t want to risk looking in the mirror over the sink,
and instead ﬁshed in his pocket for change to leave in the
basket.
A moment later, the restroom door opened, and distantly, the festival’s cacophony hummed louder for a moment, and then went quiet as the door swung shut.
Rosemont didn’t see who’d entered. He was turned at a
ninety-degree angle, looking at his change, a handful of
Nicaraguan coins. He couldn’t leave those. They were
worthless.
“Pardon me. Are you Professor Jeremiah Rosemont?”
Out of the corner of his eye, Rosemont saw a stocky little fellow all in bright green. The body of a Kermit the Frog
costume. No mask. “And you are?”
The man reached under his frog-green shirt and said,
“Drop your backpack.”
With a strange sense of disconnect, Rosemont realized

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

171

a gun was being yanked out from under the ridiculous costume and pointed at him. Coins in his ﬂat palm, he looked
at the man from under his brows. “What?”
“Put down your backpack and please open it.”
Rosemont glanced at the door and saw that the man
had locked it. No hasty exits, then. Rosemont closed up
the coins in his hand and unshouldered his backpack,
setting it on the ﬂoor between them. The walls of the
restroom simultaneously expanded and contracted, but
Rosemont felt surprisingly calm. The ﬁstful of coronas was
growing slick in his hand, but he was otherwise keeping his
panic at bay.
“Please,” said the man, stepping forward, gun still trained
on Rosemont, “open your backpack—now. Quickly.”
Rosemont did as he was told, squatting and unzipping
the pack. “I haven’t had money for laundry for a few days,
so you better stand back. It’s a little ripe in here.” Beneath
the shirt, socks, and pants, the red binder was stashed.
“My socks don’t match. Is that a problem?”
The man glanced into the open backpack. “No book?
No collection of historical documents? No diary?”
Rosemont stood, shaking his head no.
“Empty it.”
Rosemont looked down at his clothes. “You don’t believe me about the socks?”
“Empty the backpack, Professor Rosemont. Hurry.”
Now that the shock of seeing the gun was wearing off,
his breathing even, Rosemont realized he had nothing to
lose. It was the very same sensation he had when anyone
shook him down for money on highways in Central
America—a quiet, smirking invulnerability.
So he reached out with the hand holding the coins,

172

Barth Anderson

as if to pick up the backpack, then, while grabbing the
man’s eyes with his own, let the coronas slip through his
ﬁngers.
The coins hit the tiled ﬂoor, loud and musical in the little bathroom, and Kermit ﬂinched, his eyes dropping to the
clatter.
As soon as Kermit lowered his gaze, Rosemont slapped
the man’s gun hand, but he failed to loosen his assailant’s
grip.
Gun barrel pointed off to the right, Kermit looked up
into Rosemont’s face. But he didn’t look furious or coldhearted.
He was scared.
So Rosemont backhanded the man’s face and sent him
sprawling against a square garbage can. Then he immediately pounced on Kermit, prying the gun out of his
hand and delivering two quick blows to his mouth. Rosemont backed away from him, gun aimed at the man’s
chest.
Slumped against the garbage can, which leaned askew
against the wall, the man kept dabbing at his lip with ﬁngers, looking for blood. “The fuck. They told me you were
a fag teacher.”
Rosemont snapped, “I’m not a teacher.”
“Okay. Well. You’re not a tyro, either.”
“And?”
The man looked up at Rosemont with aggrieved curiosity, his combed-over black hair sticking up like a bird’s
crest. His eyes lowered to the open backpack for a moment. “So why would you risk me shooting you over your
clothes?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

173

“I knew you wouldn’t shoot,” Rosemont said. “You
aren’t desperate enough to shoot.”
The man struggled to his feet, looking down at his ﬁngers as if he now felt betrayed that he wasn’t bleeding.
“That’s probably true. But I didn’t think you’d attack a
guy with a gun.”
It surprised Rosemont too, but bandits who’d jump a
norteamericano on a desolate mountain road or raid a
small coffee farm for cash made this little interaction seem
downright civil. “What were you looking for?”
The man had soulful green eyes that couldn’t seem to
mask a single thought. They now gleamed at Rosemont
with confusion and wonder. “Are you for real?”
Waiting for Kermit to remember he had a gun trained
on him, Rosemont stared.
“Visconti and Transom sent me looking for your collection, of course,” said the man, warily. “That is—”
“My collection?” Rosemont thought Kermit was after
Miles’s binder. What other reason would Rosemont have
had to be in that apartment? What did they think was happening here? “What are you talking about?”
“Unless . . .” Kermit’s glance skimmed over to the mirror
and his moist eyes widened slightly, then back to Rosemont.
He sees it too. Rosemont could feel the supernatural reﬂection staring at him from the mirror. He allowed himself
a peripheral glimpse, and a hulking, fractiled animal face
was there, panting.
“Unless you didn’t know you’re a tyro,” Kermit said, a
vague smile on his face.
“That thing just started appearing in my reﬂections recently,” Rosemont whispered. “What the hell is it?”

174

Barth Anderson

“Some of us have been waiting years to see our tyro
selves. You see it, but don’t even know what you’re looking
at. Are you here for the Watts deck or not, faggot?”
Rosemont’s fury and confusion of the last several days
came swooping out of him, and he pressed the gun barrel
against Kermit’s brow. He pushed until the man saw something frightening in Rosemont’s face that wilted his posture. “You keep calling me that.”
Kermit was backed against the trash can again, eyes
scrunched shut, and his face turned away from the gun
barrel.
“But you’re the one in the lime-green onesie,” Rosemont
said. He pulled back, but kept the gun in Kermit’s face.
“Let’s cut to the chase. Tell me what you think the Watts
deck is.”
Kermit stammered, his obvious terror bubbling over.
“It’s—it’s too—there’s so much. I can’t even answer that,
there’s so much.”
“I understand it’s thought to have roots in, um—
Wilusija. Maybe it’s an Etruscan item?”
Kermit’s eyes ﬂuttered in perplexity and searched
Rosemont’s face. “You’ve already been in touch with Dr.
Miles or Priscilla, then.” His eyebrows furrowed and his
face twisted in a sneering, derisive smile. “Well, I suppose
they told you their asinine theory. Dr. Miles is such a loudmouth, debating with you about tarot in public forums,
disclosing ancient mysteries to the grant boards of Ligget
& LaSalle. Moronic. He’s lucky he wasn’t put down like a
rabid dog years ago.”
Miles has been on this hunt longer than I realized.
“You don’t buy his theory?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

175

Kermit laughed, then stopped and looked at Rosemont
as though to see if it was okay to laugh. “His Magicians
Anonymous bit? Occult self-help? No, I don’t buy that any
more than I imagine you do. Not that I’m paid to think,”
he said almost arrogantly. “I’m the gossip.”
“So let’s gossip,” Rosemont said. “What do others say
about this deck?”
“Oh my God,” said Kermit. “You don’t know?”
“No.”
Kermit stared up at Rosemont in disbelief. Finally, he
seemed to decide that Rosemont wasn’t toying with him.
“That idiot. Can I have been so lucky?” said Kermit. “He
was probably too eager to gush about his own theories,
right? Monologuing on and on about mystical drunks in
Sarajevo? Christ. He hasn’t told you anything about the
war?”
“What? With Iraq?” said Rosemont. Even coffee farmers had news of Desert Storm.
“No,” said Kermit. “I mean the disagreement over the
Watts deck.”
Rosemont tightened his grip on the gun. “What are you
talking about?”
“There is great disagreement over what the deck might
be, no matter what Miles and Priscilla might have told
you,” Kermit said, as casually as if they had a couple of
cappuccinos between them, not a gun. “Those accounts
that are remotely credible say the deck is a bit like a mirror,
an echo of the mind. Tyros see what they want to see when
they look at the deck, so they must be very careful not to
make too many assumptions, or they start seeing their own
selves, their own desires and fears bounced back at them.

176

Barth Anderson

And the real challenge is to see the mirror, the deck, not the
reﬂection.”
“So that’s why they want an authenticator?” Rosemont
said. “They want someone without presumptions to come
and look at the mirror, see the deck for what it is, if they
can?”
“Yes, I think that’s the plan. But everyone has presumptions,” said Kermit with a derisive toss of his head. “Over
the last few centuries, tyros from various traditions have
sought audience with the deck’s owner, an insane monk, in
order to see it, to make a claim to it, if they might. The
Spanish Moors, for example, say Watts was created by
their occult mathematicians in the glory days of the
Alhambra. The Coptic tyros say it’s a gnostic Christian curio. Miles and Priscilla now say it’s an artifact of Trojan
and Etruscan divination, maybe Hittite too, and whatever
else Miles has in his junk-drawer brain. But the Muslims,
Nubians, even the Iranians—forgive me, the Ayurvedic
Babylonians—all stake their claims to the Watts deck. All
so predictable and childlike, really. But then there is the
eldest.” Kermit gave him a knowing look. “Have you ever
heard of the Khnum?”
“The Khnum?” Rosemont shook his head.
“Oh, this is too much fun.”
“What is the Khnum? A person?”
“No one knows. But it’s drawn as an imposing ﬁgure,
maddening in its strangeness. Tall, stately,” Kermit said, “a
human with a ram’s head.”
“What?” Rosemont scoffed. Kermit almost had him
with his foreboding preamble. “Are you fucking serious?
Like goat man?”
Kermit gasped and shook his head once, hard. “I

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

177

wouldn’t joke like that if I were you. We’re talking about
something older than anything named.”
Rosemont tried picturing this, a man with a ram’s head.
“Is this a god? You don’t mean the Egyptian god Ammon,
do you?”
“No. Ammon was drawn with the typical curved-horn
ram’s head.” Kermit made a spiral in the air with his index
ﬁnger. “Khnum is so old that the species of sheep drawn
upon its head is now extinct—the ﬂat-yet-wavy-horned
ram.” To illustrate, Kermit held out index and middle ﬁnger horizontally, ﬂuttering them.
The symbol that the condotierre drew, Rosemont
thought. The foreign cult that di Trafana talked about,
that this person Visconti supposedly joined, was a Khnum
cult.
“It comes from the Upper Nile,” Kermit said, and he
was speaking now with a scary eagerness, “but long before
that region was farmed or ﬁshed. Khnum created humans.
He wanted men to be more than herd animals. He didn’t
want to see them diminished by becoming cattle trapped in
civilization or, worse, a race of fools, led astray by deceivers. Like the Ayurvedic Babylonians, the Blackleaf 23
addicts, or John C. Miles.”
“I don’t get it,” Rosemont said. “This is just a total
right angle from everything that—”
“It’s not a right angle. I’m telling you about the source
of all the strange occurrences you’ve no doubt seen since
coming to Rome.” Kermit’s eyes darted to the restroom
mirror and back to Rosemont. His tone shifted from that
of an eager, incorrigible gossip to a babbler. “The strange
events that have perhaps followed you your whole life?
The helpers who are drawn to you in your time of need?

178

Barth Anderson

The people who bend to your will without you even
trying? The ﬁres, the disappearances, and then, the very
same helpers who loved you turning on you in ways you
can’t control?” Those expressive green eyes glowed at
him.
Rosemont couldn’t hide his surprise. “How do you
know about all that?”
“Because that’s the way of Khnum’s best creations. I see
it in your reﬂection, one as powerful as you. The creator
god stole for the strongest of us the ability to control the elements, dreams, and other human beings. That’s humanity’s ancient gift from the Khnum. Lesser humans are
susceptible to the powerful, like me speaking now. It’s not
the gun making me talk. I can’t help it,” said Kermit, placing a hand ﬂat against the wall behind him as though to see
if he were still cornered. “You, in turn, are compelled by
that which is more powerful than you whether you know it
or not. The Khnum coaxed a strong one like you to come
from very far away.”
Rosemont was confused. The Khnum sent the messenger to Managua? “How did it compel me? With a letter?”
“No. It compelled you with the Watts deck, of course.
It may be in the hands of the Mad Monk. It may be the obsession of John C. Miles. But that deck was created by the
Khnum.”
Rosemont didn’t trust this man who’d come looking
for him with a gun, had no reason to believe this story over
Miles’s—but he couldn’t deny that the fellow offered semitangible explanations of all this bizarreness, where Miles,
Marni, and Priscilla offered only more bizarreness. They
offered intriguing stories and demonstrations of extraordi-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

179

nary strengths like Priscilla’s shifting run through Roman
streets, but ultimately, the elements of the mystery only
deepened the mystery. Was Marni born in the Bronze Age?
Was there a line between the “legacy of Rome” and what
seemed to be a legacy from Troy? Did it involve the Watts
deck? Kermit’s explanation squared with the condotierre’s
story—Duke Visconti had abandoned di Trafana’s Remus
cult for a foreign cult of some kind, presumably because it
was more powerful, or power-centered—and it squared,
more important, with Rosemont’s own experience. Somehow Kermit seemed to know about the kind of events that
had eroded the last vestiges of a normal life in Austin, explained Rosemont’s strange life to him. Marni, Priscilla,
and Miles barely explained anything, let alone why it involved him at all.
“Do you know why it’s called the Watts deck?”
“No,” said Rosemont.
“It’s named for the tyro whom the Mad Monk allowed
to look into the deck about a century ago,” Kermit said, “a
man whose mind was shattered and who spent the rest of
his days in a sanitarium.”
“I guess all tyros aren’t created equal, according to the
Khnum,” said Rosemont.
“No. And frankly, no one cares if you lose your mind,
either, Mr. Rosemont,” said Kermit, smiling up at him. “In
fact, they’re counting on it. Even John C. Miles is.”
“What do you mean?”
“They’re assuming you’ll go mad when you look at it,
and wisely so,” Kermit said. “Look, long ago, civilization
was just a collection of campﬁres seething along rivers like
a line of fever blisters. The Khnum succeeded for millennia

180

Barth Anderson

in keeping civilization small, interconnected with one another through dreams and what we would now call madness. But civilization is a virus that his creation contracted.
It spread out of control, and Khnum couldn’t stop it, try as
he might, and now there are more humans than Khnum
ever thought there should be. So the Khnum continues
to shape humanity and discard the waste like a potter’s
hand shaking off unneeded clay. Finding the beautiful,
the strong. That’s what the Watts deck is for. Of those who
look into it, the deck separates the momentous from the
superﬂuous—magicians from fools, as the Khnum once
said.” When he ﬁnished, Kermit examined Rosemont carefully, as if weighing what impact his words might have had
on him.
“What if I keep my marbles?” Rosemont said.
“Then your ability to authenticate it or debunk it is
icing on the cake,” Kermit said, “as far as they’re concerned.”
It seemed cold and calculating for John C. Miles.
Erratic and wanton, those were Miles’s words. Sending a
friend into the dragon’s maw, to prove a theory, didn’t
seem like Miles’s style.
And, yet, wasn’t this whole escapade erratic, wanton?
Hadn’t Rosemont been brought to Rome as part of some
capricious ﬂing, like getting roped into one of Miles’s
cross-country benders or epic parties? Isn’t this the best
time you’ve ever had? Maybe. Or maybe he’d get tortured
and killed. Who knows? It all seemed to be the same to
Miles.
Why was Rosemont here, why had he been called, and
how much of these various competing mythologies were

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

181

just bullshit, anyway? Did Kermit the Frog believe a word
of what he was saying? An Egyptian god with an extinct
sheep for a head? Impossible to tell what was true, what
was a lie, and what was intergenerational paranoid schizophrenia. Simply because unexplainable events were occurring didn’t mean that there wasn’t room for deception. Let
alone self-deception. Or madness.
“I just don’t understand why it makes a bit of difference what I think,” said Rosemont. “I mean, I’m a friend
of Miles’s and an old colleague. But why me?”
“For whatever reason, you are the authenticator, and
authenticity,” said Kermit, dabbing a spot in the air between them with his middle ﬁnger, “is power. Historical
documents. Letters. Scraps and snatches of history that
most historians dismiss or discard. An artifact like the
Watts deck is too luscious to ignore, try as many of them
might to simply forget or discount. But every few decades,
it rears its head again. So your opinion about it will matter
more than any other.” Kermit peered at him. “Assuming
you haven’t been swayed by Miles already.”
“I can make up my own mind,” Rosemont said. “I’m
not Miles’s slave.”
Kermit shrugged. “Good, then my mission wasn’t a total loss, as I ﬁrst feared. At least I managed to taint the impartial judge with doubt.”
Rosemont laughed in his throat. “I’m not your slave,
either.”
“No?” said Kermit, and his demeanor changed again,
now sounding bemused, harsh. “I beg to differ.”
Wary of this shift in tone, Rosemont raised the gun.
“What do you mean?”

182

Barth Anderson

“Don’t think of a ram’s head. Right now,” Kermit
said in a voice dripping with sarcasm. “Stop thinking of
a ram’s head, Professor Rosemont. Go on. Ram’s head,
ram’s head, ram’s head. Get it out of your mind, if you
can.”
Each time Kermit said the word, Rosemont saw a
Dodge truck logo. Or a St. Louis Rams helmet. Or a nature
show snippet with mountain rams raring to bash each
other’s heads in. He couldn’t help it.
“Oldest trick in the tyro playbook,” Kermit said,
edging sideways toward the door. “I’m in your head for
good now.”
Rosemont felt a wave of panic that he was being bested
in some way that he didn’t understand, and as Kermit
ﬂicked the lock open on the bathroom door, Rosemont
raised the gun. “Stop.”
Kermit’s eyes met Rosemont’s for a moment, and then
he seemed to see something that made him smile. He
reached over and lifted the hook out of its eye on the
door.
“Stop,” Rosemont shouted, again pointing the gun in
Kermit’s face.
But a second later, the man in green was darting out the
door.
Helplessly, Rosemont watched him go. What was he
going to do, ﬁre indiscriminately into the café? Kill him?
No, Kermit had seen what he’d seen and Rosemont
couldn’t deny it: he wasn’t going to kill the man.
Well, that wasn’t entirely true, he thought, scooping up
the backpack. He had gotten through the would-be shakedown with Miles’s binder still in his possession, and a gun,
which he stuck in his waistband under his jacket, and he

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

183

now had more information about what was happening
than he’d had before.
Reaching out to open the restroom door, Rosemont
noticed his hand was quivering slightly on the doorknob.
He lifted his hand and angrily made a ﬁst. “Get on top of
this,” he scolded himself. “Get on top.”

12

B

oy King rubbed his eyes with his ﬁngertips, careful
not to touch the orbital bones of his brow or his
cheeks, and then went back to reading Transom’s collection. He sat with his back to a central chimney, reading in
a dim pool of light from one of the high windows, a little
splash of light from Minneapolis’s skyline, and he could
actually see his nose pulse as he read. He wished he could
put down this book. Sleep. His whole body needed rest,
from his nose to his liver, and he was hungry too. But his
last dollars had been spent on numbing himself through
the worst of ﬁxing his broken nose, and in any event, he
couldn’t run off to get more booze, even if he had the
money. There wasn’t time to sleep or eat. It wouldn’t be
long before Visconti or someone scarier came searching to
ﬂush him out of his warehouse. Boy King had to read this

186

Barth Anderson

collection fast and ﬁnd any advantage he could against his
hunters.
But he felt like a mouse peering through fangs into the
predator’s maw, reading the text before him. The cult of
Khnum was so old in comparison to Boy King’s Etruscan
Discipline, that even the oldest citations from this collection talked about the cult as ancient. Many of the documents referred to other members of the sect, some of
whom were apparently older than Transom and Visconti.
Visconti had been born late in the fourteenth century, Boy
King knew, and his strengths were far beyond his own
imaginings. It frightened Boy King to think of the mastery
of a tyro who might have been born when the cult was
young and Egypt was not yet Egypt.
In a letter regarding something called the Westcar
Papyrus, Boy King read about an account of Pharaoh
Cheops (known in Egypt as Khufu: “Khnum Protects
Me”) who witnessed a challenge between magicians, one
of whom was the ram-headed god in disguise. Afterward,
Khufu abandoned his kingship in order to seek the longlost “father of Khemet,” and the text seemed to imply that
Cheops-Khufu was still alive today. This was followed by a
translation of a Greek diplomat’s stories of Khnum haunting the Library of Alexandria as something of a god of censors, building the collection there as a librarian-priest
while destroying evidence and citations of rival sects and
creating secret paths for the “open-eyed.” A footnote from
the translator claimed that the god himself still found
archives sacred, still haunted them in Washington, D.C.,
and London.
Boy King found himself getting sucked into the more
“modern” accounts, however. He liked reading about the

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

187

lowly observers after the Renaissance who began providing accounts of brushes with the god or his tyros in
Europe, when an emerging Enlightenment and pounding
normalcy should have quashed such observations. In the
seventeenth-century journal of a coureur de bois, a woodsman and pre-voyageur traveling in “New France,” a brush
with the ancient cult was described. The woodsman had
been found guilty of gambling at Fort Frontenac in what
was now Canada and had been sent home to cool his heels.
He was working the shipyard taverns and waterfronts of
Marseilles, seeking passage back to the Americas, when he
found a man named Baron who wanted to hire a coureur
de bois to guide him to a certain New World river.
The Dakota called it the Meschasipi and its length had yet
to be measured by Europeans, I told him. Baron asked if I
knew its source and were there cataracts? I did not know,
but I’d heard that the famous explorer La Salle was interested in ﬁnding the Great Water’s source and, after garnering another round of drinks from this exceedingly ugly
fellow, I told him that if he could purchase our fare to
Quebec, I could get him an introduction with La Salle.
This was a lie, but as it turned out, I did make this happen. So in hindsight, it was the truth. May Jesus have
mercy.
I asked Baron why he was concerned with the Great
Water, and he told me an alarming tale. He said he was an
astrologer and that he had determined in his charts and
calculations that a creature called le Cannoume could be
found in the New World. This was a secret that he alone
had determined, that others who sought le Cannoume
were looking for it in Egypt and among the Turque in

188

Barth Anderson

Anatolia, the sultanate of l’Orient. But these others did
not know the power of astronomy, as it had come to be
called, a new science that these ancient charlatan magicians knew nothing of, and Baron alone had determined
that the search for the Cannoume was being conducted
along the wrong Nile. When Baron heard that there was a
Great River coursing through the center of the northern
Americas, it ﬁt his own calculations of where le
Cannoume might appear. That is how I came to Fort
Crevecour in January of this year, enchanted by Baron’s
promises of deathlessness and magical powers bestowed
upon us by le Cannoume here in the land of Louisiana.

Transom and Visconti were hunting for more than a
homeless tyro. They were hunting for their god, Boy King
realized. They and their cult had apparently been hunting
for the Khnum for centuries. Millennia. Across the planet.
Out of the corner of his eye, Boy King saw something
stirring. A ghost, no doubt, edging close, testing him.
Without looking up, he hissed at the lemure to back away
and kept reading. In the diary, the coureur de bois, Baron,
and their companions were being taken hostage by a tribe
called the Issati.
So when this morning by our ﬁre in this great Issati camp,
Baron told me that a certain secret college among the Issati
was making for a waterfall in order to conduct a religious
rite, I knew we were at last about to consummate our
quest. Baron said that the savages told him that it was the
only cataract along the Meschasipi, and Baron was convinced, after consulting his charts and astrolabe again, that
this was the location where le Cannoume would appear.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

189

The “Meschasipi” was obviously the Mississippi, and
the Mississippi’s only cataract or waterfall was right here
in Minneapolis, Boy King knew. Was “le Cannoume” the
Khnum? Was Baron Visconti? Did he meet the ram-headed
god here, on the banks of the Meschasipi?
Boy King looked up, holding between his ﬁngers the
page he was about to turn. It wasn’t a ghost there, in the
dark, but a little ﬂuttering of light. Just a piece of metal
capturing a gleam. Boy King looked up at the night sky
through the high windows, the rain falling in, and dense
cloud cover over the city. No bright light to capture. He
put down Transom’s binder and stared into the shadows.
What was it? Boy King crawled across the ﬂoor toward the
ﬂickering.
On the shiny fender of an old bicycle, there was a twinkling and a ﬂashing. Very small, like the reﬂection of light
through a ceiling fan.
He started back when he realized it was his own reﬂection.
The reﬂection was waving something, which had caused
the ﬂickering. It was holding a small collage in its hand,
with a black-and-white photograph of Charles Bukowski
having a beer at the center of it. Boy King leaned toward
the fender and could see that in neat black pen below
Bukowski’s beer-hand was written “Knight of Cups.”
The way the reﬂection’s hand held the collage—middle
ﬁnger on upper edge, thumb on lower edge—seemed more
signiﬁcant than the card it held, but Boy King couldn’t
quite seize it. This was a game. It was a game meant to be
played with someone speciﬁc in his past—a signiﬁcant
other. Wait. Not a game. It was a way to converse. Whole
conversations could be had with raised tarot cards, sorting

190

Barth Anderson

through a deck and ﬁnding the ﬁgure that represented the
next turn in the story, the next chapter. How did Boy King
know this? Was this an old revelation sparking from the
bike and its previous owner? No, it was from Boy King
himself. His life. How did he know that this “game” was
played with only one other person? And who was that?
Knight of Cups.
There were volumes of associations that went with the
cards, associations and deﬁnitions that could never be
found in a tarot manual, that only that other person would
ever understand. But those associations were hidden as if
under the weight of an ocean. Boy King had never seen this
card before, but Bukowski was one of the old associations
with this knight. Allowing that remembering to spread
through his mind was dangerous—Boy King felt betrayed
and intrigued that his reﬂection was doing this to himself.
He’d kept his whole life boxed up in separate containers
and stashed away even from his own memory for so long
that he was only ever Boy King now. Twelve years of hiding from hunters who could slip into his mind meant he
couldn’t allow himself to think about precious things like
the Calvino Method—that is, the way he used to use tarot
cards to tell stories about his life to this signiﬁcantly other
person. What did it mean that he was thinking these things
now? He couldn’t let himself think of his previous name,
his previous identity. His entire strategy for hiding teetered
on the shaky fulcrum that he was Boy King and nothing
else.
He was about to back away, shut this out, but the
reﬂection-hand lowered, and Boy King could see his own
face distorted along the narrow curve of the bike fender.
Then the hand held up the card again. Knight of Cups.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

191

The guards and wards upon his own mind gave, and
forbidden thoughts came spilling out. A grand voyage into
the ill-charted territories of history undertaken by young
men obsessed with mystics who’d gone before—Crowley,
Eliade, the Order of the Golden Dawn, and even shammystics like Napoleon’s counselor, Madame Le Normand,
who’d fashioned the modern conception of celebrity
fortune-teller—that was the Knight of Cups. Misguided
quests conducted with irrational maps and a search for the
searchers who may have found the means of escaping the
encircling fascism of reality. That was the pledge after all:
to peer beyond the occulted doorways of this world, open
them, and walk through together. That seemed so far ago
and long away to Boy King, pathetically quaint in the
wake of pre-Egyptian gods and spells cast with hammer
blows. Is this perhaps what the genie in the mirror was
telling him? Was a new knight riding to the king’s rescue?
Or was the knight coming to challenge and slay the king?
Boy King?
The reﬂection held up another piece of paper, but this
wasn’t a makeshift tarot card. It was a single note card
with the ram-head of Khnum drawn upon it, rippling
horns stretched behind, just as it was drawn upon the piece
of paper in the suit that Boy King had found. The same
hand. The same pen. Same paper, even.
“Even I’m after myself?” Boy King leaned over the bike
fender and raised his middle ﬁnger, saying to the reﬂection,
“Fuck off, all y’all.”
Then he collapsed back against the ragged brickwork
of the chimney, his brow, nose, and eyes pulsing. He
wanted to continue reading Transom’s collection, learn
ways to undo the damage that Transom had done to Boy

192

Barth Anderson

King’s defenses, but alcohol dehydration was wringing out
his body and he felt nauseous, sick down to the well of his
soul. Sick of hiding and dodging and so sick of himself.
In the distance, he could hear Highway 35 rumbling to
life. Boy King let the binder slip from his hands and he
rolled his head against the rough bricks to look out one of
the high east windows. Across the sky was the sad gleam of
dawn. He closed his eyes. His mind churned over the ram
symbol message he’d found in the suit and the Bukowski
Knight of Cups. (Had his willful reﬂection taken up allegiance with Visconti and the Khnum cult? Was it mocking
him? Mockery was a sacrament to Remus whose brother
richly deserved it, or maybe or maybe or maybe. . . .)
But, ﬁnally, slow silence ﬁlled his mind, as if a tidal sea
washed toward him, carrying with it a dark fog that took
the place of his tossing thoughts.

13

T

he only sound in the piazza was the gurgle of the
fountain. When Rosemont had left the table, Miles
was starting to hit a stride and a round of Campari had
just arrived. Rosemont had ﬁgured Miles would be at a
jabbering pitch by now. Rosemont paused in the chapelrestaurant’s doorway, staring at the empty table, the dishes
that the waiter was retrieving.
“Where did they go?” Rosemont asked, striding up on
the waiter. “Did you see?”
The man scrubbed at his little mustache with the blade
of his index ﬁnger and said nothing, heavy eyelids acting as
shut curtains. The waiter was about to scoop up the glasses
when Rosemont saw a bar napkin stuffed in one that must
have belonged to Miles. The barhopping signaling system
of old.

194

Barth Anderson

“Hey!” he shouted and snatched the bar napkin out of
the glass.
The waiter didn’t miss a beat, just turned with his
loaded tray and huffed something snide that his mustache
mufﬂed.
Rosemont opened the napkin and scanned Miles’s jabbing handwriting: Purple Fireworks = No magic & You’re
Safe. 3131 via di S. Prima. I’ll buy.
Suddenly, the empty piazza seemed even more sinister
to Rosemont, without Miles or Priscilla nearby. The sleepers were gone, which meant the templum, with its real or
imagined sense of safety, was unplugged. Purple Fireworks
= No magic & You’re Safe. The gun in his waistband, far
from making him feel protected, made him feel as if he
were on the brink of explosive violence. He started walking up the steepest of the three streets, hoping it was taking
him back up to the hostel where he could ask about via di
Santa Prima. The whirling run that had brought him was
confusing, but it had been downhill, generally speaking, so
uphill seemed the best plan now.
As Rosemont drew closer to the hostel, the festival
crowd grew thicker, more elated, and eventually he realized he was either following or joining a claustrophobic
parade that heaved and uncoiled along this narrow street,
with its crack of dusk-lit sky overhead, like a great exodus
of painted humans on ﬂoats and their attendant creatures
of fantasy. Lumpen-headed goblins. Scantily dressed angels. Miner hats shining bright beams into beer cups. A
stilt-walker phalanx. Cerberus seething. A weeping, martyred Hannibal. Bejeweled opera glasses covering the eyes
of bright blue masks. Burkas made from Sesame Street

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

195

bedsheets, neon tights, and light-up nipple-studs blinking
under sheer T-shirts.
Rosemont walked and gawked and walked. He gulped
down two cups of beer rapidly, passed to him from a ﬂoat
of women in grape-bunch turbans and Etruscan tunics,
and watched a man in a wide-brimmed hat and another, a
wild-looking fellow in animal hides and a spray of feathers
in his hair. It seemed obvious to Rosemont that one was
Naught, a character from centuries-old Lenten festivals, or
a riff on him. The other he couldn’t identify.
“Who is that?” he asked a young woman standing next
to him. Rosemont pointed to the feathered man he thought
was Naught.
She was sweaty with drink and laughing, and she
grinned at Rosemont, eager to talk. “Matto! That’s Matto!”
Rosemont understood. The Fool. “And who is that?
The man in red with the hat.”
The woman had already lifted her chin, anticipating his
question, ready to answer. “Il Bagato.”
The Magician. Matto and Bagato, clowns of commedia
dell’arte—one in white, the other in red. Twin tricksters.
Schlemiel and Schlamazo. The dupe and the duper.
“Have fun!” Matto shouted up at a cluster of drinkers
in a balcony. “This is all going to be over soon, you
know!”
“Who’s hungry?” shouted Bagato. “I got everything
you need.” He held his closed hands out to a stumbling
passerby, who leaned over them. A burst of ﬂowers appeared and water spurted in the drunk’s face. Broad takes
from both Bagato and the drunk.
Lame-ass commedia dell’arte buffoonery, thought

196

Barth Anderson

Rosemont. Like Gilligan’s Island for the Renaissance festival set.
“Go home!” Matto shouted at the drenched fellow.
“This party is going to end anyway. Just go home now!”
But it hooked him, he couldn’t deny, and it caught
at him as he ﬂowed with the ﬂow of the festival trafﬁc.
It found alleyways to ﬁll and wide porches to slosh
against, not exactly sure how he would ﬁnd 3131 via di
S. Prima.
Into the square, behind Rosemont, came the grandest
ﬂoat he’d yet seen, a chariot, with its horses rising up out
of the ﬂoat as if charging through sea foam, and behind, a
great spotlight that swept the sky over the rider as three
jets bearing the old crest and colors of the empire strafed
the Aventine.
How could I have never heard of this festival before?
All of Rome is involved. Rosemont wondered at the number of people, the scope, the man painted red, kilt and
breastplate, Etruscan laurel leaves adorning his head, and
spear in hand.
“That dress makes you look like a hooker!” an old
transvestite shouted at the triumphator. It was Roman, certainly, this festival’s adoration of the profane pressed
against the revered, but its populism and camp didn’t seem
to belong on the Aventine, one of the most cosmopolitan
neighborhoods on the planet. The festival was one enormous mockery of Rome.
Rosemont found himself driven forward with hundreds
of others before the red triumphator’s ﬂoat, pushed like
spoils of Roman victory. Rosemont passed a corner street
sign: Piazza di la Haruspex. He followed the crowd out of

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

197

the square: towering, slender giraffe necks on stumpy
human bodies, girly eyelashes blinking way up high; a
blaze-orange devil laughing as a spread of purple chrysanthemum ﬁreworks ignited.
“Okay,” Rosemont said. “I’m safe. Whatever that
means.”
His section of the enormous festival crowd eddied into
a courtyard where a giant rust-maroon gear positioned ﬂat
and turning, with smaller rusty gears toothed into it, spinning proportionately faster, and in the center of each was a
crazed, rearranged mannequin: legs for heads, sitting atop
orange trafﬁc sawhorses, and stacked funnels, ropes with
toy anchors, where their arms should be. As Rosemont entered the courtyard he could see a stage where a woman
was singing a mullah’s cadences over industrial beats. Literally industrial. A crowd of men in gas masks were playing sanders, drills, and one man with a whining electric
saw was pressing it against an iron slab, sending up rooster
tails of sparks over the crowd, all of which turned upon
multifold Moroccan rhythms and the singer’s reverent,
warbling voice.
The parade kept pushing down a narrow street and the
crowd became a maze within a maze as Rosemont tried to
ﬁnd his way toward the buildings in order to see addresses
better, but he couldn’t, really, since the crowd was too
dense. It felt artiﬁcial, this street, this labyrinthine neighborhood, with golden lamplight falling on too-neat
porches and perfect red-brick houses, with the canopy of
clouds overhead, a parade held in an enclosed space, a museum’s re-creation of an Italian street. It wasn’t real.
Rosemont only knew ancient Rome from research, but

198

Barth Anderson

here it was—or should have been. The Aventine. Time
changes cities, but not Rome, he knew. Rome doesn’t
change, it only forgets now and then, like an old scholar
who’d mastered many disciplines, slipping into senility and
losing the edges, the digressions, and the minor, ﬁner details. There were alleys, corners, and markets so old that
even Rome could not be expected to remember them all.
But the Aventine was not a digression, smothered by teetering buildings and shoved out of mind. It was one of the
seven hills—arguably, the second hill of Rome, the site
where Remus took his auspices and determined that the future city should be built, as the classic version went. It was
a static part of Rome’s topography—not a neighborhood
or transient market. The festival should not have been this
sprawling, covered over by so many people and winding,
tangling alleyways, Rosemont realized as he broke away
from the crowd and stood near a crumbling manse. There
were streets below these streets. Not underground, and
not streets, but plats. Blocks. Tracts. What were they?
Rosemont tamped the ground with his foot as if he could
feel them down there below the ﬂagstones. He could not
tell what they really were, but he could tell that they were
somehow there. His.
“Testing, testing, one-two-three,” he said to himself, as
he pressed the ball of his foot against the ground again,
like a man stepping into a boat.
“Jeremiah Rosemont.”
He looked up, hand dropping to Kermit’s gun, and
found three children staring at him from the building, their
faces like white moons in the frame of a dark window.
Rosemont said nothing, watching them in surprise, as he
realized that no one had called his name after all. Some-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

199

thing pulled at him from the edges of his awareness. He
waited. Triplets. Perfect triplets. As the parade streamed
behind him, he watched their beautiful faces watching
him. Graceful chins, narrow shoulders, bright eyes. And
the three were blinking in unison.
“Come here,” the middle child called out.
Rosemont stepped toward the window with great hesitation. Miles had said that there was no magic during this
festival. But the triplets felt weird and dangerous, and then
there were the girders of force that seemed to hold this city
up. Nothing felt right. “What?”
“Come closer,” said one of the other kids in the
window.
Rosemont stood directly below them. “Hello,” he said.
Almost threateningly, the third said to him, “Help us
down,” and immediately began crawling onto the sill.
Before Rosemont could object, the child, wearing culottes
and cowboy boots, had leapt into his arms. Rosemont let
the boy slip down to the ground and immediately the second was standing on the sill, ready to be caught. When all
three had been transferred to the ground, the ﬁrst one
who’d spoken said, “We’re ready. We’re on our way. We’re
here. Let’s move.” Rosemont was about to ask what they
were ready to do, when the three literally turned on their
heels, like synchronized wind-up dolls, and stalked off
down the sidewalk, skirting the street crowd’s main bulk.
Rosemont gave one last look at the window, wondered
why there wasn’t an adult or at least an outcry from
within. But then watching them move in perfect unison, he
knew there would be no parents in that ﬂat, no family
wondering about the curious triplets. He followed them
down the street.

200

Barth Anderson

“We fracture,” the last triplet in line said over his
shoulder to Rosemont.
He hustled up to the child and bent toward him as they
walked. “What?”
“We are fractured,” said the second in line, more
loudly.
“We mean that I’m fractured,” said the leader, almost
screaming over the din of the crowd. “And I hate it.”
“Do you understand?” said the third, looking at
Rosemont.
“I think I do.”
“Sometimes the mind is broken, and sometimes the
body. In this case, I was in tripled form so I’m stuck this
way today. I’m—we’re—I mean, I’m here to bring you to
the viewing. As a favor to di Trafana.”
Di Trafana, thought Rosemont. The astrologer?
“Okay, but what are you?” Rosemont said.
“A god,” said one.
“I mean, a kid,” said the next.
“No, a hero, a hero,” said the last.
Rosemont hurried to keep pace. “You don’t know?”
“Not today, I guess. It’s this way,” said one when they
came to an intersection.
“No, it’s this way.”
“We’re—I’m sorry,” the third said to Rosemont, “but
we haven’t been to the maze in Haruspex Piazza for over
three hundred years. We’re having trouble remembering.
This may take a moment.”
The eight-year-olds clustered together and screamed viciously at one another and for a moment, the way they
leaned at one another with chins out, their skinny chests

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

201

heaving in anger, ﬁngers arched into talons, Rosemont
wondered if they would start clawing at each other.
While Rosemont stood waiting for the tripartite god to
get his act together, two men dressed in heavy black Don
Giovanni opera capes and matching smiling and frowning
masks were speaking nearby. “They platted this neighborhood themselves,” said one in a smiling mask, “the two together. But things went wrong, and on this day, one
brother murdered the other, so there is no magic during
this feast.”
The frowning mask gasped. “The oldest of the oldest
are just like you and me tonight?”
“That’s right. Sitting ducks. It started with the purple
rockets. Do you see what I’m getting at?”
The two ﬁgures stood staring at each other behind their
masks, grinning and scowling respectively.
“It would be possible to kill them all,” said the frowner.
The smiler laughed. “Now we might do it pat.”
“Wait. You know who I am, right?” said the frowning
mask.
“Yeah, I know.”
“Are you sure?”
“I just said I know who you are.”
“I’m Gordon Helfeltz.”
The smiler stood still as a tree, smiling. He sounded
pissed. “That’s my name. I’m Gordon Helfeltz.”
“No, I’m Gordon Helfeltz.”
“I am.”
The frowning mask turned this way and that, seemingly looking for someone. “Oh, shit.”
Then the two ﬁgures lifted their arms and the skirts of

202

Barth Anderson

their heavy cloaks and darted away from each other in
panic.
“We’re ready.”
“We have it.”
“It’s this way. Let’s move,” said the triplets, marching
off on their too-big strides, the two behind following the
ﬁrst as if stepping into footprints left in snow.
Rosemont hoisted his backpack and hustled behind,
trying to keep up with the scurrying triplets in the bump
and jostle.
If there was no magic, as Miles and the Gordon
Helfeltzes claimed, then how could any of this be happening? How could there be a three-fold child, a god, and how
could he feel streets below the streets? It made him suspect
that there was something wrong, not with Rome or the festival, but with himself.
“It’s a Chi-Chi’s,” said one of the children.
“Right up here.”
“That way. Up ahead.”
Rosemont shook his head and sneered. He stopped to
castigate them, but the kids kept marching, so he hurried
behind. “A Chi-Chi’s? You’re taking me to a Chi-Chi’s?
Are you fucking serious?”
The boys lifted their chins and nodded to Rosemont
over their shoulders, identical locks of black hair falling on
each of their brows. “South side of the Aventine.”
“It’s where Remus planned to depart from this world.”
Rosemont said, “At Chi-Chi’s.”
“Right there.”
They rounded a corner where the tight, strangling
street opened into a vista to the south of the wide, ﬂat

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

203

Tiber, the magniﬁcently crumbling baths, and the southern
stretches of the Eternal City.
And blotting out all that was a pillar sign, with ChiChi’s ﬂouncy, cursive script in cherry-bomb red.
The festival stopped sprawling this way, coming to the
border of this major thoroughfare of trafﬁc and breaking,
as if washing back up the hill to history and ferment, away
from petty commerce.
Rosemont had just turned back from looking up the
Aventine, when the ﬁrst boy lunged into the thoroughfare
in quick strides. Rosemont shouted. Screeching, honking
trafﬁc bunched up on either side of the boy as the other two,
just behind, made for the far side too. Rosemont followed
and waved his hands frantically to prevent himself from
being hit by a taxi.
On the other side, the leader opened the Chi-Chi’s front
door for Rosemont and his two compatriots. “So here we
meet.”
Inside the foyer, Chi-Chi’s greeted Rosemont in a demoralizing wave of faux Mexican decor. God. Chi-Chi’s.
Sad reminders of slipping into a Chi-Chi’s once as a young
man to get drunk on margaritas with a couple of giddy
friends who seemed to think that this was adulthood, that
they were stealing into new and untrammeled terrain, here
among the crappy premixed cocktails, the black and silver
mariachi sombreros, the brightly colored ponchos, the
plastic rubber-tree plants. It had all felt like a defeat somehow, as a seventeen-year-old who already knew that maturity was purchased in the failure of adults and from
even harder blows, not long-stemmed glassware. Not rims
of salt.

204

Barth Anderson

“On the Aventine,” Rosemont muttered, staring at a
velvet bullﬁght poster advertising margarita mix. “On the
motherfucking Aventine.”
Obviously, this was a mistake. He’d wound up following the wrong magical creature in taking up with the
triplets. Perhaps he should have taken up with the Gordon
Helfeltzes? Not many good options here, with the three
boys spinning him back into triteness and woe. As he
turned back to the door, ready to leave, however, his face
prickled with cold at the sight of the two men standing
there, barring his way. One was tall, powerfully built, and
bald with an ugly misshapen skull like a great cement
block. The other was slightly shorter and slim as a spike, in
his black, narrow Cardin jacket, staring at Rosemont with
curiosity and hate.
“Stay and have one with me,” said the shorter man
spinning Rosemont toward the bar. “My name’s Transom.
I have someone you need to meet.”
“Wait, wait, wait,” said Rosemont, arching his back,
his voice breaking in fright as he felt Transom slide his
backpack from his shoulders.
Transom opened it and scooped out the red binder.
“You were right, as usual, my lord,” he said, handing it to
Visconti.
Visconti immediately opened it and began reading. “It’s
here. The Refutation of Rosemont.” A young couple in
matching, pressed T-shirts entered and gave him a dirty
look for blocking the doorway.
“What’s happening?” Rosemont said. “What’s this all
about?”
“I hear you have it put together pretty well,” said

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

205

Transom, looping both arms around Rosemont’s waist and
casually lifting the gun from Rosemont’s waistband.
“You’re going to authenticate the Watts deck. And once
you determine that it is what we think it is, you’re going to
give the god’s deck to Duke Filipo Maria Visconti.”

14

H

ooks. Fishhooks are shining below this shallow water, waiting beneath your bare wading feet, returning you to shore. Convince yourself that the hooks can’t
hurt you, because you passed over them unscathed that
day. They’re just a memory that sinks into your dreams.
But these ﬁshhooks rip. A single golden one may shine
against a pale blue sky, and it may be so small when it falls
that you don’t even feel its cold curve brushing the hair on
the back of your hand. But a thousand of them, a million,
will catch and open you. You’ll be peeled apart until your
body is turned inside out, and by the will of the eight thousand gods something new will emerge from the undone
boundary stones and demarcations of your body.
Time was and what a time. You had a vantage and
a scope back then, like none for which you’d ever been

208

Barth Anderson

prepared, like none your people had ever experienced or
prophesied. When the jerry-rigged engine of your crackedhealed-cracked mind is quiet and blind (in black-fog moments like this one), your body remembers that scope, like
the vantage of two mirrors facing one another and the
emergent telescoping hallway that plunges from ﬂat, twodimensional surfaces into past and future simultaneously.
That was you: a great hallway of many generations, and all
their knowing cracked through your gray matter’s barricades. Asleep against your chimney, you can almost smell
the steely sweat of the runners, pages carrying messages
between walled cities of Etruscan kings, folding into the
dusty, hot smell of mud bricks cooling like loaves, baked
for the ﬁrst perimeter of Wilusija by visiting priests of
Khemet, folding into incense smoke in the market streets
of Ur, protecting Gilgamé from the enemies of Babylon.
This was the practice that survived the people, the practice
that opened, leveled, and raised up your mind: the alchemy
of defense, the earliest city magic. In previous generations,
paradise literally meant “encircling wall”—divine safety—
and that’s what it was. The promise of a new, safe city was
the promise of paradise. But every culture is a paradise
lost, in the end. The enemy invades and the homeland
crumbles. Tragic, but even magic, you knew, from your
new vantage, isn’t safe, isn’t set forever. Not when the paradise of your mind must crack to gain the vantage, power,
and mastery of ancients. That telescoping hallway bored
through you, and, in the years that followed, you accepted
that the universe and its eight thousand gods accepted you.
Tyro. Master. Magician.
But, oh, the price, the prices you paid.
Time was and what a time. This vantage wasn’t yours,

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

209

and the way you came by it was nothing short of criminal,
but you sense this truth only in your foggiest moments,
when this very voice (your conscience? Remus? An older
you?), this scolding, self-mocking perspective comes to
whisper cutting truths to you in your sleep. But you never
remember. Quite a defense. While events may follow one
another in little plotted parades of cause and effect in nature (sunrise, sunset, midnight), it’s not so in the human
mind. Your mind. Yours leaps forward, stops, recourses,
lifts up. It renames, shufﬂes, and erases. Sunset, swingset,
sunspot. Oblivion. Look at you. After all you gained and
all you were awarded. Your precious warehouse has been
invaded, your machinations shattered and battered, and
you are laid bare, ﬂayed raw as the day she disappeared.
You’ll rebuild, of course, because you have to. But creature
safety is not the magician’s realm; there’s something of the
wild dog in your people, circling ﬁres and skirting notice.
So now that your stab at normalcy is over, will you “light
out for the territory,” past your paradoxes and paradises,
or will you steal yourself into another cramped kingdom,
crowning yourself emperor of an even smaller crab’s shell?
Maybe get a TV? With a remote? O beautiful for spacious
mind. For broken mountain’s majesty above the frightened
plain. Something and something else. It’s hard to remember when you used the power of ancients to forget so
much. Well, here’s a banister in the mist, something to
hang on to, if you can: the betrayal on her babyface. Did
you save yourself when you stole what you stole and broke
what you broke, or did you save yourself from guilt and remembering? Hold on to this, Boy King, or whatever you
call yourself now: Her eyes were locked on yours from beneath the surface, before she sank and sank and sank and

210

Barth Anderson

the shadows in the choppy lake swallowed her. The ﬁshhooks waiting for you in the pebbled shore never touched
your skin, but she will be two years old forever.
Remember that? Remember that.
Wake up now. Haul yourself up from another ﬂoor.
What name are you going by again? Miles? Rosemont?
Boy King. Oh, right. So confusing, even to you, especially
when the black mist retreats and you’re alone with your
new, stitched-together self. Don’t try and remember who
you were. It’s easier being a self-made man.

Behind Bryce & Waterston, a ﬂock of Canadian geese had
landed and made camp on the old rail bed. It was April, so
several times a week, a new ﬂock would arrive and scream
at each other till noon. This morning, the barking was
high-spirited, ardent, and Boy King woke with the sense
that something had gone right while he was asleep. At
least, nothing had gone wrong. No trackers had jumped
him in his dreams. No ﬁfteenth-century dukes had found
him while he slept.
Pushing himself up from the ﬂoor, his face felt like a great
soggy gland, but the sharp agony of his broken nose was
gone. That seemed to stoke his optimism. Though the warehouse was now simply bricks and rotting timber after
Transom’s invasion last night, it felt to Boy King as if life
were a blank page. He could do anything now. Go anywhere.
But he was hungry, desperately hungry, and his head
thundered with a godly hangover. He counted himself lucky
that this was the worst of his pains. Sitting and listening
to the geese, he ate an entire box of Saltines that he’d
Dumpster dived a week before. Stale, but not too bad. He

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

211

drank some water from a jug, ﬁnished off his last Twizzler
from its sticky bag, and felt almost human afterward.
While he ate, Boy King decided this would be his last
day in Bryce & Waterston. Transom had successfully convinced Visconti that Boy King wasn’t here. Transom had
liberated Boy King. Now, Boy King was free to start over
somewhere else, and he found himself thinking that maybe
he’d been too hasty to dismiss Lara for trying to get him an
apartment. Maybe things had calmed down at Dona Mia’s
and he could talk to Lara about another gig next week.
The future was taking shape, like a blessed city coming
into view over the horizon.
But Boy King would need to ﬁnish reading Transom’s
collection of documents before any of that could happen.
He sat down and opened the binder.
There was little that spoke to him—more copies of
hieroglyphs and hand-drawn recreations of ram-headed
Khnum—but then he chanced across his own name in a
section that had been heavily edited, evidently by government censors. He thumbed back to the beginning so that
he could see what the document was.
Department of Justice
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D.C. 20535
January 15, 2004
Subject: Direct Action and Monitoring
FOIA No. 1014444–9032
Dear Mr. Visconti,
The enclosed documents were reviewed under the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Title 5, United

212

Barth Anderson

States Code, Section 52/552a. Deletions have been
made to protect information that is exempt from disclosure.
The enclosed material is from the main investigative
ﬁle(s) in which the subject(s) of your request was the focus of the investigation.
One document was reviewed and one document
was released.
Sincerely yours,
David N. Laurel
Section Chief
Record/Information Dissemination Section
Records Management Division
Enclosure(s):
From: Indigent and Immigrant Monitoring Division
Re: John Doe, Minneapolis, MN
ALERT: Suspected figure in Case # 98889A-DE-O (pending)
Date: December 2, 2003
These pictures of John Doe were taken following tips
from
, who advised that this unidentified individual might be a key figure in a pending
case out of the Madison, Wisconsin, bureau. The individual is said to be squatting in the abandoned Bryce &
Waterston warehouse in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Length
of squat: unknown.
However, Special Agent
used the
Forensic Image Analysis team’s EigenMatch system, which

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

213

for human identification using eyes,
chins, cheeks, ears, and
. The
system employs an algorithmic

which remains controversial, called “eigenfaces”—standardized facial elements
derived from statistical analysis of the EigenMatch database of face pictures using fourth- and fifth-dimensional
representations called “auras” that

As a result, Special Agent
was able to determine a 91% match between homeless person John Doe at the Bryce & Waterston warehouse in
Minneapolis and the last known photograph of
taken at the Circus of
Infinite Wow in Austin, Texas. In other words, the SA
feels 91% certain that
is the Bryce & Waterston John Doe and not the Houston
Cherryvale Hospital John Doe as Special Agent
asserts.
Despite this near-positive match, more follow-up is
needed. For example, the address of the abandoned Bryce
& Waterston warehouse,
given in Case #
does not seem to exist in
the zip code provided. Follow-up with Minneapolis
Police Department found no maps or other records of a

214

Barth Anderson

warehouse with that name, despite having the attached
photograph with warehouse name and logo clearly visible. Sending a beat patrol to the site elicited no hard
evidence that this warehouse exists (officer could not
find it).
SA
was asked to
repeat his EigenMatch findings in real time, which he
attempted, but circumstances beyond

for the Bryce & Waterston John Doe’s alleged knowledge
of the
and its disappearance
from Rome in 1991 (Washington office is requesting information of its possible location in US), Visconti’s
group, known as
(Boston office requesting), the whereabouts of fugitive Leo Burt and
other members of the Madison Underground (Madison office), various occult travelers’ hostels, connection to
Missing Person Tanya Elling, and/or the identity of the
Cherryvale John Doe.
As noted in the IIM bulletin, on
,
Operation Cattle Drive will begin. This coordinated
effort between the various State National Guards,
Homeland Security, and the Bureau’s
will make further homeless investigations in cities
like Minneapolis nearly impossible. We advise sending
in a SA to Bryce & Waterston for one last interrogation
before the round-up begins.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

215

Boy King quickly paged back to the initial letter from
the Department of Justice: December 2. That was ﬁve
months ago, which meant this Operation Cattle Drive was
probably still coming—maybe a spring sweep, when a lot
of the homeless folks came back to Minneapolis, or at the
latest, a summer initiative. He hadn’t heard about anyone
getting rounded up recently—but it happened every few
years, and it was terrifying. People he saw regularly on his
Dumpster dives just disappeared, here one day and gone
the next. And this investigation had pictures of him, they’d
been watching him, and they wanted to interrogate him.
Three letters, Transom had said in describing the “greater
power” that yoked him. Had he received three letters? No.
FBI. HSA.
Boy King slammed the binder shut and began gingerly
placing the paintings back in the cardboard box, imagining
special agents parachuting onto the warehouse roof. Could
Boy King ﬁnd Lara? He needed her. He took back all the
snotty things he thought about her efforts to help him and
wished he had her address, phone number, or any means of
contacting her. He didn’t know where she lived, didn’t know
how to reach her except on Dream Machine Thursdays
and Sundays at the restaurant. After the mayhem with that
couple and the crazed busboy at Dona Mia’s, he wondered
if Lara would even help him. He had to think of something
else. The van wasn’t safe, not since the mud replica appeared, so there would be no hasty ﬂight out of town now.
Where could he go? He’d gotten soft since ﬁnding and
building his little castle at Bryce & Waterston. He didn’t
know the good hideouts anymore, where the cops didn’t
come searching or where every homeless person in town

216

Barth Anderson

didn’t already squat. He patted the packing tape back in
place, loosely resealing the cardboard box that housed the
ancient paintings. A homeless shelter might be okay. But
getting there, or anywhere, meant walking through very urban stretches of Minneapolis with the objects of so many
desires under one arm. If a desert hunter, an eigenmatcher,
a Khnum worshipper, or random tyro spotted him . . .
Boy King picked up the box—easy enough to carry
while walking. He couldn’t risk changing its shape, not
with a dragnet of federal agents and tyros underway. He
was just going to have to follow the Mississippi up to the
West Bank and see if he could hustle some food and a ride
out of town. He took one last look around, then left Bryce
& Waterston. He never saw it again.

15

W

ithout the gun, binder, or his backpack, Rosemont
felt stripped nude—so nude that he folded his
arms and hugged himself for comfort and warmth. Those
idiots, he thought. How could they just leave me to wander
on my own? Transom walked next to him through the
spotlights of a tracklit hallway that hemmed the dining
room and its cheery Tejano music.
“A Chi-Chi’s,” Transom said. “Can you believe it? The
Romans aren’t in control anymore.”
Rosemont was shivering. “You’re just coming to this
conclusion?”
“By the time you have an American chain invading the
historical, mythological heart of your culture,” Transom
said, “the empire isn’t just dead, it’s undead. This must be
Chi-Chi’s of the Damned.”

218

Barth Anderson

Rosemont glanced behind him as they walked. Visconti
was still reading at the door, but he wasn’t turning pages.
What the hell would Visconti need Miles’s binder for? If he’s
who Miles says he is, then he remembers the story about di
Trafana ﬁrsthand, since he was there, thought Rosemont.
But he said he wanted the Guelph report. Ingebretsen. Now
he knows the deck is scientiﬁcally proven to be over a thousand years old.
“I want you to know,” Transom said, “that we have
Miles.”
Rosemont’s step hitched and he almost stumbled.
“Why? What are you going to do to him?” Rosemont
whispered.
“There isn’t time to do everything we’d like to do,”
Transom said.
He’s blufﬁng. “The oldest of the oldest are just like you
and me tonight,” Gordon Helfeltz had said. All they can
do is scare me that they have him. And it did scare him.
It didn’t take celestial command over ancient disciplines
to hammer a nail, throw a punch. Passing a line of plastic
rubber-tree plants, Transom and Rosemont found a banquet room ﬁlled with red Naugahyde chairs and benches.
Inside, Priscilla and Marni were seated patiently at a table,
the only table occupied of the ten in the room.
“Rosemont,” Priscilla said. Almost as if she couldn’t
stop herself, she lunged to her feet and held out her hand,
shooing him toward her.
“Go join your friends,” Transom said. “They’ll get you
up to speed.” Then he turned and sauntered back down
the hall to Visconti.
Rosemont slid into a seat next to Priscilla and, as she
sat, said, “What does it mean that they have Miles?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

219

“They’re trying to skew the authenticator’s view of the
Watts deck,” Marni said, hands folded in her lap as if she
were simply waiting for a chimichanga. “And it will probably work.”
Kermit had done his work well, even with Rosemont
aiming a gun in his face. The thought of Khnum was ﬁrmly
planted in Rosemont’s mind, no doubt about it. And the
very idea that Miles was somewhere, right now, getting the
snot knocked out of him? In a Chi-Chi’s? Strawberry margaritas were sounding really good all of a sudden.
Priscilla put her hand on his arm. “Marni’s wrong,” she
said. “You can be objective.”
Rosemont shrugged her hand away and brushed his
arm where she had touched him. “What’s the plan here? Is
there one? Are you three just making it up as you go?” His
voice was strained and it cracked as he said, “I can’t believe you just left me at the café.”
Priscilla’s widow’s peak stood black against her paling
skin. “I know. It couldn’t be helped. The festival on the
Aventine was about to begin so the templum had to be
closed.” Her voice was soothing, an alarming contrast to
her vampire-esque look. She held up her hands and patted
the air before Rosemont. “Please believe me. You were taking so long and we were in danger.”
“I was in danger, too,” he hissed, “and the shit I just
saw in this festival? What made you think I was equipped
to deal with it? I walked in here—la dee da—and Transom
grabbed Miles’s binder like he was picking cherries. How
did—?”
Rosemont shut his mouth.
Priscilla dropped her hands. “What?”
His anger guttered and went out. “I was—”

220

Barth Anderson

Marni crossed her arms and grinned. “I thought he
had it.”
Priscilla’s head snapped toward Marni, but she said
nothing, looking at the old woman gloat. Then her head
turned slowly back to Rosemont, seething. The track lighting directly above her cast horror-show shadows down her
face. “You lied to Miles?” Priscilla said.
Rosemont slumped, as if his heart was dragging his
shoulders down. He wondered where Miles was now, if he
was hurt. Would it have changed anything if he’d given
Miles the binder at the café? “I know. I’m sorry.”
“You kept it from him when you knew how badly he
wanted it?” She stepped forward and the light softened,
but her voice didn’t.
“No one was telling me anything,” Rosemont said
weakly.
“Yes”—she nodded broadly as if explaining something
to a child—“we were telling you everything—far more
than a potential authenticator should be told.” Her voice
dropped to an angry whisper and she leaned toward
Rosemont on the balls of her toes. “They dismiss us. They
dismiss what we’re about to look at. They’ve seen it with
their own eyes and they dismiss it. Do you have any idea
what will happen if they claim the deck for—”
“Ssst,” Marni said, shushing Priscilla. “Stop it.” She
pushed out a chair next to her. “Sit down, Priscilla.”
Rosemont clenched his jaw and then said, “See? You
don’t tell me what matters. Never enough to understand
what’s happening or even what’s at stake.” He turned to
the old woman and whispered in a rush, “What? What will
happen, Marni? If Visconti gets this item you want me to
look at, what terrible thing will happen?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

221

“No one can tell,” Marni said.
“Why?” Rosemont shouted. “Why can’t you just tell
me?”
Marni’s face was set in anger, but she leaned her chin
on one hand, as though this conversation both wearied
and infuriated her. “You think that ‘being told’ is the same
as ‘knowing,’ ” she said, almost snarling. “For us, and for
Visconti, Transom, Blackleafers, Babylonians, and tyros of
traditions across the planet, ﬁnding out is knowing.” Her
voice hit a sing-song cadence implying that her own words
tired her. “We live by that. We die by that. We fail and succeed by uncovering, discovering. Not by being spoonfed.”
“Well, I’m not a tyro,” Rosemont said, aiming a thumb
at his chest. “I need the goddamn spoon. I keep getting
thrown into the dark. I need a handrail or a guide wire or
something.”
Rosemont’s words seemed to wake something in Priscilla.
She laughed quietly and said, “You came to Rome when the
Monk called you.”
Marni nodded at Priscilla, folded her hands in her lap
as if the conversation were over. “Exactly.”
“ ‘Exactly’?” Rosemont snapped at Marni. “What, ‘exactly’?”
Priscilla said in exasperation, “You are a tyro.”
“I’ll be the judge of that,” Marni said in a croaking,
sarcastic voice.
“No, Marni. Rosemont will,” Priscilla said. She looked
back at him out of the corner of her eye, as if spying at him
through a keyhole. “Well, you’ll ﬁnd your own way or you
won’t. I’ve said your whole life that it has to be this way.
Now I must stand by that.”
Priscilla’s words whirled through him. My whole life?

222

Barth Anderson

He was about to ask what that meant, but her face was a
cold, shut door and she raised a ﬁnger to quiet him.
“Here he comes.”
A moment later, a man in a ﬂowing, shapeless black
caftan entered the hall. The robe took away all the sharp
angles on him so that from the top of his rounded head and
soft cap of black hair, sloping down to his rounded shoulders, barrel body, and Buddha belly, the man was almost a
perfect circle.
“Who’s that?” Rosemont muttered.
“It’s di Trafana, the Mad Monk who showed Miles the
deck,” Priscilla said, stepping close to Rosemont. “Don’t
be worried, but he’s a little crazy from a possession, Miles
says. That’s how Miles learned so much about Remus, by
talking to di Trafana. The man is half-possessed by a ghost
from Remoria.”
Di Trafana wasn’t what Rosemont had imagined from
the condotierre’s description in his journal. He had pictured a gaunt, haggard court astrologer, but this man
looked downright jolly. Di Trafana smiled a faint smile
that barely put a dent in one baby cheek, and crossed to
join them. In a pleasant, harmonious voice, he said to
Rosemont, “Miles, it’s good to see you again.”
“No, no,” Rosemont said. “I’m Jeremiah Rosemont.”
He shook hands with di Trafana, and there was something
mildly upsetting about him—the all-too-easy slope of his
shoulders, the salamander smoothness of his hand.
Di Trafana inclined his head to Rosemont, a little bow
that forced him to look at Rosemont from under his eyebrows. “The authenticator. Interesting that you decided to
take the ticket that was sent to you.”
Rosemont said, “Nothing to lose.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

223

“Hardly makes sense,” said di Trafana and closed his
eyes, lips moving, speaking soundlessly.
Rosemont looked at Priscilla, who shrugged. Transom
appeared at that moment, and while all three waited for di
Trafana to open his eyes and stop talking to himself,
Rosemont tested the ﬂoor with the balls of his toes, as he
had on the hill. He could still feel the Aventine’s secret platting pulse into him through the soles of his feet.
Di Trafana opened his eyes and they shined at
Rosemont. “What are you doing?”
Rosemont said, “Nothing.”
“What are you doing?” Transom echoed.
“Nothing, I said,” said Rosemont.
Di Trafana looked down at Rosemont’s feet then back
into his eyes.
Priscilla’s pallid face gleamed under one of the track
lights as she turned and whispered something to Marni,
staring at Rosemont.
“How can this be?” di Trafana said to him.
It’s not a hallucination, Rosemont thought. It surprises
di Trafana that I can feel this too.
“Mr. Rosemont has sensitivities that the rest of us do
not have,” Priscilla whispered to di Trafana. “Many of us
have been waiting to see them exhibit themselves.”
Rosemont wondered what that meant, many of us, or
how she knew anything about him. He was about to ask
when di Trafana turned and began gliding away toward a
small side room. “Mr. Rosemont? Follow me.”
In the side room, which was lit with wrought-iron
chandeliers and electric candles, a small station had been
set up. A microscope. A bright, full-spectrum light on a
desk. pH strips and a small magnifying glass. On a long

224

Barth Anderson

table ﬁfteen paintings were laid out, each in a sealed frame,
with one unsealed, ready for examination.
Di Trafana came to stand behind the table and gave
Rosemont a disturbing, lingering stare. “Everything you
need should be here. But if I’ve neglected you, pronounce
your need and I’ll nourish you.”
“So you say you created this deck?” said Rosemont.
Di Trafana gave him a dry, canny look. “I never said
that.”
“You know Visconti. You have held a very low opinion
of him in the past.” Testing, testing, one-two-three.
Rosemont couldn’t stop feeling the situation out. He examined di Trafana’s face carefully as he spoke. “Haven’t
you, pontifex?”
“Priscilla is right about you. Powerful. Resourceful,” di
Trafana said. “Plus, you are very tan. But what matters
now is the future and what you see in these cards.”
Rosemont wanted to keep testing to understand what
was happening, but he couldn’t resist looking, either. The
paintings were small, and several were water damaged, but
most had survived in remarkably good condition for
millennia-old paintings. In fact, if he hadn’t seen the
Ingebretsen report, Rosemont would have guessed that
they were more like four hundred years old.
He walked down the row of paintings. If these were
cards that were some missing parent of Renaissance tarots
and shared qualities with them, then these had to be ﬁfteen trumps, cards from the trump suit—or the so-called
major arcana, as popular culture referred to the twentytwo-card suit of the typical tarot deck. There were no pip
cards at all in the ﬁfteen, that Rosemont could ascertain.
Did that mean that pips simply hadn’t survived from the

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

225

larger whole? Or were pip cards not part of this ur-tarot, if
that’s what it was? It was highly unlikely that so many
cards of only one suit would survive. More likely, this is
what the deck was. Little portraits. Depictions of vanities,
archetypes, and human triumphs. That’s all. In other
words, it obviously wasn’t a deck for playing any of the
games that tarot was known for in the ﬁfteenth century,
namely tarocchi. This “deck” held some other purpose
than playing games.
The next thing Rosemont could see that broke with
tarot tradition, simply glancing at the cards, was that the
Watts deck paintings clearly hadn’t been conscripted by
royalty. There was no family device, no motto or heraldry
as in the earliest tarot decks. The inks were ﬁne, but not of
notably high quality—the blues had faded, and all the
cards had a red-yellow cast.
Rosemont looked at the lone unsealed card. The image
was that of a ram standing in a chariot, and its horns were
strangely drawn—ﬂat and rippling outward like a water
buffalo’s—and Rosemont was reminded of the species of
sheep that Kermit the Frog had described. Who would
know of this species well enough to draw it in tenthcentury Europe? What Italian would know obscure Egyptian
gods, ancient even by Egyptian standards? And was
Rosemont really seeing this? Or had the image of the ram
been planted in his mind, as Kermit claimed he’d done?
No. Don’t go down that road, Rosemont told himself.
You’ll drive yourself bat shit questioning yourself like that.
Rosemont inspected the outer lines of the ram ﬁgure. It
was not a medieval hand that drew this, nor a modern
hand, either. It was far older than any era where realism
was the norm—perhaps AD 950 as the Guelph report had

226

Barth Anderson

said? Even that might have been too young. There was
something, he had to admit, very “barbarian Italy” about
it. The ram’s round eyes reminded Rosemont of Etrurian
death masks. Stylized, primitivistic, as they say, like work
from the Haida of the Paciﬁc Northwest, or the bulls
painted on cave walls in the Lucerne. A slashing, solid dynamism in the drawing that was not prized in Renaissance
verisimilitude. This artist had more passion for the animal
than for the human. Did Rosemont surmise this because of
what he had been told? Was he seeing what others wanted
him to see in the Watts deck? The ram seemed to reach out
to him in a way that did not seem possible, to lift from the
paper and cast a shadow upon it and to place a wet, stamping hoof into Rosemont’s chest and leave a moist, cloven
print that . . .
banner of silver
water lifting
. . . but not outrageously beautiful, Rosemont thought,
like the inks of the earliest tarots. The image on the lone,
unsealed card was that of a shepherd reclining on a hillside
with a sun or a star blazing over his head. Rosemont assumed it was a star since a crescent moon hung low over
the horizon, but it was alone in the sky, not part of a constellation. The shepherd was dressed in an animal skin kilt,
and a staff lay in the grass near him. The same rays that
shot from the sun/star shot from the brow of the shepherd.
The drawing was highly compelling. Emotional. The shepherd with his shaggy kilt seemed to lift off the card stock. It
was not a modern hand, nor a medieval hand, that drew it.
Older, deliciously crude, and a great presence in the card

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

227

seemed to swell toward Rosemont as he let his heart rise to
the image of the shepherd, behold it, embrace it. An immense, oceanic personality washed over him. In Latin, the
personality said to him, “I am the half and the other side of
your hope,” and he could not bear to resist a word that it
spoke as though forgotten generations were ﬁnally . . .
lifting water
in a silver banner
. . . of native Canadians or the bulls painted on the
Lucerne cave walls.
Though he took this in and marveled at that lone, unsealed card, Rosemont didn’t analyze the image itself yet,
but instead examined the cracks in the paint on each card.
The craquelure, as the network of tiny ﬁssures and splits
was called, wasn’t fake, per se. It wasn’t a paint job itself,
that much Rosemont could see right away, and it cracked
through the subgrade paint in a satisfying randomness like
the web of a drunken spider. Clearly not a bake-and-roll
forgery. Under the microscope, Rosemont examined the
craquelure more closely and saw that the cracks weren’t
etched into the dried paint, either. In places, the cracks
went down to the very base, where the paint slightly separated from the card stock like fruit segments ripening away
from the rind.
Rosemont lifted his head from the microscope and
sighed.
It made his mouth water, it was so real. And that’s how
he always knew. Whatever the images might have been,
whatever culture or occult tradition might have spawned
them, the paintings spoke to Rosemont’s salivary glands,

228

Barth Anderson

his stomach, and his body, and that’s how he always knew
when he was beholding authenticity.
“Are you all right, authenticator?” di Trafana asked.
Rosemont realized he had stopped to rub his eyes.
“Fine.” He was exhausted from his trip, from the bizarre
run across the Aventine. That had to be it. Light-headed and
a little buzzed from festival beer. He looked back at the card
after blinking his eyes clear. What was happening? He had
distinctly different visions of the same card, he suddenly realized. Several visions. A shepherd. A ram. Not just different interpretations or impressions, but he had different . . .
memories of what he had just seen. A ram. A shepherd.
“Are you ready to tell Priscilla and Marni what you
think?”
Rosemont nodded vaguely.
Di Trafana’s whole body gave a little bob. “After you.”
Rosemont entered the banquet hall and saw Miles
standing next to Transom and Visconti and three men who
looked like hired muscle. Miles seemed ﬁne, unbeaten, but
his face looked clammy and damp, even from across the
room, so Rosemont assumed he’d at least gotten a good
scare thrown into him. Transom and Visconti looked ready
to declare victory of someone or something.
Rosemont stretched and made like he was trying to
crack his back. “It’s a fake.”
Rosemont expected that the held breath and tension in
the room would release slowly as the players absorbed his
words. Or perhaps an outburst of I-told-you-so’s or thatcannot-be’s. But the room remained tense as they each kept
their eyes on Rosemont, poised, as if they yearned to bash
him open and snatch the truth out of him with their bare
hands.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

229

Miles alone looked deﬂated, crushed by the news, and
when he spoke, he sounded drugged. “How? How do you
know, Jeremiah?”
Rosemont slid into a chair next to Priscilla. “The
craquelure is phony,” he said to Miles, who was about
twenty feet away. “It’s telltale. Very difﬁcult to forge good
craquelure.”
“He’s right. It’s a fake,” said Visconti. “I saw it six hundred years ago, you’ll all remember. I thought it was phony
then too.”
Priscilla was still watching Rosemont carefully. “He
should have been reduced to a pile of tears and screaming.
But he’s sane as an egg, look at him. He knows what he’s
talking about and he sounds convincing.”
“Or he survived it,” Marni said. “And is now tricking us.”
Rosemont said, “I’m just telling you what I saw.”
“But what about Ingebretsen?” Miles said, getting his
wind back. “What about the Guelph report? They said it
was real. They veriﬁed it was from AD 950.”
Transom apparently thought that was a good point. He
crossed his arms and looked at Rosemont.
“Well sure,” Rosemont said, “the paint and card stock
may be authentic, but I believe someone painted this thing
and doctored it to look real. The typical way to fake a
painting, make the cracks in it look old, is to throw it in
the oven right after ﬁnishing it in order to dry it quickly.
Then you take it out and roll it over, say, a cylinder or a
rolling pin while the paint is drying and becoming brittle to
get this web effect of ‘aged’ cracks. But whoever did this
one really knew what they were doing. I’d guess they
cracked them from below at several different points.

230

Barth Anderson

Pressing upward into the card stock in what we might call
the upper middle quadrant. In the upper left. And perhaps
at two points in the center,” he said, bullshitting freely
now. “It’s a very similar pattern on each one. That’s what
tipped me off. That and the crappy paint.” Feigning bemusement, Rosemont met every eye in the room, as if he
found them to be the dreariest suckers. But his full attention was on the paintings behind him, looping his mind
around them, making them his with his every ﬁber and
want. “With better oils, even a century-old painting would
look fresh and bright. With these paints, a hundred-yearold work looks ancient.”
Rosemont pretended to be fascinated by the proceedings but he was desperately calculating how he could dart
away with the paintings. Could he do it now, while they argued? Could he get Miles out of here too? He pretended to
rub his ear and stole a look at di Trafana to see if the Monk
was equally absorbed in the argument.
But di Trafana was staring at Rosemont, wide-eyed and
inquisitive, like a cat poised before rustling grass. And
while Rosemont looked at him, the man gave a little nod of
encouragement.
Rising on the balls of his toes, he looked back at the
paintings again, and feeling the hum of the plats beneath
the Aventine, he stared at one, the picture of the stargazing
shepherd, until he could feel it begin to lift off the paper.
And just as that same curious sensation hit him, of a ﬁsh
being pulled from a stream and pulling with it a silver banner of water, Rosemont had the sensation of pulling himself from the red Naugahyde banquet room, the Chi-Chi’s
of the Damned, and Rome.

16

D

ead river rushes and the stiff stalks of old weeds and
reeds snapped under Boy King’s feet as he walked
along the Mississippi, headed for the Wiggle Room Saloon
and Lara. It was April. The new growth hadn’t come in
thick yet, and the river had ﬂooded several times recently
so the ground sucked at his feet. There was a walkway, a
paved riverfront for bikers and joggers up the hill above
him, but down here he could walk without frightening
people with his bashed face and black eyes. Down here, he
could see the symbols and marks left by hunters, and read
the messages spray painted by tyros for one another on
tree stumps and tumbled concrete pilings.
NO TYRO NO WAY
TAKE BACK WATTS!

232

Barth Anderson

Another said:
REFUTE JOHN C. MILES

Boy King stopped and tried to identify the tradition
from the handwriting, perhaps even identify the tyro who
wrote it, but it had been too many years. Every curve of
every letter was a message, he knew, and he could hear the
pound of heels on Baghdad streets in the stems and swirls
of these letters—but pre-Muslim Baghdad or modern, warshattered Baghdad, he could not tell.
He stepped back and reread the second message, and
realized he knew the name.
JOHN C. MILES

He knew a John C. Miles long ago. Good God, he’d
been important to Boy King once upon a time. How could
he forget? He stared at the name and wondered what was
happening to his mind. First the false vision of an imagined
childhood and now he was apparently forgetting crucial
people from his past. The seams and fringes of reality were
fraying and he assumed the Khnum was on its way, forcing
itself through the thin cloth protecting Boy King’s world,
and important names and people were slipping through.
There would be time for puzzling that out once he was
somewhere safe. He pressed on along the river, and when
he sensed that the Seven Corners neighborhood was above
him, upbank, Boy King lumbered up the hill with his cardboard box. It was amazing how fast Minneapolis could go
from wild to urban, he thought, as he made his way
through mental health facilities, dilapidated student hous-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

233

ing, and the outskirts of the University of Minnesota
sprawl, making for Cedar and Riverside. Dona Mia’s was
that way. So was the Wiggle Room Saloon.
The Wiggle Room was an old disco-era club that had
been resuscitated as a gay cowboy venue in the nineties
and was now slouching into a more comfortable posture as
a humble dive bar. Curiously, its multiple identities worked
together with stenciled murals of Donna Summer alongside posters of Dolly Parton and Travis Tritt. Rhinestones
and pinball machines and a gummy black dance ﬂoor that
was probably hip once.
Cradling his cardboard box like it held a baby within,
Boy King slinked inside and was grateful that Bobby wasn’t
around. The bouncer always hassled Boy King, had even
coldcocked him once, for no reason that Boy King could
tell. He was also the only staff person at the Wiggle Room
who had a problem with Boy King reading cards. So with
the smell of greasy burgers and crispy french fries enticing
him from the kitchen, Boy King stashed his box under a
table and started hustling for readings, three cards for ﬁve
bucks. He got two readings right away from a couple that
had started drinking around noon, and who needed convincing that they were still in love. Within ﬁfteen minutes,
he had enough money for some fries and a cold glass of
Pabst.
But word spreads fast in a bar, and as soon as he was
ﬁnished with his lunch, he had four more readings from a
group of young women wearing Twins gear, three more
from a trio of older ladies on a shopping junket from
Brainerd, and three from a guy who didn’t like his ﬁrst two
readings.
But something was wrong. Despite the inﬂux of cash,

234

Barth Anderson

the happy parade of whiskeys he’d lined up for himself,
and the retreat of the dull ache in his brow and nose, he felt
as he had down at the Mississippi, seeing that oddly familiar name, that something was slipping through the net. He
kept catching visions of strange sights out of the corner of
his eye. Bone. Bare bone in the bar’s plate glass window.
Horn, maybe. But when he looked, it was just a trick of
light. Nonetheless, the Wiggle Room didn’t feel right, like
it was a set for a ﬁlm about a bar and not the actual Wiggle
Room that he knew.
He didn’t like this feeling of dread, and worse, he was
starting to dither at his clients, really stretching their patience with him. Boy King still hadn’t seen Lara, so he took
a break from reading, grabbed his box, and skirted to the
back of the bar where the games were, just in case she had
entered while he was absorbed with cards. That’s where
Lara would be hanging out if she were here. She wasn’t
there, but Boy King was relieved to ﬁnd Garbus, a curlyhaired man who always reminded Boy King of a somber
Harpo Marx. Garbus was shooting darts with a friend,
and Boy King gave him a short wave. Garbus looked away,
pretending to be absorbed in the game.
“Garbus,” Boy King said, sliding on to the bar stool
across from him. He placed his box on his lap.
No response.
“Have you seen Lara?”
Garbus and Boy King had drunk together a few times,
or rather, they’d hung out with Lara while she and her
friends poured pitchers. Boy King didn’t really know anything about him, now that he thought about it. The two
men were simply part of the wider circle that Lara drew
when she wanted to slum, drink hard, shoot pool, throw

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

235

darts, raise hell. Boy King wouldn’t call him a friend, and
judging by his expression, the angry set of his jaw, Garbus
didn’t want anything at all to do with Boy King. He shot
his darts and closed out the eighteens, ignoring Boy King
through the next two rounds, until ﬁnally he said, “You’re
the crazy fuck that pissed off the Ellings at Dona Mia’s.”
The man shooting darts with Garbus didn’t look at Boy
King, but Boy King could tell he had the guy’s full attention.
“I didn’t mean to,” Boy King said. “Pretty high strung,
that couple.”
“I heard you got your nose broken,” he said, ﬁnally
looking at Boy King, at his nose, his eyes.
Boy King nodded back at him. “And now I’m in trouble,” he whispered. “Actually.”
Garbus glanced from the cardboard box to Boy King’s
beaten face, and then shot his buddy a look to say, I need a
minute, then turned back to Boy King and said, “You bet
you’re in trouble. You have the cops after you.” It wasn’t a
question.
“I do?”
“Didn’t know that?” Garbus said. “The Ellings want
you put away.”
“Oh, that’s rich,” Boy King sneered. “Jesus, they had it
coming. Besides, I didn’t do—”
“ ‘Had it coming’?” Garbus said, eyebrows arching.
Screaming tires and a sudden burst of piercing, reﬂected sunlight from outside distracted both of them. A
near-accident ended in car honks and swearing, and a
burst of engines carried two cars in opposite directions.
“ ‘Had it coming’?” Garbus repeated, laughing coldly.
“How can you say that? I mean, the Ellings are, like, the

236

Barth Anderson

two most sympathetic people in America. They’re icons.
Their girl—their daughter’s been missing for years.” He
rubbed his curly head and then sipped his beer. “What the
hell did you say to them?”
Conversation was hard for some reason. The words in
his head were getting logjammed, weren’t coming out
cleanly. This had been happening in the last few years, but
three bottles of booze in the last few days made his
thoughts soggy and slower than usual. He wanted to tell
Garbus that it was always more complicated, that the people you think of as heroes are really just hopeless, and desperation could make a villain of anyone, anyway. These
were the thoughts in his head, but what came out was,
“They wanted truth, so I told them a little.”
Garbus obviously knew Boy King’s reputation through
Lara. For the ﬁrst time, he looked at Boy King like he was
something other than a dirty homeless guy. “They wanted
some psychic information, eh? What did you tell them?”
Everyone wants a peek, thought Boy King. Everyone’s
trapped inside and wants a peek over the wall. “If I tell
you, will you help me?”
Garbus looked angry ﬂeetingly, then a sardonic smile
spread over his mouth. “Okay. If I can.”
Boy King tucked the cardboard box under his chin and
related the entire story, exactly as he saw it. The girl Tanya,
her new name, and the parents’ helplessness. He wondered
if Garbus believed him, but ultimately, he didn’t care. Belief was irrelevant. He even related the ﬁght, how Papa
Elling broke his nose and the chaos that erupted out of it.
“I don’t know why that busboy attacked me,” Boy King
said. “Just looking for an excuse to throw a punch, I
guess.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

237

But Garbus was still hanging on to the description of
what Boy King had seen when the Ellings ﬁrst approached
him. The girl. Just looking at him, Boy King could tell that
everyone in America wanted to know what he knew now.
The girl and where she was.
But then Garbus’s expression soured and he went back
to looking at a dirty homeless guy. “You told them all that?
Jesus, you’re cold,” Garbus said, staring at him with his
hands behind his head. “Haven’t you been following that
story? Don’t you know what those people went through? I
mean, you’re kind of a bastard, you know?”
“But I didn’t mean to hurt their feelings,” Boy King
said. “Garbus, look.” He was beginning to feel that even
tracking down Lara was going to take too much time.
“Can you help me get out of town?”
Garbus appeared aggrieved as he put one hand on his
hip. “You want me to help you run from the cops?”
“No. I mean, I didn’t even know about that. I need— I
mean, you can’t possibly know what I’m up against,” said
Boy King. “I mean, if I told you?” He started laughing.
What little peek over the wall could he give this man that
wouldn’t turn him off like a light? “Someone wants me
dead. Yeah. Yeah, it might be Papa Elling now that I think
of it. But I don’t know.”
Garbus sighed and ﬁnished off his beer with the air of a
banker weighing a loan. He took out his cell phone and
thumbed through the index, ﬁnally nodding and looking at
Boy King. “Look, I have a farmer friend who manages a
bed-and-breakfast outside of town. He comes in to
Minneapolis and drinks on the weekends down at Leaning
Tower. I can call him. He might be willing to give you a lift
out of town,” Garbus said.

238

Barth Anderson

Boy King shook his head and shut his eyes in gratitude.
“Yes, please. You have no idea how much that would
mean to me. Thanks, Garbus. Thank you.”
“No worries,” he said and punched in the number,
stepping away from Boy King.
Boy King felt like his body was going to explode. He
was grateful for the ride out of town, but it was a fall-back
plan at best. He couldn’t wait all night long for the B&B
farmer to come and pick him up. On top of everything, the
cops were after him. Jesus. He’d have to keep looking for a
ride somewhere, anywhere. Maybe he could pry Lara’s address out of Garbus or get him to call her. Maybe she’d
show up and help him.
Garbus turned back to him and said, “You’re in luck.”
“Oh yeah?”
“He’s been down at the Hard Rock. He says he can
swing by and pick you up as soon as he ﬁnishes his vegan
special.” Garbus snapped the cell shut. “How ’bout that?”
Boy King sighed in gratitude. “Garbus, I can’t believe
it,” he said. “How can I thank you?”
He looked down at Boy King’s cards, which he held in
his hand the way Garbus was holding his cell phone.
“How about a reading before you go?”
Boy King passingly thought it odd that just a moment
ago Garbus had wanted nothing to do with him and now
he was asking for a reading. But he shufﬂed the cards, glad
he was on his way out of town. “Is there anything you
want to ask the cards about? Romance? Fortune?”
Garbus stared at him pointedly. “No.”
Boy King cut the deck and then started tossing cards.
He stopped with just two face up on the table—The
Magician and The Fool.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

239

“Looks heavy,” Garbus said, watching him.
Boy King stared at them. The Magician and The Fool
stared at Boy King. Finally, Boy King said, “It’s the whole
deck in two cards. Right there, in a basic, binary equation.
Fool equals zero. Magician is one. Everything is ones and
zeroes, and the whole world is here, in two cards. Quick,
how many cards in a standard pack of playing cards?”
“Huh?”
“How many cards in a regular deck?” said Boy King,
agitated, not able to speak fast enough.
“Fifty—”
“Wrong! Fifty-three. Everyone forgets the Joker. That
is, The Fool. That is, the zero is never counted. See? So it is
with Lemuria, or Remuria. Or Remoria. The lost city of
Remus. The only thing that could appease Remus and his
ghosts, the lemures, was a return to the lost city he created
and named for himself. It was called Remuria or Lemuria,
you see? Weisman and Versnal most notably have talked
about the possibility of this city being located on the
Aventine and archaeology backs them up. Now, as John C.
Miles once wrote in ‘Lemuria: A Roman or American
Cult?’ there’s ample evidence of Remus and his lemures’ efforts to get back to their forgotten city. Take the real animals called lemurs, which Linnaeus named back in 1783
for the homeless, wide-eyed, shrieking ghosts of Roman
mythology. Right? Linnaeus was a member of the Etruscan
Discipline and was the ﬁrst to purport the theory among
tyros that lemurs are not primates. Indeed, they are not
even ‘real’ as we think of ‘real.’ Lemurs are ghosts, too,
agents of Remus, his spies, looking for doorways back into
his lost city of Remuria. They now span the globe watching with their wide, shocked eyes the parade of humans

240

Barth Anderson

and seeking to identify human souls on behalf of Remus,
souls brave enough to ﬁnd the pathway into their master’s
lost city.”
Garbus reached into his shirt pocket, tapped out a cigarette, and offered one to Boy King.
“God, yes,” Boy King said and placed it between his
lips without lighting it.
“Keep talking,” Garbus said, cigarette bobbing as he
spoke.
“It’s all here,” Boy King said, tapping those two cards,
again and again as he spoke, the words spilling out of him
with impossible, tumbling speed. “The game for which
tarot was created was called trionﬁ—that is, ‘triumphs.’
Remus’s death and the ritual it inspired were commemorated with the game. Each hand in trionﬁ, taken with a ‘triumph card,’ was a reminder of the triumphator’s approach
to the templum, the Temple, and his petition of the god
over the exposed liver of the sacriﬁcial bull. One cannot
separate the rite from the myth, the game from the rite, the
cards from the occult. Because it’s all here like a little city.
These two cards might as well be The World card. The
brothers. The parade. The evocation of the crime. The
question that Romulus needed to know, which was Am I
forgiven for what I did to my brother?” Boy King covered
his mouth. He swallowed a laugh, then realized it was
a sob. He looked at Garbus, then dropped his hand and
smiled.
“Sounds like you have a lot to say, John,” Garbus said.
Boy King put his ﬁnger on The Magician’s chest. Then
he stopped. He looked up at Garbus and said, “What did
you call me?”
“John,” Garbus said, grinning at him. “John C. Miles.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

241

Who was this? Was Garbus in the real world? How did
he know that name?
Boy King didn’t want to ﬁnd out. He grabbed his cardboard box and darted for the front door. He could hear
Garbus scrambling after him. Boy King turned over a bar
stool behind him to block Garbus’s way and saw, at the
front of the bar, three police ofﬁcers and a fourth man in a
black suit with a massive white head and dark sunglasses.
That fucker, Boy King thought. Garbus called the cops
on me!
With the front door blocked, he skidded to a stop and
changed directions, Garbus leaping over the bar stool behind him. Boy King barreled through the swinging doors
into the kitchen, hoping to ﬁnd a ﬁre exit back there.
“We got him, we got him!” an ofﬁcer shouted. “Everyone stand back.”
It was a tight ﬁt in the kitchen, so he couldn’t help but
bash into Elaine and Sarah, the two line cooks on duty, as
he shouted for them to get out of the way. Then, having
forced them back from the deep fryer, he opened the cardboard box and upended the little paintings into the boiling oil.
“Boy King! No!” Sarah yelled.
Elaine hurled herself back against the refrigerator.
“Stop!”
There was a great heave of bubbling oil as the contents
of the fryer crested and boiled over onto the griddle. As the
oil hit the hot surface, a plume of oily black smoke billowed into the little kitchen.
Elaine and Sarah wormed past him to get out of the
kitchen. He stood there, staring. There was no way out.
He had imagined a back door, a sprint down an alley, and

242

Barth Anderson

freedom. Instead, the police easily sealed off his escape and
hauled him out of the kitchen, with Sarah and Elaine
screaming about the boiling grease everywhere and the
bald one-eyed man glaring at Boy King in abject hatred.
“Visconti,” Boy King said.
“That wasn’t the deck!” Visconti screamed into Boy
King’s face as the police dragged him out of the bar. “Tell
me that wasn’t the deck!”
Garbus shouted from somewhere in the bar, “Is that
John C. Miles? Was I right? Is there a reward?”
“John C. Miles, you’re under arrest,” one of the police
ofﬁcers was saying as they grabbed him by belt and shirt
and hauled him out of the kitchen and the Wiggle Room.
“You’re being arrested for disturbing the peace. Do you
understand me, Mr. Miles?”
Boy King’s mind reeled. “Why are you calling me
that?” he shouted, twisting to look the ofﬁcer in the eye.
“Why are you calling me by that name?”
“You’re John C. Miles. We have a full dossier on you,”
the ofﬁcer said.
“You have the wrong man,” Boy King shouted. “I’m
not! I’m not that man!”
“You destroyed it,” Visconti kept shouting, screaming
behind Boy King as the ofﬁcer herded him out into the sunlight. “That’s the end? You tossed it into a goddamned
deep fryer? That’s how it all ends?”
A squad car was parked with two wheels on the curb,
perpendicular to the bar’s front door. As they emerged
from the Wiggle Room, the ofﬁcer pushed Boy King
against the back door and frisked him. A crowd had already formed in a ring around the squad car, and while he
was read his rights, Boy King looked across the car’s roof

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

243

and saw a man in a black jacket with wiry hair, herringbone trousers, and shiny black cop shoes. He wore a sarcastic grin, and he nodded a hello when Boy King saw him.
“You were blowing smoke at me,” the man said across
the car roof to Boy King, arching his thick eyebrows, “that
time in Trudy’s.”
Trudy’s? thought Boy King. That was the name of his
favorite bar in Austin, back in the old days when he hung
out there with Jer—
Who was this man?
“It’s not as amazing as it looks,” the wiry-haired fellow
said. He wiped his brow. His face was slick with perspiration. “Twelve years for you was just a couple days’ work
for me, Miles.”
Boy King spat at him. “That’s not my name!”
“Damn animal.” Visconti came to stand by the wiryhaired man with a downward glance at Boy King’s spittle
on the ground. He lifted his ugly bald head and said to Boy
King, “You’ve destroyed yourself. You’re going to pay and
pay and pay, Miles.”
“That’s not me!” Boy King shouted as the ofﬁcer put a
hand on his head, guiding him into the squad car. “That’s
not who I am!”

17

H

e was about to ﬁnish cutting. The curved blade of
the plow opened the turf, exposed the black soil,
and dust plumed from the muscled bodies and heavy
hooves of his driving team. The long trench trailed behind
the team, circled back around the greatest of these seven
hills, ending dead ahead of him several hundred paces,
where his plow-circle had begun. He pulled back on the
reins, leaning his sweaty, sunscorched body backward, and
the two horses twisted their necks, showing their teeth to
the sky.
The muddy Tiber River ambled through the dry ﬂoodplain that was amber from drought, and a short way from
the black wound in the turf, a squad of shepherds was gathered with thick staves facing the plowman. One shepherd, as
tall as the plowman, stood forward from the gang, unarmed.

246

Barth Anderson

Both were young. Both were big, broad-shouldered and obviously related—brothers. Sunlight shafted down through
the spreading orange dust around them.
Watching this scene, Rosemont sat on the northern face
of the second highest hill, elbows on his knees. Miles appeared at his side, staring down into the wide river valley.
“What the fuck did you do?” He took in the scene but
didn’t seem surprised by what he was seeing. “How did
you make this happen?”
The lone shepherd standing apart from the rest shouted
something long and involved, and the plowman stood as if
enduring hurtful words, holding gloves in one hand in a
ﬁst upon his hip, head bowed, black hair hanging in his
eyes.
“What’s he saying?” Rosemont asked.
Miles turned his ear to the ringing voice of the shepherd. “So that’s Etruscan. Sounds like Greek.” The shepherd kept gesturing back to the Aventine and making a
sweeping arc with his arm to indicate the valley or the great
circle his brother had drawn. Miles quoted, as if translating
the shepherd’s words, “ ‘Illium’s maidens ﬂed their bowers / Soldiers unmann’d armor’d towers / Fences fell and so
did doors / Ulysses walk’d through walls like yours.’ ”
Rosemont looked at Miles. “That’s pretty. Who’s that?”
“A contemporary of Jonson’s and Shakespeare’s,” said
Miles. “Lionel Crane’s Remo et Romolo. He knew.”
The plowman was now waving his work gloves at the
shepherd and shouting back, dismissive and patronizing.
He looked past the shepherd at the congregation listening,
waved at those shepherds too, shooing them away.
“Romulus is the one inside the circle, right?” said
Rosemont.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

247

“Right,” Miles said, watching.
“He’s going to kill Remus? The shepherd?”
Miles nodded. “That’s the story.”
“Do you know what they’re arguing about?”
“Remus is about to jump across the trench in an attempt to ruin Romulus’s magic,” Miles said.
“Why?”
“No one’s sure about why.”
The plowman, his body grimy from the dirt churned up
by his team, began walking back along the trench seemingly to inspect his work. The shepherd stalked him.
“It doesn’t make sense why,” Miles said. “They were
both trained in the Etruscan Discipline, which back then
was keyed on the art of city building—creating gates, laying down streets, and raising walls. Jumping this circle?
After the Trojan Diaspora? It would have been like a
Catholic knocking over a Vatican cross on Easter Sunday.
This is the climax of a ﬁve-hundred-year-old quest for
Romulus and Remus’s sect of the Etruscans,” Miles said,
letting his gaze travel across the forests and slopes of this
terrain, the Eternal City to be. “They wanted to resurrect
Troy here and needed this circle, this wall to do it.”
The brother within the circle turned away and began
walking back toward his plow team. The brother without
kept right after him, the trench dividing them as if a wall
already separated them. Rosemont and Miles watched them
go back and forth like this several times, with the shepherd
shouting and the plowman ignoring him.
Miles said, “This is fucking nuts. How did we get here,
Rosemont? What is happening?”
Rosemont said, “I wanted us out of that Chi-Chi’s. I
wanted the deck, and I wanted you. So I got us out.”

248

Barth Anderson

Miles frowned. “You wanted the deck?”
Rosemont lifted his hand. He was holding ﬁfteen
normal-looking cards. Turning them over, they could see
the broiling images on each one, and Miles jerked his head
away.
“Ach,” he said. “Turn them over. Hide them.” When
Rosemont did, Miles looked back and said, “You took
them? You changed them?” He looked hard at Rosemont.
“What in the name of fuck are you?”
Rosemont said, “I don’t know how I did it. I didn’t try.”
“The idea was to show it to Marni,” Miles said. “The
idea was to show an unbroken thread between Wilusija,
Rome, and us, and claim the deck as part of that. It’s not
meant for just one person.”
The exchange at the bottom of the hill was heating up.
Now the shepherd was lying prostrate before his brother,
pretending to worship him. Then he ﬂipped up his wolfskin kilt and bared his ass, crawling in front of the plowman on all fours, barking, braying like a donkey, and
making loud farting noises along the trench. The plowman
stood stock still, his shoulders back and his chest heaving a
little in anger, watching his brother mock him. Finally,
Remus stood and seemed to implore his brother to jump
across. He was cajoling him, but it seemed sincere too, as if
he honestly wanted his brother to break his own spell and
join him outside the circle.
“Remus didn’t want a city,” Rosemont said.
Miles looked at him. “Don’t think so? What did he
want?”
Rosemont shook his head. “Freedom from all that. He
wants his bro to want that too.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

249

Romulus unclasped a weapon from his belt that could
have been either a spade or a sword, walked briskly to the
unplowed section of the circle, held up the tool, spoke to it,
and then ran dragging it in the dirt, shouting the same
short, rhythmic sentence over and over. When he reached
the beginning of his circle, he completed it with a ﬂick of
the blade in such a clear gesture of contempt that Rosemont
and Miles both chuckled.
But as he swaggered back to face his brother, something
appeared behind Romulus inside the circle.
“What is that?” said Miles, standing.
Rosemont stood too. “People.”
A moment later, Remus was threatening to jump across
the circle and Romulus was sarcastically welcoming him.
Neither brother seemed to see the three ﬁgures in sandcolored desert robes behind Romulus.
“Maybe they aren’t really there,” said Rosemont.
“What in the world?” said Miles, voice breaking. “Did
Romulus conjure them?”
Remus leapt across the trench and came to stand before
his brother. Romulus staggered back as if struck. He
dropped the spade and turned away from his brother’s
consoling hand, staring at the trench with back straight,
his head in his hands, like a man watching trains collide.
Remus walked up to the trench and, yelling to his mates,
gestured for them to come forward, come across, enter the
impotent circle. As Remus raised his left arm to them,
Romulus spun and snatched up the spade behind Remus’s
back, then plunged it with one great, two-handed thrust
into Remus’s ribs, high under his arm. Blood spurted onto
Romulus’s forearms as he forced his brother down with the

250

Barth Anderson

tool jammed in his body, down onto one knee, and then to
his right side and back.
Romulus stood and ﬂicked the tool toward the earth,
like a gardener ﬂipping mud off the blade of his trowel.
Then, the three robed ﬁgures ran toward the Aventine.
“He’s gone,” said Rosemont. He meant it literally.
Remus was gone, nowhere to be seen in the circle. No body.
No blood.
“Shit,” Miles said. “What the hell are they?”
Rosemont turned over one of the cards and tried to recreate the same frame of mind he’d used to steal the deck
in the ﬁrst place. He tested the earth with the balls of his
toes and was almost knocked backward at the force he felt.
Miles instinctively steadied him. “You got any ideas?
Want to try to talk our way out of this?”
Rosemont held his friend’s arm and saw that the robed
hunters had reached the bottom of this hill. These hills
were enormous, but the beings were running in a shifting,
dissolving run, like Priscilla had, covering ground at a
shocking clip.
I want out. I want the deck. I want Miles. And this
time, I want out of Rome altogether.

Stale beer, a smoky mesquite grill smell from Ruby’s down
the street, stiﬂing cologne in tarrying auras, long-neck bottles on the picnic tables, and the stars at night really are
big and bright, high over bent magnolia trees and a growling Texas bar. Rosemont knew this place like he knew
how to tie his shoes, a mindless, habitual knowing. He felt
that if he turned the corner around this bar that the older
tarot reader would have already ordered a pitcher, would

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

251

be grinning at him over it, like a crazed monkey with a
mane of ringlets, lording over his golden idol, pouring
Rosemont another glass as the younger reader tried lamely
to beg off, both of them secure in the knowledge that neither was going anywhere.
Rosemont turned the corner, where the eclectic jukebox
sat in an awkward choke point, and there they were. They
were there, like two chess players leaning over an imaginary
board. They’d spent the whole day talking between bouts of
tarot readings at the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow, and now they’d
spend the night unhinged from their own minds, ranting
and laughing and quarreling, as if the words couldn’t come
out fast enough, as if they’d spent the previous eighteen
years waiting for the arguments and beer to begin.
Students sporting more tattoos than Rosemont had
ever seen as a young man milled through the bar. Day-Glo
ﬁngerpolish on nails. Magenta hair. So very Austin. It
seemed fresh and so long ago.
An older Miles appeared at his side, staring at themselves across Trudy’s. “They look so innocent. Let’s kill
them now and put them out of our misery.”
A moment later, a man in a dark suit jacket with a tight
black T-shirt underneath and light herringbone trousers
was sidling up to Miles. Rosemont snickered as Miles gave
him a complete head-to-toe, from his shiny cop shoes to
his wirehair terrier curls.
The man said to Miles, “Who are you?”
Miles glared down at the stocky little man with heavy
eyebrows. “I’m Hillary Clinton. Who are you?”
“Hillary, I’m Special Agent Erturk Mehmet,” said the
man. “And I know you don’t belong here, because I don’t
belong here.”

252

Barth Anderson

Rosemont started as if to run—but run where? He
looked at Miles.
“We’re tourists,” Miles said.
“Me, I’m ﬂat on my back in a hospital that has no name
with an FBI hypnotist whispering sweet nothings in my
ear,” said Special Agent Mehmet. “I’m looking for someone. A homeless man. He doesn’t belong here, either, but I
don’t know who he is.” He turned his head as if catching a
far-off tune, and his gaze lifted inexplicably to the ceiling.
“Yeah? We just got here, but I’ll keep my eyes peeled,”
Miles said. “What’s he look like?”
The special agent looked back at the two men standing
before him. “He looks like you. Either one of you.”
Mehmet scanned both their faces, back and forth. “You
two brothers?”
“We used to get that a lot,” Rosemont said.
“Either of you been to Minneapolis?”
Miles shivered. “Hell, no.”
“Let me ask you something,” Mehmet said. He
touched his chest, searching his breast pocket, and swore.
“Oh, right. My notebook’s back with me in the black ops
hospital.” His hand went to his forehead, rubbed it dejectedly. “Ibotenic acid and muscimol are coursing nicely
now.” His thick eyebrows met. He was sweating profusely,
Rosemont suddenly realized. “But it makes it hard to remember where and when I am. Listen. Listen up. I need
help with two words.”
Miles laughed. “What do you mean? Help with
words?”
“ ‘Meschasipi.’ ” He bit his lip and shook his head.
“No? Do you know that word? Meh. Shah. Sippy. Something like that?”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

253

Rosemont said he didn’t know what it was and turned
away. Mehmet made him nervous.
But Miles continued to laugh. Across the bar, their
younger counterparts were arguing loudly, slashing the
air in front of each other’s faces with hands and pointed
ﬁngers.
“Might be a city. A whole lot of people I know are
headed there, looking for the homeless man I was telling
you about. I want to join them but I don’t know what it is,”
Mehmet said, wiping his brow with the ﬂat of his hand.
At that moment, the jukebox went silent and Rosemont
shouted into the suddenly quiet bar, “I thought you said
the homeless man was here!” “Cherub” by the Butthole
Surfers had ended. Rosemont lowered his voice and repeated himself.
“No one knows where he is.” Mehmet looked about,
suspiciously, then said, “What about this? I’m not sure
how the vowels land in this name. Khnemu? Khnum? Ring
a bell?”
Hank Williams ﬁlled the stunned silence with “I’m a
Long Gone Daddy.” After a pause, Miles decided to laugh
some more.
“Is that a city, too?” Rosemont asked coldly, willing
himself not to be frightened of this man.
“No.” Mehmet stopped wiping his brow and seemed
more conﬁdent being able to speak about Khnum. “It’s the
name of a foreign intelligence agency. I’ve been tracking its
movement and lending them support. Here.” He ﬂattened
his hands, palms down, and looked around the bar. “On
this level.”
“You’re helping them?” Miles stopped laughing but
kept his smile nice and friendly. “What are they after?”

254

Barth Anderson

“Something pharmacological, I think,” Mehmet said.
“Must be potent. The full twenty-three expressions allow
one to create doppelgängers, which is what Ehirllimbal sent
back to the States, of course, but the intervening expressions work up to that.” He nodded signiﬁcantly and cast
his skittish gaze about the room again. “You two know all
about that.”
“The fuck are you talking about?” Rosemont said.
“You tell me. A new way to astral project?” Mehmet
mused. “It’d explain a lot. Something beyond the twentythird expression? I can’t even imagine what’s at stake here,
or what everyone is looking for, but I’m sure the Bureau
knows.” His beady eyes narrowed even further and, amiably, he hit Rosemont with the back of his hand. “Now
what is that? I’ve been seeing that for a while now.” He
pointed out the window.
Rosemont turned and saw the smooth, lion-colored
fabric of a desert robe, just as it disappeared from view.
The wall of the bar, there, seemed to ripple as the thing
outside walked by, heading toward the door.
Before he could stop himself, Rosemont had the Watts
deck cradled in his palm.
Miles and Special Agent Mehmet glanced down to see
what Rosemont was holding.
“What’s the matter?” hissed Miles, looking up into
Rosemont’s face.
Mehmet, too, looked up from Rosemont’s hand to his
eyes, and then he stepped backward, looking back at the
deck. He reached beneath his jacket for a gun, perhaps,
that was usually there. He swore and looked back at the
deck. “That’s it, isn’t it? An expression. You have it!”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

255

No more. No more! Rosemont recoiled from Mehmet.
Let’s go!
The air in the bar felt cooked, loaded, like too much
blood pumping in a single vein as Miles and Rosemont
stepped away.
“It’s you!”

“Fall apart in the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow.” A taped woman’s
voice wove through the makeshift fairgrounds, cottonwoods
nodding overhead. “In the Circus. In the Circus. In the
Circus of Inﬁnite Wow.” And then reverb, with the cooing
feminine voice going. “Wowowowowowowowowowow.”
Acid carnival music in three-quarter time carried sinister whimsy among the stalls of tattooed strongmen and
sword swallowers, pony girls in leather skin suits carrying
circus-goers by cart to the main stage where Ed Hall was
bashing out a set with Fire Goddesses squirting lit jets of
lighter ﬂuid on bare breasts, well-muscled giants in skimpy
short-shorts and kitty costumes giving piggyback rides,
I-Can-Eat-Anything Man (“Because I can eat anything,
man”), Jigsaw the Human Contortionist, the Cutter
Sisters, Orgasma the Dirty Mentalist—and into this memory came Rosemont and Miles.
“It’s more colorful than I remember it,” Miles said,
reading the main banner.
“I was seventeen,” Rosemont was saying. “It was all so
new to me after Racine.”
They walked over to the tarot tent together, and
Rosemont wondered if they were really safe here. He didn’t
want trouble. He didn’t want any more menacing surreality.

256

Barth Anderson

Couldn’t they just be in this Austin and explore it without
worrying about being followed, hunted, chased? “I want
to get rid of the Watts deck,” he said.
“Now you don’t want it,” Miles said. “Now you want
to throw it in a river.”
“No, I just—” Rosemont stopped. He did want to
throw it in a river. “It’s a relief just to be away from Rome.”
Miles took the cards and said, “You know what a templum is?”
“No.”
“It’s a safe piece of territory from which to view the
other world or work the greater work. In there,” he said,
pointing to the tarot tent. “That’s a templum. I know. I
drew it before we ever raised the tent.”
Rosemont followed. “You drew it back then?”
He shrugged. “I must have known what I was doing,”
he said. “It’s strong. I can feel it now. Maybe why you
were able to get a foothold, too, and bring us here. Come
with me.”
In the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow, the two tarot readers had
been bland geraniums among jungle orchids. Even with
Miles’s trademark wrestling mask, tarot readings simply
slowed the pace of the Inﬁnite Wow down to an unsexy
halt compared to the raging mayhem of, say, the crosscountry jugglers or the Mighty Twelve (boxing midgets),
but it turned out that lots of circus-goers appreciated the
tarot readers’ tent as a brief retreat from the Inﬁnite Wow’s
symphony of bodily weirdness. It was always full, with
young folks lounging and drinking Shiners on folding
chairs watching Miles read.
Miles opened the tent ﬂap and winced as he looked at
himself. “Yeeg. What a grisly sight.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

257

But Rosemont grinned. When he ﬁrst met Miles he was
seventeen and ripe for exactly the brand of strange that
Inﬁnite Wow was cranking out. Rosemont had fallen in
love with John C. Miles the moment he watched him read
cards for the ﬁrst time, that love one feels when another’s
strangeness and oddity feels like a puzzle piece snapping
into place. Lucha libre mask over his face, hands folded
calmly, a little candle lighting the hot tent, young Miles
was leaning across his card table and jabbing his index ﬁnger at a farm boy wearing a Longhorns cap.
“Thirteen days!” Miles in Mexican wrestling mask was
shouting at him. “That’s how long you have to get things
right with your sister! After that, things are going to explode like a water balloon right in the kisser. Full of lighter
ﬂuid. While you’re smoking. So no lit cigarettes and don’t
come crying to me when your face melts right off your
head. Next.”
Rosemont recalled the ﬁrst time he got a reading like
this from Miles. He’d been hired by the Circus to be the
straight reader because Miles was scaring lots of money
away. Young Rosemont thought Miles’s reading style was
hysterical, which earned him points with Miles, but it was
unnerving too. So was seeing Miles’s tarot deck. Scrawled
over with notes, written in ballpoint. Rosemont simply
couldn’t get his brain around it. “You write on your tarot
decks?”
“Sure.” The red wrestling mask had faced him. “But
only important shit,” Miles said, mouth slightly mufﬂed
behind the lamprey eel mouth of the mask. “It’s not like
I’m putting phone numbers on my cards, for chrissakes.”
Older Miles and Rosemont stood inside the candlelit
tent for a moment, listening to the younger Miles read, and

258

Barth Anderson

then Miles gestured for Rosemont to follow him, circling
around to the back of the big tent.
“The Page of Swords is a trap. He’s a vicious little thing
and you’ll have to chew your leg off to get away so don’t
play around—hey, you two clowns wanna sit down?”
younger Miles said, looking up from his spread. “I’m in
the middle of surgery, okay?”
“Shut your cakehole, jackass,” said Miles to himself.
The lucha libre mask stayed aimed at them for a second
more as they backed into the shadows of the tent, and then
younger Miles continued. “So that’s The Page. Let’s look at
The Four of Testicles.”
In the back of the tent Miles pulled up piles of S&M
gear until he found, on the ground, a blue spray-painted
square, like something a utility company might draw on
the ground for digging. “There it is. Put the cards right
there.”
Rosemont looked back at the younger Miles. “Won’t
someone ﬁnd it?”
“Nah. Not exactly Remus getting ready for the auspices, but it’ll do,” Miles said. “Just put it there and I’ll
draw another templum somewhere else and retrieve it.”
Rosemont set the cards down in the middle of the blue
square and instantly, the deck vanished. He was almost relieved to see the cards disappear.
“What are they?” Rosemont whispered, looking down
at the empty square. “What did I steal?”
Miles’s eyes narrowed in wonder. “You still don’t
know.”
“How in the world would I know, Miles? How in the
world would I understand? I get a letter in the middle of
the night, and I follow it back to the sender, and, yes, I un-

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

259

derstand that I was the one who accepted the ticket, I get
that. But it doesn’t help explain what the Watts deck is or
who these people are who are obsessed with it. Or why I
just walked from the Aventine to Trudy’s with a whackedout urban mythologist. You see?”
“Hey, asshole,” younger Miles shouted from the main
room of the tent. “Go have your pathetic mental breakdown
somewhere else!”
“Nobody knows, Rosemont. None of them know,”
Miles said, lifting the tent ﬂap for Rosemont and then
ducking out after. “They want it to be something, but they
don’t know what it is.”
“Visconti seems to know. He seems to have some
control,” Rosemont said. He could smell the mutton that
On the Lamb caterers always brought in. “You have any
money?”
“No,” Miles groused, his posture straightening as he
smelled the roasting mutton. “See. This is my theory about
you and Visconti. But especially you because I know you.
What you just said is wrong. Control and knowing aren’t
the same thing. I think we have a cultural memory of a
time when logic did not prevail, when instinct and magic
ruled and we routinely bumped up against chaos without it
destroying our minds. We rightly call that chaos madness
now, but once, madness was an accepted mechanism in human thinking. It was necessary. And I think something like
the Watts deck does not exist without it.”
“Madness,” Rosemont repeated, skeptical and dismissive. “Maybe.”
“By our standards, madness, yes. Schizophrenia. Hallucinations. Multiple personalities.”
Miles had never liked the way Rosemont contradicted

260

Barth Anderson

him—ﬂat out, blunt. Rosemont liked getting Miles’s goat.
“Bullshit.”
“Well, you explain what just happened! Go on. Explain
it, you ridiculous motherfucker. Explain how you got
here.”
Rosemont had been settling into their old rhythm, and
he was arguing from his no-bullshit default mode, as if he
hadn’t just traversed the globe and across time in a heartbeat. “I can’t.”
“That’s right, you can’t, because you need control to explain anything,” Miles went on. “You’re a harnessed horse.
You’re a good little tool of Romulus and George Bush and
the Democrats and the Ford Motor Company. You trust
control more than your own eyes.”
Rosemont was incredulous. “Are you calling me a control freak?”
Miles laughed raucously, crowlike.
“What’s so fucking funny?”
“You. You and your perfect hair and your perfect little
work boots,” Miles shouted, “and you just stole,” he
shouted some more, slapping the table, “the Holy Grail.
You are the biggest control freak I have ever known in my
life. Why? Why did you steal the deck?”
Rosemont couldn’t answer him, because he sensed his
friend was right. He didn’t like to believe it about himself.
He liked thinking that he was a libertine, the kind of fellow
who could screw a priest and feel okay about it afterward.
But he knew Miles was right, and he knew what Miles
would say about his motive. His seduction of Aurelio
wasn’t done out of a love for freedom or a respect for the
liberty in the man. He wanted to control the situation,
wanted to guide the older fellow down the street, into bed,

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

261

and say he did it wantonly. Rosemont didn’t twirl his mustachios and pounce on the poor man. He did it without
thinking, like grabbing a smoke or following his stomach
to a restaurant, except that want inside him, that need to
fulﬁll, commit, control, was frightening.
Rosemont recalled long ago, how, after Miles had
watched Rosemont read cards for a big-haired Dallas lady
at the Inﬁnite Wow, Miles had said, “You’re too smooth
for your own good.” Hearing it was like a concussion for
Rosemont—it was one of the truest things anyone had ever
said about him. And it remained true. Readings, explanations, artifact analyses, lectures, historical reports, articles,
truths, lies, all could spill out of him faster than thought—
so fast, sometimes, that he would later wonder where all
the right words had come from. Standing in the Chi-Chi’s
of the Damned, when he realized that the Watts deck was
as real as the Guelph analysis said it was, Rosemont had
coveted it—so when he’d turned and faced the room, ready
to tell them what he thought about the deck, the words
were already ﬂowing. He had taken control of that room
without knowing it, without planning it. He just did it and
he didn’t know why.
There had been a day when Rosemont proved to himself that he was this way, a controller—though he’d
thought of it as something playful, challenging, and freeing
of his hungers. That day with the funhouse mirrors when
he’d shown Miles who he was. That day that a duel of bodies, hearts, and selves began, which had never ended, which
still clashed and parried, clashed and parried.
“We could be brothers,” Miles had said, pulling
Rosemont close and looking at themselves in a mirror, side
by side.

262

Barth Anderson

A blue balloon had levitated to the peaked roof of the
funhouse tent, and young Rosemont watched its reﬂection
slither up the funhouse mirror.
Rosemont’s shoe-polish black hair and clean-shaven
face had been oddly matched by the harder, scrufﬁer version of himself in Miles. We could be brothers. But the way
Miles said it, it was like a hint, a proposal. Was Miles
really coming on to him? Three swallows darted in the air
around the blue balloon, and Rosemont pushed Miles
away playfully, but didn’t know why, except it just felt like
too much all of a sudden, after days and days of drinking,
throwing cards, drinking, and locked up in conversation
with Miles over drinks, and some more drinking. But before the break of contact, there was a tangy recognition of
skin and muscle ﬁnding its own and wanting more, and
Rosemont looked back at Miles, the moment stretching
out and out and all the days of schoolboy kidding around,
the strategies of getting close to each other in roughhouse
intimacy, of smear-the-queer and swimming pool chicken
ﬁghts, which Rosemont played with a smirking selfknowing, even at a very young age, now ﬁlled him with
stage fright, looking at Miles and the shape of his delicate
chin. Because behind all of John C. Miles’s veils—brash
Texan, fast-talking bullshitter, leaping, unrestrained intellect, mad fortune-teller—was a disorienting heaviness.
Rosemont hadn’t felt it in his friend before, but Rosemont
understood it, that weight like a massive planet in the
heart, warping gravity around it, and caving reality in on
itself, because to look at Miles and see it, feel it, was to feel
it in his own self. Being pulled from Valhalla like a ﬁsh
pulled from its own silver waters. Guns and ﬂak jackets.
Thrown into his grandparents’ home. A new name for a

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

263

new school. Forced to make it all normal. And no mother
to explain it, protect him. All executed as if he didn’t matter. And he didn’t matter, never had. Not like now.
“We could be,” Rosemont hinted back, feeling raw and
exposed, seeing Miles this way.
And then it was Miles’s turn to shy and shirk, turning
his shoulder to Rosemont and mugging in the mirror.
“Hey. I’m Elastic Man.”
Most men were boys, really, even older ones, Rosemont
had learned in high school. They felt most at ease turning
innocently intimate moments into games, and most did not
care for hearts. Rosemont had expected something more
from Miles, that the young man would be a guide, not a
boy. But that weight, that dense planet turning in him—it
was a wonder Miles could stand upright, breathe, let alone
offer guidance.
Standing slightly behind him, Rosemont leaned against
Miles. “I’ve never been pinned.”
Miles grinned at him in the distorted mirror. “Bull.”
“Never. And you can’t do it, either.”
“I could pin you blindfolded.”
Rosemont shook his head, looking at their reﬂections
over Miles’s shoulder. “Sorry.”
It was an off-day. There were no guests, no customers.
Most of the Inﬁnite Wow’s performers had road tripped to
Mustang Island on the Gulf Coast to eat mushrooms. Like
that, Rosemont found his wrist in Miles’s ﬁst, pulled forward, his neck under Miles’s armpit in a headlock, and a
moment later, he found himself driving Miles forward,
onto his hip, knocking his yellow tinted glasses across the
grass, breaking the hold, straddling him, winning.
“Come on!” Miles said from beneath Rosemont,

264

Barth Anderson

laughing and trying to catch his breath. “Come on,
buddy.”
“I’m not letting you up.”
Miles put his hands on Rosemont’s thighs. “I didn’t ask
you to.”
Good thing. Rosemont couldn’t have stood if he wanted.
Their bodies were magnets snapping together, too powerful to pull apart, so Rosemont kept Miles pinned and
kissed his delicate chin, his throat. Then Rosemont raised
his head and looked at Miles, stunned to realize that the
soap opera details of whatever had hurt his friend didn’t
matter—Rosemont might as well have been looking at a
shell-shocked version of himself, looking down at Miles.
“Don’t worry, I’d never hurt you,” Rosemont told him.
“What?” Miles said, and then he laughed raucously under Rosemont. But he fell quiet. It was no use, his shining
eyes seemed to say. Rosemont had seen.
“I’d do anything,” Rosemont whispered, not sure what
his words meant but knowing they were true.
Miles’s head nodded, a little boy’s earnestness. “I know.
Me, too,” he said. “Wherever I go, you come too. Okay?”
Rosemont nodded, unbuttoning Miles’s shirt down to
his stomach. “Okay.”
Skin pressed against new skin, and their bodies crushed
together and held. One mouth fed, another gasped, a hand
slipped over it to silence the cries, and a quiet grinding
yearned for itself over and over. Might this moment stay?
Would the pain stay away? Would the world make this
much sense when it was over? A quake shot through all
that muscle and bone. A wild, looping release, and the
pleasure that came was a sad, shredding split. It wouldn’t
stay together. It was over, and this was all.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

265

“You wanted to be in control, didn’t you?” Miles was
saying in the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow, a few years older but
just as excitable. “You wanted Visconti and Transom and
me to know that there was another force to reckon with at
that bargaining table.”
That might have been true but Rosemont said, “It’s not
always a competition, Miles.”
Miles smiled slyly as if sharing a delicious joke. “It is
with you.”
Rosemont shook his head, toying with the notion that
he had once loved Miles but knowing that the truth of that
was far away. Miles never told, never told about the vicious hole that had been torn in him. So all they had was
the game. If that was love, then what was Casa Evangelista,
ﬁnding the old priest’s delicious fear of being caught and
leaning on it, commanding it? Was that love? And when
the young Professor Rosemont had drawn a cadre of students and fellow teachers, most older than himself, but all
devoted, frighteningly devoted—was that love? And when
one of his young students received a birthday card written
in his dead father’s hand and another was possessed by a
spirit that burned alchemical symbols into his skin with
match heads, when irrationally straight lines were drawn
back to Rosemont, and the shovel handles came down
one night—was that love? Professor Rosemont’s strangeness, his witchy charisma and otherliness was something
Rosemont had vowed to relinquish lying on that hospital
gurney. He’d fallen down through Mexican and Central
American highways and rows of coffee plants, only to
wind up here, back in the Circus of Inﬁnite Wow, a
stolen talisman in his pocket, John C. Miles before him,
and the old duel about what they were still clashing with

266

Barth Anderson

every word he chose or didn’t choose. “No. Not always,
John.”
Miles gave him a goofy grin, obviously didn’t know
how to respond, could not see Rosemont, now, as anything
but a gamesman who got what he wanted, and he admired
him for it.
Over Lake Travis, a storm was swooping into town
with wind and rain coming across the water. All around
them canvas ﬂapped in the sudden storm, and it was
strange not to be joining the team in breaking the circus
down. Whipping tents unstaked themselves and banners
lashed, so that Rosemont did not hear the swish of robes
or see the shift and dissolve of sand-colored fabrics.
Lightning cleaved the blackening sky in the northwest and
froze there, didn’t wisp away, but remained a glowing,
brazen streak, brandished in the dark. Hands upon wrists.
A wrist across the windpipe. Someone was being muscled
to the ground, and Rosemont was pretty sure it was him.
What followed was very, very dark. So black that Rosemont
could barely breathe. How had this happened? How had
he wound up here? With duct tape over his eyes, and a
pillowcase upon his head? Duct tape on his hands too,
and he was lying somewhere cramped, in something like
windshield-wiper ﬂuid.
There was a sound like bungee cords scraping on a
bumper, and as they snapped and lashed, the noise was
deafening.
Because I’m in a trunk, thought Rosemont. How did
this happen? Am I Miles suddenly? Back in Rome? Who is
opening the trunk of this Volvo? Is that me coming to save
myself?

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

267

A moment later he was being hauled, carried, like a sack
of ﬂour over someone’s shoulder. All he could smell was
oil. Machinery. A garage? He tried to ask what was happening but his brain was foggy and he didn’t care right
now what was happening to him enough to speak or to
complain about the hard chair in which he was placed. A
deep, echoing cavern of time hollowed him out as he
waited and waited and waited.
At last, footsteps scuffed in the room some ﬁfty or sixty
feet from him. There was a scratching and scritching too.
Nails on concrete. Animals were here in the room with
him. A moment later, the fabric covering his head was being removed.
“It’s him. We found him,” said a woman’s voice.
“Priscilla?” Rosemont said.
“Yes,” she said, close to his ear. “Are you hurt?”
His wrists were bound in place, he realized, ﬁxed to the
arms of this uncomfortable chair. “No, I don’t think so.
But I can’t move.”
“Rosemont,” she said, “you don’t have the deck with
you, do you?”
“No,” he said, and for a ﬂash, he doubted if this were
really Priscilla. “It’s safe,” he said.
“Good, good,” she said. “Because you aren’t safe. We
can’t let them yoke you—your mind won’t survive it. Now
listen. I’m not really here. I’m hunting for you along with
Marni, and Miles is searching too. He’s closer than I am
but I don’t think he’s going to get to you in time.”
Rosemont’s head turned toward Priscilla’s voice. “In
time? For what? Where am I?”
“Visconti is going to get the location of the deck out of

268

Barth Anderson

you,” she whispered. Every syllable was like a tender secret
in the vast, empty room. “He has to hurt you in order to
do it.”
Rosemont’s head turned left and right as he thrashed
against the bindings. “God, Priscilla, get me out of here!”
“Quiet, quiet,” Priscilla whispered urgently. “Stop saying my name!”
He stopped wrestling against his ties and forced himself
to calm down. “Where’s Miles? Is he coming? Is he near?”
“Yes,” said Priscilla. “But he—he’s being an idiot. So I
need to tell you something.”
Rosemont felt a resigned sob well up inside of him. He
swallowed it, assuming he was going to get the ridiculous
apology now for having sent for him, for having thrown
him into a situation for which he wasn’t prepared. “What?
What do you have to say?”
Her voice was so close he was sure her lips were inches
from his ear, his hair. “I’ve been watching you your whole
life,” she said, and it was almost a coo, “since you were a
little boy in Madison. I was your mother’s teacher, and
Thyme Goldblatt was mine.”
Thyme Goldblatt. He turned the name over in his head
like a locket. Thyme? He hadn’t thought of her in years,
hadn’t thought of Valhalla Commune, really, since the winter he was taken from it. Her name was like something
from a fairy tale—it was a fairy tale, because those days
didn’t exist in anything like reality, rubbed out as they
were by the FBI agents who came to transplant him in
Racine. As he grew up there, his grandparents had simply
iced over everything from Madison as if it had never happened, as if their own daughter hadn’t been involved. His
new name, Jeremiah Rosemont, was given to protect him

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

269

from the ﬁgures of the Madison underground movement
who, federal agents advised, might come for him. Figures
like Thyme Goldblatt.
“What happened to Anita?” Rosemont said. “Where’s
my mother?”
Priscilla whispered, “Safe. In Prague.”
“Well, good for fuckin’ her,” Rosemont said. “I take it
she’s not ﬂoating into this ﬁnal scene like Glenda in a bubble to send me back to Kansas.”
“No, Jeremiah,” Priscilla said.
“Heh. One last betrayal,” he said. He turned toward
the voice. “Why the fuck are you telling me this now? Just
to mock me? Why didn’t you tell me this years ago, if you’ve
been watching me?”
“Because we couldn’t ﬁnd you. You don’t think we
would have come and spirited you away? We had to wait
for you,” Priscilla said. “We all were waiting. Your mother
too. We’ve been waiting to see if you would shuck off that
blind normalcy that your grandparents put on you. That
gets put on just about everyone.” She paused. “It’s time for
you to realize that you don’t need cards. You don’t need
the Aventine. You don’t need anything, not even the Watts
deck. What you are—”
“Yeah, I’m special,” Rosemont said in a sneering mockery of Mr. Rogers, “just because I’m me. Get the fuck out
of here, Priscilla. Stop it! Go! If you can’t lift a goddamn
ﬁnger—”
There was a loud whump, like a body hitting the ﬂoor.
A body had hit the ﬂoor, right in front of him, Rosemont
realized, and he jerked back in his chair from it. A woman’s
voice groaned and then started sucking for air. “Oh no,”
she said.

270

Barth Anderson

It was Priscilla.
“Got her,” said a voice, and it was Kermit the Frog’s
distinctive tenor. “Was she talking to him? Was she freaking communicating? Christ, the nerve of—”
Kermit let out a shriek of laughter, and a second later,
there was a gun blast. The report echoed sharply, made it
sound like the walls were made of metal. In the smothering
quiet, the pain of the gunshot kept stabbing Rosemont’s
ears.
“Transom,” a rumbling voice said.
“Don’t,” said Transom, sharp and tense. “Just don’t.”
“That wasn’t necessary,” said the resonant, rolling
voice. “I’m going to need a greater degree of discretion
from you in the next half hour. Take the pillowcase off Mr.
Rosemont’s head.”
“You heard him. Take the pillowcase off Rosemont’s
head,” Transom snapped.
The hood came off, the duct tape was stripped from his
eyes, and Rosemont found himself face to face with Kermit
the Frog again. But now the balding fellow with the tender
green eyes was wearing a beige linen suit and his general
air of ridiculousness had been burned away. He was standing before Transom, who was dressed in that tight-ﬁtting
black Cardin jacket with his thinning hair slicked back.
Transom had a hand on Kermit’s back and Rosemont
didn’t like the look in Kermit’s green eyes. Hard. Vicious.
Now he seemed desperate.
A mechanic’s garage or a machine shop. Against one
wall, a tangle of old transmissions was stacked. On another, tools hung on pegboard. Thirteen car doors were
stacked nearby against a press or forge of some kind.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

271

Priscilla’s body lay several yards away on the concrete ﬂoor
of this wide, open space.
Like the Japanese woman he’d seen in the Roman
apartment, his forearms were lashed to long rectangular
pieces of wood, like placards. The placards’ wood was
very ﬁne—excellent hardwood. Rosemont tried to lift his
forearms, to examine the boards, but duct tape was wound
around chair arm, wood, and his arms.
Kermit and Transom were staring down at him, and
Rosemont took in his new surroundings.
“I think you’ve changed,” said the rumbling voice, and
Visconti stepped into Rosemont’s view, eclipsing Transom
and Kermit. Tall, imposing. He was far uglier too than
Rosemont had originally thought, with his pale ﬁsh eyes
and large, unﬁnished sculpture of a head that looked like a
skull hacked hastily from white chalk. He leaned down,
and on a little chain, a pendant swung forward. The
Khnum symbol. “I said, I think you’ve changed,” Visconti
said. “Everyone says so.”
“Everyone says so, huh?” Rosemont said, eyes darting
from Kermit to Transom to Visconti.
“How have you changed? Can you say?” said Visconti.
Rosemont couldn’t pretend that he didn’t know what
Visconti was talking about, but he was busy trying to control his panic, to keep himself from looking at Priscilla. After
Rome and Austin, he felt like his synapses had been rerouted
with exploding stars, and he would have been shocked if a
tyro like Visconti hadn’t been able to smell it on him.
“Why don’t you tell me about it?” Visconti said.
“I’m a quarter Italian.” Rosemont looked down at his
arms. “Hard to talk without using my hands.”

272

Barth Anderson

Transom, after a little smile to show how unimpressed
he was, reached out of Rosemont’s view and a moment
later had a hammer in his hand.
Rosemont’s cockiness fell and broke when he saw the
hammer, knowing what was about to happen.
All the while, Visconti’s absurdly round eyes were lifeless in his great rock of a skull, staring down at Rosemont.
“Tell me about the Watts deck and what happened last
year in Rome,” the Duke said. “Quickly now. Before the
others ﬁgure out where we are.”
Last year? Is he bullshitting me? A year has gone by?
Before he knew what he was doing, Rosemont’s imagination had reached out for Visconti, a friendly arm and hand
curving around the ugly man’s shoulder, and he convinced
himself that he believed what he was saying as he said, “I
haven’t changed. I’m me. I’m just me.”
Visconti’s face slackened in sympathy, disappointment.
“Oh.”
Rosemont said, “I’m a victim of circumstances that I
don’t understand. Only a few minutes went by for me.”
“I see. Well, that can happen to a tyro like you or me,”
Visconti said. “Time, time. Who can tell with time?”
Transom glanced sidelong at Kermit, who glanced sidelong at Transom. Then Transom looked at Visconti in an
angry squint.
Priscilla had said that Miles was near, but called him an
idiot, so Rosemont wondered if he was having trouble
ﬁnding where Rosemont was. He needed to stall, buy
Miles more time to track him down.
“I didn’t take the Watts deck. I was sent away,”
Rosemont said. “It was that di Trafana person.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

273

“I see,” Visconti said. “Di Trafana, then, has the
deck?”
Rosemont shrugged. “I don’t know who has it.”
“Di Trafana told us you took it,” Transom said.
With the swagger of a tomcat lording over prey,
Visconti said, “Di Trafana was the Mad Monk, as we
called him back then. A lemure—our term for priests of the
lost city of Remoria. We think he created the deck, but that
doesn’t mean that there isn’t something of Our Lord Khnum
in his work. Khnum was the ﬁrst. As the god-potter, his
ﬁngerprints are on everything.”
“What are you talking about?” Transom asked Visconti.
“Why are you nattering on about—?”
Rosemont pulled Visconti close, imagining his arm nice
and snug around the ugly old bastard.
“A creature of extraordinary powers and length of life.
That’s what I’m talking about,” Visconti said to Transom,
as if rebuking him. “Like you, Jeremiah, I attracted the
attention of ancient powers in my youth, 568 years ago.
Di Trafana and a magician from Khemet, a disciple of
Khnum, Our Lord the Spinning Wheel. They vied for my
allegiance in my Citadel of Milan. I listened, because I
wanted to unite Italy under my duchy.”
Kermit was rapt. He’d obviously never heard this before, and his soft eyes seemed to ﬁll with thoughts of
Renaissance Italy. Transom was listening now too, though
his eyes kept sliding over to Rosemont in his chair.
Rosemont didn’t know if any of this was true, didn’t
care; he just wanted Visconti to keep talking. “So you were
given the ancient cards and asked to look into them,”
Rosemont said. “By di Trafana?”

274

Barth Anderson

Visconti nodded and frowned as if this were a judicious
concern on Rosemont’s part. “What di Trafana did not see
was that the answer to his riddle was not Remus. The twin
Italy needed to remember was the triumphator, the heir of
Troy, the conqueror. Romulus. And Khnum and Romulus
were one, I saw. They were shapers. Builders of empires. Di
Trafana saw power in hiding and camouﬂaging, and I saw
power in—”
“Stop this!” shouted Transom. “You deformed, stupid
mongoloid! He’s playing you from the torture chair.
Stop it!”
Visconti lunged at Transom, and the two tussled for a
moment, until the duke grabbed the hammer from Transom.
He swung it at Kermit, and then at Transom. “Will you
stop interrupting me?”
“What is wrong with you, you drooling, moronic—”
“Go out in the ofﬁce and wait there!” He took another
swing at Kermit. “And take this shithead with you!”
Kermit backpedaled and then placed a hand upon his
chest, as though wounded. “I’ll have you know that I escaped Rosemont while I was at gunpoint! There’s no need
to insult—”
“Get him out of my sight, Transom!”
“And leave you alone with—”
“Go!” bellowed Visconti, raising the hammer.
Rosemont could tell he’d lost Visconti. He had lashed
at Transom like that because he was furious that his underlings had seen him spun on his head. Rosemont felt all of
this as if they were his own feelings, furiously boiling in his
own heart—and he was terriﬁed of the released, unleashed
Visconti, for he had never felt anything so threatening,
sadistic as the man when he raised that hammer. Visconti

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

275

would have killed Transom had the smaller man not cowered and retreated.
“Bloated retard!” Transom stamped away, stung and
petulant. He grabbed Kermit by the shoulder and shoved
him through the doorway, into the outer room. “Imbecile!” Transom shouted at Visconti. He drew his gun and
stepped outside, frowning childishly at Visconti through
the crack in the door as he shut it between them.
Visconti turned back to Rosemont and his face showed
his humiliation and bitterness. “What did the Khnum give
you, Jeremiah Rosemont?”
Rosemont dangled from the image of the painting, not
understanding its signiﬁcance, not knowing how to tell
Visconti what he wanted to know. It wasn’t Khnum. Khnum
was there, he supposed, but only insofar as Rosemont had
been poisoned ahead of time by Kermit. It wasn’t Khnum,
no matter how the old man repeated the claim. There
was some other presence within the cards and it wasn’t
Egyptian, wasn’t what Visconti wanted it to be. The image
had reshaped Rosemont, the thought of it reshaping him
even now as he recalled it in his mind’s eye. All he could
say was, “Paintings. Paintings from the Watts deck is what
I was given.”
“That’s what you took.” Visconti hefted his hammer.
“But that’s not what he gave you.”
Eyes on hammer. Eyes on hammer. Eyes on blessed,
goddamn hammer. “I don’t know what he gave me.”
“Think. It was just a few moments ago for you. Think.
He gave you something. What was it?”
There was no thing. There was no item. Had di Trafana
given him something? There was the nod of encouragement and that strange moment of double-memories while

276

Barth Anderson

viewing the deck, a light-headed disorientation and the image of ﬁsh leaving water that hardly seemed worth remembering at all. Was that it? Did Visconti want to hear about
that? “I can’t say. It was—”
Like a carpenter ﬁnding a knot in the wood he was cutting, Visconti said, “You really don’t know, do you?”
“No,” Rosemont said and sighed.
“It’s too difﬁcult for you to remember.”
Rosemont nodded, relieved. “That’s right.”
Visconti removed a long, heavy nail from his suit coat
pocket. He nodded the nail’s head at Rosemont. “Torture
is a failure, I’ve always said, because it’s a recognition of
equal power.”
He may have cried out when he saw the nail, but he
couldn’t be sure. All over his body, Rosemont’s skin broke
sweat.
“You have something I want, that I cannot simply
take,” Visconti said.
Rosemont’s face, the backs of his legs, even his feet
seemed to be pouring sweat. “It was a painting. Some shitty
little paintings. We don’t need the nail. We don’t need to do
that.”
“But it’s a long-held Roman tradition for putting down
magicians—or putting them up,” Visconti said, crossing
himself with a laugh, “as the case may be.”
Rosemont clamped his eyes shut and, gloriously, there
in the dark of his closed eyes, he could see Miles, who was
looking this way and that, as if waiting for someone. He
was standing next to a cash register and a tire display. A
door behind him read Employees Only. If he screamed,
Miles would hear him. But what if he didn’t respond in

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

277

time? Visconti could kill Rosemont with a quick hammer
blow if he didn’t handle this correctly. Oh Jesus Christ,
Miles, why can’t you hear us talking? We’re so close. Open
the door and walk through it!
To Visconti he said loudly, “I took them because I
wanted them. I’m sorry. But I don’t need them. I don’t need
them that badly.”
Visconti made a little noise in the back of his throat as
if he found this fascinating. “What were they of?”
Rosemont had just enough presence of mind to realize
that even though Visconti had seen the deck with his own
eyes at Chi-Chi’s, seen it other times in his long life, he may
have never seen the deck. He may have only seen what he
hoped it would be. Why else would he want to know such
a thing? He wanted to know what the authenticator saw.
He wanted to see what Rosemont saw. Rosemont shut his
eyes again to see where Miles was. In his mind’s eye,
Rosemont could see that Miles didn’t even seem to notice
the door into the machine shop. He was being cautious,
unsure of himself. He was casting out with his mind,
searching for Rosemont, but unable to latch on to his location. It ﬁlled Rosemont with contempt to see him so close
to the Employees Only door. God, you idiot, turn around
and walk through it! Walk through the fucking door!
But he wouldn’t. He remained positioned outside, as if
guarding it.
A moment later, Transom and Kermit stepped into the
ofﬁce where Miles was, carrying Styrofoam cups of coffee,
and the three of them began talking, chatting, like old acquaintances trying to place one another.
Miles!

278

Barth Anderson

“Now, now,” Visconti said. “Don’t squirm like a ﬁsh on
the line. No scheming and plotting, because it takes a character like you nowhere good.” He took the nail, leaned forward, and placed the point on the back of Rosemont’s right
hand, digging it in painfully between the tendons. “Childlike? Savage? Frightening in its simplicity?”
The duct tape was too tight. No matter how he
thrashed and shook he couldn’t squirm himself out from
under the point of that nail. “What do you want? What are
you asking me?”
“The images on the Watts deck,” the duke said patiently, ﬁrmly. “Describe them.”
“Yes.” Rosemont nodded frantically, eager to be able
to say something that he knew. “That’s right. Primitive. No
way could it have been a modern hand.”
“I see. So you lied about all of it to us. Do you have it,
Jeremiah?” Visconti’s great chalk-white face loomed close.
“Is it in this very room with us, somehow?”
“No. No, it’s not.”
“You’re lying. As evident to me as a stoplight.”
“I’m not lying!” Rosemont shouted at the top of his
lungs. “It’s not here! It’s not here in this machine shop! It’s
not anywhere near us, I swear!” Rosemont shut his eyes.
Miles was lunging toward the Employees Only door.
Jeremiah! Kermit got between him, and then Transom
grabbed Miles around the upper body.
Oh, God, that little geek has never been in a ﬁght in his
life, Rosemont realized in hopelessness as he watched the
two small men easily subdue his friend. Miles didn’t see the
letter opener on the counter. The box cutter. The pipe at his
feet. Rosemont thrashed harder in the chair. “Goddamnit!
Get me out of here!”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

279

“Jeremiah!” Rosemont could hear Miles from the ofﬁce. “Jeremiah, what’s happening?”
“Ah. I see. I do see now. It’s hidden. You hid it. In a
templum. Very wise of you. But it could be anywhere
then.” Visconti looked down at the nail between his ﬁngers. “Now just relax.”
And to his horror, Rosemont relaxed. He was actually
unclenching his ﬁst and laying his hand ﬂat, as if readying
himself for the nail. Visconti had control of his body. Total
control. But Rosemont could still think, could still lie,
could still fear, and overhead was a stone structure, the
smooth underbelly of a spanning arch with cruel characters carved into it.
The yoke, a voice told him. The arch is a yoke. Look
up, slave, and see the arch that Romulus built. Look up,
slave, and see the sight the captured enemies of Rome saw
in their lament.
“Miles!” Rosemont shouted.
But the voice was Miles. The voice in his head was
Miles’s voice. The hand he felt upon his shoulder, guiding
him forward, beneath that arch, was Miles’s controlling
hand.
“Stop! No!” Rosemont cried.
A multitude of jeering and mocking people milling
about the base of the arch were screaming at the two of
them, and Rosemont felt certain they were castigating
Miles for his betrayal.
“Why are you doing this?” Rosemont screamed over
his shoulder. “Miles, no!”
But the deed was done, and Rosemont felt his whole
being, his very self, kneeling in subjugation to Miles. Then
he could feel himself retreating into that loneliest deep,

280

Barth Anderson

that oceanic presence he’d felt in the deck, sinking to the
bottom of an unmapped sea where whole worlds go to be
forgotten—and landing in Miles’s body.
“Because I’d do anything to save you,” Miles was saying. “Even this.”
Rosemont felt Transom’s hands on his shoulders. He
felt Kermit bear-hugging his hips. A sign that read
Employees Only was right in front of Rosemont suddenly.
So was the box cutter. Then who was strapped to the chair?
Arms and bodies and legs were trying to drag Rosemont
down to the ﬂoor, and a rage boiled inside him, shaking
loose of his attackers and lunging for the box cutter.
“Kill them, Rosemont! Save me! Get rid of them and
come get me, goddamnit.”
Rosemont was yanking Kermit’s head back by the thick
locks at the base of his skull, making a fat bulge of his
neck, and the box cutter was opening the man’s throat like
an envelope with one bright red slit.
A loud series of pounding metal notes clanged from behind the door, followed by a scream like an animal being
slaughtered.
Kermit crumpled, thrashing and gurgling, beneath
Rosemont. Transom released him and backed away in horror from Rosemont as he landed on top of Kermit and,
with two more savage slashes of the cutter, stilled Kermit’s
throes.
Transom turned and ﬂed through the shop’s front door.
Blood dripped from ﬁngers and box cutter. He was
breathing heavily. Madison, Racine, Austin, and Nicaragua
were all far, far away for the person who had once been
Jeremiah Rosemont. His body was not his own body.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

281

His self was subjugated, submerged. He was an absent person now.
“I’m in trouble, Jeremiah! I’m in trouble. I’m in trouble. I’m in trouble. That was. That didn’t. I can’t. The
worst is coming. Oh, God, Jeremiah Rosemont, I need
you, I need you, I’m in so much trouble.”
Through the crimson nova of pain that this absent person felt coming from the screaming, he understood that he
had to help. Attend. It walked through that red cloud, feeling doorways literal and supernatural open as it beelined
for Visconti and the bound Rosemont-Miles in the chair.
Visconti was crouched over Rosemont-Miles, who sat
slumped beneath him, one hand on his shoulder and the
other spinning the hammer. “It’s here. It’s in this city of
Austin,” Visconti was saying. “In a templum.”
“I don’t know, I don’t know, I don’t know,” RosemontMiles cried.
The unperson saw only Visconti, the bow of his back
and his obliviousness. His only concern was to get close
enough, to leap upon that huge back and slit the throat as
he’d done to Kermit.
But Visconti straightened as if he’d heard the thought
and looked right at him. “Transom?”
The unperson paused. Why would Visconti call him
that? Even Rosemont-Miles in the chair looked confused
under sweaty, matted bangs.
“Now!” a woman shouted.
The unperson leapt. The tunnel of red mist focused on
Visconti like a frame, and the unperson felt as though its
body were tumbling inevitably toward the duke. Visconti
raised his hammer to defend himself, bafﬂed, it seemed,

282

Barth Anderson

why his own henchman would attack him. But the hand
that held the box cutter was too quick, and it slashed across
the duke’s left eye. As he fell backward, blinded, Visconti’s
hammer landed hard, uppercutting and hitting the unperson’s chin. They landed together, the unperson atop
Visconti, slashing madly at his arms and face. He could feel
the blade entering and leaving, opening and splitting.
But then, there was nothing. Nothing beneath him but
red mist and the machine shop’s concrete ﬂoor. No duke.
No hammer.
“Stop, stop,” an old woman was saying behind him.
“He’s gone.” A kind hand held the unperson’s arm while
he caught his breath. “You scared him off. Thank you.”
She stepped toward him and peered into his eyes, holding
his shoulders and forcing him to look down at her. The
Armenian/Turkish/Arabic woman. So old. What was her
name again? “Come. Here. Down here. Look,” she said.
From deep down in that unnamed sea, beneath cool
strata of water and darkness, Rosemont sat on its ocean
ﬂoor and began to weep. The unperson, too, sat, and then
collapsed to the ﬂoor.
Rosemont-Miles sat sprawled in the torture chair, weak
from blood loss, and all he could say was, “I’m sorry! I’m
sorry! I’m sorry!”
The unperson lay on the machine shop ﬂoor, crushed
and dropped there by Marni’s penetrating gaze and complete lack of volition.
“He’s gone. Jeremiah’s gone. You took him,” Marni
said to Rosemont-Miles in his chair. She wore the same
blue peacoat she’d worn a year ago in Rome.
“I’m sorry, sorry for taking away your beautiful self. I
thought I was sparing you the torture. But then I was in

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

283

trouble. Oh, please forgive me, Jeremiah!” said RosemontMiles.
That’s what Jeremiah heard, anyway, down there
beneath the deep blue sea, broken as he was by Miles’s
yoke.
Blood dripped from the chair. A clock ticked loudly by
the ofﬁce door, the ocean ebbed away from RosemontMiles, and the tide took away Miles’s name, his face. It inhaled his two-year-old cousin, his aunt and uncle. It took
the tragedy, the sorrow, the blame, the fuming acrimony,
his epic instinct to ﬂee, and the harrowing encounter in
Sarajevo when he saw her again. The ocean drew back like
a great muscle, lifting all that he had been as John C. Miles
and swallowed it whole into its leviathan self, and swam
away.
Marni stepped back from the inert unperson as if what
she saw in its eyes horriﬁed her. Then she swiped the
bloody box cutter from the unperson’s hand as easily as if
she were taking something dangerous from a baby, then
slit the duct tape, releasing Rosemont-Miles. A second
later, the nail in his right hand was gone, though the hand
continued to bleed. Rosemont-Miles lifted his left hand for
her to help him up. She looked down at the spray and puddles of blood on the right side of the chair and stepped
backward. “I’m not helping you anymore,” she said to
him. “You’re on your own from now on.”
“I know,” said Miles who was Rosemont, now.
“I have to choose one of you to help, and I choose this
one,” she spat. “The Egyptian will get him for sure otherwise. And, don’t kid yourself, they’re coming for you, too.
Now get up.” She reached into the pocket of her peacoat
and took out a set of keys on a chain. “I stole this van but

284

Barth Anderson

you can have it. I masked it. It might keep you hidden for a
little while, but not forever. Good luck, Miles.”
He watched her leave and blinked at her by way of
waving or saying good-bye. Already, he felt like the name
“Miles” was wrong for him. He was this. This was him.
He wanted nothing to do with that bastard John C. Miles,
and by the time Marni had left the room with the old, unperson’s body, he knew that this new Jeremiah, his new
stitched-together self, was the being he needed to preserve.
He stood and pain shot up his arm in volts.
They’re coming, came a voice from the bottom of the
ocean. You have to escape! It doesn’t matter where you
run, Jeremiah said to his new self, sweetly whispering the
childhood name that he called himself in the scariest of
moments to encourage and strengthen himself. Distantly
aware that other tyros’ minds were turning to his own, to
this place in Texas, Rosemont who was now a new
Rosemont staggered from the torture chair, right hand still
dripping.
Boy King, you have to run and don’t look back!

18

B

oy King sat with his elbows on his knees, hunched over
and facing the blank white wall. He was alone in an
empty room that was big enough, the ceilings high enough,
but it didn’t matter how big the room was. He felt strangled, trapped, in this room with no doorknob.
He had nothing, no toehold from which to spring
himself out of this place. A week ago, he might have slid
through the crack in the door like a shadow. But everything had been stripped from him in the last week. He had
no van. No maze of spells to deter trespassers in Bryce &
Waterston. No Bryce & Waterston. No hidden neighborhood. No Aventine Hill beneath his feet. No circle of
friends to give him a lift, no Lara, no Marni to come riding
in and save him in the end, or no childhood that he could

286

Barth Anderson

blame or long for or try to comprehend. Even the laces of
his shoes and his belt were gone.
“Boy King.”
Now he was trapped and consequences were coming,
swift and sudden as those desert hunters had come for him
in Austin. So fast he didn’t even know from which direction, or who might be a betrayer, or who would deliver the
blow. He’d seen FBI on his way into this room. Tobacco
and Firearms. TSA and HSA jackets with Khnum pins on
the lapels. Minneapolis Police and National Guard. He’d
even seen one-eyed Visconti and a new protégé talking to
young men and women with the classic, dark throatveining of Blackleaf addiction. The duke had taken enough
time to pause as Boy King was ushered past to say, “The
left hand is next, whoever you are.”
Because now it wasn’t about information. Or submission. Or even subjugation. It was about justice, or at least,
the powerful’s sense of justice, and Boy King knew he had
a lot to answer for in their eyes. Stealing and hiding and arrogating ancient powers to himself that the powerful had
wanted rubbed out. Insulting the Ellings. Ruining that
batch of fries.
The deck.
Romulus had slain his twin for doing something
similar—destroying their Holy Grail—and empire and
power in this world were built on such blunt sentiments.
Romulus’s wasn’t a world that prized mercy. There was no
power in pity or forgiveness from Khnum.
“Boy King? Boy King!”
He faced the wall more fully, refusing to look at the
source of that voice.
He kept wondering where the ram-headed god was.

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

287

Was it all pins and pendants and no mud-slicked delegate
from ancient Khemet? When would that hammer fall?
When he learned that the most powerful was coming for
him, he’d felt a certain thrill, he could now admit. He felt
ﬂattered, worthy of the challenge. Was it still coming for
him? Would he yet face it in a Room 101 like Winston
Smith, or would he be disappeared into some archipelago
of supernatural gulags? Now he wished there really were a
primordial half-beast coming to confound this too, too
normal status quo.
Even the spell he’d cast upon himself was gone, that effort to save, protect, and spirit himself and his friend away.
He was no longer Boy King, couldn’t think of himself
so. Beneath that, he was a cracked and reglued Jeremiah
Rosemont, a self barely thriving on life support. There was
no other name he cared for, no other self he wanted.
Without even a glove upon his right hand, he was completely laid bare in this horrid little cell, and his guilt and
shame were hatching things, unable to shed the shell and
come into the sun, nor crawl back in the eggs they’d shattered.
The thing he’d done. The thing he’d done to his
Jeremiah. He looked down at his left hand. He’d let
Visconti have this one too if he knew that Rosemont might
remain safe and whole.
“Boy King!”
He clapped his hands over his ears for a while, and then
he tugged off one shoe, spun on his rump, and hurled it at
the huge two-way, wall-sized mirror that reﬂected this
room back at him.
“Look at me.”
He looked. And he looked away in panic. The same

288

Barth Anderson

feeling he’d had in Rome, seeing the reptilian thing morphing into ﬂower and fractiled images of himself ﬁlled him
with dread and revulsion.
“That didn’t happen to me!” he shouted to remind
himself. John C. Miles had never seen his “tyro self” as
Kermit had called it. “I’m not Rosemont. I’m not Boy
King.”
He looked again and saw his reﬂection standing, arms
crossed, while he sat trying not to look too long at the reﬂection.
“Do you know what it is?” said his reﬂection, once he
caught his eye. “Mirrors are intimate, but they aren’t that
intimate. No heat. No wet. No touch.”
The man who had been Boy King said, “There’s no
magic left! This shouldn’t be happening!”
His reﬂection said, “Come here.”
He looked at the reﬂection, really scrutinized it for the
ﬁrst time in a decade, examined what it was wearing, how
it stood. So like him, as he’d come to think of himself. But
not him. The right hand was whole. The face was unbroken. It was Rosemont as he should have been. No. It was
really John C. Miles’s face.
“Do you see who I am?” said the reﬂection.
The man who had been Boy King nodded.
“Come here. I ﬁgured it out. Come on, buddy,” the reﬂection said.
The man crawled to the mirror, and his reﬂection hunkered down to look at him, whispering, “You know what
a mirror is, Boy King?”
He shook his head. “Don’t call me that.”
“Do you know what a mirror is?”
“I hate mirrors.”

T H E M AG I C I A N A N D T H E F O O L

289

“Me too. But, look, it has four corners. It has four
sides. It allows you a safe vision into another world,” it
said, leading him. “Get it?”
He smiled a little in admiration. He didn’t know why
the thought struck him so, but he breathed, “Ahh.”
“You do see,” the reﬂection said.
“A templum.”
“A lifting of the plow,” said his reﬂection. “A doorway.
Right? A breach in the wall of Romulus. Go on. Touch the
mirror where my hand is.”
It was the reﬂection’s left. He would have to raise his
ungloved and shattered right, look at it. “I can’t do that.”
“Do it.”
“I can’t. I can’t do what you ask. I can’t even hear your
voice without dying inside—and it used to be my voice.”
His reﬂection lowered his hand and looked at him with
pity. “Because of what you did?”
The man’s mouth turned down and he willed himself
not to cry.
“You saved me, Miles,” the reﬂection said. “You saved
me from all that horror and took it on yourself.”
He turned his proﬁle to the mirror, but his reﬂection did
not look away. “Don’t say that.”
“Then touch me.”
The man turned back and raised his hand. He held it
against the mirror, as ﬂat as he could manage, the ugly,
brutal wound right in front of his eyes.
Hot. The reﬂection felt warm, hot skin, not glass.
He jerked his wounded hand away.
“Don’t stop now,” said the reﬂection. “Come on,
buddy. Up, up, and away.”
The reﬂection put its hand to the mirror again, and the

290

Barth Anderson

man touched it, pressed his palm against the other palm.
He gave a little shout as his hand dissolved into the mirror,
into the warm, moist skin of the reﬂection.
Then he raised his other hand, the reﬂection did the
same, and they pressed their other hands together through
the glass.
“Head,” said the reﬂection.
The man pressed his head to the glass, just as the reﬂection did so too. And as they touched, felt, pulled back, and
pressed again, there was no turning back as the man who’d
once been Boy King, his head, his thoughts, his mind, his
memory, his fears, and his body began to press through the
mirror into the head, thoughts, mind, memory, childhood,
and body of the mirror him. It felt cool and warm as the
membrane, the barrier of the mirror slid over the crown of
his head, over his eyes, and along the bridge of his nose like
a loving ﬁnger. Lips. Chin. Throat. And he kept pushing
and pushing.
“He’s leaving!” someone shouted, thin and far away,
on the other side of the two-way mirror.
Shoulders and chest—laughter into laughter—and a
glorious joy burst through him as his heart and the heart of
his reﬂection pushed into each other.
“Don’t let him go! Grab him.”
Stomach. Penis. Butt. Thighs. Knees and foot and other
foot.
And then Miles and Rosemont were so very far away.

About the Author
Barth Anderson is an award-winning author who has been
reading tarot cards for over thirty years. His ﬁrst novel,
The Patron Saint of Plagues, received wide critical acclaim.
Barth lives in Minneapolis with his wife and two children.

