THE ADVENTURES OF CUBE – GALACTIC MESSIAH
Written by Christian J Bennett
© Christian J Bennett 2008*

For all my family and friends who
keep me on the sane side of the fence;
okay at least for most of the time!
x

1

PREFACE
Born on earth, not far from the Milky Way, Christian J Bennett has
grown up with a life effecting illness called Hypochondria. Actually,
being a hypochondriac was his latest self diagnosis; before this was
social anxiety, agoraphobia and, for most of his life, panic attacks.
Some may say it is due to over thinking everything and anything.
Throughout his time on planet earth this condition has induced
Christian with many feelings. The main feelings that are a day to
day occurrence have now manifested themselves into characters
which feature in this book. The world Cube inhabits is indeed real
and as you read this, aliens are actually fighting each other, loving
each other and laughing with each other.
This book though has not been written for Christian, no, this book
has been written for some extraordinary heroes and heroines who
battle aliens every day; this book has been written for the most
amazing children in our universes!
Cancer and Leukaemia in Children is an emotional ride for those
involved. CLIC Sargent is a charity that helps provide invaluable
support during, after and beyond treatment. This is why at least 50%
of all book sales will go directly to the charity CLIC Sargent. Here’s
to you everywhere who are fighting illness, remember, if you think
this world is the only one you are very much mistaken, hopefully this
book will prove this fact even further…
Reader warning:
Adults, please note that this book does contain some swear words
and adult phrasing, hence if buying this for your kids you may want
to read it first.

2

DAY LOG:
I might as well start this story by telling you that I have aliens in my
head. Chucker, one of these aliens, is banging at the door of my
brain, yet again. My brain, in non medical terms, is a place these
aliens have come to call an “observation post”. I’ve been trying to
ignore him for the past half an hour. That goes for all his crazy alien
friends as well.
I arrived at the Gare du Nord, Paris twenty minutes ago. It’s been
a long and drawn out trip from my dad’s home in the south of
France. My pulsing headache is evidence to this fact.
If I’m going to be Dong, for a moment, from the blubbery and very
moody squidgean race, I need to now give you some further
information stating that, one, my father’s humble place of residence
is settled in the centre of a typically French village, and two, the
village’s wonderful inhabitants are still living in the 1940s and wearing
garlic around their necks.
Chucker’s still banging at the door. I’m going to have to open it
soon. In fairness he’s only doing what is routine for his worrying race,
the vom. Feeling sick for most of the time, if not all of the time and
panicking about the silliest of things.
Scank doesn’t help much. Scurrying around, making me even
more restless, always wanting to be somewhere else, doing
something, anything but this. Dong’s just told him to shut up!
I look around the train carriage I stepped into and settled,
uncomfortably, quite a while ago now. Finally kicking open the
door, Chucker dutifully reminds me that there is a little well known
universal law called the “Law of Sod”, or reversed, “Sod’s Law”. You
have probably heard of it, or at least experienced it. It is a law
which denotes, in this case, that I was the first on board and so you
can bloody well guarantee that the beautiful, comforting, priceless,
empty seat next to my crunched up form will be occupied
imminently.
Thanks to Chucker’s cries I now await the Law of Sod to take
effect. There is bound to be a last minute passenger and they are
bound to be either smelly and or somewhat larger than life.

3

‘Now you’ve done it!’ screamed Chucker, from somewhere. I
imagine his neck expanding in length. ‘That’s bound to encourage
a last minute passenger!’
Dong points out the evidence for his alien friend’s outburst. ‘Look
at your watch.’ I stare at the double faced watch my dad gave me
for my birthday, several years ago. It is clearly showing, twice, that
there is only one minute left before the train doors close and we
finally pull away from the historic station.
An announcement confirms the time. A French-English accent can’t decide which - states the train will be leaving imminently.
The seconds trickle by, one by one, until at least sixty have taken
their toll on my nerves and headache. Have you ever unknowingly
smacked your head on a low ceiling, if so, you will know how I was
feeling.
‘It’s moving! The train is moving,’ Chucker burps, the nausea lifting
like steam from a hot iron.
I wildly imagine Scank is scrambling to the top parcel shelf, above
me, with his suction padded paws echoing around my mind and
thankfully, as far as I know, not in the other passengers’ minds. He
settles for a rare moment. Releasing the suctions on his front paws,
he dangles from his legs and stares behind me. If the other
passengers had the benefit of seeing him, they would note his
widening smile.
Chucker’s reaction was instant, renewed nausea turning him dark
green.
Scank chuckled aloud, ‘Here we go, just when you thought the
Law of Sod had been overlooked, here comes a late passenger.’
My heart sinks even further as I can hear two voices behind me
being asked if the space beside them is being occupied. To my
dread, the two asked reply in French and English, ‘No, my partner is
getting some food from the restaurant’.
Faster than I can recite - I’m not a pheasant plucker but a
pheasant plucker’s son and I’m only plucking pheasants until the
pheasant plucker comes - the train judders. As if the hand of god
reaches out on my behalf, the late passenger is knocked off

4

balance and conveniently stumbles into what must be an empty
seat just in front of mine.
Not sure whether it was the intensity of the situation but within
minutes I feel myself falling into a deep and, soon to be proved,
rather productive sleep. The Adventures of Cube, part one,
Galactic Messiah has begun.
COMMENCE ANALYSIS...
With her navigational systems activated Cube threw her crew
backwards as she thrust forward into layers of surrounding matter.
The display on the domed optical screen (now giving the wondrous
feeling of one of Michael Angelo's chapel paintings) suddenly filled
itself with stars, in much the same chaos as gushing water would
enter an opened hatch on a diving submarine. Glistening light
flickered across three oddly shaped faces like a strobe light, as they
momentarily stared up at its magnificence...
STOP! STOP ANALYSIS ... the beginning, let’s start at the beginning...
COMMENCE ANALYSIS ...
In one of the many universes situated far away from our own there is
a spacecraft called Cube. Cube is a square shaped vessel whose
crew comprises of three aliens; "The Three Wise Aliens" being their
proper title. Each of the crew comes from different races. Scank is
from a race known as the leetlesheets. Chucker is from a race
known as the vom and last but by no means least is Dong whose
race are called the squidge. Together they fly around the galaxies
they know, and some they don't know, having wonderful
adventures. One of these adventures is now going to be told for the
first time ever.
It had been for several hours that all three of Cube's crew members
had remained asleep.

5

One after the other they'd woke, each of them with only one
thought on their minds. They wanted to tell their comrades what
they had just dreamt and there was only one place on Cube where
they frequently gathered together, the observation post.
Set deep inside the smooth surfaces of the spacecraft, the post,
the heart of the observation section, is like all of Cube's other
sections in that it's abnormal in its overall layout. Not at all dissimilar
to the making of an ice-cube, a very large ice-cube, the
observation post has (instead of water) been filled with organically
growing technological equipment suitable for the crew's every need
to observe the elements space tends to throw at them. Its shape
can be compared to a very low and extremely wide bottle - the
bottom is filled with most of the contents - whilst wrapping itself
around the smooth (upward curving) neck, like a glorified cork, is her
optical screen - the main visual device which displays what ever is
worth viewing.
Dong had been the first to seat himself inside the post, Chucker
and Scank had appeared later taking up positions not far from one
another. Dong was also first to break the silence. 'I have just had
the strangest dream. I dreamt god came to me with a message.'
'A message!' gulped Chucker, widening his one and only eye,
remembering his own dream.
'Woof ... Yes,' interrupted Scank, scratching his hairy little body with
each of his four legs, 'I too had a message told to me ... grrr.'
'About a messiah?' queried Dong, rolls of blubber wobbling around
his body like a freshly set jelly. 'It would appear that we each were
told the same message. God told me that soon, very soon, a
messiah shall descend on our galaxy ...’
'A Galactic Messiah!' exclaimed Chucker, remembering God's
words.
'Indeed, a "Galactic Messiah" was the term used.'
Scank lifted his monkey-like arms. Placing the suction pads which
layered each palm of his hands he began to dangle from the higher
parts of the post swinging from one arm to the other, squelching
noises filled the air with each manoeuvre. Stopping beneath a small
monitor he hung beneath it for several moments before dropping to

6

the floor next to Dong. 'So, were you given the exact co-ordinates
of the appearance of this galactic messiah?'
'No, but I was told to head for the Olas system. It is there we shall
be given a sign.'
Scank raised his four eyebrows and remained silent.
'CUBE,' typed Dong, in communication, a keyboard having
appeared from out of his gripseat. 'PLEASE NAVIGATE WEST TO THE
OLAS SYSTEM.'
With her navigational systems activated, Cube threw her crew
backwards as she thrusted forward into the layers of surrounding
matter. The display on the domed optical screen, now giving the
wondrous feeling of one of Michael Angelo's infamous chapel
paintings, suddenly filled itself with stars in much the same chaos as
gushing water would enter an opened hatch on a diving submarine.
The glistening light flickered across the three's faces like a strobe light
as they momentarily stared up at its magnificence.
Scank was soon zigzagging around the observation post's many
levelled floor pressing different buttons on different shaped terminals
moulded into the surrounding equipment.
Making the mistake of continuing to look around the encircling
screen Chucker began to turn an all too familiar shade of white.
Circling around his wobbly head the display of blurred planets,
mixed with a rainbow of stars, started to affect his sense of direction.
Slowly his face and body swirled into a pale yellow.
'Woof ... Oh no!' Scank yelled, frantically waving his arms as his feet
stayed stuck to the above circuitry he was again hanging from.
'Chucker's turned yellow ... grrr!'
Dong didn't hear, he was too deep in thought.
'Woof … now he's green! Get out of his way!'
Chucker's tall form began to wobble and shake. Different shades
of green replaced one another until a very pale colouring
dominated. Small lumps started to appear from within his stomachs
like popcorn exploding into life, the explosions protruding through his
skin in their attempt to escape.
Scank shouted and shouted but it was to no avail. Chucker's body
abruptly curved backwards. One by one the mobile lumps began

7

travelling upwards. With a sudden jerk forwards the lumps turned
into an impressive formation a flying chunks.
The sound of vomiting was to be heard once again.
Chucker very gradually turned back into a healthier shade of
orange. 'That's much better,' he gulped, a few of the chunks having
remained in his mouth. Using both right hands he wiped his huge lips
clean and burped a jazzy tune.
Dong stayed completely still. In a comical fashion (only the old
black and white films could muster) the squidge slowly turned to
face his soon to be ex-friend, layers of puke toppling from his head,
running in waves down his body to the floor. Shaking his hands free
of the revolting substance which coated them, he just remained
completely quiet, his eyes doing all the talking.
A sniggering sound quickly rained down from above. At least one
of them was seeing the funny side to this whole incident. 'I ... woof ...
did warn you,' Scank laughed uncontrollably as Dong left the
observation post in yet another one of his reputable bad moods.
'He should know better than to stand with his backs to you,' he
continued, looking down at Chucker. Scurrying rapidly to the lower
levels, the leetlesheet positioned himself in front of a terminal whose
beeping keypad span round and round ready to be fondled.
Stepping carefully backwards, Chucker permitted a cleaning
robot its unfortunate duty of sucking up the remaining mess he had
been so kind as to make for it. Just in time too, a vom's puke can
smell very nasty if left in the open for too long. 'I'm off to clean
myself up. I'll leave you to carry on the observational tasks.'
Without looking Scank waved both his longs arms in
acknowledgement and hearing the suction pads on his four feet
come unstuck one after the other - CRASHED - heavily to the floor.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Having escaped from its vacuum-sealed container, the bionic grass
seed lifted into the air of the sci-cubicle and waited for the next gust
of wind to blow it out of sight.

8

ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
It couldn't have been for more than half an hour since the
leetlesheet, after rubbing his bruises, had been left alone to monitor
things. He had been so busy scurrying from one terminal to the
other that he hadn't come to notice the flashing red light on one of
Cube's communication panels.
'Scank!' screamed Dong, appearing from nowhere. 'You idiot,
look!' The squidge wobbled down from one of the many chutes
which allow entry into the observation post. Running heavily forward
on blubbery limbs he reached the flashing light and headbutted it
several times.
Just in time to see the red light stop flashing Chucker's head and
body appeared from out of another chute, a gravitational one. A
useful alternative to a ladder, situated beside each other around
the whole of Cube's interior both methods of transport are hidden
from view inside cylindrical tubing. The user can decide between
the natural feel of the ladder or the completely unnatural feel of
gravitation; the gravitational one being the easiest, laziest, and
generally the fastest one of the two.
'Oh my ... grrr ... god!' Scank barked, shocked by what he could
see. The leetlesheet was looking fearfully at the worrying image now
being displayed upon one side of the optical screen.
The red light had been indicating they were being summoned to
speak by a following galactic destroyer, an extremely large and
extremely pant-wetting horn-shaped space vessel. The screen itself
was only displaying a comparatively small part of the approaching
craft but it was enough for the three aliens to realise who this
particular one belonged to.
'What does ... She ... want with us?' grumbled Dong, trying to
comprehend the unwanted appearance.
When using the word “She”, Dong is talking about the infamous
Star Empress of the bosseye race. This race, it is safe to say, are
dominating the local galaxy at present. Slavery and death walk in
her feared shadow along with a small servant named Stinkz (his

9

looks matching his own races name) who stems from the yuck
people.
'Stinkz!' bellowed The Empress. 'Where the hell are you?' Digging
each of her long, painted finger nails into her slender palms she
waited until the surface of her skin was broken and bleeding,
something which she sadistically enjoyed. Banging her clenched fist
against her throne she deliberately turned her back to add some
dramatic emphasis.
'Wow! Look!' gasped Chucker, upon seeing the erotic rear image of
The Empress appearing on all sides of Cube's domed optical screen,
the highest part elongating her top features a little more than was
necessary.
The Star Empress' body was fully endowed with welcoming curves,
curves which could even make a blind alien wolf-whistle in delight.
'Look at those legs. I didn't know that kind of length was possible this
side of our universe. Pausing for a moment he sucked back the
saliva he was starting to produce from the corners of his mouth.
'She's absolutely beautiful.'
Scank and Dong were just as dumbfounded by her good looks.
They had been expecting somebody a bit uglier from what other
fellow aliens had said.
Now that she had their undying attention fixed firmly upon her
buttocks The Empress began to turn slowly around to face her new
admirers.
From her side profile she was just as enticing as she had been from
behind. 'Wow! Look at those breasts. I've never seen four such
perfectly shaped mounds of flesh. But why oh why do the bosseye
have to go and wear clothes, that's what I want to know ... Mind you
at least the one piece body suit she's wearing is a painfully looking
tight fit. Mmm! I hope it bursts under the pressure.' Dong sighed
with anticipation as she swept back her long mane of white hair to
reveal the much overdue appearance of her obscured face. 'I
don't believe it, I just don't believe it!'

10

The unexpected laughter of The Three Wise Aliens blasted out from
the speakers onboard The Empress' technologically infested galactic
destroyer - lights started to flash - but to the disappointment of
Cube's crew The Empress didn't.
'Her eyes! Look at her eyes!' Chucker was hysterical, his body
flashing all the colours of a Wobbl'it rainbow.
'It's been a long time since I've seen a bosseye with such bosseyes,' coughed Dong, gasping for air. 'Crumbs! I bet she sees
everything more than once that's for sure.'
From within her heavily fortified ship The Empress struggled to make
out the changing positions of Cube's crew. The picture sharply
displayed (on her personal view screen) was most confusing.
Appearing at the top, upside down, was the hairy long armed
image of Scank. Clutching a ladder chute below was the wobbling
figure of Chucker, holding on to it because he was laughing so
much. And of course there was the most noticeable foreground
figure of Dong whose layers of skin were pressing unappealingly
against the screen almost blotting out the other two images
completely.
'What do we have here?' said The Empress, softly, misleadingly.
'Silence!' The power of her voice was as captivating as her figure,
the instant she shouted everything went quiet, Cube's crew feeling
their hearts jolt to a standstill as though something had begun to
squeeze them tighter and tighter.
Having regained the three's undivided attention, The Star Empress
began her interrogatory questioning which was the sole reason
behind her honoured appearance. 'What brings the infamous Cube
to this part of the universes? I have been monitoring you for several
days now and my officers tell me that our ship's censors picked up
some type of distortion from within Cube, just several hours ago in
fact. What would you be hiding from me?' She paused, thinking for
only a moment. 'Perhaps some kind of weapon? You wouldn't be
working with the Opposers would you?'
The Opposers are a small group of freedom fighters sworn to free
the galaxy of the dreaded bosseye, and basically, it would appear,

11

everything that moves! Whatever policies they started with, if any,
have been completely forgotten.
Silence once again fell around the communication speakers. The
Three (Not So) Wise Aliens looked blankly at the optical screen, each
with their mouths held wide open; in Chucker's and Dong's cases
they were hanging halfway down to their stomachs.
Eventually it was Dong who broke the persisting silence and in true
squidge fashion spoke bluntly to the awaiting bosseye empress. 'I'm
sorry but we aren't at liberty to discuss the distortion you speak of ... '
defiantly he sucked in a lung full of air and then, one at a time, he
filled his other lungs and expelled the pressurised air in a casual burp
to finish with, ' ... you are not worthy of an explanation ... '
'Ah!' The Empress jumped in, moving her face nearer, the top of
the optical screen making her elongated features even longer. 'So
the galactic rumours are true.' The pupils of her eyes rapidly moved
up and down, constantly staying fixed in the middle. 'There have
been other distortions elsewhere. Funnily enough the crew of those
ships were all fast asleep when we came upon them. Each member
was in the middle of dreaming when we blew their ships to pieces.'
'Excuse me,' Chucker interrupted, yellowly, his left hands
suspended in the air for pathetic attention, 'but when you say, "to
pieces", I presume you didn't mean death. You wouldn't just kill
them whilst they slept would you? Not a beautiful woman such as
yourself ... no ... no ... surely not ...'
'Kill them now!' screeched The Empress, her patience coming to an
abrupt end.
Cutting off communication Cube was instructed to immediately
act to the threat by way of several loud farts and screams. Shooting
to one side she narrowly avoided two horny (as in horn shaped)
blasts from the galactic destroyer's forward array of guns.
Seeing it missed, the bullying ship tilted slightly as if all its crew had
just run to the front of it and fired twice more.
The legendary Cube anticipated the manoeuvre and with skill, or
perhaps sheer fluke, dropped thousands of feet below the enemy
craft. Taking advantage of the position she fired twenty times.
Laser-cubes shot out from one side like she'd rapidly given birth to

12

fifty glowing cubes of equal size. The repeated births had little effect
on the mother they originated from, it was the destroyer who came
off worst as one after the other they pounded against its flat, wide
base in a display of trendy colours a Rastafarian would be proud to
wear on his head.
'Woof ... Cube's done it again,' cheered Scank, jumping up and
down with joy, parts of his shaggy hair (especially on his tail) swaying
with every movement.
'I just love Cube's defensive attitude,' Chucker added, in
admiration.
Dong wasn't so overwhelmed with joy. 'They're only immobilised
for the time being. Don't get too complacent. We had better get
out of here before The Star Empress has time to react. Look! The
destroyer's firing as I speak ... '
Pushing her crew forcefully to the floor, which they had all
become accustomed to, Cube reversed with speed, narrowly
missing a few stars in the process, opened up an acceleration funnel
and poured herself inside.
Somewhat like a reversed tornado, Cube has developed the
ability to create a momentary vortex in space, which when opened,
using focused gravitational and magnetic forces, sucks her through
to another system. This procedure is what's known as an
acceleration funnel.
It took just a few seconds before Cube shot out of the other end,
the funnel vanishing as quickly as it had appeared.
'Where are we ... woof ... Chucker?' asked Scank, his head still
spinning, his four eyes unfocused.
The green-stricken vom blew chunks, this time with nobody in the
way, before he could answer. Whilst the same robot as before
cleared away the artistic mess splattered beside his long feet,
Chucker looked down at the location scanner and scanned for a
location to give. After several moments of gulping and burping he
came up with one. 'We are in the Dodu system, south of our last
position.'
'I don't think I've ever been to the Dodu system,' hiccuped Dong,
at the same time eating something slimy and brown.

13

'We're going to have to wait here a while,' continued Chucker,
looking curiously at Dong's mouth, mainly at the substance he was
ramming into it with such passion. With squidge one would think
whenever they eat that they haven't touched any food for

14

months. 'Just until Cube's systems cool off. She hasn't created an
acceleration funnel for quite some time and she's overdone it a bit.
We should be safe enough anchored here.'
Dong strolled inwards from the far edges of the observation post
and squeezed inside one of the many centrally offered and
differently coloured gripseats, the one he chose being an extremely
bright yellow.
Gripseats explain themselves. They are especially designed for
galactic space travel, having the ability to hold a seated occupant
with the minimal amount of discomfort under any circumstances
using a combination of interesting methods.
Waiting for a much needed burp to arise from his digestive systems
he began to munch another snack which he'd conveniently found
wedged in between folded layers of blubber underneath his left
armpit.
'Sod this ... grrr ... waiting lark. I'm going to take one of the pods
over to this asteroid belt and have a little fun ... woof.' Removing his
long knuckled finger from a scanner pad Scank disappeared inside
a ladder chute. Dong stared after him but carried on eating.
'Hey!' yelled Chucker, not wanting to be left out. 'Wait for me!'
Still staying put, Dong nestled his blubber deeper inside his gripseat
and swivelling it around to face the optical screen, waited for his
two crew mates to appear.
Like a couple of babies leaving their mother's womb two pods
popped out from Cube's sides, a tiny pinprick of light lessening as
the exit route slowly closed.
Looking back at the motherly vessel, Chucker and Scank watched
her shrink quickly behind whilst the asteroid belt grew increasingly
larger from in front.
'Woof ... we're going to be entering the asteroid belt soon,' Scank
shouted into his hand held communication pen. About a foot in
length this computerised pen is used to verbally steer and function a
pod. 'Chucker ... grrr ... are you ready for some cheap thrills?'
There was no visible sign from outside that the pods were being
piloted by anyone. From within, the hidden occupants wore optical
head-screens which enables them to perceive their outside field of

15

vision. By simply moving their head in the direction they wish to see,
the optical display provides the pilot with the chosen navigatory
view.
Seeing them entering the treacherous asteroid belt, Dong zoomed
in on their location and rubbing his hands together, watched from
his comfortable and rather less dangerous position onboard Cube.
He could easily tell which of the two pods Chucker was in due to the
regular small trails of puke which one of them discharged every now
and again, the glare from one of the local stars lighting the trail like
ignited gunpowder. 'Where's the damn food robot when you need
it?'
Within seconds of his call a lopsided robot appeared wearing a
funny shaped chef's hat perched upon what could only be
described as its head due to the fact it was the only

16

part of the funny looking machine which wasn't touching the post's
floor, the parts touching the floor had the honour it would appear of
being it's legs.
Holding out three large pincers an equal amount of squidgean
sludge bars could be seen. Each one was wrapped in a silver foil
packet. Taking the bars one at a time and placing them onto his
laps, Dong nodded once at the robot in a rare moment of gratitude
and then kindly told it to, 'Piss off!'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Starting to feel slightly vulnerable out in the open now that it was a
fugitive, the grass seed continued to hang around the sci-cubicle. It
was waiting, pleading, yearning for that next gust of air to blow it out
of sight.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Hang on tight ... woof ... Chucker ... grrr ... by the end of this you'll be
vomiting to your hearts' content.' Cutting off communication,
Scank's pod just managed to avoid some of the many large pieces
of flying rock shooting past on all sides, from all angles.
'Eeeergh ... ' Chucker puked back in response.
The spectacular sight of the pods disappearing then appearing
increasingly looked, from onboard Cube, like a couple of drunk
penguins messing about with some passing icebergs.
'Hey ... woof! Look down there,' said Scank, amazement filling his
voice. 'There's something signalling us from the surface of that large
asteroid ... grrr.'
Both pods impossibly dropped backwards to hover above a
flashing (as in lights flashing on and off) figure.
'I don't believe what my eyes are telling me ... It's a robottom and
it's joined to a host.'
A robottom is a mechanically controlled pair of legs. The host is
whatever the legs have joined themselves to; in this case some kind
of space-breathing alien resembling a type of demented jellyfish.

17

'I thought they had all been dismantled by the bosseye ... '
'Obviously not,' interrupted Dong, looking up at Cube's optical
screen which was showing an enlarged image of the flashing
robottom. 'Send him down a tow-line and pull him back here.
Quickly!' Using the controls closest to his fat fingertips he zoomed
away from the pods' location, swivelled around the base of his
gripseat, and took a huge bite out of an half eaten sludge bar.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Tick Tock Tick Tock … Safely back onboard, in their designated
cubic positions, the pods' dynamic sides slid to one side to let their
anxious pilots out onto the glowing floor directly beneath.
'Chucker?' inquired Scank, his fingers scratching his ears as he
looked innocently around the aligned pods. 'Where ... grrr ... is the
robottom and his host?'
Several globules of perspiration slid to the end of the vom's three
antennae before he answered. 'I didn't have him dangling below
my pod,' he was quick to state, not wanting to be blamed for
anything he hadn't been responsible for. 'You did!'
Scank gulped upon seeing the taut tow-line coming from the pod
he'd piloted, disappearing ominously behind the closed docking
doors which he knew had just acted like a pair of sharp scissors.
'Ooops!' he mumbled, before scurrying up to the observation post,
hotly persued by Chucker's reddening figure.
Springing out from a ladder chute the worried leetlesheet
zigzagged towards the optical screen. Just before reaching it one
of his legs trod on the other sending him flying into a brightly lit
terminal. Gently opening one eye, he was quick to open all four.
'You've got them!'
'Of course I've got them,' repeated Dong, confidently.
Chucker wobbled up to join the other two who had come
together underneath the domed central part of the optical screen.
The three of them stood quietly for a moment. In unison they stared
at the blue beam of light sticking out from Cube's side in a rather

18

unfitting phallic way; at the tip of it the robottom was being held in a
stable position.
'Woof ... bring him in quickly,' trembled Scank, 'the host doesn't
appear to be moving ... grrr ... at all!'
As if suddenly getting the upper hand in an up until now equally
matched tug of war, the flickering grip ray pulled its captive
opposition directly inside Cube's medical section.
'We must hurry to a med-cubicle,' Chucker worried, the fear of
what they, or rather what Scank had done, was sinking in.
Dashing one after the other into a gravitational chute, Dong was
the last to leave the observation post, his large shape eventually
squeezing into a chute's tubular metal casing, which with a final
gush of air flushed his body downwards to rejoin his friends in the
medical section.
Appearing in the triangular doorway of the med-cubicle, the
medical robots stared at the three intruders who were all out of
breath from running from the observation post.
Startled, shocked and most definitely horrified, Dong, Scank and
Chucker looked on helplessly as one of the robots removed the
unknown host which was beyond any shadow of a doubt
completely and utterly - dead! In comparison to the floppy form
above it, the equally lifeless robottom continued to stand awkwardly
still.
This unplanned event, especially to food-minded Dong, quickly
took on a similar routine of when the dead corpse of a Trebular crab
is scooped out of it's shell by one of Cube's painfully inefficient food
robots. 'You've killed the host!' gasped Dong, holding his head in his
hands, his fingers slowly sinking in to the endless layers of facial
blubber.
For once both his companions remained respectfully quiet. Each
of them had now turned their attention on to the robottom, hoping,
praying for it to move in some small way.
Following a sudden jolt in their general direction all three jumped
as the red legs began twitching in a rather aggressive fashion.
Slowly but surely the robottom began to move. Both his legs
quickened in pace as he headed directly towards Scank, Chucker

19

and Dong with a purposeful strut. The sound of heavy footsteps
echoed upon the floor even though it happened to be made of
rubber.
Dong's two eyes, which as with all squidge normally are difficult to
see amidst the blubber, could be seen quite clearly staring out
through his fingers which he continued to hold pressed deep into his
face. In comparison Scank's four and Chucker's one eye remained
screwed tightly shut as if they expected to be hit at any moment.
Coming to an abrupt standstill the robottom froze, two green lights
flashing from his waist which happened to be equal in height to the
small Buddha-like stature of Dong whose eyes were also now firmly
shut.
The Three Wise Aliens leant back in one synchronised motion,
terrified at what looked like being the legs' vicious reprisal. Then as if
to prove their first assumptions had been justified, suddenly, without
any kind of a warning, from out of the robottom's peach-shaped
behind came a long resonant fart, 'Pfffffffffffffffffffffffffff!' The bubble
of the created tense atmosphere burst instantly with it's sound and
vulgar smell.
'Oh my god! What a stink!' choked Chucker, placing two long
fingers over his nasal slits. 'It just about equals my puke's own
smelling abilities. So that's why The Star Empress ordered all the
robottoms to be dismantled ... '
'Bleep ... That's hypercritical coming from a puke-stinking-vom! Do
you ... pfff ... really think that's a justified reason for having every one
of my kind hunted down and killed?'
'YES!' the others replied, in unity, taken aback by the sudden
mechanised voice.
The voice had come from a speaking mechanism conveniently
situated within a moving bulge in-between the top front part of the
legs. This same bulge seemed to give the robottom a stare inducing
expressive facial movement and along with two green lights (which
had now stopped flashing) positioned above and the two handles
either side - looking like a pair of extremely big ears - there was a
distinct face definitely to be seen.

20

'I thought ... grrr ... only the host could speak?' Scank remarked
loudly, without thinking. 'And it's dead.' He shuffled his feet (or paws
as leetlesheet prefer to call them) awkwardly around and lowered
his muzzle. 'Oh ... grrr ... yes sorry about that.' His head felt heavier
and heavier, filling with uncontrollable guilt.
'Usually,' began the robottom, flashing his right eye twice, 'when a
host and I ... pfff ... are joined we become one; the host taking over
all the communicative functions. Although ... bleep ... in the
unfortunate event of the host being injured, or even worse ... ' his
bulge quickly pointed to all Three Wise Aliens, 'killed, I have the built
in capability allowing me to act on my own initiative until such a
time when a new host can be found ... bleep.' Each of the guilty
three-not-so-wise-aliens hung their heads even further in shame.
Scank's head was now so close to the floor that his legs were
bending under the strain.
Stemming from directly underneath the visual bulge and bottom
(at an equal distance apart) the robottom's two comically thin legs
bent in the middle before lifting the giant blocks of metal - which
were his feet - in a robotic movement forwards.
Chucker watched every movement the legs made and in turn
listened to every noise each part of them created, the sound being
unique and fascinating; it was almost musical. 'Aren't you at all
angry?' he asked, warily returning to the conversation.
'I'm not the one who's angry ... pfff ... but I know some that will be!'
The robottom walked back and forth, this time slightly bouncing on
the rubber surface beneath his feet. If the host had been attached
its head would probably have been crinkled in deep concentration.
'Bleep ... You see ... the host I was carrying was some kind of leader
for the Opposers. So if I were you I would seriously think hard about
leaving this system before they see and identify this space vessel.
They might just put the wrong two and two together ... pfff ... if you
know what I'm trying to get at? You don't want to end up on their
hit list ... and we're not talking the top ten albums!'
A little speechless from what had just been said, all three quickly
communicated to Cube to leave her current positioning in the Dodu
System.

21

The usual head rush, to their relief, signified they had entered and
left an acceleration funnel which had been initiated according to
their instructions for getting them, quote: " ... the hell out of here,
now!”.
'Where has,' Robottom paused thoughtfully, his obvious name
having already been accepted by the wiser three, 'Coobe ... '
'Cube!' Dong corrected, outlining her shape with his wobbly hand
and arm movements.
'Where has Cube ... bleep ... pfff ... taken us?' the legs continued, a
small but audible fart once again escaping from the rear like the air
of a tyre deflating.
'Hopefully,' Scank replied, pinching his nostrils shut, his voice
gaining a higher tone, 'we should be back ... grrr ... on our course
with the Olas System ... woof.'
'The Olas System ... bleep ... Why that's where my host wanted to
go before our space vessel was forced to crash-land in that asteroid
belt.' Robottom's bulge moved into an inquisitive expression. In
response to the movement, Dong, Scank and Chucker quickly
looked to each others blank facial expressions and, shrugging their
shoulders, they quickly looked back to the bulge - mouth.
'You look tired,' Chucker observed, 'even for a robot. I think we
better go to the relaxation section to recuperate ourselves.'
'Not a bad idea at all,' agreed Dong, his regular grumpy nature
lightening a little with the suggestion.
Robottom followed his three new likeable companions up and
down a knowledgeable combination of chutes, round and round
corridors and eventually through an automatically opened circular
door which as it happens was crafted from an ancient and relatively
unknown block of glistening wood.
'I can see ... pfff ... well actually ... bleep ... it's more a case of me
being able to tell by the use of unexplainable sensory circuits, why
this is called the relaxation section.'
Robottom's remark was amazingly understood. The main entrance
to the section couldn't be defined as a shape of any kind, nor could

22

you say it was of one colour, it was everything - comfortable, warm,
cool, dry, wet, big, small, short and tall ...
The robottom's bottom soon touched one of the many objects
littering the entrance and instantly settled down, completely
overwhelmed with the exact feeling he had needed at that
particular moment in time. Gazing around the entrance, which he
now had decided was fairly small in size, he wondered where each
of the doors and corridors led to. 'Where do ... '
'Each of the ... grrr ... doors and corridors lead to,' interrupted
Scank's voice, expectantly, Robottom nodding. 'Grrr ... this and ...
woof ... indeed all the other sections around Cube lead to other
parts of other sections, which in turn lead to other parts of other
sections, which in turn all contain their specific cubicles, which in
turn always have a toilet situated just on the left ... grrr.'
Robottom's listening sensors picked up the changing tones in
Scank's voice, he would like to one day explore Cube but for now,
relaxing, feeling calm and at peace with his metal bowels he
sighed, 'Ahhh ... pfff ... comfortable at last,' and quickly added, 'you
know, asteroids aren't very comfortable to sit on for long periods of
time.'
'Yes, I've only just had mine removed. They were almost getting to
the size of a bunch of Tovarian grapes.' Dong's already black figure
began to blacken, in growing embarrassment. All eyes were now
firmly fixed on him, the atmosphere silent.
'Bleep ... besides asteroids,' Robottom kindly continued, 'my host
took me to many uncomfortable places. Let's just hope the next
one will be more pleasant ... pfff.'
Thinking over in his minds what had just been said Chucker turned
a greyish colour in deepening curiosity. 'I like Tovarian grapes. In
fact I found some in a container on top of one of the wall tables in
the med-cubicle, they tasted a bit off ... ' realising from Dong's
surprised expression what he had mistaken for Tovarian grapes,
Chucker's colour turned instantly from grey to green. 'Eeeeergh!'
'So ... woof ... you say you will be able to accommodate another
host,' repeated Scank, moving to the far corner to what was in his
opinion a very large room, his mind fascinated at the thought of two

23

different life forms intertwined together in life. 'What, though, did
you say your former host said about heading for the Olas System?
Was there any reason it wanted to go ... grrr ... there?' His doggy
voice gave nothing away of The Three Wise Aliens' dreams of
seeking out a galactic messiah.
'I believe I can trust you lot so I'm not going to beat around the
proverbial bush, no instead I'm actually going to attempt to tell you
the truth. Whether you believe me or not it's up to ... pfff ... you?'
Robottom farted once again but this time - to the others clearly
expressed relief - the relaxation sensors were at hand to soak up the
pungent rusty odour which normally would have been smelt. 'It all
happened two days ago ... bleep ... in one of the neighbouring
quadrants. There we were, me kneeling down, my host busy setting
a bomb ... pfff. We were in what my sex circuits have now come to
think of as the usual Opposer position. My host was planning to blow
up one of The Star Empress' many galactic destroyers. Suddenly
signalling for me to run. I did. Straight into the slightly unhelpful and
rather solid turret of a laser-canon ... bleep!'
Scank, now hanging recklessly above everyone, was desperately
trying not to laugh. Below him as if one was looking into the
reflection of a puddle Chucker mirrored the same expressive smile,
biting his bloated lip he managed to tame the animal of laughter
struggling to escape from within, several small droplets of spit
sprayed out of the pressured corners of each of their quaking
mouths.
Ignoring the others childlike behaviour Robottom carried on,
'anyway ... pfff ... so there it was we lay unconscious, the bomb
ready to explode at any second, when who do you think appeared
to us in our moment of slumber ... '
'Who?' Dong broke in, trying to reach the end of the explanation
before it had been given, and trying to regain a more serious air.
'Dog!' replied Robottom.
'Dog?' each of the Wise Three repeated, baffled.
'Yes, Dog! Our Holy Farter, Life Giver and Life Taker ... '
'Woof ... oh you mean God!'
'Bleep ... that's right, it told us there was a messiah and ... '

24

Dong raised his flabby arm forward as if he were a traffic cop and
brought Robottom's explanation to an abrupt halt. 'I think we all
know what you were told because I can admit to you now that we
too have experienced the same prophecy which you have just
described.'
'Yes,' Chucker interrupted, at the same time annoyed and jealous
that there had obviously been others entrusted by God with the
same important event, 'but of all those aliens why was your host
chosen to be told?'
'Dog said it had been chosen because it would be able to raise
the messiah within the loving arms of the Opposers. For the messiah
is said to have risen again to help prise open the smothering grip of
the dominant bosseye. A day will come when the galaxy will be
free once again from their tyranny. Evil will perish and good will
grow and lots of angel-like things will happen don't you know.'
'So ... grrr ... what happened to the bomb you had set to go off?'
'Oh it exploded with us next to it and blew us into space and
eventually we landed on the asteroid. It must have been Dog's wish
as we were blown on course for the Olas System which has
uncannily led to our fortunate meeting.'
'Your explanation is a good one,' pressed Chucker, still jealous, 'but
you mention these Opposers and the downfall of the bosseye ... I
thought that Dog - God - wasn't into violence of any sort? Could
God have been confused? Could God have mistaken the terrorist
group of Opposers as a group of mirror-loving aliens hailing from the
planet Op?'
Whilst the rapid answer of, 'No!' preceding another well placed fart
was given, Dong decided that his sagging eyelids, which were
already half closed, had had enough excitement for the time being.
'I suggest we all rest ourselves before we arrive in the Olas System.
We shall then await a sign which will guide us to the messiah.'
With all in agreement for the first time in a long while, the
relaxation section fell fast asleep around them.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...

25

Still impatiently waiting, the bionic grass seed was starting to wish it
had been designed with a useful pair of arms and legs, or even
wings for that matter, but remembering it didn't even have a mind
to think with, it quickly stopped worrying.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The relaxation section woke to find its occupants already gone.
From the glistening darkness of the Olas System four pods could be
seen circling Cube like flies around a pile of steamy brown stuff.
'Woof ... your piloting skills aren't bad at all,' Scank barked over the
growing interference which had started to buzz through his pod's
many speakers. 'Especially as you haven't a host to help you from
above. If you know what I mean?'
'My former hosts have taught me many things. Flying space
vehicles is just the tip of the iceberg. I have to say, though, these
pods are indeed in a class of their own, I am very impressed.'
'You sound muffled ... grrr ... where have you positioned your
communication pen?'
'Communication pen? What communication pen? I've been
using the pod's secondary interface.'
Scank thought for a moment as to where the pen might be. 'Woof
... the pen could have been left on the ... grrr ... gripseat?' he
suggested.
Emerging slowly from out of the following silence came a sloshing
sound like a boot having been pulled from out of a muddy bog. The
intriguing sound blasted through the sensitive intercom and out of
each of the others finely tuned pod speakers. 'I had thought this
gripseat ... pfff ... was a bit stimulating on the old rectum!' Robottom
awkwardly waited for the thick rectal oil, which the communication
pen had gathered, to drip slowly away before resuming the correct
way to control his confused pod.
Dong and Chucker kept their opinions quietly to themselves as
they concentrated on not hitting any of Cube's sides whilst flying this
way and that around her smooth body.

26

'We've been out here now for hours and there's still no sign from
that ... grrr ... God geezer.' In frustration, Scank flew his pod around
Dong's, several times, each time dangerously coming close to a
fatal collision. Dong remained mysteriously calm throughout the
terrifying ordeal without moaning once; the reason being he had
found some food wedged in between his toes and had given his
concentration on picking them clean.
'Don't worry,' Robottom comforted, 'at least in the pods ... pfff ...
we can manoeuvre closer to whatever holy sign is revealed to us.
Something ... bleep ... was said to happen in the Olas System and so
here we shall wait. Just try and be a little more patient!'
Several hours and a lot of arguments later something was beginning
to transpire.
'Hey, look! That cluster of stars wasn't there before.' Having
pointed out his observation to the others, Chucker vomited twice,
moved away from Cube's orbit and the overpowering shadow a
distant sun had recently cast over his pod and shot towards the ever
apparent space anomaly.
'What,' replied Dong, picking the last of his toes clean, angered at
not seeing whatever it was he couldn't see, first. 'I don't notice
anything?' Bringing his pod swiftly level with Chucker's, he stared
through his optical head-screen out into the vastness of space-typethings which had decided to move around in a space-type way.
Chucker felt an urge of excitement, 'Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes! Look at
the way those stars are positioned ... ooooh ... don't you see it?
Come on! Come on! Look ... eeergh!'
'Woof ... I see it!' Scank broke in, his voice thickly coated with two
distinct layers, one jealousy and the other curiosity. 'Chucker? You
don't happen to be sitting on your communication pen do you ...
grrr ... because it really isn't all that amazing to be getting the over
enthusiastic reaction you obviously appear to be having.'
No verbal response followed the leetlesheet's supposition.
'Oh yes! Yes! Yes! An arrow!' Dong screamed, at the same time
wanting to annoy Scank further. 'I see an arrow! Yes! Yes! Yes!
Let's go in for a closer look.'

27

Taking care not to get in the way, Cube followed her pods into the
arrow-like cluster of stars that for some inexplicable reason hadn't
been noticed right from the start.
'The tip of the arrow shape,' Chucker began, directing his headscreen up towards a pinkish glow, 'seems to be pointing directly at
that funny looking planet over there. Therefore I would think that the
messiah must be on it. My pod sensors are informing me the planet
is called ... '
'Huj Huji Wuji,' interrupted Robottom, 'giving ... bleep ... home to
more than five billion aliens spread across its pink oval outline which
we can clearly see glowing from out here in ... bleep ... space.'
Indeed, in the shape of an egg, Huj Huji Wuji quickly appeared on
each of the others optical head-screens courtesy of Robottom's nifty
computer skills.
'Fascinating,' Chucker remarked in several deep breaths and then,
hesitating for a moment, added, 'I suppose it too is under ... '
'The ... bleep ... control of the bosseye,' Robottom's familiar voice
pattern finished, briskly. 'Yes,' he sighed, 'I'm afraid like many other
worlds it is under the direct command of The Star Empress. In fact
nowadays most of it's inhabitants are from the bosseye race. The
planet has proven itself rich in mining deposits and is said to be
considered a home away from home for them.'
The following period of thought filled with questions each of The
Three Wise Aliens wanted to ask Robottom but were too afraid of
being interrupted. Finally, Scank plucked up the courage to say
something. 'Woof ... How come ... '
'I ... bleep ... know so much about Huj Huji Wuji? It's all down to
one of my former hosts. She brought me here to live for a while, it
was all to do with her line of business.'
Apart from the way in which he'd interrupted them, Robottom's
outbursts of knowledge had deeply impressed each of his fellow
pod pilots. Although they too had travelled, this was the first time
they had navigated into this particular location in their own galaxy.
'So, any suggestions as to what we do now?' asked Dong, too lazy
to think of one himself.

28

'Perhaps ... bleep ... we could dock our pods on the surface and
ask around. I'm sure if indeed the messiah has appeared on Huj Huji
Wuji, she will not have gone unnoticed by the locals.'
'Woof ... you know, Robottom, for a pair of metal legs with an arse
for their head you really are quite useful.'
'... Pfff ...'
Cube reluctantly stayed in orbit around the farthest shades of pink
as the large egg-like planet sucked each of the pods towards what
appeared to be its large yoke, with more than a little help from
gravity.
One by one the tiny cubic spacecraft burst through cloud after
cloud, the overcast atmosphere quickly proving itself as having a life
all of its own. Hanging carelessly around and above the underlying
city which Robottom was now trying to pinpoint on a map which
had, with his help, appeared on his head-screen, the clouds proved
to have the annoying habit of hiding solid matter. And not only did
they hide solid matter but they blocked out any type of radar
device the fateful four thought of using. As you must agree this
unfortunate handicap caused quite a niggling problem, but luckily,
included in the pods' many useful gadgets were a handful of
kamikaze probes. It had been Dong's brilliant idea to use them and
they worked relatively well.
Hovering several hundred feet in front of the advancing cubic
crafts, the probes (upon ramming in to a hidden solid object) sent
back the all too important message that there had been something
the pilots really didn't want to fly into situated dead ahead.
'We're nearly there,' said Robottom, guiltily. 'Look, I'll say it again,
I'm sorry that I forgot to mention the ... bleep ... clouds. It's just that
it's been a long time since I was last here. A lot of stars have flown
under the proverbial bridge if you could please excuse the pun. I'm
sure the clouds were not as bad as ... pfff ... this before, it must be all
the mining the bosseye have done over the years, it seems to be
ruining ... pfff ... the atmosphere ... bleep!'
'Speaking of atmospheres ... woof ... the one in your pod can't be
too pleasant.'
'Pfff ... what do you mean?'

29

'Exactly!'
Using his communication pen to circle and enlarge an area of the
map displayed before his sensors Robottom added, 'There's a place
we can safely ... bleep ... dock our pods, down there!' Pressing
another button on his communication pen he transferred the image
of the map he was seeing to the other head-screens so the others
could see which part of Huj Huji Wuji he was talking about, 'If you
look carefully you can see some space vehicles glistening in the
brief rays of sunlight.'
Moving their head-screens in unison towards a widening pink ray
of sunlight which had moments before valiantly forced its way past
several annoyed clouds to the ground far below, they all watched
as it expanded just enough for each of them to see, for the first time,
the central part of the city most aliens call Lotta Wonga.
Seeing as how the curve appeared to have such a distinct part to
play in the overall make up of Huj Huji Wuji, the square shaped pods
managed to cause relatively little upset on their sudden arrival
through the converging clouds.
Most of the planet’s dock workers were used to the comings and
goings of many different craft. Some came from as far away as the
planet "Faraway" itself. Quite frankly they really couldn't give a
damn who landed on the planet. So the sight of the four small
cubes plopping harmlessly to the ground was of little concern to
their already busier than busy schedule. Besides, they knew the
bosseye military police were now scanning every single atmospheric
entrant to see who or what they were; Huj Huji
Wuji's security was in safe hands…
'Guys?' Chucker whispered through the head-screen's internal
intercom, in sudden speculation. 'I have found one flaw to our Robottom's - plan ...'
'What's that then?' snapped Dong, wanting to quickly get on with
things.
'Well,' Chucker began, still feeling that he had a good point to
make, 'I just thought before we leave the safety of our pods, we
ought to think seriously hard about disguising Robottom. I say this
only because it would mean certain death for all of us if the bosseye

30

see what is, according to their strictly enforced laws, supposed to be
extinct by order of their beloved empress. Things have changed
since Robottom was last here.'
'Woof ... like the cloudy atmosphere for one!'
'Exactly, Scank.'
'Good point! Good point!' everyone answered over and over
again into their tightly held communication pens, apart from
Robottom who remained quiet.
'Dong thought for a moment before adding, 'I suggest then that
we should use an old fashioned cloaking device.'
'Good idea,' agreed Chucker, 'have you got one? I sure as hell
haven't!'
'It just so happens that I do. I thought it might come in handy and
it looks like I was right. Robottom, stay enclosed in your pod until I tell
you to come out.' Dong eventually squeezed free of his opened
pod and, joining Scank and Chucker, walked casually over to where
Robottom had docked several feet away. 'Right, nobody's looking
this way, open up and come on down.'
Feeling like he was a contestant on the “Price is Right" intergalactic
game show, Robottom quickly obliged the request of his fellow
alien.
'Stand back everyone I'm going to initiate the cloaking device.'
Chucker and Scank immediately did as they were told, at the
same time watching out for any immediate and surrounding
dangers.
'This won't hurt a bit. You'll only feel a slight itching sensation the
cloaking device might produce from time to time. Ready?'
'Bleep ... yes,' answered Robottom, lying to himself.
Dong made sure the device was held securely in both of his flabby
hands and, with a great amount of skill, threw the dark woolly
blanket over the pair of nervous legs.
'Pfff ... Is that it?' Robottom sighed, his vocal resonance slightly
muffled.
'That's it! You are well and truly cloaked. You're now completely
out of sight to the untrained eye. Don't worry, though, we three can
still see you, thanks to Ammaliar Dont-Yoono's book on “The Theory

31

of Complete Sci-fi Bollocks". Now you'll be able to walk freely about
the city, unnoticed. Quickly now, though, let's go whilst the device is
firmly in place. These earlier cloaking devices have been known to
have technical difficulties when exposed to high winds. Come to
think of it, you had better walk behind of us because you had beans
for breakfast ...'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Hearing the pulsating tones of an alarm going off in the adjoining
sci-cubicle, the unlucky grass seed was blown forcefully against a
wall as an escaping Tovarian Tickle fly shot past into the outer
corridor, hotly pursued by an angered scientific robot armed with a
laser net.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
It had taken the planet's new arrivals several minutes to leave the
open air of the oval docking area. As if they'd been linesmen at a
football game, several bosseye soldiers walked around it's
boundaries waiting for someone to foul up so they could use their
somewhat limited authority to its fullest extent. Unfortunately,
instead of whistles hanging around their necks, they carried
extremely menacing weapons.
So far the party of four had gone unchallenged, the cloaked
robottom creating no suspicion. 'Grrr ... your device appears to be
working,' growled Scank, surprised, at the same time itching his bald
belly.
Robottom again remained quiet, now having to use most of his
sensors all the more carefully, so as not to fall over or bump into
things as they entered the layered shadows of the surrounding city.
The Three Wise Aliens were astonished by the heavily structured
architecture the local inhabitants deemed suitable for living in and
around and, in some cases, underneath. Metals were intertwined
with metals, which were themselves intertwined with yet more
metals. A spectrum of metallic colours dominated the eye and

32

sensors. Rusty browns of centuries long gone mixed unforgivingly
with the glowing blue-silver of the more present day metals.
Having now left the docking area some distance behind them,
they eventually came to a hopeful standstill outside a large oval
doorway. Above in the dusty breeze swung a welcoming sign which
signified this was one of the many local breweries.
'I suggest we go in here and sample some of the local beverages,
oh, and if we've got time we can do a little bit of detective work.'
The veins in Chucker's neck throbbed at his own suggestion.
The others quickly agreed; anything to remove themselves from
the relative openness of the streets. Stepping through the doorway
they came upon a brightly lit room made up of ample proportions.
Weird furniture cluttered the place but most of it was in context.
Dong rubbed his multiplying bellies several times at the thought of
getting some food on the premises. It had already been nearly an
hour since he had last eaten.
Sinking themselves inside a vacant blob, they waited patiently to
be served.
It took a long time for the mobile bar to finally hover across to
serve them. Robottom had remained cautiously cloaked and was
quite happy to stay that way. Still, it turned out that the barman was
a squidge just like Dong and therefore probably wouldn't have said
anything anyway but it was better for now not to get side tracked in
their search for the messiah. A robottom on Huj Huji Wuji would take
more than a moments explaining and they didn't have the time for
that, not even for a fellow squidge.
'It's good to see another squidge in this part of the galaxy. What
brings you to this particular planet?' The barman quickly and skilfully
filled three liquid bags full of the local brew whilst Dong answered.
'I am in search of a special being. She is supposed to have
appeared here recently ... '
'Oh you mean Loolol and her amazing pair of jungars! She
appeared on stage here last ... '
'No, no, no, no ... no!' replied Dong, proud to be the same species
as the barman. 'Although, you say, "her amazing pair of jungars!".
Where is she now ... no, no, I am actually looking for ... '

33

The barman itched his saggy bits and belched, staring for a
moment at his nose he mimicked the great bosseye stare.
Dong looked at the others then back at the barman, 'Do you have
any idea what I'm talking about?'
The barman's eyes slowly uncrossed. Looking cautiously around he
leant prudently forwards over the oval bar he was central to, his
huge bosom sagging on the surface next to a packet of oval
cigarettes. 'No, no, no, no ... no!'
Groans immediately came from the wise three, not to mention half
the locals who had been leaning in their general direction up until
the barman's disappointing response.
To the groups complete bewilderment the barman started shaking
his head and opening and closing both his suggestive eyes, layers of
blubber rolling in motions never before seen to a non squidge.
'Woof ... is something wrong?' barked Scank, concerned, his
shaggy ears staying erect for just a few seconds before folding back
into their semi folded position.
The barman continued to gesture for a few moments longer until
finally giving in. 'Come on! You know!' Taking the oval cigarette
packet from the bar, he beamed out a lit cigarette in-between his
two fat fingers which he had been holding ready in a vee shape
and began smoking it, nervously.
'Know what ... grrr?' Scank growled sharply, this time just his left ear
rising and falling, or rather, flopping.
'You know ... ' The barman's rolls of flab were starting to glisten
with sweat as his voice quickened with each word, 'For example barman meets The Three Wise Aliens - barman remains ignorant
under repeat questioning by The Three Wise Aliens - barman
withholds vital information you all desperately bloody need! You
should know what to do next ... come on, come on …' soaking his
cigarette, hearing the lighted end hiss when extinguished, the
barman collapsed behind the bar.
'Oh, I see!' understood Chucker, playing with his huge lips as
though they were a musical instrument he'd suddenly discovered.
'You really do have information which could help us in our quest and
you want us not to give up the first time we ask because if we persist

34

you'll tell us everything you know, including what deodorant you
obviously didn't put on this morning.'
The Three Wise Aliens and Robottom waited for an agonising
moment as the barman attempted to raise himself from the floor.
'Yes,' the knackered squidge sighed, wiping the perspiration off his
many brows, almost burning them as a lit cigarette suddenly
appeared in-between his fingers again. 'Damn, I must remember to
close the packet!' Stopping, he looked around at his weird looking
tormentors. 'Well? What are you waiting for? A bloody galactic
messiah?!'
Dong, Scank, Chucker and the cloaked Robottom quickly looked
around at the other folk who were once again leaning in their
direction, all of them ready and eager to hear out the rest of the
conversation. Once each of them had, in turn, straightened up, like
a pack of falling dominoes in reverse, and had returned their
attention elsewhere, Dong asked the barman for the information he
had so cleverly appeared not to have had the first time around.
'Damn,' the barman replied, taking a deep drag from his dying
cigarette, 'you are a pushy lot aren't you.' Happy to play along with
the unfolding events, raising his hands, or rather two mounds of loose
flesh with digits in, he swiftly carried on as if surrendering to their
persuasive charms. 'OK! OK! I'll talk. I have heard from one of my
preacher friends that there is a new alien in town. She goes by the
name of Annoying Shiet. Apparently she pesters them with wild
religious stories and is to be found somewhere within The Row Of
Columns.' The barman looked yet again at the expressionless faces
set before his own. 'Don't worry, you'll find this place, you can't miss
it.' No sooner had he finished, he resumed winking and wobbling.
Chucker looked back to the barman and said, ‘Could you at least
give us some directions?'
The barman immediately stopped his movements and smiled.
'Good, good, you're getting the hang of this at last. You know, as a
barman I am so used to having people on missions coming in here
giving me the spiel, I'm getting quite a dab hand at this sort of thing,
even if I do say so myself. Anyway, here I go ... you'll need to leave
this establishment first, but that goes without saying, I can see you

35

are a bright bunch really. Take an immediate left to follow the
outside street northwards until you come across a crissy crossy type
of criss-cross crossing crossroad. Once there you must do the
traditional dance which entails jumping up and down whilst
screaming foul words at the top of your voice. Then you have to
walk, again that goes without saying, ha he ha hoo, eastwards until
you sight the unmistakable structure of The Row Of Columns … You
know there was a time when one could see them from outside this
entrance, those were the days. In fact one could see the columns,
or at least the tip of them, from anywhere in Lotta Wonga, but due
to the growing population the buildings have grown taller and taller
... '
'Excuse me,' Chucker greenly interrupted, 'do you have a bag
behind that bar of yours?'
'Certainly,' replied the barman, excited by the unexpected
question, 'here you are, but what do you want it for ... '
'Eeeeeergh ... Dollop ... Splat ... Trickle ... Arrrgh!'
' ... Pfff ... '
With a ghostly white face the barman coughed, 'Well, I'd better be
going now, there's some very suspicious looking bosseye seated over
there in the far ceiling and they look in desperate need of a refill.
Maybe I'll puke ... I mean ... speak to you again sometime ... ' With
that said and done, the bar, and the gagging barman, moved
quickly away.
'Let's ... grrr ... go,' sniffed Scank, turning his attention to Dong,
eager to leave with the other two who were already breathing the
air outside. 'What are you waiting for?'
'I'm starving, I need to eat and soon! You know my squidgean
race needs to eat every hour or we ... we ... we change!'
'Look ... grrr ... we have to go now, before I choke to death, I need
some fresh air. Please ... woof ... it will be worth the sacrifice when
we set eyes on the messiah.'
'Okay, agreed Dong, very reluctantly, looking down at his middle.
'I'm coming and then I'll meet you outside.'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...

36

With the vibrations of the alarm still massaging its body, the grass
seed lay unconscious at the base of the wall which it had hit so
hard. From within the darkness of its newly found dreamstate a
strange and powerful voice could be heard ...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Since Cube's crew had been last outside an oily odour had filled the
street and within only a matter of seconds, each of their nostrils,
although, in Robottom's case, fragrant sensor. This distinct change
wasn't the only difference, the weather had warmed up
dramatically, but according to Robottom this was just part of a
normal Huj Huji Wuji winter.
'That smell is driving me mad in this heat!' squawked Dong,
coughing several times, his blubbery body forced to deal with the
rippling aftershock.
Everyone quickly looked around in an attempt to locate the cause
of this overpowering smell.
'Woof ... look! Over there by those refuse boxes ... grrr ... what is it?'
Scank's observation rapidly turned the others' heads towards the
sighting. A weirdly designed robotic form was hesitantly focused on
and its unique image thrown dramatically into each of their brains.
'He reminds me of what I've seen of ... I believe they are called,
"Dawgs".'
'Oh, yeh,' agreed Chucker, remembering what Dong was talking
about, 'those hairy creatures we've seen from those scrambled
transmission waves we came across a while back.'
'Except,' added Scank, 'this one's ... grrr ... held together with wires
and antique bolts.'
'I don't like the look of him!' Dong conceded, grumpily.
As if in understanding, the creature's head turned to acknowledge
the group of staring aliens. His whole face was simply a mass of jaw
filled from ear to ear with dangerously looking sharp teeth. From
where the jaws were hinged a blood-red slit of light , on each side,
represented his eyes.

37

'Woof ... he just winked at me!'
'Scank, you did say, "winked"?' clarified Dong.
'Grrr ... yes!'
'Just checking.'
'Oh, forget him,' Chucker intervened, 'he's only an old tin can. We
must see to the business at hand. Come on let's follow the barman's
directions.'
Scank didn't need to be asked a second time, he didn't like the
look of that creature, not one bit. Scurrying at first to the left he
suddenly dashed to the right and then to the left again. The others
followed in a straight line, ignoring his frisky movements.
'The street was becoming busier the further on they went. Small
crowds began developing around the best of the market stalls
positioned on each side, some being at least two stories high.
Before sighting the crissy crossy type of criss-cross crossing
crossroad which they had been told to head for, Dong asked the
silent Robottom if he was all right. A swift movement underneath the
cloaking device was his only response, a response which didn't
demand anymore questions. Dong gave a low snarl of disapproval
and slowly returned his attention to rubbing his stomachs.
Several bosseye military police suddenly appeared from around a
corner and looked the differently shaped group up and down.
Luckily, before anything could come of the tense situation, they
were dragged aside by the many street sellers who now littered the
way.
There were sellers offering medicines for computer systems that
have come down with a virus, there were sellers selling equipment
supposedly capable of changing the buyer's gender. Sellers selling
cellars and the list went on. All in all there were some pretty unusual
products swapping hands.
'Don't look now,' gestured Dong, 'but we're being followed by that
dawgy creature.'
Ignoring his words of advice Chucker went black before turning
around for a glimpse of the strange follower. In doing this
completely unsubtle movement it made the creature instantly
pretend to sniff three police officers who were rapidly overtaking

38

him. The creature, realising who he had started to sniff, stopped to
scratch his wiry neck. Turning back to orange, Chucker resumed a
forward position alongside his companions. 'Perhaps he is simply
going the same way but the three police officers running towards us
I'm not so sure about!'
'The What!' Dong gulped, moving his hands up to his chins and
then round and round his shiny bald head.
Robottom twitched but said nothing.
'I'm ... snfff ... going to have to have a look for myself,' sniffed
Scank, something he only did when really nervous. Dropping
behind, he positioned his four legs ready to turn. The others waited
for his analysis of the situation. 'Woof ... oops ... they've seen me
looking and have speeded up!'
From his leading position Dong noticed a change in the street up
ahead. 'I think we're finally coming up to the crissy crossy type of
criss-cross crossing crossroads. Strangely, there appears to be
nobody in sight, we must be leaving the hustle and bustle of the
market behind us.'
Closing in from behind they could hear the heavy patters of what
could only be the feet of three bosseye police officers still running
towards them. The crissy crossy type of criss-cross crossing crossroad
was now just several feet away. 'They're going to arrest us!' Chucker
winced, crumbling under the intense pressure. 'I bet The Empress
has put a warrant out for our immediate execution.'
The first and tallest of the three police officers - awkwardly dressed
in a baggy uniform - suddenly grabbed a hold of Chucker's right
arms. 'Excuse us! We are in a hurry!' he shouted, before jumping
into the centre of the crissy crossy type of criss-cross crossing
crossroad closely followed by his smaller, but bigger breasted,
comrades. 'Chicken!' the taller shouted, as he began continuously
jumping up and down with the other two joining him, their body
parts bouncing in more directions than his.
'Chicken!' shouted the second officer, her voice shaking with her
erratic movements.
'Chicken!' repeated the third.
'Turkey!' added the taller, again.

39

'Turkey!' said the second.
'Turkey ... and pheasant!' stated the third.
'And pheasant!' said the taller, in gratitude.
'And pheasant!' joined the second.
'Not forgetting ... grouse!' said the taller, finally.
'Grouse!'
'Grouse!'
No sooner had they finished their fit of calculated madness they
ran hastily off into the blurring distance.
'What the dooglash was all that about?' sighed Dong, looking to
the covered form beside him, for advice, his brows furrowed.
Robottom slowly stated, 'Pfff ... I don't ... bleep ... remember
anything about this tradition the barman mentioned, but then I
never came to this part of Lotta Wonga before when I was living
here.'
Scank followed the eyebrow trend and wrinkled his left two, 'Why
did they shout out names of birds?'
'Foul!' remembered Dong. 'That's what the barman must have
meant when he said for us to shout out "foul words" at the top of our
voices, he meant fowl! As in birds!'
Several locals, appearing from a small alleyway, confirmed his
conclusion. Together upon reaching the crissy crossy type of crisscross crossing crossroad they began carrying out the same mad
ritual that the bosseye police had danced moments before.
Although at first it seemed funny to watch it was actually very
effective in slowing and controlling the advancing foot traffic which
had suddenly come out of the metal-work, it was acting as a
primitive form of traffic light.
'Here ... grrr ... goes my dignity!' sighed Scank, jumping forward.
'I don't have any,' joined Chucker.
Dong, waited for a few moments to take in what he was seeing,
and for some reason Robottom (think about it!), eventually followed
the other two's lead in carrying out the hilarious rituals of the dance.
After this event it was with greater caution that the party of four
made their way eastwards to what appeared to be a vertical line of
metal cylinders. The closer they got the taller the line became until

40

eventually the cylinders touched, with some even penetrating, the
moving bellies of the many pink clouds which had started to gather
above. The warm temperature reacted in obeyance and started to
drop to well below freezing.
'Incredible!' gasped Chucker, overwhelmed by the spectacle of
nature.
'They are incredible you are quite right,' repeated Dong, motioning
his hands towards the structures ahead.
'No, not the columns! The creature ... oh ... did I neglect to
mention that he's still following us!' The others nodded, slowly. 'Even
though he seems to be made of twisted metals and wires he still has
the ability to urinate. I think that's quite ... incredible.'
Chucker's red enquiring colour was quickly partnered with the
equally toned face of an angered Dong. 'I would like for you to be
a little more concerned with the finding of the Galactic Messiah and
a lot less concerned about that damn creature and his "incredible"
habits! Have I made myself clear?'
'Yes,' Chucker squealed, submissively.
Where they had come to stand many different species were
gathering together. There were definitely less bosseye present, yet
still enough for caution to be advised. Dong came to the conclusion
this was the poorer part of Lotta Wonga, an area of the city where
the police didn't voluntarily choose to come.
Continuing to march on a bit further, the group couldn't have
been walking for more than five minutes when Robottom suddenly
stopped dead.
'What is it?' Dong whispered, trying at the same time not to be
talking to whom no other, apart from his friends, could see was
there.
'Well, I'm afraid it's that creature again, he's having another leak
on that column over there. It really is, as you said, Chucker, quite ...
incredible!'
This time Dong moodily remained silent whilst his two companions
talked happily amongst themselves about the creature's "incredible"
habits. Eventually, in an attempt to change the way things were
going, he made what he believed to be a more constructive

41

observation. 'There seems to be something happening over there
by that column. I'm going to find out what!'
Seeing their flabby friend moving rapidly away, Chucker,
Robottom, and Scank, hurried just as rapidly after him.
Unfortunately, before they could catch up he had disappeared in
between a curving wall of aliens.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Most of the lightly built aliens in the crowd were easily pushed aside
by the squidges sheer weight, although, there were a few that
actually pushed him aside from time to time. Feeling his stomachs
rumbling, Dong was again made aware that he needed to eat
something and quickly! Seeing a gap of light appearing up ahead,
he knew, after a lot of hard effort, that he had almost made it to the
front; his friends were nowhere to be seen.
Upon reaching the centre of the crowd he noted several
preachers, each one from a different race, some dressed with
clothes some without. In turn they themselves circled an extremely
unusual looking form; each listening reluctantly it seemed, to what
she had to say.
The jagged form immediately captivated Dong's attention.
Positively capturing to the eye this feminine speaker wasn't like
anything he'd seen before and he's seen a lot of things since being
aboard Cube. She was at least a quarter of the height of the
preachers, in fact about half his own height more or less, probably
less than more.
'Woof ... what's going on?' Scank suddenly enquired, sneakily
appearing underneath the middle of Dong's heavily rooted legs; a
position most aliens would die for, some even pay for.
'Shhh ... '
'Sheet?' Scank finished, gulping several times at the thought of the
consequences of his positioning. 'You'd better not be! Not whilst I'm
below your bowels, like this.'

42

'No, no, no, no ... I meant ... Shhh, be quiet, hush yourself is
basically what I'm trying to tell you. Believe it or not I'm trying
desperately hard to think ... '
'Hey,' gaped Scank, suddenly recognising the speaker, 'well stone
the googlies ... grrr ... look what it isn't; it's a crystal being. Woof ...
well I never.' Due to the persistent cold, the vapour of Scank's
breath began to freeze on his long, black muzzle, the clouds of
breath which escaped his hairy face looking as though he was
breathing out puffs of smoke.
A crystal being is indeed a rare and wonderful sight. They are
usually to be found floating around white dwarfs, not small, pale
coloured midgets, but stars near the end of their life. Having said
this, they do live around most other stars, such as the laxative suns of
Errrnnngh-Ahhh, aptly named for obvious reasons. Knowledge of
how and why they exist are privileged to only a select few. Also,
one extra comment, a crystal being cannot be described as either
female or male; but for the sake of translation the she descriptive is
the more appropriate of the two.
Scank's impressive outburst had only been possible thanks to his
childhood fascination with crystal beings. Their images are to be
found throughout in his own race's Book of Study. The Book of Study
displays fundamental pictures upon its many sacred pages.
'I am telling you, I have been sent by the Almighty to deliver us all
from evil! To give you this day your daily bread ... ' The small ball of
jagged crystal invisibly raised herself from the smooth metal ground
which she had settled on like a golf ball upon a tee. 'Follow me and
we will see the day the bosseye no longer enslave other worlds.
Together we can stand ...'
'On the likes of you!' screamed a bosseye soldier, barging
aggressively through the unprepared audience. Judging by the
soldier's draping black uniform - upon which a silver star rested
above her left bosoms - she was most definitely in charge of the
squad of equally dressed (except in yellow) soldiers who were also
closing in on the crystal being's position.

43

'Woof ... that must be the Galactic Messiah!' barked Scank, still
huddled underneath Dong. 'We must help ... grrr ... because you
know what the bosseye will do to her!'
Dong was deeply worried, the unravelling situation was beginning
to look dangerous. They had arrived too late. If only they had
found the messiah an hour or two sooner.
Two large soldiers, who had been edging nearer and nearer,
suddenly made matters worse by grabbing the crystal being and
holding her whilst the rest of the squad aimed large weapons
towards her back and front - if indeed the messiah had one - it was
hard to tell. The battle weary soldiers all knew that if their target
moved just a little bit she was to be killed instantly without so much
as a second thought.
'So what are we going to do?' asked Dong, looking down upon
Scank's long, frozen muzzle. 'We cannot afford to reveal ourselves,
we will be captured as well and more than likely we'll all be killed!'
Rushing forcefully through the hushed crowd, Chucker and the still
invisible Robottom finally came to join their companions’ discussion.
'It's too crowded to be able to run,' noted Chucker, all three of his
antennae twitching rapidly as if they were knitting needles working
enthusiastically on a solution to their current predicament.
'Oh my god!' shouted one of the preachers, blaspheming, as he
caught the ruff end of a dreadful odour which had started to
spread around the gathering.
'Disgusting!' others quickly joined in, one after the other, gasping
for fresh air.
All eyes seemed to be quickly fixed upon three aliens huddled
together in what appeared to be a secretive discussion. Then, as if
things hadn't been bad enough, out of nowhere pounced the
metal creature who had briefly been forgotten, onto a more than
alarmed Robottom, immediately de-cloaking him for everyone to
see.
'It's a robottom!' screeched one of the soldiers in shock.
'Kill him before he fills our lungs with his lethal farting. Death, by
order of The Star Empress ... Charge!'

44

With this unwanted aggression now aimed towards the four
mysterious strangers, the messiah was carelessly thrown to the
ground. The squad of bosseye soldiers were focused upon the
robottom and his shit scared companions.
The general public started to panic and run. Some, who had the
natural capability, ran up columns, some into them, disappearing
like ghosts. It was indeed chaos for all concerned. Alien madness
was everywhere!
'Quick,' screeched Chucker, 'The messiah is going to be trampled
on and cracked into tiny pieces if we don't get to her soon ... '
Before finishing what he was saying, the dog-like creature scooped
the crystal being into its jaws and was ran off into the vast forest of
columns which the distance painted around them.
Robottom dodged left and right, screaming on high volume as the
soldiers started to use their weapons indiscriminately.
'Follow that bloody creature ... grrr ... it's taken the messiah!'
Working to their advantage the chaotic crowd acted as a smoke
screen long enough for the group to make their dash.
Running as fast as they could, Dong bouncing, Chucker wobbling
and Scank zigzagging, Robottom remained some distance behind.
'Look over there,' informed Chucker, 'the creature's going into that
narrow alleyway ... '
Screams and shouts, mostly in bosseye dialect, were almost upon
them. The soldiers were proving to be fast at running, it wouldn't be
long before they would catch up and blow their brains out. Several
green lasers, taking on the form of a spinning ball, whooshed past
the group’s heads as they pursued the metal kidnapper.
'We must get to the Messiah before she is killed,' said Dong, now
breathing heavily.
Chucker looked to the entrance of the alleyway, an idea coming
into his minds. 'I'll prevent the soldiers from following,' he burped,
waiting for Robottom to finally catch up,' you keep going!'
Watching his companions carry on without him, he defiantly turned
to face the oncoming squad of bosseye and, with a green colour
totally unsurpassed by a vom, he spew endless chunks.

45

In only a matter of seconds the entrance was covered with the
pungent smell of his puke. No soldier, or anything for that matter,
would be following that way in a hurry. Quickly turning his head, he
was just in time to see the last of his friends scampering into a blurry
distance. Several desperate laser blasts from a few soldiers brave
enough to cope with the growing smell whooshed past his
antennae, lighting the route of the previously dark alleyway in a
glowing shade of bogey green. 'Wait for me!' Chucker's form
wobbled into the fading light and was gone from sight.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Chucker eventually caught up with the others as they were in the
process of cornering the messiah's fearless kidnapper.
'Woof ... it's still holding her in its mouth,' confirmed Scank, kneeling
down on his two right legs.
Ever so slowly the group inched their way closer and closer to the
trapped, and now snarling, creature. Oil dripped from his fangs as if
he'd developed a sudden case of rabies.
'Grrr ... you can't run from us anymore,' growled Scank, with equal
ferocity shaking his voice.
'Who be sayin' anythin' about me runnin'?' The creature's snarling
metal lips turned all too quickly into an ugly grin. 'Me name be
Pugjaw, for obvious reasons, and I be head spy for the Star Empress
'erself. I'm sorry t'say this'll be the last you'll ever be seein' the
Galactic Messiah,' the group looked at him in surprise, 'you see I've
known about her appearance for a while now and thanks t'you I've
finally succeeded'n'findin'er.' Like glistening drops of blood his eyes
gazed past the confident four. From behind the group a large
orderly line of crack military secret police, under the direct
command of Pugjaw, were closing silently in from the rear.
'Goodbye fools,' he laughed, 'goodbye!'
It was at this precise moment the four realised they had been
cleverly tricked. Looking swiftly around they met face to face with
the closing in bosseye. For a brief moment their attention was pulled
back to the evil, metal creature now known to them as Pugjaw. To

46

their astonishment his limbs had folded, his shape changed. His
body was now in the form of a space shuttle with its rear thrusters
glowing white hot.
'What now?' shouted Chucker, above the deafening noise
vibrating through his entire body. In answer to his question the
police obligingly pushed him and his companions backwards with
the ends of their weapons. Reluctantly each of them were forced
against a wall and quickly had their hands glued together.
Hovering for a moment longer than was really necessary, Pugjaw
powered his way over their heads, higher and higher into the
planet's swirling atmosphere. Instead of his pugnacious jaws, the
Galactic Messiah now found herself positioned inside what
appeared to be a well designed cockpit. Unlike before, Pugjaw's
overall appearance was now impressively modern and faultless.
Firing lasers into the clouds above he made sure there was a clear
route ahead of him and blasted out of sight.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
With the alarm having stopped, the bionic grass seed awoke to find
itself being lifted higher and higher towards an air vent. Its long
awaited escape from the scientific section finally seemed imminent.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'You are all condemned to die here in The Empress' prison.' The
guard's voice trailed off as he pressed a small pear shaped button.
With a jet of high pressure the confinement door sealed shut,
reflecting its four new occupants upon its shiny inner surface.
'This ... grrr ... place stinks!' Scank looked around at the cell which
had been specifically built with the occupants' comfort not in mind.
'And with the confined and combined smells ... snfff ... of Robottom
and Chucker, well, we are definitely doomed!'
'Never mind that,' grumbled Dong, 'I need to eat something or I'll
turn into ... her!'

47

'Bleep ... who?' questioned Robottom, his bulge coming back to
life for the first time since they'd been captured.
'I don't like to talk about it. All that “Miss Nice” stuff.' Fed up more
than usual, Dong sat down on his behind then, in unexpected pain,
jumped straight back up again. 'This bloody floor has small spikes in
it,' he groaned, vigorously rubbing his posterior.
None of the others took any notice of their friend's shared personal
discomfort, they were too busy thinking over what he'd just said.
Scank was the first to break. 'Woof ... come to think of it, Dong, I've
only ever heard you talk about what happens to your species if they
don't eat. Apparently you said it is something weird? But didn't you
say,' pausing, he scratched his ears, 'didn't you say that each
squidge has their own unique reaction ... grrr ... if so, what's yours?'
'You don't want to know!' snapped Dong, suddenly feeling like an
alienated female in an all male changing room. 'I turn into a form
completely opposite to my normal self.'
The other three looked blankly at each other, in thought.
'Bleep ... so let me get this straight,' Robottom loudly analysed,
bleeping with newly found excitement. 'Normally you are moody,
hungry, short, fat, lazy, bossy and, let's see ... male!'
'Hold it! Hold it! Hold it! I'm not t ... ' Dong abruptly lurched
forward. 'It's happening, I ... ' Again he lurched. Diving
acrobatically towards one of the many darkly lit corners of the
unusually shaped cell, his black skin quickly blended into the
shadows.
'Thank goodness we aren't still glued to one another, this would be
a most embarrassing situation,' observed Chucker, not detracting
from what was happening in the corner. 'What's happening to him?'
Grunts and groans came from the corner as Dong continuously
twitched and turned. Several hours passed on by, the grunts and
groans having turned into an erotic selection of gasps and whimpers
followed closely by an encore of intense heavy breathing.
Suddenly all went quiet in anticipation and from out of the cell's
many shadows came an extremely tall and extremely well muscled
white giant; it was like Dong had been stretched out. 'Hi there, my
fellow alien pals!'

48

Dumb struck to say the least, the three spectators stared in
disbelief at the newly formed alien heroine. It was still possible to
make out Dong's distinguishing features but, as he himself had said
hours before, everything now seemed the opposite. His general
appearance was (on the whole) an extended (healthier looking)
version of before, but the main difference could be noticed in his
two (previously sagging) chest muscles which had now bloated out
into two round, wholesome mounds and unlike the bosseye squidge
don't wear clothes; this was a change in him the others could get
used to, in a sick, overfriendly sort of a way.
'OK,' said the new Dong, her voice having a cool, heroic edge to it,
letting the listener think that she could achieve anything she told
them, 'seeing as you all seem to be speechless, I have an idea!'
Looking at her stunned friends she ruffled her new head of white hair
and waited for a reaction ... it didn't come. 'See that panel above
the door?' This time the others managed to nod each of their
heads. 'I believe I can force it open and once opened I'll be able to
raise the cell door by using my body as a circuit breaker.'
Robottom eventually reacted with a comment, his bulge shrinking
for just a few seconds. 'The power surge could prove ... bleep ...
fatal!'
'Yes, it's too risky,' joined Chucker in his worried, gurgly voice, his
body turning white with obvious fear and apprehension.
'We're only going to die if we stay here, anyway,' reminded Dong.
'What would be the difference?'
'Well ... '
'Good! That's settled then ... stand back!' With muscles flexed and
popping, the white giant grabbed hold of a small corner of the
proposed panel. With an almighty groan - from both the metal and
the heroine - the panel bent back with all the manners of a sardine
can opening for the first time tried.
'Her’ I go,' mocked Dong, with a literal jest demonstrating her
newly found sense of humour. Lifting up her arms up towards the
revealed circuitry, which was making a buzzing noise now that the
panelling had been ripped away, the others couldn't help but
notice Dong's basketball sized pectorals pushing together to form a

49

crevice the size of which Saturn and Uranus couldn't even make if
brought together by a cosmic force. This was the stuff Greek
legends were made of. Within a matter of seconds they and the
rest of her body shook, the tremendous surge of unleashed power
running through her veins, lighting them up like an underground
map. Where the veins forked outwards it looked like a painful
display of trapped lightening was desperately trying to escape from
her blood stream.
'Woof ... it's working!' barked Scank, sweating profusely. 'It's
actually ... grrr ... bloody working!'
At first there appeared a small sheet of light as the door slowly rose
upwards from the floor. Finally the sheet turned into the
overwhelming light from the corridor outside. It was very much like
one of those X-file scenes when an alien spacecraft lands and
opens its doors to reveal the forms of little grey aliens with large
heads moving about in the growing light.
'You've done it,' shouted Chucker, concerned now for Dong's well
being, 'let's go!'
Everyone looked over to the squidge. Apart from her obvious
shaking she hadn't moved.
'She's ... grrr ... stuck in the surge! It looks like she can't get herself
free, that's if she's still alive?' Moving forwards in a desperate
attempt to dislodge her, Scank was roughly, but wisely, held back.
'Don't be a fool,' screamed Chucker, 'you don't want to join her,
do you? … Do you?'
'No ... grrr ... not really.'
'Well then, we must think of something else and now would be a
good time, for Dong's sake.'
'Bleep ... I can do it!' bleeped Robottom, bravely. 'I'm mechanical;
the least that can happen to me is an overriding shut down.’
'Grrr ... or total meltdown!'
'Sheet ... bleep ... maybe I won't do ... no, yes I will, we must help
her.'
'All right,' added Chucker with a rather all too fast reply, 'quickly!'
Grabbing Scank's arm he pushed him into the corridor and together
they kept an eye out for any prison guards that might be on patrol.

50

Robottom took several long steps backwards until he was
eventually pressed firmly against the ice-cold touch of the cell wall.
With an amazing burst of speed he ran bum first into Dong, who as it
happens appeared to be smiling whilst she shook.
It hadn't worked! Dong was still jiggling around like a squirrel on
acid. With increasing desperation Robottom assessed his bladder
level. He knew he only had a few drops of fuel left, but it would
have to do. Checking both his foot thrusters were positioned
correctly, he began another run towards Dong - and at a
calculated time - turned them full on …
The added powerful boost seemed to create the much needed
speed to be able to push Dong away from the sparking panel, but
all the same, the power surge had the final say...
Both Robottom and Dong were propelled forcefully against the
back of the cell with a thud. Where the aggressive little thud had
come from is a mystery; they have been known to live in circuits
though, but it managed to run out of the cell alive and well which is
more than can be said for the other two it left behind.
'They're unconscious,' Chucker gasped, looking from the escaping
thud downwards at the two bodies (mainly at Dong's more
attractive one) which were slumped half against the wall and half
limp upon the spiked floor.
'No, on the contrary, I'm quite conscious,' stated Dong, lifting
herself up whilst rubbing her chest.
'Oh, let me do that for you, Dong?' said Chucker, happy to help.
'No, it's all right, there's no time to lose, we must get out of this
place before we're spotted and if you've ever been spotted you'll
know it's not a nice experience; especially if you prefer stripes like I
do.'
Casually lifting the robottom's heavily mechanised form away from
the floor with the use of his ear-like handles, Dong joined the vom
who had gone back into the disturbingly silent corridor to join Scank
who had remained on watch.
'It's ... grrr ... great to see you alive,' welcomed Scank, looking at
the motionless legs squeezed tightly under the giant's left armpit.

51

'What condition is he in,' he quickly added, pointing his snout in
Robottom's general direction.
'I'm not exactly sure, but for the moment we must concentrate on
our escape.'
'Which way do you reckon we should go?' prompted Chucker,
looking left and right.
'Just follow me, alien friends,' smiled Dong, 'I'll find a way out!'
Choosing to go left, she paced off down the endless corridor like a
tube train which had somehow grown a pair of very large tits in front
of its engine.
After several minutes had passed by, showing their hairy arses out
of the taxi window and beeping profusely, the endless corridor, as it
had first appeared, started to curl progressively upwards to the right.
Minutes are yet another species which crop up from time to time in
Cube's world, along with thuds and several others we have yet to
come across, they take some getting used to but like their motto
goes, "It takes Time to make a minute pass by ... ".
The group continued to scurry past cell door after cell door, light
after light, always the same distance apart, always the same height.
'This is going on forever and it's starting to rhyme, we must find an
exit or we'll run out of time!' Chucker paused for several deep
breaths. 'This is getting worse! Where are the guards, anyway? Why
aren't they chasing us like they're supposed to in these frantic
situations?' No sooner had he finished, from around the following
corner, the desperate group stumbled upon a small, oval, door
blocking their way forwards.
'I'm sorry Robottom,' apologised Dong, in advance, 'but this
shouldn't hurt too much with your circuits shut down.'
'Woof ... what do you mean by that?' queried Scank ...
CRUNCH! came the sound of Robottom hitting the door as he was
used as an innovative battering ram. 'Let's just hope his metal is
stronger than the door's!'
'Woof ... what if it isn't?'
'I hope we don't find that out ... damn, this door is strong!' cursed
Dong in growing frustration as several more attempts failed
miserably. 'It's only been dented. I can't risk Robottom anymore ... '

52

With biceps flexed to amazing proportions, she punched the door
hard with her clenched fist.
KAPLAM! went the fist, shooting through the door as if it had been
made of cardboard, making a fairly large hole to look through.
'I can climb through ... grrr ... from here on,' offered Scank, eagerly
trying to do something to help, 'and I'll possibly be able to open the
door from the other side.'
'Okay! Go for it!' encouraged Dong, in new found admiration.
Scank's small hairy figure whisked itself through the opening, using
all six of his dextrous limbs. With a cartoon reality he pulled himself
into and out of the hole and instead of "KAPLAM!" his body went,
POP!
'He really is a true leetlesheet,' approved Dong, slapping Chucker
firmly upon his snake-thin back, forcing him to jerk violently forwards.
'He's a brave little guy, don't you agree?'
Chucker looked up and nodded. It felt weird. He was normally
the tallest of them all by far. The sudden WHOOSH! of the opening
door quickly turned his drifting attention.
'Grrr ... I know why we haven't seen any prison guards chasing us,'
gulped Scank, his four eyelids flickering with shock.
Not really wanting to find out what the leetlesheet was talking
about, Dong and Chucker stepped cautiously through the opened
doorway to be greeted by a powerful gust of warm wind; the winter
weather had once again changed.
To their reluctance The Three Wise Aliens were standing together
on what appeared to be some type of balcony. It circled the very
tip of a column, thousands of feet above the metal-ridden city
scattered in a phobia inducing way below. Surrounding them, on all
sides, the other columns which formed The Row could be seen
twinkling in the occasional rays of sunlight which managed to break
through the pink clouds.
'Well ... stone the googles!' stated Chucker, in awe.
'Dooglash!' added Dong.
'Woof! What's that?' barked Scank, the wind drowning out his own
surety.

53

'What's what?' asked Dong, her attention half taken away by the
slightly unnerving sight of one of Huj Huji Wuji's pink clouds floating
carelessly passed her head.
'That sound ... ' Scank paused to listen, 'I think it's an alarm, coming
from within the prison column ... woof ... we've been sprung!'
From across the way, where some of the other surrounding
columns were conveniently positioned for an ambush, came several
bursts of light as though a group of tourists had suddenly taken an
onslaught of flash photographs.
'Get down!' screamed Dong, at the same time pulling the others
aggressively to the balcony floor. They were all just in time to be
missed by several devastating power balls which screeched through
a pink cloud, leaving it with a window-like hole big enough for them
to see who had fired upon them.
The hole soon filled again a moment later with the pink wisp of Huj
Huji Wuji's unique atmosphere.
'Bosseye soldiers have positioned themselves at the top of the
other columns,' indicated Dong, feeling nice and hungry. 'As we just
very nearly found out, they're using power balls set at maximum
destruction. We're sitting ducks!'
'Woof ... more like shitting ducks the way I'm feeling!'
Dong continued, 'In a short space of time they'll be able to
demolish the entire top of this column and we'll go with it.' Stopping,
she peered over the rounded edge of the balcony. 'We must think
of something ...' The gigantic squidge quickly retracted her
beautifully elongated head.
Several flashes of green shot past into the top of the prison
column, showering the group with thousands of painful metal
splinters. Without mercy another ball struck, creating destructive
vibrations which tossed the four bodies around the balcony floor like
sizzling sausages inside a frying pan. This in turn was closely followed
by another and ... you might just say things were not looking too
good for the crawling crew of the craft called Cube.
'Quick!' shrieked Chucker, his eye widening. 'The doorway is
replacing itself!'

54

Jumping to her webbed feet, Dong leapt for the door in an
attempt to force it back open. This time she was forced to give up
as a relentless bombardment of power balls stopped her from being
able to break back through. 'It's no use, we've but the one chance
left open to us.' Dong gritted her heroically shining teeth. Looking
away from her scared companions once again at the thousand
foot drop, she made her last suggestion. 'We could try our luck and
jump for it?'
Chucker's sudden puking said what he and Scank both thought of
that idea.
The balcony and the column were fast looking as though
metalworm had set in; holes were everywhere, in fact, the top of the
column had started to bend under the lack of solid foundation.
From the comparative safety of the other columns the cruel
bosseye knew that the next array of blasting would prove The Three
Wise Aliens and the robottom's fitting demise.
Just as each soldier was about to fire another pink cloud suddenly
blocked their view of the prison column. 'Open fire! Open bloody
fire!' screamed a blood thirsty commanding officer, the occasion
becoming all too much for him, a cloud was not going to get in the
way of his victory.
Sounds of screams and exploding metal quickly filled the sky for
miles around. Each of the bosseye smiled at their malicious
accomplishment having been fulfilled with such relish.
Very slowly the pink cloud lifted and to the soldiers' immediate
delight, revealed that the top half of the prison column had been
completely destroyed. The commanding officer stood still, smiled
and then screamed for a second time out of pure mindless
satisfaction, 'Open fire! Open bloody fire!'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
From beneath the rising grass seed, the Tovarian Tickle fly buzzed
back into the sci-cubicle, the scientific robot was still chasing it with
a laser net. The grass seed laughed, a powerful and relentless laugh

55

and - with a SUCTION! of air - disappeared into the vent to fulfil its
awaiting destiny.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Upon reaching a reasonably safe altitude, Cube blew away the
pink cloud covering that she had just used as camouflage in her
successful rescue attempt moments before. Two of her thankful
crew had dashed off to the toilets and then on to the observation
post, with the exception of Robottom who was now in the medical
section and the exception of Dong who, with her anger
concentrated on the commanding officer back at The Row of
Columns, had jumped in a pod and headed back to Lotta Wonga;
revenge was written all over her mind.
It wasn't long before Cube's optical screen showed a pod, with the
internal pod cameras focused upon an angered squidge sitting at
the controls, the pod disappearing into and out of cloud after
cloud, the kamikaze probes doing their jobs successfully!
'Set sequential laser squares and release on my command!' Dong
raised the pod's communication pen closer to her pouting lips,
ruffled her white mane of hair and sat back to enjoy the ride. The
pod immediately stopped and dropped, one hundred feet to be
precise, re-establishing its gravitational core it shot towards the
group of gob-smacked soldiers staring anxiously from their now
vulnerable position next to the, or what was left of, the prison
column.
The pod manoeuvred left and right, dodging the green power
balls which were now being thrown in abundance toward its
threatening approach. Inside the pod Dong bent forward slightly,
her new shape just about fitting the purple coloured gripseat. Using
the optical head-screen, she assessed her targets.
'Attack!' she cried, like a vengeful queen. Her voice was resonant,
cold and decisive ... to get yours to sound the same you would
need to put it in an atomic-translatory oven, on distortion mark 5, for
about twenty-two years, give or take a month for smokers! In an
instant all the sides of the pod glowed an amazingly bright orange,

56

like a baby sun, and with a blinding flash of light several laser
squares burst free into the surrounding sky, evaporating any cloud in
their path.
First one column exploded, then another, then ... until all who had
been so cruel were themselves destroyed, slaughtered, torn apart,
killed, not breathing anymore, pretty much dead and that included
the commanding officer who was, as it happened, no longer
commanding.
'What a heroine!' came a rush of compliments from the leetlesheet
and the yellowish vom who'd stayed gathered together underneath
Cube's optical screen throughout the short battle.
'Don't get me wrong in saying this, but although I miss the old Dong
a bit, I have to say this new, almost queer, side to him will prove
extremely useful in future situations.'
Chucker nodded, or rather moved his long neck backwards and
forwards, 'I know what you mean, Scank, I agree with what you've
said. It has nothing whatsoever to do with the way he ... I mean she,
looks.'
'Oh no ... grrr ... of course it doesn't. No of course not. No ... woof
... no, oh most definitely not.’
Whilst her two friends discussed her new anatomy, Dong's
victorious pod slowly grew in size on the west side of the optical
screen; its vision looking so realistic that one might just believe that it
would fly, at any given moment, into the observation post itself,
ripping through the screen.
With the entire domed screen suddenly turning dark, the pod
docked safely back inside Cube.
Seeing the new heroine was back in one piece, Scank decided to
go to his personalised accommodation cubicle. As a matter of fact,
by the time Dong burst triumphantly out of a gravitational chute
onto the deck of the observation post, she found Chucker had also
gone to the accommodation section.
So it was Dong found herself once again alone, but thankfully, it
wasn't long before a food robot appeared with an all too tempting
sludge bar. Ramming the dripping snack inside her opened gob,
she was quickly transformed into his blubbery shape - his chest

57

deflating into its eventual sagging appearance - giving him the not
so in vogue Buddha look.
Not to be forgotten, whilst the others were resting, Robottom was
being subjected to the welcoming stimulation of one of Cube's
analysation bugs, which at this moment was working its way through
his complex circuitry, mending any fault it could find, although
funnily enough it seemed to occasionally get confused and would
move back and forth; faults which had been corrected kept on
malfunctioning again and again, especially around his facial and
rectal areas.
'X-CUBE-R?' Dong typed onto a small remote keypad he had
earlier been handed by a scientific robot. The keypad, it would
appear, was in its experimental stages; for one thing the keys were
not suited to Dong's flabby finger tips. Dong erased the command
and retyped, 'CUBE, HAVE THE OBSERVATION POST TOILETS BEEN
FIXED YET?'
A series of flashing lights indicated they had. There had been a
few unfortunate and rather painful incidents where the liquid
nitrogen flush had been set in to action prematurely whilst Scank
had been sitting on the toilet seat; several hours in the medical
section had proved most embarrassing for the leetlesheet who had
a rather long sheet frozen to his hairy arse.
Dong responded to Cube's answer, 'OKAY, I AM LEAVING ALL THE
OBSERVATIONAL TASKS OVER TO YOU. THANKS FOR WHAT YOU DID
EARLIER IT WAS MUCH APPRECIATED ... ' Somewhere in his typing
there was definitely a hint of gratitude, something which was indeed
most rare whilst in his male state.
The squidge's heavily weighted footsteps slowly echoed away into
the depths of the ladder chute's metal casing, leaving the
observation post alone and naked, its many lumps and knobs left to
the mercy of Cube's more than capable hands.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Cube is a spacecraft of unsurpassed sophistication; even The Three
Wise Aliens do not know where or how she was created. She is a

58

craft who, although out dates all she has come across, always
keeps ahead of present day technology, something or someone
gives her the ability to do so.
Her interior is fathomless. It has many levels filled with many
cubicles and many cubicles filled with many levels, all of which are
divided into areas known as "sections".
Colours and shapes play a key role in her overall design. Her cubic
figure, if looked at closely enough, is individually made up from an
equal amount of tiny squares. These squares seen from the outside
represent each of the inner sections.
One of Cube's numerous abilities is to be able to accommodate
the universes' many different species. Her accommodation section
has the impressive capability of using the most up to date
personalisation systems. In short, the cubicle allocated to its guest
will immediately change to accommodate whatever condition is
suitable for its new resident; be it a space or water lover, or anything
else for that matter.
For an example of the latter, Scank's very own personalised
cubicle has been adapted to his own personal tastes. There is no
one floor so to speak, more a case of each side of the room (or
rooms) being full of different objects only a leetlesheet would find
amusing. Such as the bed which is made up of a series of leather
bars which enable him to hang from when tired. Fiddly technical
things protrude from every surface, keeping his hyperactive mind
actively distracted.
Dong and Chucker's cubicles also reveal much about their
occupants. Dong has nothing but a bed and a mirror in his, the bed
shaped to his own peculiar taste, the mirror carefully hung on the
ceiling just above the bed. This arrangement suits him down to the
ground as all he seems to be capable of doing in his male state is
eating, sleeping and other things best not stated; things the mirror is
used for. So far he has ignored his heroic, feminine side; his lack of
interior decoration reflects this. The walls, with the help of nano laser
paint have become a target for him to get all his built up moans
and groans off his flabby chests; this intensely powerful self
expression has turned him into one of the best wall artists this side of

59

This Side. His expressive writing and detailed pictures look so real he
once had a two hour conversation with one of them, shortly after
which he stubbed out what was left of the long, still smoking, joint,
which for some reason had lipstick on it.
As for Chucker's living area the least said the better. It is mostly full
of bags and buckets which are designed for his puke to dissipate
easily. For some reason the others don't visit him all that often. As for
Robottom, he is yet to be given any permanent accommodation.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'BLEEP ... I'M PLEASED TO SAY I'M UP AND ABOUT,' blasted Robottom,
from out of Cube's onboard intercom, which moments before he'd
raised the volume levels to the maximum setting. 'YOU HAVE ALL
RESTED QUITE ENOUGH FOR NOW!' At this point Dong groaned, in
disagreement, from underneath the warm foam covering the top of
his bed which in contrast to his black skin looked like the head on a
pint of well known Irish ale. 'AND THEREFORE I ASK YOU ALL TO MEET
ME AS SOON AS ... BLEEP ... POSSIBLE INSIDE THE OBSERVATION POST.'
Robottom's bulge quickly raised on each side into a smile, the two
front lights which he deemed to be his eyes brightening a he raised
the volume to its maximum setting, 'I ... BLEEP ... HAVE BEGUN THE
SEARCH FOR THE GALACTIC MESSIAH!'
As usual Scank was the first of The Three Wise Aliens to appear on
the post. Next came Dong, to the leetlesheet's surprise, he was
normally last to surface from a sleep. 'There's no damn need to look
at me that way!' Dong grumbled, showing he hadn't lost his usual
grouchiness.
Eventually, as if late for his first day at school, Chucker's body
appeared, feet first, from one of the side entrances, changing from
green to blue. 'Sorry I took so long but I just had to puke.'
'BLEEP ... LIKE I SAID OVER THE INTERCOM ... ' Robottom stopped
talking, walked calmly over to the volume settings of the intercom
which he hadn't turned off and pressed a button with his rear, a
white light faded to black. 'That's ... pfff ... better.'

60

The others took their hands away from their ears, in Chucker’s case
two of his three antennae bouncing back into shape, in Scank's
case his shaggy ears both flopping forward, in Dong's case he just
made a suction sound as his sweaty palms came unstuck from his
head flab.
'Yes ... bleep ... well, as I was saying, I have started the search for
our galactic messiah.'
'Grrr ... woof ... grrr ... have you made any headway ... snfff?'
This isn't the time to talk about cooking,' snapped Dong, thinking of
his groaning stomachs.
'As a matter of fact I have made ... pfff ... some headway and no,
Dong ... bleep ... I don't mean the "Headway" chocolate bar!' The
expressive shadows around Robottom's bulge vigorously moved as
he answered Scank and ignored Dong. 'As Chucker and I kept
pointing out on Huj Huji Wuji, Pugjaw was constantly leaking what I
now believe to have been fuel. Therefore ... bleep ... I predict he
had to have refuelled or landed somewhere nearby.' Pausing, some
highly pressured rotten air squeezed through his resonating crack.
The others quickly covered their air holes. 'Pugjaw used, as I do, a
thruster mechanism which enabled him to power his way into the
clouds above us ... bleep.'
'Hang on!' frowned Dong, placing his left hand upon his stomachs,
his right hand scratching his foreheads. 'If you also have thrusters,
why didn't you just fly your ex-host out of that asteroid belt, to
safety?'
'Due to the simple fact ... bleep ... that I didn't have enough fuel!
Not enough to pull away from those asteroids. I used ... bleep ...
what I had left to save you in the prison cell.' Dong lowered his
hands and looked to the floor. 'I tend only to use my thrusters when
they are really needed. I prefer using other forms of flight. Thrusters
and my gaseous farts can also prove lethal if mixed together. Plus
it's safer than having to rely on my limited fuel supply which my
bladder can hold.'
'Well ... ' started Dong.
'Besides ... bleep ... I'm also used to being connected to oxygen
breathing hosts who don't appreciate me rocketing them into

61

space to what would be their immediate and rather messy death
and believe me that's already happened once or twice.'
'Have you quite finished?' stated Dong, grumpily.
Quickly turning back to the reason for the conversation, Robottom
ignored Dong and briefed the crew on what he had accomplished
so far. '... and so ... bleep ... then I had Cube scan the surrounding
quadrants and she eventually came up with the only available
possibility. Where could Pugjaw have landed to refuel if we take
away the possibility of him rendezvousing with a larger space vessel?
The answer; he would have had to land ... bleep ... here!' Robottom
waited a second for the optical screen to display the only planet
surrounding Huj Huji Wuji.
Scank was impressed by the robottom's presentation, Dong was
not so impressed, 'Let me guess, Robottom, using your intelligence
circuitry to work around the clock, I bet you estimated Pugjaw had
to have landed on that round moon ... oh, let us see ... mmm ... just
about ... there!' Dong quickly pointed at the one and only planet.
Robottom, ignoring the squidge's argumentative mood,
continued, 'So this pink moon is where I believe the messiah has
been taken. It is our job to ... pfff ... save her ... bleep ... if she's not
already dead.'
Completely in agreement, Scank climbed halfway up some of the
post's panelling and proceeded to fiddle with some square shaped
dials, resulting in nothing more than a few more lights flashing on
and off, but all the same, this small achievement seemed to amuse
the leetlesheet and that's all that mattered in his world.
'I see from the scanner read-out,' examined Chucker, having gone
off to do his own thing, 'that it shows a moon dock is situated on the
south side of Huj Huji Wuji's moon.'
There was a moment of contemplation.
'Bleep ... there is indeed,' Robottom resumed, feeling happy at last
that he was being taken seriously. 'I suggest that we take the pods
Cube collected back for us and fly down to the surface and
together, as a team, move undetected into the moon dock itself. If
the messiah has been taken there by her captor we might have a
chance of attempting a rescue.'

62

'What are we waiting for, let's go!' Scank raced off into a chute.
The others followed directly after.
Once all four had reached the docking section, where the cubical
containing the flight-ready pods was to be located, Chucker, Scank
and Robottom secretively stopped and huddled together.
'What are you all staring at me for?' grumbled Dong, annoyed at
having been purposefully left out of their obvious scheming.
'Woof ... have you eaten any food within the last hour?' enquired
Scank, trying not to give anything away, his toothy grin not doing
him any favours.
'No!' Dong looked innocently at each of them. 'It's been nearly an
hour now since I last ate.'
Looking as though they'd formed into some new type of eight
legged alien with two heads, all three schemers examined the
squidge's body for signs of hidden food.
'Listen to me you lot,' flared Dong, 'there's no food anywhere on
me! I'm going to eat something from the pod's food
containerisation unit; you know that plastic little box I keep under
the gripseat for times such as this,' the nervous squidge paused,
taking a deep breath as he realised what they were thinking,
'because I'm not, I repeat not going to turn into that heroine again!
Okay?!'
'Okay, okay!' all three replied, smiling. 'Of course, we wouldn't
dream of putting you through all that so soon.'
Dong hesitantly strolled off and entered one of the opened pods.
As soon as its outside had sealed firmly shut, the remaining three
huddled even closer together.
'Did you ... grrr ... empty all the food containerisation units?'
whispered Scank, checking all was going according to their plan.
'Yes, everything is just as we wanted,' answered Chucker.
The three laughed a cruel and heartless laugh then quickly
dispersed so as not to cause anymore suspicion; if that was at all
possible.
Unlike entering and leaving an acceleration funnel, the feeling
experienced when departing Cube by pod is quite unique. It brings

63

forth a sudden rush of freedom, or puke if you happen to be a vom
like Chucker. It's as though you are being set free into a world of
incomprehensible excitement, at all times alert to every movement
and sound around you.
Like sex it can invoke the feeling of not being quite in control of
your bodily organs; an ecstatic feeling that rushes and rushes
around your body - until finally - you feel relieved as you enter
uncharted depths ... this is the main reason the pods are used
frequently!
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The grass seed couldn't help but feel a little claustrophobic as it
continued to be propelled upwards through the narrowing air vent.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Passing, without knowing, through a local gathering of spacedust
mites, the pods made their secretive descent to the surface of the
eerily pink moon, Huj Huji Wuji's pink suns shrinking from the
background the closer they went.
Dust mites live almost everywhere. The three main varieties are the
aforementioned spacedust clans along with their closest relatives
the moondust and cosmic clans. As clans they often feud and
many stories can be told of their colourful history. Coincidentally a
large thousand strong clan of the moon variety have just been
crushed to death as a result of the pods landing on them – but that’s
another story.
'Okay ... bleep ... so far so ... pfff ... good,' sighed Robottom,
checking all the appropriate instruments. 'It appears as though we
haven't been detected by the bosseye moon dock.'
'Hey!' interrupted Dong, in an angrier voice than normal. 'Where's
the food all gone? you bastar ... ' The shock had only just sunken in
when the inevitable started to happen.

64

The three listening schemers, in each of the other pods, smiled
once again as the sound of high pitched whimpers and screams
dissipated into the silence which followed.
'Woof ... this is,' Scank began, wanting to get straight on with the
mission ahead of them, 'a code W.H.W.L.O.I.F - Priority One Alpha.'
'W.H.W.L.O.I.F ... bleep?'
'Robottom ... grrr ... it comes from the vomish language and it
basically stands for: What Have We Let Ourselves In For?'
'Bleep!'
'I've never heard of that before?' queried Chucker.
'Woof ... just shut it, vom!'
'Why did you succeed the code with "Priority One Alpha?"'
Chucker persisted.
'You'll find out soon enough ... grrr ... We are going to have to
equip ourselves with the required apparatus. Robottom, you
obviously won't need an atmospheric breathing suit but you may
require something else. If you do, just speak your request into the
communication pen and the pod will see what it can do for you.
Understood?'
'Bleep!'
'Eeeeeeeerrrrrrgh!'
'High there, guys!' blurted out Dong, now in her opposite form.
'It's ... grrr ... great to hear your luscious voice again,' added Scank,
feeling a little safer knowing the squidge's heroic side had emerged
to join them as planned. 'Woof ... it's time to step outside.'
Breaking the intense silence which the pink moon had bathed her
new visitors in, came a succession of long winded and rather
misplaced burping sounds which the four pods made as they slowly
opened to allow their occupants out.
Scank was, after being the most agitated, the last to leave the
safety of his pod. Watching the chosen side he had programmed to
open, half of the pod's inner surface (littered sparsely with lights, dials
and peculiarly angled switches) slid to one side, letting him
conveniently step onto the outer part which separately to the inside
had lowered itself down to form a useful ramp.

65

The barren surface enthusiastically welcomed the leetlesheet's four
paws as one after the other they scurried off to join the others,
gathering and squashing several clans of moondust mites as they
went!
The surface of the pink coloured moon, on the whole, looked like a
mass of bubbling porridge - with the added ingredient of strawberry
jam mixed in - creating its pinkish colouring which in reality the bright
glow of the distant two suns helped to achieve.
'Grrr ... Dong?' queried Scank, looking between her legs.
'I know! I know! You are wondering why I'm on this bike. There's a
simple explanation. Those moon craters we saw on the way down
have to be amongst the tallest I've ever seen, anywhere! There's no
way I could leave this place without having ridden my moontain
bike across them. No way!'
‘Okay! Okay!' repeated Scank, in awe of the long low slung shape
of Dong's moontain bike which was supported by two extremely
wide rubber tyres which seemed to want to burst free from the
thinner rims they were attached to. The sight of the squidge's feet
pushing down on the massively oversized pedals moved the bike
away from his gaze.
With all four eventually lining up side by side like something out of
an old cowboy movie, they made their way towards the direction of
the moon dock, Dong throwing more dust mites up behind her bike
as she rode through clan after clan.
All except Robottom had opted for pod equipment. Robottom
obviously had no need for a spacesuit and for defence he felt it
best to rely on his own unique talents; his ability to fart and the more
impressive ability to run extremely fast in mass panic (usually in
circles) and not forgetting his refuelled bladder so his thrusters were
now ready for use in a dangerously thrusting sort of way.
The Three Wise Aliens were each equipped with a much needed
spacesuit, making them look something like a futuristic Ninja. The
suits were made of organic materials which, when fitted around the
wearer, seal themselves over him, her or sometimes it. Being organic
they are able to produce the required atmospheric conditions for
the smothered wearer inside, although it has to be said that on

66

previous occasions they have been worn because they look so
damn cool; in Dong's new form it was a question of watch out
Cowboy!
'To defend themselves, the wise three had chosen a cube blaster
each. These worked along the same lines as the pod's defence
mechanism which Dong had been so kind as to demonstrate earlier
in The Row of Columns. Within a small hand sized cube energy is
stored and when needed it can be expelled in cubic form towards
a given target; this is accomplished by way of the griptrigger which
is built into a protruding handle. You have a choice of firing laser
cubes (which are solid; therefore containing and inflicting more
power) or laser squares (which are less powerful but lighter and
faster) the assortment of produced colours being the envy of all
those who have witnessed them - and survived!
The group had only been walking for several minutes when Dong
felt the irresistible urge to do something heroic. 'I'm going to scout
ahead of us,' she proclaimed, her voice slightly distorted through the
transparent part of her spacesuit covering her face.
Before the others could object, answer, move, she had cycled off
into the distant scenery of bumpy porridge, followed closely by a
growing cloud of moondust mites feeling the full force of her rear
tyre as it dug itself deeply into the surface of the moon.
Watching the moontain bike disappearing into the scenery,
Chucker remained alongside the other two. With the distinct lack of
gravity evident to his senses, he let his long neck curve backwards so
he could look up at the glistening stars above, his position not unlike
a cobra readying itself to release its venom. He could see no sign of
Cube; she was rightly keeping a low orbital profile (out of sight!).
Next to the vom, Scank was keeping his eyes on the moon's tricky
surface which had started to slant upwards. The leetlesheet
appeared to be having a bad feeling about something and
Chucker quickly noticed.
'What's wrong?' the vom wobbled, his eye twitching nervously in its
watery socket, allowing Scank with the reflective qualities of the
spacesuit to see two reflections of himself.

67

'Dooglash ... grrr ... what was that ... no, no it's just my imaginative
mind taking over,' came his own undecided reply as he continued
walking, surveying the ground.
Chucker tapped the leetlesheet's shoulder several times, 'So you're
not worried about the forty fully armed unfriendly fat fanatical
bosseye soldiers aiming their guns at us?'
The vom's comment was abruptly followed by the deafening
sound of the forty fully armed unfriendly fat fanatical bosseye
soldiers open firing. The forty fully armed unfriendly fat fanatical
bosseye soldiers were each dressed from head to toe in an
exceedingly badly designed bell bottomed space suit; its colour a
putrid yellow.
Line upon line of power balls sailed through the air with the sudden
ferocity of a box of fireworks making contact with a naked flame.
As the lethal bombardment plundered towards its surprised victims,
from the depths of space a clan of spacedust mites watched part
of the moon's surface light up in an exchange of green and blue; a
colourful sea of destruction soon shook the globe with each wave of
attack.
Dong turned instantly, again skidding her thick rubber tyres on a
family of moondust mites. She could hear the cries of battle calling
to her heroine heart. With a great amount of speed and a little
hashish too she hoped she would get to her friends quickly enough
not to care...
The sight of the moontain bike appearing and then disappearing,
as it launched itself up and over moon crater after moon crater was
unforgettable, her figure growing pleasurably larger and larger the
more distance she covered. Eventually she came close enough to
see that an inspirational battle was already being fought by her
brave companions fighting to stay alive.
Scank had found the moon's gravity, or rather lack of it, suited his
natural abilities extremely well and so was jumping madly up and
down whilst firing a deadly shower of laser cubes.
Chucker was most impressive, bringing a tear of pride to Dong's
eyes. In a state of mass panic he held his cube blaster tightly within

68

his three fingers and for each of his nervous wobbles a row of laser
squares thundered forth into the bewildered enemy.
Whilst the others were using their impressive and very effective
weapons, Robottom was using one of his own. Apart from dodging
left and right, at every opportunity some of the enemy found
themselves being kicked extremely hard from behind. As each of
the bosseye were sent flying through the air one after the other,
Chucker joined in by using their out of control predicament as a fun
way to blast them; it was just like being at a galactic fairground,
except this time the prize that was on offer was not a bag of goldfish
or even a coconut, it was the prize of staying alive!
Managing to jump out of the way, Scank sighed as four yellow
power balls flashed past his face. Feeling as though the shots had
singed a few nasal hairs, he knew if he’d been just a second later he
would have been dead for sure. Looking quickly down to the
surface whilst he was in full flight he spotted the smug grin of the
bosseye responsible and saw that he was about to fire again...
'Never fear ... Dong is here!' came a comforting cry, sounding
somewhere the middle of Tarzan and Jane's jungle cries. Having
launched her moontain bike into the air with the help of a wickedly
steep crater, she immediately disintegrated the guilty soldier and
then, in a kind of naughty satisfaction, blew the end of her blaster and then - she crashed!
Seeing the white hero recovering herself, Scank waved in
gratitude before looking over toward Robottom. To his immediate
horror he witnessed the full force of a green power ball striking the
brave legs to the ground. Without a thought for himself, he rushed
over to defend his fallen friend. By the time he arrived Robottom
was in a kneeling position and shaking vigorously.
'Get out of ... bleep ... here! Now! You will die if you stay near me.'
Scank remained absolutely still and began drowning in a mixture of
shock and sadness. 'That crater, over there! Run to it for cover ...
bale ... be ... BL ... b ...'
'So you're not ... grrr ... too well then?'
'Bleep ... RRRUN YOU FOOLS!'

69

This time the leetlesheet carried out the request. With angry
determination he rapidly signalled for the others to follow him and
then without a second thought disappeared over the brow of the
crater that Robottom had pointed out.
The robottom, it would appear to the forty fully armed fat
unfriendly fanatical bosseye soldiers who had come to gather
around, was almost coming apart at his bolts. The deadly shaking
kept on increasing and increasing until ... with an almighty bang ...
his buttocks exploded ... but not until one last, 'Bleep!' was heard ...
'Grrr ... do any of you smell anything?' snuffled Scank, from within
his protective spacesuit. 'I think I've guessed what just happened.'
'Me too,' gulped Chucker, swallowing a few chunks which had
been left circulating beneath his tongues. 'We better see if
Robottom is okay…'
Not knowing what lay in wait for them on the other side of the hill,
they crawled cautiously up and around the top of the moon crater
to peer over the other newly indented side; its inward curving
appearance making them feel as though they were surfing a giant
sand wave back on Wobbl’it; Chucker's home world.
'Stone the googlies ... eeerrrgh!' hurled Chucker, feeling weak at
the knees, folding his four hands across his chest.
The scene from where the three were standing was one of mass
destruction. All that was left of the forty fully armed fat unfriendly
fanatical bosseye soldiers were their forty fully frazzled, fried, and
totally fuc*ed spacesuits, each one scattered in shreds upon the
moon's restructured surface.
'Woof ... where's Robottom?' barked Scank, ever more worried
now for his friend's safety. 'Where the ... grrr ... heck is he?' In a
sudden frenzy, using all his limbs, he clambered down what was left
of the crater leaving an unreadable trail of footprints as he went.
Dong and Chucker took a deep breath inside their spacesuits and
followed the leetlesheet's erratic trail...
At first The Three Wise Aliens found themselves nervously kicking at
broken space helmets and deflated spacesuits and to Dong's
complete horror, parts of the destroyed moontain bike. They did this

70

for at least thirty to forty seconds, the organic suiting was becoming
hot and sweaty, this only adding to their growing anguish.
It wasn't until they took the time to rest and collect themselves that
Dong spotted something interesting. 'I don't remember a legshaped mound being there before?' she observed, suddenly
hungry.
Realising what its appearance might signify they ran to the mound
at full pelt reaching it in just under an hour; time and space; you can
never fully get used to its idiosyncrasies! Once there the three got to
work, looking like a group of dogs desperate to find a buried bone.
Throwing clouds of dirt in the air, breaking up moondust mite family
dinners, they continued to dig, deeper and deeper.
Stopping, in disappointment, his shoulders (of what he had of
them) beginning to droop, Chucker said, 'I was so sure we'd find
Robottom buried here.'
Leaving the vom quickly behind in a dusty haze, Scank and Dong
carried on digging deeper and deeper and then even deeper. It
wasn't long before they both disappeared into a darkening hole.
Chucker remained seated above, his huge feet dangling over the
growing hole's crumbling sides as he whistled a sad tune. Stopping,
in wonder, he shouted, 'I can't see you anymore!' Leaning forwards
he added, his voice creaky, I said I can't see you ... hello ... guys?'
Waiting for a reply which never came, the blue vom, slowly turning
grey, decided to investigate further. Without delay he slid
downwards in to what had now become an extremely dark and
extremely dark pit. Leaving the solid touch of the pit's uneven sides,
the moon's gravity added an awkward feeling of falling in slow
motion, the feeling becoming ever more apparent as he began to
focus upon a dim light far beneath his feet.
... After an extremely long minute, if that was at all possible,
Chucker's feet met unexpectedly with a metal floor.
'Oh good, you followed us down,' greeted Scank, seemingly alive
and well.
Dusting himself off with both pairs of hands, the vom eventually
replied with, 'Where are we?' and then a worried, 'Have you found
Robottom?' He glanced across to Dong who was busy examining a

71

network of shafts which were surrounding them like a large wasps'
nest.
'I cannot say whether or not Robottom blasted himself all the way
down here, I can't see him anywhere around the place. Even if I did
he may have decided to find another way to the surface via one of
these shafts. Things could have also happened the opposite way
around though.'
'What do you mean?' questioned Chucker, picking at the part of
the spacesuit covering his neck.
'Well, Robottom could equally have blown himself up into space,
in one or even several pieces. But then, having just said that, we
didn't see him on the surface or in orbit so that gives us a little hope
that he may still be alive somewhere.'
Chucker looked around at the shafts. 'Do you think these might
lead us directly into the moon dock?'
'It looks very likely,' answered Dong, running her dirty hands
through her long shiny hair, whose white colouring glowed in the
weird light, the organic spacesuit having allowed it to flow freely
through it's protective membrane. 'What's more if they do allow us
entry we will gain the upper hand in rescuing the messiah.'
'Woof ... what are we going to do if the bosseye send more soldiers
to look for us?'
'That's the best part of all of this any of above patrol will think we
were killed in the explosion, along with the others.'
'Grrr ... so we'll need to seal this hole up,' growled Scank, 'that way
we won't give them an indication that we are still very much alive
and an indication of where we've gone.'
'Yes,' agreed Dong, 'we will have to seal the hole up when we are
positioned inside one of these shafts, that way we won't be buried
alive.'
'But we might have to come back this way if these shafts don't
lead us anywhere!' argued Chucker, obviously afraid of being
trapped, a little hint of claustrophobia setting in.
'We don't have time to think about the consequences,' comforted
Dong, placing her hand around one of Chucker's flexible antennae
which poked through the spacesuit as did her hair.

72

Chucker reacted with a large smile from behind his organically
smothered face. You are right, let's just live dangerously and do it!'
With all three having hunched together inside one of the many
shafts, Dong did the honours of firing a successive line of deafening
laser squares into all sides of the hole.
Before the dirt had time to fall to the metal floor The Three Wise
Aliens had crawled briskly away from the main force of the foreseen
dust cloud which rapidly imploded in on itself leaving several clans
of moondust mites confused and bewildered.
The flat rough shape of their chosen shaft quickly proved difficult
to manoeuvre in. At first each of them were finding it hard to move
forwards under the cramped conditions, especially Dong, but after
a while they got used to a certain set of movements; movements
which made them feel like a Tovarian slug.
'We shouldn't have far to go,' whispered Dong, from behind.
'Robottom is okay ... grrr ... isn't he?' Scank growled, hopeful, his
thoughts returning to the asteroid belt where he had first set eyes on
the loveable pair of robotics legs.
'Of course, Scank, my hairy friend, he's fine, wherever he now is?'
Chucker went red at the thoughts he was suddenly having.
'Grrr, I just can't help thinking that he hasn't survived his final fart. It
was pretty awesome and he seemed pretty distressed.' Feeling a
sudden drop in the surface ahead of him, the leetlesheet halted
and turned his head back to inform the other two of another shaft,
leading in a different direction. 'It looks as though there is an
adjoining shaft going downwards. This place is looking more and
more like some complex maze.'
'If we are able to, I suggest we continue to crawl onwards,' said
Dong, confident of her own advice. 'I am certain it will lead us to
the moon dock. I had nearly reached it on my,' the squidge paused
in thought, 'moontain bike before your cries of help turned me
around.'
'I'm sure you're correct,' agreed Scank, 'it does appear to be the
most sensible decision. For all we know this downward shaft could
lead to all our deaths.' With the choice made he crawled happily

73

onwards, taking care not to slip down the adjoining shaft he had just
found.
After several bends had been carefully negotiated, just ahead of
the group, something appeared to be moving toward them. Even
in the dim light Scank had a good idea as to what the moving
object was. 'Woof ... stone the googlies and double dooglash!'
'What is it?' asked the others, their view blocked by Scank's body.
'Back as fast as you can! A cleaning drone is heading this way
and it is operational ... grrr ... it’s sucking things into its ... snfff ...
frontal crematory device. Back! Back now! Head for the
downward shaft, it's our only option to escape being burnt alive…'
The leetlesheet knew it would be no good blasting the drone for it
was equipped with its own safety shield which was part of its specific
design; a design he knew only too well for once upon a time he was
top salesman for an intergalactic company who introduced them
onto the market, another story perhaps for another time. ‘Back!
Back! Woof!'
'I have an idea!' stated Chucker, seeing Dong's muscled frame
was slowing them up as it rubbed against the sides of the shaft with
each frantic movement. 'Lubrication is what we need to get us
quickly out of this mess...’
'And ... grrr ... into another, if you know what I mean!' stated Scank,
knowing what the vom had in mind.
A vom's spacesuit is equipped with a facility which collects and
stores excess vomit. His idea was to discharge the vomit, thus
producing the much needed lubrication they needed to get them
to the other shaft in time - the drone was almost upon them.
There just wasn't time to argue. Before Dong could finish, 'Why
does puke always contain bright coloured vegetables?' she found
herself moving rapidly backwards as though having entered a water
slide. Slipping and sliding she reached the shaft that led downwards
with Chucker and Scank following on from behind. Together their
bodies plopped downward as if someone had just pulled the plug in
a bath tub, the vomit making a gurgling sound as the last of it
washed away after them.

74

Thankfully, as Scank had expected, the length of the cleaning
drone stopped it from falling in after the three, instead it rolled
steadily onwards towards, it was about to find out, a wall of hard
packed moondust mites and moon dirt.
Falling now, out of control, the robottom rescuers looked as
though they were now in need of the rescuing. Bend after bend
pushed them faster and faster to their unknown destination...
After two days of the same falling exhilaration, the group began to
realise something was indeed amiss.
'We MMus have fallen into some kind of loop,' screamed Chucker,
his voice shaking as if on some kind of monstrous roller coaster ride,
'upon which we're continuously being pushed round and round ... '
'SSomething tells me that you're right!' Scank replied. 'We must
come up with something to get us out of this MMess and today
would be NNice!' Finishing his sentence he was just in time to be
lunged around the next bend.
'I've GGot the answer, guys,' Dong heroically yelled, wishing she
had thought of it two days ago.
'SSpit it out!' Chucker's voice sounded fatigued.
'I'm going to flex my muscles; hopefully they will act as a brake,
bringing us to what I hhhope will be an abrupt hhhalt. Then what I'll
tttry and do is hold on as you sssmack into me. It's going to bbbe
knackering so as soon as you are brought to a standstill you mmmust
use your cube bbblasters to bbbreak through the sides of the shaft
and then you mmmust ggget out as fast as you cccan ... OOOkay?'
'OOOkay!'
Bumping his head yet again, falling faster and faster, Scank
thought of a small problem with overall plan. 'Woof ... what if there's
nnnothing bbbut solid mmmatter sssurrounding us?'
'Well you know as well as I dddo what that means,' yelled Dong,
approaching yet another sharp bend, 'we'll be stuck in the llloop
until we dddie ... so get rrready!'
Feeling as though their brains were being squashed into a small
canister, Scank and Chucker got themselves ready as was asked.
'Here gggoes ... ' shrieked Dong.

75

In a burst of sheer, intense pain her muscles flexed against the
shaft like a balloon inflating in a tube and due to the fact that she
hadn't eaten in two days the attempt worked better than she could
have hoped.
Bringing her body to a complete and utter stop, Dong watched in
disbelief as her two friends slipped past her body, starting yet
another loop. There was no option left but to wait for them to come
back around and make another attempt to stop them.
The brave squidge strained for a long time … occasionally loosing
her grip … but eventually she found a comfortable, permanent
position which saw her take up the position of a rolled up
hedgehog.
Appearing through the dim haze the shaft lighting created, Scank
and Chucker eventually hurtled toward the curled up form of Dong.
Before she could do anything, the squidge noticed that from behind
their clear visors the leetlesheet and the vom were smiling. 'Why the
hell are you both grinning ... ' Before she could finish the two of
them had slipped in-between her huddled together cleavage and
started yet another loop.
All Dong heard as they disappeared below was Scank barking,
'That was a bbbloody good idea of yours, Chucker ... grrr... '
'You bloody perverts!'
It seemed even longer than last time but two figures finally
appeared from above the squidge. Positioning her body parts so
they could definitely not slide past her, Dong braced for their
impact. Feeling the full force of them hitting her back she found
herself slide a couple of meters before thankfully coming to a stop.
Placing the cube blasters directly against one side of the shaft,
Scank and Chucker fired a laser cube, hoping that it would act in
the same way as a pastry cutter. In disappointment Chucker looked
at the leetlesheet, where they had fired there was nothing more
than a dent in yet more metal. As if connecting psychically, they
both turned at the same time and fired into the other side of the
shaft.
'We’ve found a ladder chute ... woof ... we've broken through!'
‘Whoopee!’

76

Knowing the pressure Dong must be under with them both on her
back they began to evacuate the shaft, carefully crawling through
the square hole as if its edges were made of broken glass.
After Chucker had positioned himself above the leetlesheet on the
ladder, Scank's head appeared back through the hole, concerned
for Dong who hadn't followed. 'Hold on!' he barked, in support,
seeing the squidge's grip wasn't too secure.
Dong acknowledged her companion's call by nodding. Slowly she
made an attempt to crawl her way to where Scank was holding out
his arms to help.
Suddenly, without any warning, the squidge slipped another
couple of meters; her strength was leaving her under the constant
pressure she had to sustain to keep from moving. Slipping a little
more with each brave effort she was soon quite a distance from
Scank's assistance.
'It's no good, guys, I'm going to fall back into the loop, and if I do, I
won't be able to stop here again,' stated Dong, looking at the sharp
edges of the hole. 'My organic spacesuit will be ripped and without
any breathable air in here I'll definitely die. It would be too
dangerous to even attempt it. No, you had both better find the
messiah on your own. Who knows, you may even be able to come
back for mmme... '
Scank watched helplessly as Dong's beautiful form fell, her glowing
white hair vanishing into a dot as she disappeared from sight.
'Damn it! There's ... grrr ... nothing we can do, quick!' Bringing his
head back through the hole he looked up to Chucker, 'We must go
now if we're to have any chance of not completely messing up this
mission.'
Chucker was at first reluctant to leave but with a lot of barking and
growling from his companion he was eventually persuaded to
commence the long climb up, or it could have been down, the
ladder.
Even though they were tired and hungry the weird gravity of the
moon made it fairly easy for them to ascend higher and higher until
they eventually stopped beneath a large circular hatch.

77

'This ... woof ... must lead into the moon dock,' Scank remarked,
pulling up level with Chucker, on the same run of the ladder.
'It's definitely an air lock of some kind,' the vom added, not having
seen its design previously.
Luckily for them the air lock was a manual one, allowing them to
open it without the use of any security codes, just their brawn would
suffice.
Using the comparative strength of their combined multitude of
long arms, the leetlesheet and the vom managed to turn the lock's
mechanism. After a lot of grunting the hatch was pushed upwards,
opening up into chamber.
Climbing through the hatch as if the music had suddenly stopped
on a game of musical chairs, they took a good look around their
new found room which sparkled like a glitter ball. They had entered
what appeared to be an air chamber. As far as they could
determine, the chamber made the air breathable to allow its users a
safe entrance into, hopefully, the adjoining moon dock.
Staring at a door opposite the one they’d climbed through, they
looked at their fragmented reflections. Bending down they closed
their route of entry. Clicking their fingers together and singing out
the words ‘Crazy boys’ the air pressure hissed into action around
their sensitive bodies. Whilst they waited disturbing thoughts of Dong
and how many loops she had completed since they'd left her
entered their tired minds.
'She'll be all right ... grrr ... so will Robottom...’
Feeling the first stage had been completed successfully, their
organic suits sensed that the atmosphere was safe and
automatically retracted like a foreskin shrinking away from a Jewish
surgeon’s knife. This motion exposed their heads to the atmosphere,
allowing them to finally breathe naturally.
Not happy enough to have just their heads exposed, Scank and
Chucker tickled the suits and they immediately responded by
retracting from the main part of their bodies until they were
positioned conveniently upon their backs; acting as a useful
rucksack.

78

Seeing their reflections moving like shiny ants, they watched as the
chamber door slid to one side, allowing them their first glimpse of the
bosseye built moon dock.
After vomiting several times, Chucker joined his four legged
companion inside a brightly lit passageway and rubbed his eyes. ‘It
looks like we’ve made it!’
'Woof ... which way?' Scank asked, unsure, shrugging his hairy
shoulders.
'Why not ... left!' replied Chucker, wobbling.
'It feels great to have our faces and bodies uncovered,' stated
Chucker, filling his lungs with the air now flowing freely from an air
vent next to his nose slits.
Scank nodded and began moving down the passageway,
Chucker followed. They eventually stumbled into a large room filled
with flashing equipment. Lots of different coloured lights made them
feel as though Christmas had come early. The parts that were
flashing the most looked highly technical and most impressive to the
eye. Unfortunately theirs were not the only eyes to be quickly
impressed. Two bosseye had spotted them enter.
What followed was a scene from a Jackie Chan movie, Scank
reacting first. Seeing one of the bosseye reaching for a weapon, in
a mere second, he had somersaulted, rolled to the left, back to the
right, growled, spun around, had a scratch and then watched as
Chucker blasted them with his cube blaster. 'Grrr ... what did you go
and do that for?' he wined.
'Sorry, I just couldn't stop myself,' smiled Chucker, his large lips
bending like two large sausages glued together.
Rushing over to a recognised set of lights, which appeared to be
clustered together for a purpose, Scank began pressing them
erratically. 'Perhaps we will be able to use this room to find out if
Pugjaw and the messiah are nearby?'
Chucker strode over to a keypad placed in the middle of the wall,
just below a viewing screen and, using his nostrils, started pressing
each one of the musical keys. A moment passed before he spoke.
'According to this system’s data collective, yesterday evening a
small craft disembarked from this dock, rendezvousing with The Star

79

Empress' personal galactic destroyer, the same destroyer we have
recently come across.' Stopping, he searched for the actual point
of rendezvous. 'No ... I just can't get a fix...’
Scank looked up with a sparkle in his eye and after removing it
with tweezers he barked, 'Only one galactic destroyer was reported
to be on the border with the Umpy Bolland system ... grrr ... well as
far as I can detect! Plus,' his voice filling with emotion, 'the battle on
the moon's surface involving us reported there were no survivors ...
grrr ... no prisoners were taken ... grrr ... no metal legs have been
spotted, captured or ... ' he lowered his shaggy muzzle.
'What a cock up!' snivelled Chucker, going black in respect.
'Snfff ... Your phrasing couldn't be closer to the truth,' agreed
Scank, sniffing, thinking about the direction Robottom more than
likely exploded.
'It looks like we won't be seeing our cherry red friend ever again.
We must get out of here and back onboard Cube if we're to stand a
chance of at least saving Dong and possibly the Galactic
Messiah...’
'Woof ... you are right,' responded Scank, anger running through
his veins as he explored further into the dock's information web for a
way of escape. 'At last!' he barked, with a much needed boost.
'Finally some good news...'
'Come on what is it?' pleaded Chucker, going from black to white.
'This moon dock ... grrr ... is equipped with an escape capsule on
each level,' he took a deep breath through his watery snout, 'we
can use one to get back up to Cube.'
Without another word spoken they ran out of the room,
determined now to reach the nearest capsule.
Passing several adjoining corridors and air locks, Scank caught a
glimpse of what they were looking for, up ahead. 'Woof ... there it
is!' he pointed out, rubbing his suction pads together like a chef
about to prepare a meal. 'One useful escape capsule, for two,
coming right up!'
BOOM! came a sudden explosion as a yellow ball of light smashed
into the ceiling, filling the corridor with lethal clouds and piles of
debris.

80

'Oh rollocks, not again,' swore Chucker, determined to have
something right happen to them on this mission. He dived into a
firing position, sliding next to the capsule door as if mimicking a
balling ball just kissing the first in a triangular line of skittles. Releasing
several loud coloured laser cubes in support, he allowed Scank
enough time to reach the access plate positioned in the middle of
the door; a plate which would need to be deciphered if the two of
them were to gain entrance to the capsule and escape.
Without bothering to decode the access codes, Scank stuck to
one of science’s most basic of rules; if at first you can't be bothered
blast away and see what happens. Kissing his blaster against the
access plate, he squeezed the griptrigger and waited as the recoil
broke his arm. 'Arrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrgh!'
Chucker turned to see his friend's limp arm drop the cube blaster
at the same time as the capsule door opened. Next a powerball
shot past his antennae into the leetlesheet's bold belly, sending him
to his knees as he clutched at his stomach.
Without another thought, the vom went bright red, rage coursing
through his veins. Getting to his feet he faced the onslaught of
power balls and stared directly at the bosseye firing them. 'You
didn't want to do that!' he stated, taking a step forwards. His
colouring slowly turned to orange as power ball clipped one of his
antennae, 'Ouch!' He continued to step forward, his colouring
fading to a yellow as a power ball shot through his bandy legs, 'Sod
this!'
Within two strides the vom had pushed Scank into the capsule and
had got the door shut. Now all he had to do was release it into
orbit; if only he knew how… There was no time to help his friend's
motionless form, looking at an endless row of buttons, upon one side
of the capsule, with great concentration, he pressed a large red
button which read, "Push to release capsule into orbit!", he hoped
he had chosen the correct button, there had been so many.
A sudden rush of speed threw him to the floor as the escape
capsule tore free from the moon dock. Before it could touch the first
pink layers of the reflective moon, a row of lasers shot past from the
angered enemy on the surface below.

81

Several times the capsule was struck and weakened. Chucker
pulled his wounded friend closer to try and bring some comfort to his
limp body, knowing it was all he could do for the leetlesheet. With a
deafening BANG! the internal lights were suddenly shut off. Another
BANG! set off a flashing red light - a rocket thruster had been
destroyed - Chucker knew this by way of the brightly lit screen in the
middle of the capsule flashing the words, "Thruster has been
destroyed!".
The vom looked through the capsule's transparent roof. He
watched helplessly whilst the bombardment of red lasers hurtled
around the small unprotected craft, fading and eventually blending
into the storm of approaching stars.
Keeping his eye upon the brightness filtering through the roof, he
jerked back in fear as sudden darkness fell all around the capsule;
this was it, he thought, terrified at what was about to come next.
‘Sheesh … Charlie never had this problem with his chocolate factory
lifts or did he…’
His first fears of being dead were quickly put to rest as the darkness
was replaced with a familiar and most welcome light; Cube had
swallowed the capsule - to safety!
Continuing on her set course for vengeance, Cube swooped
down over the moon dock and released a shower of blue and red
cubes.
All that could be seen from the comfort of space was immense
flash of mixing colours. It was as if an angry artist had just spilt a tray
of coloured paints. When it was all over, the colours blending back
to pink, the moon dock was left to the clans of moondust mites who
had been stirred up enough to inhabit it for themselves. Whilst this
mass settlement was being accomplished, the occasional escape
pod ejected into space like popcorn being made.
Being only a fifth class set up, the moon dock had been no match
for Cube's weapons. Not knowing what had just taken place, from
inside the medical section, where they had been brought onboard,
Chucker watched a team of medical robots taking Scank's body
away from the damaged capsule. He knew there was nothing he

82

could do so he raced off to the observation post to see if he might
at least in some way be able to help Cube.
Reaching the post as fast as his tired legs would carry him, the
orange vom was just in time to see a pod appearing on the east
side of the optical screen. 'Chucker,' laughed a familiar voice from
out of the intercom, 'glad to see you've made it back safely.'
'Dong!?' Chucker gasped, gulping a piece of vomit.
'We're both ... bleep ... coming in,' added Robottom, cockily.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Chucker entered the pod cubicle just in time to see Dong and
Robottom docking. He had informed Cube of the messiah's hopeful
destination, leaving the delicate art of navigation down to her. As
for his friends he still couldn't believe they were both alive.
Having eaten a little food on the pod, this time finding the food
containerisation unit was full, Dong was back to his regular flabby
appearance. Chucker wobbled, in greeting. 'How in this universe
did you manage to escape from the loop?' Robottom appeared
from over the squidge's shoulders, forcing him to wobble even more,
'you had ... both ... better tell me what happened to yourselves on
the way to the medical section. Scank's been taken there.'
'The medical section!' exclaimed Dong, very concerned, 'Is his
condition serious?'
'To be honest I haven't had a chance to find out yet. I'd only just
walked into the observation post when you approached.' Chucker
was becoming tearful. It is a funny sight to see a vom cry; instead of
falling down the face from their one eye, tears build up until they
explode into a cloud of steam.
Slightly less enthusiastic, due to the new circumstances, Robottom
explained what happened to him and Dong. 'When you left, as I
had asked you to ... pfff ... my upper systems were in the middle of
overloading.' Placing a foot inside a gravitational chute, he
continued, 'It was caused by the surge created when the power ball
struck me. All my upper circuitry was caught in a surcharging
overlap phase. It has happened to me once before so that is how I

83

... bleep ... knew it to be wise for you all to take cover. What I didn't
know, this time around, is that it would act like a rocket; propelling
me up into space, emptying my bladder and rendering me disabled
amongst the stars.'
Chucker slapped his feet upon the metal floor and asked, 'So how
did you get rescued?'
'Well, without any of my thrusters in use I thought I was going to
drift inside a black hole or something equally disastrous. Then, just
when I was about to be melted by a robotic refuse craft, actually,
that's one thing the bosseye have to be commended on - their
sense of cleanliness ... bleep ... there's almost a refuse device for
every one thousand bosseye don't you know ...'
'Robottom!' snapped Dong, stopping him from getting too carried
away.
'Sorry ... bleep ... where was I ... bleep ... oh yes, the robotic refuse
craft, well it was approaching me, I was about to have a melt down
and who of all spaceships should pay me a visit, why Cube, of
course. As soon as I was able to I took another pod back down to
the moon to look for all of you. I immediately scanned ... pfff ... the
area where the battle had been fought for any traces of organic
deposits; which I was hoping your spacesuits would have left behind
as a trail for me to follow. Following the readout disc, my sensors led
me to where I had previously had my unfortunate little explosion. I
began digging with my feet, but that idea soon wore off, so I
continued cutting through the ground with the help of my pod's drill.
It hadn't been long before I came across a circular nest of shafts ...'
Realising they were almost at the med-cubicle Robottom decided
to cut it short, 'After I'd deprogrammed a confused looking cleaning
drone which I found struggling to push its way forwards, and which
the readout disc showed was blocking the route you had all taken,
it was a simple matter of me using my refuelled thrusters and
locating a rather dizzy Dong. In the end, together, we flew back to
where the other pods still stood and after programming them to ...
bleep ... pfff ... return ... bleep ... rejoined Cube it was her alone who
picked up your location and took effective action.'

84

It would have been an impressive, and much longer, tale if the
sight of Scank lying helplessly on a med-couch hadn't brought its
order of importance into prospective.
'He doesn't look too good,' said Chucker, crying, taking several
steps forward his own steam cloud of tears.
Dong came from behind to walk over and stand beside the
unconscious brown leetlesheet. As he did so Robottom walked over
to one of Cube's medical interfaces and, with a method I'd rather
leave to your imagination, connected his frontal circuitry.
'According to ... bleep ... the medical analysis carried out on Scank,'
he started, his robotic voice now muffled, 'he has severe lack of
internal body parts syndrome.'
Looking across to Robottom, Dong stared for a while at the
position the legs were attached to the wall and asked, in frustration,
'What are those damn medical robots doing about it?'
Robottom trembled slightly then stiffened as the information was
released. 'At this moment they're on a ... bleep ... coffee break.'
Dong was just about to shout when he added, 'But there are other
internal med-bugs which are monitoring him inside. It seems that is
all they can do for him because he was injured so badly.'
Trying to come to terms with their friend’s awaiting fate, the three
of them stood, sat, and stood again, beside the med-couch, for
several long and utterly boring seconds. It was quickly decided that
they wouldn't be so bored if they just left the med-staff to it. They
knew there was also the matter of finding the messiah to sort out. If
they were to have even the smallest chance of locating her they
would have to put all their brains into gear and preferably not
reverse.
Keeping their eyes still firmly upon Scank, together, in line, they
edged their way backwards like actors leaving a stage at the end
of a show, gradually getting nearer to the opening doorway. They
were so transfixed with their friend's well being that they hadn't seen
the extremely late medical robots rushing back from their extremely
long coffee break. The latter misfortune resulted in only one obvious
outcome. Chucker was thrown violently, along with Dong, upon
two exposed anaesthetic powder injections which took immediate

85

effect. Robottom, after having been catapulted through the air in
much the same way at the other two, was conveniently shut down,
yet again! 'Oh not again!' moaned Dong, remembering his last
major god-sent dream. 'Isn't there another bloody way we can get
these holy news bulletins?'
For a long long time there flowed deafening silence and unlike the
last dream the squidge had had, it scared him a little. Where was
The Voice?
'Hey,' remembered Robottom, 'I've ... bleep ... been here before!'
'Beeeerrrghh Agheergh?' Chucker responded in his native tongue.
'Hang on!' shouted Dong, miffed. 'Just wait a minute! What are
you guys doing in my dream? Have you been here all this time?'
'Your dream!? It's my dream!' replied the other two at the same
time.
'I suppose God wishes us to receive communal prophecies at the
cheap rate.'
Silence once again fell upon their minds...
Feeling as though they had been suspended in nothingness
forever, which was far too long, Dong decided - was allowed to
decide - to say something else. 'Hello?'
'What do ... bleep ... you think is going on?' wondered Robottom,
attempting to fart.
Suddenly, from above their suspended images, two images briefly
appeared and disappeared.
'Did you see what I just saw?' Dong admitted, shaking his head
almost to the point of a wobbling jelly.
'They were fighting!' affirmed Chucker, jealousy filling his voice
while he attempted to achieve the same type of wobble.
'Good and evil?' Dong enquired further.
'Yes, I suppose one could say that, but yet what I saw cannot be
described so simply ... it was more,' Chucker paused to think, whilst in
the background a small fart was finally released from Robottom's
metal cheeks.
'More ... bleep ... a feeling!'
'Yes, that's it! More of a feeling...’

86

'So which of these feelings do you think is going to win?' joked
Dong, in somewhat foul taste.
Immediately with only a suddenness only a suddenness would
know about, a powerful storm erupted around their three forms.
'Oh my god!' screamed Chucker, overwhelming his colouring
organs.
'That's Wight,' God's voice cheerfully boomed out, like thunder. 'It
Is Most Certainly ... Moi!'
'So you won the fight, then?' said Dong, trying his best to cope with
it all.
'This Time ... Yes ...'
‘I presume you are the good and not the evil image of the two
images we saw?’
‘You Know I Am, Dong! The Other Was The Devil, He’s A Bit On The
Weird Side, You Want To Watch Him If Your Paths Ever Cwoss; He’s A
Bit Schizophrenic ...’
'What actually happened?' Chucker croaked, feeling colourless.
'If you don't mind a mere vom asking…'
God could not be seen in a solid form, but if it had been, it would
be breathing heavily down their necks in a deep, eerie sound.
'Occasionally He Twies To Get The Better Of Me. This Time I
Managed To Force Him Back To Where He Comes Fwom. The Devil
Knows I Have Sent The Galactic Messiah And I'm Afwaid His
Pwesence In This Particular Galaxy Will Be Felt Even More As A Result.
He Will Now Do Evewything Possible To Twy And Stop The Messiah
Fwom Fulfilling Her Destiny.'
Silence knocked at the door of noise for a moment and, realising it
was not in, went to the pub on its own. 'I Have Called Each Of You
Here Today For Two Weasons And Both Involve Your Good Selves
And The Galactic Messiah. Your Haiwy Fwiend's Life Is In Danger; His
Only Chance Of Survival Is For You To Find The Messiah! What I Ask
Of You Is This, I'm Forgetting The Opposer Idea; I just Don't Think The
Messiah Would Have Been Too Happy Stawing At Miwwors All Day
And Living in Vain On The Planet Op. So From This Second Onwards I
Formerly Entwust Both Cube And You To Wescue The Messiah And
Take Her Onboard As Part Of The Cwew ... '

87

In a FLASH! all three found themselves back inside the medcubicle, Robottom slowly straightening himself into a standing
position, Dong and Chucker copying him.
'He's still unconscious,' noted Chucker, looking down at the hairy
body lying limp on the med-couch.
'Look,' shouted Dong, unable to cope with emotions, 'come on,'
he grabbed Chucker's smooth, skinny and rather scaly shoulder
which felt, as normal, cold to the touch, 'we must now concentrate
on finding the messiah to make all of this sacrifice worthwhile.'
After using the much needed med-cubicle toilet hoses attached
to the med-couches, the three said farewell to Scank and walked
quickly away from the medical section without anymore accidents
being caused.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Having satisfied some sexual urges, which in theory it wasn't
supposed to have, the grass seed moved nearer and nearer to a
growing source of light…
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
It was a different manner to which the three remaining crew
entered the observation post. There was an important task ahead
of them and it was their duty to see it through to the end. God had
given Cube a helping hand, helping her to reach the border of the
Umpy Bolland system not only quicker than an acceleration funnel
could have managed but with a the added bonus of putting a smile
on her circuits; the hand of God can never be under estimated.
'OPTICAL SCREEN ON!' demanded Dong, typing the words as
heavily as he could. Tucking parts of his loose skin inside an already
over stretched gripseat, he quickly made himself comfortable. A
purple coloured vom sat next to him in an equally purple coloured
gripseat; the blending tones making it difficult to see Chucker's
knowledgeable combination of brisk movements which he had

88

started to undertake via a hovering keyboard that had landed in
front of him seconds before.
Using a mixture of the hovering keyboard, a data plate discharger
(this acting like a remote control enabling the vital operation of a
few of Cube's more delicate functions) and a few voice activation
commands, Chucker vomited several times.
'What's the plan?' Robottom asked from behind, still choosing to
remain standing.
'We know that Pugjaw is meeting The Star Empress on the border
of the Umpy Bolland system, I suggest we try and locate him before
he has the chance to board her formidable galactic destroyer.'
'EEEErrrrrgh Ayyyyargh?'
'What did you say?' said Dong, looking to Chucker's lowered head.
'Bleep,' Robottom answered, fluent in the vom language, 'he said,
"What if he does?"'
'Well if he does manage to board the destroyer we'll have to
dream up some bloody way of getting him off ... so shut it, right!'
Dong banged the sides of his gripseat several times. 'Robottom are
you going to taste the rainbow?'
Not quite understanding what the squidge meant, the metal legs
declined the offer. Watching the already raised (by about a foot)
circle of differently coloured, central gripseats, their colours
resembling a rainbow, it dawned on him what "Tasting the Rainbow"
had meant.
Robottom silently wished that he had joined them as a deep
burping sound moved the circle higher and higher until its round
shape had almost plugged the sloping neck at the base of the
optical screen. In all of its new found splendour the screen curved,
bringing forth the many inspirational colours of the Umpy Bolland
system.
Supposedly one of the most colourful and beautiful, the Umpy
Bolland system is also one of the most dangerous systems. If its nests
of black holes don't suck you in, you most probably will be thrown
into a deadly shower of meteorites; the trouble is it has the knack of
drawing you in to it! Due to its reputation the system is home to

89

many pirate ships hiding from something or rather; normally it's
Rather the most infamous of all the pirate ships.
'There’s Pugjaw!' bellowed Dong, like a character out of Moby
Dick, climbing to the edge of his gripseat. 'CUBE!' he typed, 'SWITCH
COMMANDS TO VOICE ACTIVATION ONLY, PLEASE.' Wiping his lips
thoughtfully, he continued, 'Navigate to full speed; gravpull
10000000000 ... Get that sodding shuttle!'
Gravpull is the terminology describing the speed to which Cube
can pull herself along a gravitational line. Gravitational lines are
known to exist in infinite numbers, connecting each and every
object around the universes.
'There's no sign of The Empress' galactic destroyer,' informed
Chucker, removing his hand from a glowing sensor.
Pugjaw's figure soon became dwarfed by the approaching Cube.
'He's turning to fight us!' cried Dong, in amazement. 'I've tasted the
rainbow enough. I'm lowering the circle of gripseats.'
'Full blocking tactics advised!' shouted Chucker, not willing to take
any risks.
Connecting to an interface Robottom quickly obliged the vom
with a little help from Cube. A row of green lights from the circuitry
above showed the blocking to be engaged. 'Good, let's see that
bastard's laser try and damage us now!'
BOOM! the observation post shook. 'What the hell was that?'
yelled Dong, knowing full well something of Pugjaw's size could not
be capable of such frightening power.
'A ... bleep ... galactic destroyer's at our rear end!' Robottom
sounded surprised to say the least. 'It must have used … bleep … a
space pocket to hide from our sensors.'
'Never mind,' said Dong, accepting the situation, 'Cube is still in
blocking mode. Our main priority is to capture Pugjaw. I'm not
going to let that little shit get the better of us again ...'
BOOM! the post shook again…
Pugjaw laughed, knowing that it was now Cube's turn to be
dwarfed by the formidable and utterly gigantic galactic destroyer
coming for its much awaited revenge.

90

'Look at that smug creature, he's actually got a smile all over his
cockpit, he's laughing at us! He hasn't yet realised that he's drifting
into the dangerous Umpy Bolland system.' Chucker was hoping
Pugjaw would soon be scared into holding his current position, he
wouldn't be able to survive the Umpy Bolland System with all of its
dangers, not a shuttle of his size and limited power.
'Look, Captain,' said a dark, tall handsomely bearded form, 'it's a
bosseye galactic destroyer!'
'I can see it, Number One,' answered an authoritative voice,
pronouncing every word with Thespian pride, his tongue obviously
dying for an R to roll over it. 'They arrrre afterrrr that small shuttle
craft,’ the voice paused, ‘crrrraft, the one heading towards us!' The
captain stopped to itch his long nose and shiny bald head. 'Initiate
full defence systems and set frontal, excuse me, frrrrontal, course, full
speed, Number One. We arrrre going to snatch that shuttle crrrraft
whilst those two fight it out amongst themselves. But before we do
all that ... Computer, tea, earl grrrrey, hot!'
After the tea had been happily sipped, the long, mostly white form
of the pirate ship, moved slowly away from the asteroid which was
sheltering it.
'Dong, there's a ship coming at us head on ... it's called the U.S.S
Something or Rather, I believe it's Rather.' Chucker leaned forward,
his eye narrowing, 'I think it's a pirate ship ... it looks very familiar
though ...'
'You say it's coming at us head on,' repeated Dong, an idea
bursting open in the middle of his mind, making an awful mess in the
process. 'I think we'll leave the navigation up to Cube, don't you
agree?'
'Yes,' smiled Chucker, catching on, 'agreed!'
Quickly summing up the situation at hand, Cube acted
accordingly.
Having started firing a spiralling round of spinning horn shapes, the
galactic destroyer watched each silver torpedo miss its target. They
missed not just one- two- three- four- five- six- seven- eight- nine times

91

but after ten consecutive attempts. Throughout the bombardment
Cube had knowingly moved up and down, escaping extinction yet
again. The bosseye are renowned for their bad marksmanship, the
reasons for this reputation are obvious.
Meanwhile with all the attention being paid to the raging fight in
front, the pirate ship continued on its drawn out (but most thrilling)
forty-five minute course to snatch Pugjaw for its own purposes.
Seeing what was happening, Cube plunged forwards with an
astounding amount of grace, leaving the more than surprised
galactic destroyer behind in a storm of stirred up spacedust mites.
Moments later the destroyer followed them at full speed.
Cube jerked forwards, this time with just enough accuracy to
initiate a hold on Pugjaw via a grip ray and - with another skilful and
completely unplanned manoeuvre - dropped downwards with
breathtaking velocity.
As hoped, the manoeuvre resulted in the dramatic collision of the
two spacecraft which were left embarrassingly behind to make their
unwanted, and slightly painful, acquaintance with each other.
'WWWehey!' screeched Dong, from the safety of his newly
vibrating gripseat.
'It's bbbecoming my favourite line but she's dddone it yet again,'
cheered Chucker, his voice also shuddering.
'HHHold on!' Robottom quaked, rattling at an interface. 'Our
speed hasn’t dddecreased! WWWe seem to ... bbbleep ... bbbe
above a bbblack hole ... and it's pulling us in! Cube's having a
mmmomentary systems failure!'
Chucker and Dong looked quickly at the optical screen.
'GGGet the Pugjaw and the messiah inside one of Cube's sections
right nnnow!' yelled Dong, his tits flapping against his chin. 'DDDo it
before it's tttoo late!'
Chucker gave the appropriate commands, pulled himself free
from his gripseat and stumbled over to the appropriate terminals.
Lying below like a dew ridden spider's web, the black hole waited
impatiently for its new victims to be caught within its powerful
structure. Twirling and glowing, the vortex of light and darkness
appeared to spin more and more with each passing second.

92

Back inside Cube's chaotic observation post, Chucker was
struggling to access the appropriate command functions. 'It's no
use III can't do it!' he yelled, being thrown violently upwards or it
could have been downwards. 'The gggrip ray isn't functioning
properly. We're gggoing to have to let PPPugjaw go or the messiah
will dddie inside him. It's our only oooption!'
It was now Dong's turn to leave the safety of his gripseat. His first
and easiest task would be to set his body free of the constraining
suction which the gripseat was designed to produce under
circumstances such as the one he was now not enjoying. He could
achieve release after one simple command, his authorisation code,
was stated. There seemed, unfortunately, to be one small problem.
He was always changing his code to different things, to initials and
numbers he thought he might remember more easily in a highly
pressured situation. 'CCChucker? I cannot rrremember my release
cccommand?'
'You fffat bbbast ... ' the vom responded, not being in complete
control of his mouth, the dominating grav forces cut his helpful
answer short of its ending.
'"You fffat" ... what?' repeated Dong, struggling to understand. 'Oh
yes, now I remember! YFB!' No sooner had he said the correct three
letters of his code, the yellow gripseat set him free to the mercy of
the tidal grav forces which his distorted face showed to be rushing
around the post.
With a huge weight just about keeping his shuddering body upon
the floor, the squidge grabbed a hold of what was near to him and
quickly set about helping the others in initialising Pugjaw's, and
therefore the messiah's, release from the powerful grip ray.
Freed at last from her hold, Pugjaw was quickly left behind as
Cube's bigger bulk was sucked down faster and faster. Trying to
escape the pull of the black hole himself, Pugjaw found the
messiah's added weight was hindering him from escaping, his
thrusters weren't powerful enough. Knowing he needed all his
power if he was to escape, he opened the cockpit, which were his
jaws, and let the messiah tumble after Cube and thus towards the
growing centre of the black hole. Realigning his thrusters, he quickly

93

found it a lot easier to power his way back to the blazing destroyer
which was now some distance away. Result! He had just destroyed
the Galactic Messiah and Cube…
'BBBleep ... the mmmessiah has been released!' informed
Robottom, 'and she's bbbeing pulled in after us.'
'She'll dddie!' gasped Dong, feeling his head being pulled to the
left and right at the same time. 'We nnneed some dilithium crystals
or she'll bbblow!'
'What are you tttalking about, Dong?' Chucker shouted.
'Oh nothing, never mind!'
Cube had no other choice left open to her but to hand control
over to fate.
'We mmmust get back into the gripseats or we will bbbe killed,'
Dong kindly pointed out, the others having figured that out for
themselves.
'EEEEErrrrgh arrrgh eeeayhargh!' responded Chucker, his face
pressed hard against some prickly circuitry.
Robottom looked on, helplessly, from the stable position he had
been, and still was, safely anchored to.
With luck more than anything, Chucker was abruptly thrown within
reach of a gripseat. 'I'm sssafe,' he sighed, after a huge gymnastic
effort had landed him within its web-like grip. Looking across to
Dong he realised the squidge wasn't going to survive for much
longer if he didn't steady himself soon; all that flesh was proving
fatal.
Starting to feel like he had fallen inside a washing machine stuck
on spin dry, Dong was tossed round and round and round.
Robottom knew it was up to him to do something. Seeing the
squidge's blubbery buttocks flying in his direction, he used what
soccer skills he had acquired over the years and kicked the peach
shaped ball of flesh towards one of the nearest gripseats.
Flying through the air the grav forces worked in Dong's favour as
he was sent on a well aimed course towards a gripseat. Once he
had touched the 'seat's material, its suction was initiated and his
body was gripped securely into place. 'Thanks RRRobottom, I owe
you ...’

94

At last all three were in a somewhat stable position. All they could
do now was watch the Galactic Messiah on the optical screen and that soon went blank - as the black hole welcomed its new
victims. Cube was out of control, so great were the pressures that
the crew were eventually knocked unconscious.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Shooting out into the light, from the air vent, the bionic grass seed
flew over three strange forms; one fat, one thin and one robotic
arse…
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Your Most Gracious Empress ... he has arrived ... ' Stinkz quickly
scurried to hide behind The Star Empress' standing figure, her new
attire consisting of some kind of skimpy leotard partly covered by a
long, white, transparent cloak.
'Ah ... Pugjaw ... I see,' The Empress caressed her lips, 'you have
survived yet again!'
'Indeed I'ave Empress. If only t'see your bootiful eyes once more.'
Stinkz coughed and spluttered, stopping as soon as The Empress'
foot met solidly with his soft head.
'Cut the space crap! Where is this so called "Galactic Messiah"? I
was led to believe by Huj Huji Wuji's moon dock that you had her in
your cockpit?'
'I did, in a matter of speakin', several times as it happens, but
ther'be no need to go into tha'now. You have no need t'worry as I
have ejected'er into that black'ole I just escaped from.'
'MMM ... yes ... well okay, good!' came a quick, rare, and most
unexpected approval from The Star Empress. Stinkz stirred. 'Still, I
wish you to keep your network of spies at their designated positions
in the galaxy. I want to monitor any other out of the ordinary
happenings.'
'Very well,' finished Pugjaw, bowing his glistening jaws.

95

'Tell Navigator Dipsheet to enter on your way out, there's a good
fellow.'
Pugjaw nodded once, blinked his blood red eyes and left the
throne room in deadly silence. Stinkz grinned as the creature
disappeared out of the doorway.
'Oh good,' sniggered Stinkz, still from behind The Empress, its tiny
mind already turning to the next visitor the throne room accepted in.
'What did you just say?' The Empress shouted, looking as usual for
an argument.
'Nothing,' cowered Stinkz, before adding, 'Your Most Beautifulness!'
'Star Empress, you wish to talk with me?' Standing tall, proud and
to attention, was an extremely handsome bosseye officer. He was
dressed in the formal baggy uniform of a navigator.
Looking the young male up and down and undressing him with her
eyes, The Empress pouted her lips before answering. 'I did!' Purring,
in approval, her voice turned low and husky. 'I wanted to talk with
you about the collision we just had.'
'What collision was that then?' he replied, blankly, his eyes
twitching in the middle as he tried desperately hard to recall such
an incident.
'Oh ... ' began The Empress, slowly, sarcastically, 'just the one
where we lost half this destroyer's front section! The one where
several thousand of our crew were sucked out into space to their
exploding deaths! The one where the pirate ship and her crew now
have their bodies embedded in certain parts of this destroyer, some
of which I may add are burning into the metal as we speak. I could
go on - but I won't!'
'So you noticed?' Navigator Dipsheet gulped several times.
'Damn! I was hoping I could have covered it up.'
Stinkz peeked its scruffy head out from behind The Empress, its eyes
widening at the sight of the handsome idiot.
'I don't like mistakes!' The Empress pressed on. Several of the
navigator's muscles flexed with uncertainty, his future career wasn't
looking too bright. 'But ... ' she continued, 'I am a reasonable
woman, with womanly needs. Meet me in my chamber in one dung
drop's time!' After I'm through with you you won't want to go near a

96

black hole ever again. Do you understand what I'm telling you?'
The Empress widened her legs and licked her lips in moist
anticipation.
'Er ... well ... no ... not exactly, was there intended to be some kind
of hidden sexual innuendo in what you just said? If there was then
I'm afraid I ... ' Having been cut short of his full sentence, Stinkz and
The Empress watched as a red beam encompassed the navigator's
body and he disappeared.
Turning to one of the windows of the throne room, the two figures
looked on as a body appeared in view and exploded, leaving blobs
of flesh and other bits to merge with a clan of cannibal spacedust
mites.
'Such a pity, it's been ages since my juices were this shaken over a
male.' The Empress started to think of what might have been. 'But
then again what a complete, and utter, prat!'
'He definitely deserved to be ejected into space, oh most
definitely without a shadow of a doubt!' Stinkz loved watching her
victims' deaths. It had almost become an obsession of its. Without
her knowledge it had once held a party in her thrown room and, just
for the hell of it, sucked all those who'd had the stupidity to turn up,
out into space. It had been great fun to watch. He now collects
information on how each particular species copes with space
suffocation.
'Computer! Promote Officer Dungheed to Navigator and tell him
to plot a course toward Huj Huji Wuji and then toward my personal
bed chambers! Oh, and please be good enough to get whoever is
left of the crew to peel those bodies away from my side of the
destroyer.' The Star Empress stared out of her view screen as the
remains of her spaceship pulled away from the Umpy Bolland
System. 'Ah, yes, also, Computer? The ship Cube and her crew …
put missing, presumed dead, at the top of their data file.'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
It was lucky the universe had little knowledge of crystal beings. If
Pugjaw had known, he would not have thrown the messiah into the

97

realms of a black hole. Crystal beings are among the few who
actually understand what powers will await them within...
Stars live throughout their lives constantly changing. To exist they
need an even balance of inward and outward pressures. This
balance, in most cases, helps to create the illumination of the star
via the reactions produced.
Some stars come to a point where their inward pressure becomes
dominant, so much so that the outward pressure cannot compete;
the balance is thus affected. The next reaction is the imminent
collapse of the star, the result usually being a black hole.
The inward pressure of a black hole is so powerful that illumination,
for example, cannot exist to the outside eye. Unfortunately the
collapsed star [Black Hole] then proceeds to affect everything
surrounding it, which also starts to be pulled towards its centre by the
inward pressure. It must be said that this change takes place over
many, many, many lifetimes, and then some.
No one knows for sure exactly what is on the other side of a black
hole; no one that is, except for crystal beings and a few select
others. It isn't just coincidence they have been sighted around white
dwarfs. Crystal beings have the task of monitoring many other stars,
including black holes.
Black holes are, in elemental theory, completely impossible to
understand. For example, to recap what has been explained, they
are created by the overpowering inward pressure of what once was
a visually bright star suspended in a galaxy, therefore that visual star,
although undetectable, must surely still exist at its centre in one form
or another … mmm?
The question is, where does the matter being pulled towards the
star's centre go - once it reaches the point of no return - if each
surrounding area of the star's surface (or what's left of it) is also
pulling from all known angles? There is no way of escaping the all
round inward pull. Everything in current mortal scientific theory
suggests the centre is the only place to go but to where, I ask
again? There surely isn't enough room for all the matter that is
constantly being sucked in! You’ll be glad, or bored, to know that

98

the answer to the latter question will be answered at a later stage,
but for now I would like you to read the following which I feel is a lot
easier to comprehend than the previous few paragraphs - ZJHS
HSouojskdj:jjlsjd;'idjncciccmnclj==++++slqjlkji%55%@sjcljxkh - so what
is a black hole ? h dqsdhkn+=3##y qd/k?ldkk djdjd q
iu76qd765fyh4346431c]qo - a thing which sucks everything into it in
space ! jshckghih*76277~# - etc.
Although the particular crystal being we have heard about so far
in this adventure has been sent with the role of messiah, crystal
beings, since their beginning, have been regarded, for
interpretation, as a kind of angel. The centre of a black hole isn't
incomprehensible for nothing, as you are about to find out.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Wake up mortalssss!'
'Who said that?' groaned Dong, coming to.
'I, we didn't ssssay "That" - I, we ssssaid - "Wake up mortalssss"!'
'Who did?'
'Me! Ussss!'
'Okay, a joke's a joke!' snapped Dong, already angered.
'I, we know, issssn't that obvioussss?'
Dong quickly decided it best to ignore the voice and help his
waking companions.
'Are we functional ... bleep ... I mean are we alive?' asked
Robottom, swivelling his joints the correct way around.
'To tell you the truth I'm not exactly certain?' Dong replied,
coughing, rubbing his belly buttons.
'Damn, does my head hurt or what!' Chucker looked around. 'At
least we're still onboard Cube, but are we still inside the black hole?'
'All Cube's systems remain ... bleep ... dysfunctional,' informed
Robottom, his two block-like feet facing an intricately detailed
holographic display - which was floating above the connected
interface - his exact position having remained the same since his
inexplicable shut down. 'We have no way of finding out anything!'

99

'What about the pods? Can we use them?' suggested Chucker,
limping across to try and make the optical screen operational.
'It would be too risky,' Dong answered, now itching each of his
saggy nipples with a half swallowed sludge bar, 'we have no way of
knowing what we would be in for. Especially if we are still
somewhere inside the black hole…'
'What about Scank, he will have been shaken up pretty badly in
the medical section.' Chucker was just about to rush off...
'He issss all right, he issss with me ... ussss!'
'With who?' Chucker made the easy mistake of asking.
'Me! Ussss!'
'Look, what is your bloody name?' screamed Dong, tired of being
messed about.
'I, we don't have a bloody name. No, mine, ours issss clean,
although, I, we would like a bloody one if you ...'
'Shut up!' Dong turned angrily to his bewildered companions.
'Guys, this isn't the usual weirdo. The only way we are going to get
any answers out of whoever whatever this is, is by asking straight
forward questions. Watch and learn. I'll go first.'
Releasing his frontal circuits from the interface, Robottom sat
himself inside one of the gripseats (positioned at the far edges of the
post) that was nearest to him. As if in a cinema, Chucker quickly
settled down next to the red legs and together they waited for Dong
to speak, at any moment a box of popcorn was expected to
appear.
'What is your name?' Dong began, this time trying to be a little
more patient.
'I, we have many namessss,' replied the voice, which I may add
was neither soft nor deep in tone.
'Right, we'll forget the damn name for now,' conceded Dong,
scratching his head in growing anguish.
'But I, we didn't give you my name to forget!' stated the voice.
Dong turned, raised his hands, and broke down. 'I give up with
this. I just wish I was somewhere else.' Instantly, the squidge
disappeared before his friends' bewildered eye and sensors.
'What the ..?' gasped Chucker, blabbering.

100

'Something ... bleep ... weird is going on here,' said Robottom.
'Where's Dong gone to?' he carefully questioned the voice.
'SSSSomewhere Elsssse!' answered the stranger, sarcasm and
innocence playing a lead role in his voice.
'Where's that?' said Chucker, interrupting, without thinking, his top
half changing to yellow, his bottom half remaining brown.
'"That" issss closssse by, but perssssonally I, we prefer
“SSSSomewhere Elssse”.'
'He's ... bleep ... talking as though "That" and "Somewhere Else" are
locations,' observed Robottom, astutely.
Chucker nodded in equal thought and, knowing the grip of his
gripseat wouldn't be activated under such calm conditions, stood
easily away from it without having issued his code. 'I wish Robottom
and Chucker would be sent to Somewhere Else!' he shouted, taking
care how he phrased each word. As anticipated they instantly
vanished from the post ...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Feeling silently proud to have (for something with no arms or legs)
successfully made it into the observation post, the grass seed felt a
little hard done by when another gust of wind blew it straight back
inside the same air vent to which it had only just escaped. Escape
from the scientific section was not going to be as easy as it'd first
believed, that is, if it had a mind to think a thought with.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The messiah was still only a quarter of the way inside the black hole.
From all around she could see, hear and feel the all too familiar
scenery she had already come across several times before. Swirls of
colours ever changing in both size and pattern wrapped around her
form as she floated inwards.
The slow and gradual change from the factual and theoretical
mortal side of outer space to the unexplainable and

101

incomprehensible immortal inner space became more apparent
the deeper in she went.
This was all happening sooner than the messiah had anticipated.
It had been explained to her that she would be brought into
temptation by the Devil at some stage in her life, but to bring Cube
and all her crew into it at the same time was indeed a challenge
which had been unforeseen.
The mental stress was immense from knowing that if the others
accepted a temptation they would be caught on the dark edges of
the black hole for eternity. She must get to them before it was too
late, before they are tricked into doing something they might, at a
later stage, deeply regret.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Without even time to feel either a little claustrophobic or even a
large one for that matter, the grass seed was spat out of the air vent
and propelled onto the widening blade of a spinning fan, a fan
which hung loosely from the central part of its least favourite scicubicle, just above the container from which it had escaped days
before.
As the blades continued to turn round and round and round and
round and round, the embarrassed grass seed was forced to go
round and round and round and round and round with them. If it
had been blessed with a mind and a stomach it would have started
to feel - and be - completely and utterly sick.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Seeing themselves materialising, Chucker and Robottom found
Dong leaning heavily upon a sign which had "Somewhere Else"
written upon it in large lettering.
'Where in the hell are we?' moaned the unhappy squidge seeing
the others, hitting the edge of the sign with his clenched fist.
'Nice catch phrasssse! I'm, we're going to use that one,' rejoined
the voice.

102

'Let's play along with this fool,' proposed Dong, 'we'll walk on in the
direction this sign is pointing to. Maybe where it leads us is where
we'll get some answers, well I hope to god...'
'Oooohh, don't ssssay that!'
'Can't you damn ... bleep ... well leave us alone!' shouted
Robottom, his mechanical voice turning to full volume.
'That'ssss it! Excellent! Get angry, and even violent, then...' There
was a moment of silence. 'It'ssss your lucky millennium. I, we musssst
leave you to your own devicessss. Enjoy ... ' The voice left the three
alone unexpectedly.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The answer to what lies at the centre of a black hole is made easier
the closer you get to its core.
As was explained earlier, if the mass at the core of a black hole is
pulling from all parts of its surrounding area, then where does the
matter being pulled towards it disappear to? If you think about it,
human logic cannot even begin to explain what happens, so oddly
enough there has to be a reason for this.
The centre of a black hole is where a whole new existence begins.
It is where everything one knows is completely turned upside down.
Another dimension, if you like, exists there; the centre being the
gate, the opening, the door, marking the border between both
sides. It's a dimension where time has no meaning and meaning has
no place in time.
Believe it or not but this place is subconsciously known to the
universes. Some planets have interpreted small amounts of it into
parts of their own local knowledge, a part, a few, have called
Religion.
In many universal readings there is talk of angels [Crystal Beings]
whilst in others there is a portion of unexplained knowledge
describing a gateway, the so called "CeNtre" of a black hole's core.
Some species even talk of near death experiences, the vision of a

103

tunnel with a light at the end which as you now know happens to
subconsciously be referring to the image of a black hole.
Above all there is the following lexis which are widely used by
almost every species at one time or another within their histories, the
lexis are - God and Devil, Good and Evil. The similarity between the
two isn't just a coincidence; these expressions are merely a mortal
description of powers that really do play a role in the vital structure
of life and death.
Many species have taken these words and used them to describe
that of one sole being. It is indeed very difficult to explain, they exist
not as a single solidly structured alien but as what would be best
described for you to understand as a feeling in both cases.
The closest the mortal world has got to this understanding is
through the word known as "faith". Unfortunately this word has been
used to support the ideas of many as a means to prove that their
own religion is the real one when in fact all religions are the “real
one” to some extent.
If you still doubt what has been said I'll leave you to ponder this.
Don't you think it too coincidental the role light and darkness have in
your society? The comparison of the evil dark outer edges of a
black hole with the good hidden brightness at the centre; these
things are so apparent that surely you cannot, even as a critic,
dismiss them altogether, perhaps just one at a time, but not
altogether! Also, why does one think that if you were to ask
somebody where they think their mythical heaven would be, they
will most certainly point upwards?
Believe what you will as long as it makes you personally happy,
but, for the purpose of what you are reading, I ask you to keep an
open mind about all that has been said and that you remember the
famous philosopher from the city of Lecturinfools and his now
legendary words, “… you and your neighbour are both right, it is
their neighbour who is wrong until proven right …”.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...

104

Having gone round and round and round for the two-hundred and
twenty-seventh time, the bionic grass seed (who was also still a
fugitive) started to hear a familiar buzzing noise coming closer and
closer.
Feeling itself being forcefully thrown against the same solid wall as
before, the grass seed said goodbye to his one and only fan,
fainting to the blurred images of a scientific robot still chasing a
Tovarian Tickle fly.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The messiah had arrived sooner than expected. This was to be the
first time she had actually stopped within the Edge.
'SSSSo you have actually come,' mocked the Devil. 'Normally you
crysssstal typessss carry on beyond the Edge of Darknessss.
Although, having ssssaid that, ssssome of your kind, on the odd
occassssion, decide to join with me, ussss...' Smug laughter arose.
'They come to live on the "edge" assss ssssurfer mortalssss would
ssssay, making their livessss more exciting.'
The messiah was in constant thought. She couldn't trust anything
the Devil was saying. 'Where has the ship called Cube and her crew
gone? I know they are here! They weren't ready to enter so soon,
therefore according to the law of space and time you must have
stopped them from going further inside to the CeNtre. You know
damn well you have!'
'You're a clever little ssssheet aren't you!' cursed the Devil. 'I'll, we'll
have you know what you have been told about me, ussss issss all
wrong...'
'Wrong!' snapped the messiah. 'Wrong! You're insane and evil,
twisted and dangerous, mad and destructive...'
'May be it’ssss not all wrong ... in other wordssss you could let it be
ssssaid that I'm, we're downright good fun to be around!' The Devil
was enjoying mocking the relatively inexperienced crystal being, by
making her angry he was gaining an advantage. 'Follow me, let'ssss
ssssee if your friendssss have been brought into temptation yet.' The

105

Devil thought it best to move things on at a fast pace, he was in
control now and that was the way he wanted it to remain.
The messiah disappeared from the Nothingness and reappeared
in a grandstand position above the two Wise Aliens and their farting
companion. 'Looks like you've failed!' she smirked, thankful for small
mercies.
'SSSSo far!' growled the Devil, starting to smell of sulphur.
Dong, Chucker, and Robottom, had been walking for what had
seemed like forever over a long winding road which was made up
of overgrown food, plastic sick-bags and large oil drums. Rotten fruit
the size of a galactic cruiser had been trodden in step after step
after - yes you've guessed it - step.
Large glasses of water had poured down from above (out of what
was supposed to be some sort of sky) as they carried on walking in
the direction the sign had pointed. Little alien men and women and things - had shouted "Ooopsy poopsy woopsy" at them whilst
socks and books continued to flow past their faces in the shape of a
curling stream. All in all, you could say, things had become bloody
confusing!
'What is going on?' groaned Dong, not knowing they were being
watched. 'We'll all starve if we don't eat soon. I don't know about
you but I would do anything for a sludge bar!' Dribble began
pouring from his mouth in buckets and in this world of the Edge there
were real buckets filled with saliva falling to the floor!
'Yes ... mmmm ... sludge bars,' said the other two, in hypnotic
reaction.
No sooner had they all agreed, they found themselves back inside
the observation post, the hunger sensation was now the only feeling
dominating their minds and bodies.
'Scank? You're alive!' said Chucker, seeing his hairy friend appear
from out of a chute. 'How did you manage to ...'
'Never mind that now,' said Scank, ignoring his friend, pointing to
the optical screen. Dong, Robottom and Chucker quickly turned
their attention on the image it was displaying.

106

'Bloody hell!' exclaimed Dong, excited. His scrunched up figure
gave an appearance of a child who's going to wet himself at any
given moment. 'It's a space crate containing sludge bars. Cube,
bring it aboard, bring it aboard!'
Within seconds the crate was wrapped in light and slowly but
surely the grip-ray reeled it in. The starving crew continued to
dribble at the sight of the crate growing bigger and bigger and
BIGGER upon the screen. Suddenly, before anyone could do
anything, the worst scenario was happening, Scank had moved
over to the grip ray control centre.
'What are you doing?' shouted Chucker, terrified at the thought of
what the leetlesheet was about to do.
Scank took no notice and proceeded to cut power to the grip-ray.
The others were horrified.
'I'll kill you, you leetlesheet,' spluttered Dong, 'I'll bloody kill you!'
From out of thin air a cube blaster appeared in his chubby hand,
ready to be fired into action. The squidge was just about to use it
when he was hit by a voice ... 'Ouch! That hurt!' Shaking his head
from side to side to recover from the blow he swiftly apologised for
his brash behaviour and quickly went to calm, and sit, himself down.
'You are indeed sssstrong,' raged the Devil, 'but I am, we are older
and sssstronger!'
'Yeh,' answered the messiah, in childish retaliation, 'but my dad's
bigger than your dad! So there!'
'Watch and learn,' roared the Devil, knowing he had reached that
part of the adventure when he must reveal his entire plan to
everyone in the whole universes, 'becausssse it issss thesssse idiotssss
by which I, we will get you to join me, ussss. In their current sssstate
of hunger they will not think twice about killing, esssspecially that
overweight ssssquidge, and when they do kill they'll be mine forever
... unlessss … unlessss you would be willing to sssswap yoursssself for
them and I, we know you would!'
'Would I ..? '

107

Once again thunderous laughter filled the Edge whilst the Devil
mulled over the messiah’s response, the laughter quickly turned to
silence.
'Never mind,' shrugged Chucker, 'bring the grip ray back on line. We
can still get the crate aboard.' He stood still and waited.
'The grip ray ... bleep ... has made contact,' informed Robottom,
having taken Scank's place at the controls. The crate was theirs to
plunder once again. 'Hang on! There's something heading rapidly
towards us?' Chucker and Dong stood away from their gripseats,
eyebrows furrowed. 'Uranus-eaters! It looks like it's a mother with her
child. They're after the food crate!'
'I'm not letting them take our crate! I'm not!' Dong raced over to
a series of switches and consequently fired two laser cubes.
'Damn! The 'cubes have missed!' jeered Chucker, in an equal
display of madness. 'Have another go! Have another go!' Dong
moved his hand to fire again. Chucker's facial expression changed.
'No! Wait!' he retracted, but Dong had already fired.
Almost in slow motion the two black and blue laser cubes flew
obediently towards the Uranus-eating mother and child, seeking out
both their inevitable destruction. Then, in a sudden flash of light,
both 'cubes seemed to know what to do as they turned away from
the space creatures' direction and back towards Cube. Before they
struck, the emotional crew would have enough time to say
goodbye to each other...
'How did you know?' asked Chucker, realising, with relief, that
Dong had deliberately fired the laser cubes in a self destruct
pattern.
'Who else but the Devil would have set us up with this ridiculous
scenario even the reader is struggling to comprehend. If you
remember, God did warn us about him, but I didn't think the Devil
was this stupid! There were many clues ... ' Dong paused, knowing
that the Devil had to be listening ... By the way, the laser cubes were
waiting for Dong to finish his explanatory finale before blowing Cube
to bits, just in case you were wondering.

108

'For example,' he began, 'let's see what went wrong, well,
Robottom, you have hardly farted since we woke up. The same can
be said of you, Chucker, you've hardly wobbled or puked. But
Scank, my dear friend, my bestest buddy, you haven't even climbed
one single thing on the observation post and you haven't had one
tiny scratch and you haven’t even growled. Oh yes, the other thing
was the way I was able to ...’ Okay, the laser-cubes have waited
long enough! Dong stopped explaining and, silently, with the
others, watched the 'cubes fly, in slow elegant sequence, into
Cube's side.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Cube's crew had valiantly ... actually that's a lie, they had used the
gripseats as toilets had the truth be known ... anyhow, it would be
true to say that they had watched as the destructive laser cubes
exploded around them in a blaze of yellow and orange ... or was
that Chucker's puke? Eventually though there was a blinding white
light and after a short while ... which had been followed by a long
while on a bicycle ... of thinking they were finally dead, they were
proved utterly wrong as they focused, once again, upon the
welcoming image of the real observation post which was revealed
to them along with a new crew member. Before they realised who it
was, a Tovarian Tickle fly came from out of a chute to buzz around
their vulnerable heads.
Knowing how dangerous a Tovarian Tickle fly's sting can be,
Robottom, Dong, and Chucker, fell to their knees like a falling row of
dominoes.
'Oh really,' blushed the messiah, in a way only a crystal being can,
'how embarrassing, there's no need for you to get down on your
knees for me, it's quite unnecessary.'
'Watch out!' warned Robottom, jumping bum first into the newest
holy crew member, who as a result, conveniently dodged the fly.
'And ... bleep ... by the way, welcome onboard.'
'Yes, welcome,' added the others, still on the look out.

109

'This is just a small example of our nutty life onboard Cube. Now
you are part of the crew,' Dong pleaded, dramatically raising his
voice, 'couldn't you do something to get rid of this sodding fly!'
'Sure!' reacted the messiah without a second thought, delighted to
already be of some assistance. 'Have you got a rolled up
newspaper handy?'
'But I thought you weren't actually suppose to kill things,' argued
Chucker, 'I would've thought you would make it disappear or
something along those lines?'
'This is different!'
'Why?' Chucker continued to question.
'Because it is this fly's given time to die! Otherwise, yes, you are
right, I am normally unable to harm.'
'Mmmm ... I see ... I think?'
‘Buzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz!’
While the crew were chatting amongst themselves, a scientific
robot from one of the sci-cubicles to which the fly escaped, came in
and, after a little comical struggle, caught it safely within a
reinforced laser net.
'I thought you just said it was that fly's time to die?' repeated Dong,
having seen everything, but the instant he asked the question the
robot malfunctioned and as the messiah had predicted the fly
became minced to a pulp inside the netting. It appeared to buzz
one last time as if to say something along the lines of, “Oh
buzzzollocks!”. 'Point taken,' complemented Dong, to the messiah,
'but how were you going to swat the fly anyhow, you've no arms or
legs?'
'Well, in my natural element I have the ability to accomplish tasks
by simply thinking about them. Unfortunately, within your domain I
find it more difficult to achieve the array of things I'm used to. This
was why that Pugjaw creature snatched me so easily I find it terribly
difficult to manoeuvre in this type of mortal atmosphere.'
Walking, or it would be more correct to say hovering, across to the
collapsed scientific robot, the messiah proceeded to demonstrate
her magical ability by lifting it up from the floor without the use of
any hands. If the crystal being hadn't known better, she would have

110

sworn that its mechanical face had smiled upon seeing the dead fly
squashed between the net and its left pincer.
'It's as though you have arms,' noted Chucker, 'but they're
invisible!'
'Exactly,' acknowledged the messiah, 'arms do not always have to
exist as a solid viewed state. In your atmosphere I use most of my
concentration on walking and holding things. It can be very tiring at
times.'
After hearing what had been said, Dong looked to Robottom and
back to the messiah. 'May I make a suggestion, Galactic Messiah ...
’
'Please ... if I'm going to be part of this crew then I'm going to need
another name. Let me think ... because I'm a crystal being, call me
... Crystal!'
'Nice,' said Chucker, 'but how about ... Cryst?'
'Perfect!' approved the messiah. 'By the way, Dong, what was
your suggestion?'
'I think ... bleep ... I know!' intervened Robottom. 'If you don't
object, I would like to have you as my next host.'
The messiah looked the bowing metal pair of legs up and down
with glistening crystal eyes. 'I would be most grateful and honoured
to sit on your arse,' smiled Cryst. Similar to Robottom's, her unusual
visage was blended into her jagged crystal shaping, the visual
expressions becoming more evident the longer they were looked at.
'You haven't smelt his farts yet!' Chucker joked, seriously.
'I'm lucky in the respect that I have no nostrils in this form of mine,
which means I have the ability to block smells out if I so desire ... '
'Oh believe me you will desire! I think you are going to fit perfectly
in with Cube’s crew with that ability.' From the corner of his eyes
Dong was quick to notice a panel flashing and, after tripping over a
gripseat, ran over to investigate. 'It's the med-cubicle, it's Scank!'
'The med-cubicle? He's not dead is he?' asked Chucker, turning
white in dread.
'I'm not sure. We must get there as soon as possible.' Before
leaving, Dong turned to Robottom. 'There's no time like the present.
Attach yourself to the messiah, and hurry after us!'

111

With a symphony of strange sounds Mozart would have been
proud of, both forms joined together as one. The end result was
indeed a weird sight to behold. Positioned happily at Robottom's
top the messiah's round shape emerged in its already mentioned
more than five billion times, jagged form. An egg cup from a wacky
universe would be a good description for the role Robottom now
played. They very, very, very roughly looked like a cross between
the legs of a stork and a (spiky) punk wig embedded into the waist,
there was no sign of a stomach or chest.
'Let's go!' said Cryst, content with her positioning.
Using his top speed to impress his new host, Robottom arrived at
the med-cubicle just in time to hear the others screaming.
'Oh sheet! He's dead! He's dead!' In a state of shock, Dong and
Chucker stood frozen to the floor.
'Robottom, take me closer,' pleaded Cryst, calmly.
Together as one they walk towards the med-couch where the
leetlesheet lay lifeless.
'Whoops ... bleep ... ahhh ... ' yelled Robottom, finding one of his
feet had become entangled in some cables.
Dong and Chucker watched helplessly as the new form flew
messiah-first into the circuitry above Scank's head. Bolts of
electricity, intertwined with red and blue particle beams,
subsequently threw Robottom and Cryst forcefully downwards and
onto the floor. Flashing and smoking, the circuitry fell violently onto
Scank's exposed head.
Within seconds of touching him, the violent surge of vivid power lit
the leetlesheet's body in only a way a violent surge of vivid power
can. What had been a still corpse now shook in spasm upon the
rippling med-couch.
'It's a miracle!' cried Chucker, jumping up and down. 'It's a miracle
he's still dead!'
'Woof ... no ... grrr ... I'm not!' emerged a familiar voice.
'Scank, you're alive!' gasped Dong, walking quickly to his side.
'Thanks to you I suppose,' observed Scank, looking with tears of
emotion towards the messiah. 'Welcome onboard, finally.'
'Well, it wasn't exactly me,' Cryst blushed.

112

'Oh, you are too modest,' complimented Scank, propping himself
up against the back of the med-couch, a grimace of pain flickering
across his face. Dong and Chucker kept completely still and said
nothing. 'You will never guess what I saw whilst I was dead?' he
continued, dying to reveal his near death experience whilst he
could recollect it. 'A black hole, would you believe it, of all things...’
'Really?' the others replied, their voices donned in that slightly
raised tone which sarcasm often wears.
'How do you feel?' asked Dong, grabbing one of Scank's long hairy
arms, stroking it in sympathy.
'You tell me. You are the one touching my arm! I ... snfff ... hope I
still feel hairy?'
'No ... I mean, how do you feel mentally and physically?'
'Funnily enough, I feel mentally and physically ... grrr ... with most of
my normal bodily senses!'
Seeing that Scank was back to his unbearable sarcastic norm,
Dong knew he was well enough to be hit.
'Ouch!'
Pushing Dong aside impatiently one of the medical robots barged
through to check the miraculous recovery of their patient.
'I presume you're okay to leave, then?' remarked Chucker, seeing
the robot was totally unconcerned as it quickly left the med-cubicle
for yet another coffee break. 'Right, let's get you out of this damn
place.’
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Being a bionic grass seed was beginning to piss it off.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Upon leaving the disinfected smell of the med-cubicle, Dong turned
to look properly, for the first time, at the new partnership of
Robottom and Cryst. 'Um?' he mumbled to himself. 'I think it's high
time we gave you your very own personalisation cubicle.'

113

'Brilliant idea,' agreed Chucker, 'we'll go to the accommodation
section right away.'
Grouping together like a bunch of haemorrhoids, the happy crew
walked further down the curving corridor - its changing colours
being matched step after step by the proud (and wobbling) vom.
After half an hour of being hopelessly lost, everyone - now feeling
completely miserable - stopped by two openings which broke the
smooth seamless walls they had become accustomed to for so long.
They had finally found a gravitational and ladder chute.
'What function do these have?' asked Cryst, learning new things all
the time.
'They enable ... grrr ... us to move from one part of Cube to
another. Woof ... watch ... ' Scank leapt forward and quickly
disappeared. Cryst immediately realised that instead of falling at
speed to the deck below, he had fallen at a perfectly controlled
rate, the invisible pressures keeping him in an upright and stable
position.
'Cool!' approved the messiah, setting herself up for her next over
emphasised word. 'Levitation!'
Before the others jumped, Dong stepped up to a brightly lit device
which had the holes of a pepper shaker punctured onto its rounded
surface. Lifting his fingerless hand halfway up the middle of both
chutes, he pointed to the device and began to describe what it
was there for. 'This is simply used to verbally instruct the gravitational
chute's sensors, to send you up or down or sideways.' The squidge,
who had seemed to have taken on the posture and stance of a
parachute instructor, suddenly moved to the edge of the
gravitational chute and shouted, 'Down!' before leaping out of sight.
'My turn,' squealed Cryst, just like a four year old child pleading
next turn on a game. 'My turn!' Not wanting to wait any longer for
the experience she took a deep breath and ran hastily towards one
of the two available chutes - and jumped.
Chucker was quick to run to the place where the messiah had just
leapt from. 'You will find the gravitational chute's all over Cube,' he
yelled, his voice echoing as he peered down the chute to which
Cryst now lay in agony at the bottom. 'Along with these ladder

114

chutes situated alongside. It is up to you which one you decide to
use. Personally, if I were you, I'd stick with the gravitational type!'
A small and still rather stunned voice echoed back in response,
'Thank you.' Robottom twitched about on the hard floor, at that
moment wishing he was back in control of his own functions.
Moments later saw Chucker joining the others in the
accommodation section, his face in the process of exchanging
green for orange colouring.
'Well then,' smiled Scank, rubbing his naturally padded wrists
together and looking to Cryst, 'let's show you ... grrr ... an
accommodation cubicle.' Seeing him dart off down a corridor, the
remaining crew gratefully followed the zigzagging figure of their
much missed friend as if he were the new host of the Crystal Maze,
which as it happens was the messiah's favourite show.
It didn't take long before they had reached Scank’s chosen
destination. 'You can move in here, in between mine and Dong's
places,' he happily suggested, already jumping across to the
opening doors.
'Hang on, Scank,' shouted Chucker, 'aren't you forgetting
something?'
The leetlesheet halted abruptly and looked back. 'Oh yes, sorry.
You'd better be the first ones inside, Cryst, Robottom. The
personalisation system has just been set to adapt to the first being, or
beings, who enter.'
All three wise aliens looked thoughtfully at Cryst and Robottom,
both of them having remained still. 'Well ... what are you waiting for,
go on then!' Together they slowly entered.
Closing in swiftly behind the hesitant new occupants, Chucker,
Dong, and Scank, watched as four small triangles whooshed
together to form a perfectly square shaped door. With the cubicle
firmly closed, the remaining friends talked excitedly amongst
themselves.
'I can't wait to see what happens. The system's never had to deal
with two joined beings in the same room before.' Dong looked
quickly back as the usual sounds of the adaptation requirements
were being undertaken.

115

'Don't forget,' added Chucker, 'the system will adapt to whatever
its resident requires, meaning it's capable of space conditioning!'
'That means we'll only be allowed inside with our organic suits on.
Damn!' Dong's blubber bounced in frustration.
Suddenly there was an immense thunderous clash ... IMMENSE
THUNDEROUS CLASH! ... the square door mysteriously opened.
'Come in,' beckoned Cryst, in a rather relaxed voice.
Dong was the first to venture inside. 'No space?' he questioned,
taken aback by what he saw - or rather - didn't see.
'No!' stated Cryst. 'There will be no space whilst I'm onboard
Cube.'
'What was that noise?' wobbled Chucker, looking around the
completely unchanged rooms whose walls were left in their normal
state of flashing circuitry and glowing terminals.
'This cubicle hasn't changed at all...' Just as Dong was finishing his
sentence, he and the others noticed that one thing was indeed
different. Each of their mouths dropped open in complete and utter
disbelief. The messiah's form was being overcast in a powerful
shadow of what appeared to be a large solid gold box. At the top
of it, on each end, was a pair of long meticulously carved handles.
Dong eventually managed to set his frozen voice free. 'Is that thethe- the ... ' He couldn't quite spit it out so Scank finished for him.
'Woof ... the Ark?'
'Yes, the Ark is what it is,' twanged the soothing voice of the crystal
being as if a tubular bell had been struck. 'I have much to learn and
much to preach. This will give me the knowledge I require. Call it, if
you will, call it my own fully integrated personal encyclopaedic
library.'
'Do we have to? It's quite a mouth full!'
'All right then, don't!'
The Three Wise Aliens looked shocked, if not flattered by the
presence of such a powerful object having been brought aboard
Cube. Chucker looked down at Robottom. 'Have you seen inside
it?' The legs remained absolutely still and didn't reply.
'He did,' answered Cryst, 'for he is part of me now as I am also part
of him.' A beautiful fart resonated into the air, proving the point. 'I

116

speak for him; we speak as one. I'll eat potato - so he'll fart potarto,
I'll eat tomato - so he'll fart tomarto, potato, potarto, tomato and
tomarto, let's call the whole thing off ... '
'What the heck are you talking about?' shouted Dong, irate, at the
same time cutting the messiah's song in mid flow.
'As a robottom he is programmed to hand over all functions to his
host. Didn't you realise?'
'Yes, come to think of it he did mention it, I'd just forgotten.' Dong
looked at the pair of mechanical legs and waited for them to shout
- only joking - but they didn't. 'Is he okay?'
'Perfectly fine,' assured Cryst.
After staring at the Ark, entranced by its looks, Scank and Chucker
decided it was a good time to leave. 'Now you have your own
place to go we're off to the relaxation section just down the end of
the corridor to the left ... '
'Is the section integrated into part of this one?' asked Cryst,
wanting to know everything about Cube's interior.
'Yes, it has proved to be a good combination. So, anyway, are
you coming with us or what? It's the nearest you'll get to heaven
onboard Cube!'
'Sounds good, I'll be right there.' Cryst quickly finished what she
was doing, which was nothing, and promptly joined them outside in
the corridor.
Once inside one of the relaxation cubicles they slept for a while, ate
for a while and slept for another while until all their whiles were
almost used up.
'So what happens from here on,' said Scank, his thoughts turning to
future endeavours, 'we have universes, or perhaps universeseses,
waiting for us out there. Cube is a great explorer and can take us
anywhere we want to go.'
Cryst smiled, an annoying smile, 'I appeared on Huj Huji Wuji for a
reason. That reason was to bring the bosseye to justice for all the
evil they have inflicted on other worlds, especially the evil renaming
of planets to names such as Huj Huji Wuji. This means I must return to

117

their ruling quadrants and finish this crusade before anything else is
undertaken.'
'We understand,' said the others in complete misunderstanding.
For their last remaining while the relaxation section stayed nice
and peaceful, each of its occupants falling into a deep and
overwhelming state of slumber.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Just when all its hopes and aspirations seemed completely lost, the
grass seed was set alight by the flickering flame of a Bunsen-burner
and so - as a direct result - it began to smoke itself, a smile (if it had
lips) forming upon its face (that’s if it had one of those too). In the
background there seemed to be a tune playing, adding to the
mellow moment it was now experiencing.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Woof ... oh sheet!' squawked Scank, jumping from his restful position.
'What is it?' asked Cryst, awake instantly.
'Grrr ... a communication light’s flashing again. Something has
been trying to contact us!' Before darting off, he stopped to look at
the others, 'We must remember to switch the bloody warning siren
back on, so the next time we'll know immediately when someone
wants to communicate with us.' With that said, he scurried off to the
observation post using a clever mixture of both the gravitational and
ladder chutes.
Almost tripping over his legs, he clambered to the appropriate
panelling and pressed a selection of musical buttons. 'Scank,
opening communication ... woof ... who is communicating?' Cube's
speakers crackled with interference. 'I repeat ... woof ... who is
communicating?' Dong and Cryst stepped beside him, their faces
carrying a worried expression.
'Has there been an answer?' Dong enquired.
'No,' replied Scank, wrapping his mind in deep thoughts.

118

'Maybe I can clear up the frequency with the leveller coding?'
suggested Cryst.
'By all means, have a go,' relented Dong, impressed by the
messiah's fast growing knowledge of Cube's many systems - of
course she did have the help of Robottom beneath her.
Without any hesitation, the crystal being began to move the
correct controls with her invisible fingers. All the while the speakers
crackled and crackled until something eventually burst out loud and
clear...
'Get out of the damn way, you imbeciles! This is Captain Rugga of
the refuse ship 7821ARSE...' the message faded. Cryst reacted by
pressing several buzzing keys in an attempt to re-establish the
transmission. '... Ships thrusters are over heating, navigation
impossible!' The message ended...
If you are wondering why Cube, being the most secretive and
intelligent, hasn't moved already, and yet she can save the crew in
other situations, well, it's because of her built in safety program.
When the crew are onboard she will not act unless given the
authorisation to do so. If the crew happen to be away from her, or
in the event they are unconscious or not in the right frame of mind,
she can override all systems and act accordingly.
'CUBE,' requested Cryst, switching from a keypad to voice
activation, 'evasive action to get us the ... BEEP! ... away from the
path of that approaching ship.'
As if to say, thank Cryst for that, Cube's gravitational core
whooshed into immediate action.
Within a gap too close to be described as close, the refuse ship
shot past, pushing Cube into an uncontrollable spin.
Violently turning round and round and round and round through
space, breaking up millions of cosmicdust mites (yet another clan!)
as she went, Cube's army of cleaning robots took up positions
around Chucker's greening figure.
The spinning cube looked as though the Devil had just thrown a
dice and wasn't going to let it stop until it landed on six six six.
Inside, the crew were being thrown back and forth around the
observation post, the cleaning robots, armed to their wires with

119

utensils, still followed Chucker's every and sudden move. This was all
becoming too much of a bad habit.
'Cryst, do something!' yelled Dong, before being thrown with the
other Wise Aliens (closely followed by the pack of robots) into some
above - turning quickly into below - panelling. Gripseats were most
definitely not an option at this point in time. Cryst was the only one
of them managing to keep in a relatively stable position.
'I'm trying something, but it's not working!' the messiah blabbered.
'But you're not doing anything?' screamed Dong.
'Exactly,' replied Cryst, 'and it's not working!'
'It's the gravitational core!' informed Scank, who for a brief second
or two had managed to clutch hold of a sprocket stabiliser lever
thingy-me-bob relay switch with his fuction sands and heet; more
commonly known, for those of you who aren’t dyslectic, as his
suction hands and feet. 'Its levels must need ... grrr ... balancing out.'
'Okay, I'll have a go at doing that,' offered Cryst, pathetically.
There wasn't much time left, she would have to balance the core
before body parts start to break off her flying colleagues. Floating
over to a white panel she casually inserted Robottom’s nose and
began groaning.
Adding to their problems, Cube was now on a collision course with
a planet, its name being "In-The-Way" - it was what most early space
explorers of the local galaxy thought was a myth, a space mirage,
but having come across it once before Cube knew it to be
otherwise. Its sole purpose for existing was to glide around the
galaxies getting in the way of things; it was yet another proud
creation that the Devil, all by himself, had thought up.
'Look,' blared Chucker, in overwhelming dread, 'a planet, I saw a
planet! We're going to collide.' The others couldn't believe their
luck, it appeared they had just missed one collision only to be
confronted by another which was, on paper, deemed a worse
proposition. Because of this, for a moment, they didn't believe what
had been said was true.
The optical screen was stuck with the forward view all around and
was spinning along with Cube.

120

'You're right!' suddenly screamed Scank, seeing the planet for
himself, his suction pads ripping away from the sprocket stabiliser
lever thingy-me-bob relay switch.
The doom coloured planet started to move nearer and further, but
then nearer still and, for some totally known reason, it felt the
increasing urge to collide with the cubic space vessel which was
now only some seconds away from being burst like a Tovarian boil
full of puss.
'Done it!' exploded Cryst as a sequence of blue lights turned red.
Cube immediately stopped and, in her now favourite manoeuvre,
dropped just in time for In-The-Way
to pass by in utter disappointment over the top of her.
'Thank god for that,' wheezed Dong, looking to Cryst, waiting for
her initial reaction to his statement. 'I mean it, literally!'
'I know.' The messiah smiled once more, this time with
accomplished relief.
With everything that had just happened, and Dong's religious
outburst, Chucker let the cleaning robots have what they had been
waiting for. In the following minutes the sound of vacuums and
pulsating air dryers filled the post with the same busy noise a nest of
Trebular ants can give if listened to with a stethoscope.
'Cube,' said Scank, leaping up to a small round monitor positioned
high above. 'Quickly ... grrr ... navigate an interception course with
that refuse ship ... 7821ARSE.'
Cube jerked forwards with a bang and stopped.
'Systems malfunction,' observed Cryst, feeling a case of deja-vu
coming on. The wise aliens, still a bit shaky and bruised from the past
several minutes, painfully went to work on the problem alongside
their saviour (now in both senses of the word).
'The analytical data survey points to the motion section,' grumbled
Dong, 'the gravitational core is leaking.'
'Is that serious?' asked Chucker, stupidly.
‘You know damn well this means we'll be left to drift in space. If
the bosseye spot us we will certainly be vaporised.' After Dong's
telling off, Chucker changed slowly to green, the last remaining
cleaning robot taking one look at him and exploding like the tightly

121

wound mechanisms of a watch which has just been smashed with a
hammer, each and every part flying in each and every direction
impossible.
'Who's going to the motion section?' inquired Dong.
Scank dropped his arm, 'Woof ... I will go.'
'Can I come,' pleaded Cryst, eager for more knowledge.
'Sure,' said Scank, grateful of the company. 'I'll meet you there.'
'We'll stay here and observe,' smirked Dong.
As the leetlesheet disappeared down one of the chutes, Chucker
stopped Cryst from giving immediate chase. 'Scank prefers the
ladder chutes because he likes to exercise his limbs, but you will be
better off using a gravitational chute to get to the motion section.
You remember what happened the last time you rushed down a
ladder chute!'
The messiah nodded. 'Okay, which one of these will take me there
the quickest?'
'That one over there - on the left!' Chucker smiled, his lips almost
breaking free from his face. Cryst acknowledged its positioning and
hurried off, not wanting to waste anymore precious time.
Dong and Chucker began to snigger. It wasn't long before they
were on the floor in a fit of hysterics.
'You know that chute leads to the observation post's designated
toilet capsule ... ' Dong had to pause for all the laughter he was
having to endure. 'She'll be placed directly upon the toilet seat and
... '
'Very funny,' grimaced Cryst, emerging from the chute, the slightly
forgotten robottom not looking too pleased either. 'This is an
emergency if you haven't forgotten, we are drifting aimlessly
through space.' She scowled. 'Which chute is the right one?' Slowly
the crystal hearted messiah began to smile in an attempt to fit in
with things.
'No, seriously,' said Dong, 'you say you want to know the right one,
okay, it's that one,' he pointed, 'next to it.' Both he and Chucker
resumed serious expressions.

122

Cryst instantly turned Robottom back around and sprinted into the
chute positioned on the right. Uncontrolled coughing from Chucker
and Dong turned immediately into roaring laughter.
'That's the other toilet capsule,' laughed Chucker, puking into a
bag he held ready.
'I know!' cried Dong, hysterical. His bladders were beginning to
itch under the constant vibration, he would be needing the toilet
himself soon enough.
This time, when the messiah eventually emerged, her (or rather
Robottom's) rear-end was plugged full of multi-coloured toilet paper
some of which was dragging on the floor as she walked forwards.
She didn't appear so spiritually fulfilled with kindness and goodwill,
'Right!'
'Well that is what you asked for, right is where you went...'
'I mean – right – listen - shut up - be still ... OR I'LL TELL MY DADDY!’
She paused. ‘In a way, yes, well I suppose it is slightly funny,' she
admitted, remembering anger was not the way to approach things,
at the same time staring at the optical screen with wide crystal eyes,
'but I'm not laughing about the fact that the kamikaze planet we
just missed is heading back towards us!’ Dong and Chucker
instantly stopped laughing and looked up to the screen. 'Only
joking!' boasted Cryst, her revenge tasting sweet as honey. 'And just
so I don't have to rely on you in future, I'm going to use Robottom to
access Cube's layout data.'
'Okay,' said Dong, his laughter resurfacing.
'We'll show them, Robottom. Start connecting yourself to
download the appropriate information.' The messiah quickly spun
around in unsuspecting shock, whilst in a way I'd still rather leave to
your imagination, Robottom inserted his extending bulge into an
appropriate information (and ironically termed) interfacial hole.
Having to endure the continuous laughter of the other two, Cryst
waited for the data to be adequately processed. She was definitely
relieved when it was all over (so was Robottom) and this time
around, knowing where to go, she disappeared down the correct
chute.

123

'Sorry I took so long,' apologised Cryst, at the same time slamming
both of Robottom's feet onto the glistening floor of the motion
section, its magnetic fields keeping each foot suspended several
inches above the actual surface.
With the delicate prowess of someone learning to ice-skate,
Robottom, very slowly, walked towards what appeared to him to be
the motion section's centre.
'Never mind ... grrr ... about all that,' said Scank, not having listened
properly, 'it's this I'm more concerned with.' What he was standing in
front of and pointing to looked similar in shape to a circular chimney
that had been painstakingly wedged between the floor and the
somewhat low ceiling. Using the same comparison from what the
messiah could see - where an opened archway was positioned
behind the leetlesheet - the inner metaphorical fire, which should
have been blazing away, looked to be extinguished.
At the gravitational core's (the chimney's) centre, a ball of wires
and tubes (the extinguished fire) looked to be filled with important
substances, some magnetic, others simply containing different types
of liquids as simple as carbonated mineral water.
'So how does all this work?' Cryst enquired, getting onto
Robottom's knees to view the core from underneath.
'Well ... grrr ... this complex ball ... '
'Ah yes,' the messiah immediately cut in, 'I've noticed how its
overall design matches the blueprint of a, so I'd previously thought,
undiscovered atom, undiscovered in this universe anyway. Cube is
indeed one of the wonders of the universes. I can see now why I
was asked to be a part of her crew. You were saying ... about the
"ball"?'
'Thank you ... snfff ... ' sniffed Scank, suddenly feeling like an
amateur soccer player having to tell David Beckham how to kick a
soccer ball; the messiah and Robottom’s knowledge was far
superior to his own. 'This complex ball-like atom-thing structure holds
many different elements which will be too complicated for me to
explain to ... grrr ... you.' Scank didn't think his waffling was getting
him anywhere and he was more or less correct with that assumption.

124

Knowing that he would have to review his notes on atomic
science if he was to have another future confrontation with a boffin;
Scank carried on with his extremely long explanation. 'The elements,
when in a proper working order...'
'When functioning correctly!' insisted Cryst, not realising that she
was almost correcting the leetlesheet's every sentence.
'When ... grrr ... functioning correctly,' Scank emphasised with a
distinct growling sound, 'the elements will start to glow until
eventually you get ... grrr ... blinded...'
'You mean it will accelerate its luminosity until transmitting rapid
degeneration of the optic cells ... '
'SHUT UP!' shouted Scank in unleashed fury. Cryst went still, looking
completely innocent. 'Do you want me to tell you about the
gravitational core ... woof ... or not?'
'Um?' the messiah mumbled in a gesture meaning, yes you
schizophrenic hairy nutter please continue.
'Okay, so then, when the appropriate levels balance out and the you know what - has started to light up ... snfff ... it becomes a
necessary precaution to wear this visor.' The leetlesheet pointed to
the bridge of his snout, upon which a thin blue strip of transparent
plastic covered each of his four eyes. 'Just wait here a moment, I'll
go and get both of you some to put on.'
With a type of sucking motion the leetlesheet disappeared up
inside one of the many (unfortunately termed) suck-holes punctured
into the ceiling. This rapid movement rather looked like someone
having sucked a pea through a straw. He appeared moments later
with the two visors clutched in his hand.
'Do these suck-holes lead to other parts, cubicles of the motion
section. Do they,' the messiah badgered, 'do they? Have I got that
information right?'
'Yes,' answered Scank, 'it's a ... grrr ... bit like a bee hive in many
ways, you do get used to their complex layout - the others haven't
yet - but I'm sure you will. Anyway, now that I'm thinking about it ...
snfff ... both your so called eyes probably wouldn't be affected by
the glowing core.' He still proceeded to hand Cryst and Robottom
the two visors before adding, 'Still, I would like you to put them on

125

because they'll make you look pretty cool and funky, just like me.'
Placing his weird fingertips upon the frame of his own visor, he
proceeded to move them up and down.
Looking up at the rainbow coloured archway (the metaphorical
mantle-piece of the chimney) they were positioned under, Cryst
thought it wouldn't hurt to ask one more question as long as she was
careful what she said. 'Surely there is a containment door to stop
the dangerous light escaping when the core is operable?'
'There is! It's incorporated into the whole unit (the chimney-stack)
and automatically slides downwards like a rusty guillotine when
sensing the ... grrr ... gravitational core is, as you would say,
“operable”. But with our current problem it is wise to wear the visors
whilst we try and ... snfff ... fix the problem from inside.'
'Have you worked on this problem before?'
'No ... woof ... not in this capacity. You see, the gravitational core
was designed so once its substances were in place, and balanced,
that particular part of it would be maintenance free. But we must
bear in mind Cube's been through ... grrr ... a lot recently.'
'There was a leak according to the sensors,' remembered Cryst,
'have you found it yet?'
'No, that's our first task and biggest problem. Once we have found
where it is we can try and use what ... woof ... substances are left
and balance their remaining levels out.' Scank wiped his brow,
'Maybe then we will be able to get to a friendly ... grrr ... space
wharf and get the repairs and other things we need done.'
Cryst suddenly stiffened, looking utterly alarmed. 'You know as well
as I do that most wharfs are under bosseye control. We'll be blown
up before they ever let us dock!'
Scank winked several times. 'We will just have to surrender
ourselves as pirates then. It will throw them off guard, for they
already believe Cube and her crew are all missing and more than
likely all dead. It will take ... grrr ... them ages to verify who we really
are. At least I hope it will.'
Cryst didn't press the point any further, instead, she turned her
attention back to fixing the core.

126

Scank looked up at her as he lay down upon the floor, ready to
crawl underneath the ball of wires to search for the leak, 'There's an
interface, or as you would correctly term it - an information
interfacial hole - positioned in a quiet corner, somewhere over there.
Go and plug yourself in, you'll find it useful.' Cryst slowly nodded and
whilst whistling a peculiar whistle, walked over to the far corner to
connect Robottom's bits; this was getting all too regular an action.
After several minutes of continuous movement she returned,
holding a metal tray, smiling. Scank couldn't help but notice that
Robottom's bulge appeared to be smiling also - in fact - it was
grinning. 'Woof ... what's that?' he asked, looking rapidly to the tray
so as not to confuse the question.
'It's the motion section's do-it-yourself tool kit. It was in the draw
beside the interface.'
Scank looked surprised and a little embarrassed, but then again,
he always does. 'Grrr ... I never knew we had one.' With
awkwardness, he slid back under the wires like a tortoise retracting
into its shell.
'Still no leak found?' shouted Cryst as Scank appeared and
disappeared after several minutes.
'Not ... grrr ... yet,' came Scank's hastened reply as the last part of
his body disappeared from sight.
'Where have you gone to now?' Cryst waited for a reply, she
couldn't see the leetlesheet anywhere. 'Scank?' Placing the tray of
rattling tools to hover upon the shiny floor, she knelt down with the
aid of Robottom's trusty, and most useful, knees and after a frantic
visual search, she spotted two pairs of familiar hairy legs through
some purple tubing which seemed to distort their shape
considerably.
Scank had somehow managed to crawl right around to the other
side of the core. 'Woof ... I've found the damn thing!' came a
cheerful bark, muffled at the same time by the layers of wires and
tubes.
Cryst quickly pulled the tray under the wiring in her own special
way and crawled beneath the core until she was roughly positioned
somewhere below the legs she had been focused on.

127

'Is that you ... snfff ... Cryst?' asked Scank, only hearing but not
seeing.
'Yes, I heard you say you'd found the leak so I brought you the
entire DIY kit. Tell me what you want and I'll give it to you.'
There was a moment of silence whilst Scank assessed the problem.
'It's ... grrr ... going to be difficult,' he sighed in frustration, 'but let me
see, mmmm, I think I'll be needing a pair of scissors ... grrr ... and a
roll of sticky tape.'
Cryst briskly searched through the tray of complex modern
materials, passing laser drills, testing equipment, analysis pads, state
of the art gravity hammers until eventually she found what had
been asked for. 'Got them!'
'Hang on,' replied Scank in equal tone as one of his long arms
lowered itself through several contorted gaps. Grabbing hold of the
instruments, with the mobility of a python having snatched an egg,
he re-coiled his arm and slid it back through the gaps he'd made by
pushing some of the wires and tubes apart.
'Is there anything else you need?'
'No thanks. You can crawl back out now ... woof ... I'll have this
leak fixed sooner than you can say - dooglash.'
'Doo ... what?'
'Woof ... just get out of here!'
Having crawled out upon his request, Cryst didn't have to wait
long before he joined her. Slipping out from underneath the core,
the leetlesheet's suction pads made a similar sound to that of a
champagne cork being released from the neck of a bottle. 'Well
done,' the messiah eventually congratulated as he stood up and
dusted himself down.
'Cheers,' Scank smiled, pressing his blue visor closer to his eyes.
'Now it's just a case of balancing the levels ... grrr ... if we are still able
to?'
'The information I have gathered,' assessed Cryst, placing her
invisible hands upon Robottom's startled bulge, 'tells me we are
going to have to change the level settings on both the inner and
outer terminals. This course of action should make the core
function.'

128

'Woof ... I will be the one to realign the inner terminal,' decided
Scank, swiftly, 'I'll be able to crawl around the core much faster ...
grrr ... than you would.'
'But you could end up being sealed inside when the containment
door is initiated!' exclaimed Cryst, her usual concern for the welfare
of others being safely upheld.
'I'm ... grrr ... going to have to take that chance,' Scank replied,
bravely - which more often than not is sometimes confused with
stupidly.
The messiah watched her comrade's shaggy limbs clambering
back inside the inner terminal. Feeling slightly apprehensive, she
walked slowly across to the outer terminal and set about initiating
and balancing the gravitational elements.
Most aliens would have been unable to figure out how to use
Cube's array of functions but, with the added knowledge Robottom
delivered, Cryst was able to set about the task feeling quite
confident.
Although Robottom's knowledge was sufficient in operating the
terminal mechanisms, he had never seen one of this particular cubic
shape. It was as though someone had welded a metal cube
against the wall. The only similarity it held with the many other
terminals he had experienced over the years was the fact it used
pressure points to key in the proposed data. For a brief moment, if
you closed your eyes and imagined hard enough, the way in which
it was being used looked as though a small accordion was being
played, the escaping musical notes being replaced by data.
Still inside the core, Scank was just about finishing. The casing
around the inner terminal started to glow, warning him the
gravitational core was at any moment about to resume. Knowing
the urgency by which he must leave, he quickly climbed down from
the back of the complex ball and in his frantic rush to escape, he
slipped. 'Bugger!'
The terminal began to convey to Cryst that operations were now
also ready on the outer side of the core. After waiting calmly for
around about two seconds, she started to have growing feelings of
panic as she saw there was no sign of Scank and the core itself had

129

started to glow quite brightly. Suddenly, to go from bad to worse,
the containment door above the arched opening was beginning to
lower, the deep burping sound it created adding to the moment of
doom.
Without a thought for herself, well actually that is a lie - she was
doing it because it was in her job description - the messiah ran
forward to pass underneath the lowering door. 'Scank, what's
wrong?' she shouted. 'Get out of there now, the core is established.'
'Woof ... I can't! To make this page more exciting I have to stay in
here and look fatally doomed.' Looking down at his hands, he
practised pulling his four fingers apart in the middle to leave a vshaped gap, but he soon gave up, it wouldn't have been funny
anyway.
'Don't be a fool!' resumed Cryst, angered by his better acting
abilities. Realising he wasn't going to move, she pushed herself
under the core till she was in reach of his entangled form. 'If you
have to make this dramatic point I will be the one who gets trapped
inside. Is that all right with you?!'
Scank quickly looked away from the messiah and into the
increasing glow. He knew it would mean severe pain and a slow
death if he decided to stay. 'Well ... snfff ... okay, if you insist.'
Just as the containment door was sealing shut and was two
centimetres away from closing (as you would expect in this kind of
situation) Scank miraculously dived out from underneath, into the
safety of the outer room.
With the same effect as a lighthouse, the gravitational core
projected a beautiful spectrum of light through the remaining one
centimetre gap and onto the nearby floor. As the last glimpses of
the spectrum disappeared from his reflective visor, Scank felt a huge
turd roll to the floor, showing his immense relief at having narrowly
escaped.
Observation post sprang immediately to mind as he heard an
agonising scream coming from within the sealed core. At first his
head filled with terrifying visions of what might be happening to his
trapped friends, then he remembered Robottom and an interfacial
hole were in close proximity to each other and, upon hearing

130

another scream, had second thoughts as to their exact kind of
suffering.
In a moment of sheer panic the leetlesheet ran around the motion
section feeling a contagious need to scream. Gradually calming
down he slid across the magnetic floor, shot up a suck-hole, and
vanished into a gravitational chute.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
With the effects of the smoke taking full control over its senses, the
grass seed forgot about the burdens of reality for a moment and
began imagining itself flying back up to the observation post,
except this time it had the use of wings and an army of garden
gnomes to help it get there...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Chucker jumped into a sudden shade of white as Scank's small hairy
figure appeared abruptly from behind where he was standing on
the observation post, shouting, 'Woof ... The Galactic Messiah is
dead! The Galactic Messiah is dead!' over and over again, in
obvious panic.
'Calm down. What do you mean by - dead?' Dong grabbed the
leetlesheet's shoulders and shook him before kneeing him in the
groin. 'And what is this new song, "The Galactic Messiah is dead!
The Galactic Messiah is dead!", I don't recollect Bob Marley having
sung that one before?'
'Cryst has been shut inside the ... grrr ... gravitational core,'
explained Scank, out of breath. Relaxing himself for a moment, he
began to tell them what had happened...
'We have to get to a space wharf as soon as possible, but Cube's
only going to be able to reach gravpull 90210 with such low levels
within her core.' Chucker paced back and forth, thinking aloud.
'Where is the nearest wharf?'
'Hang on,' waved Dong, willing to oblige him with an answer. After
several seconds of keyboard banging he hadn't managed to come

131

up with one. 'It's going to take a minute to find a wharf, but I can tell
you that after our experience with the black hole, we have been
placed inside the north quadrant of the Cantoo System. We are
now, as I'm speaking, passing into its west quadrant.'
Ancient local logic believes that each system is surrounded by an
invisible circle, the circumference of this circle is known as the
system's border line. If you were to imagine the circle as being a
large, very, very, very large cake, and cutting it into four equal slices,
each slice would be representing the four quadrants of a system north, south, east and west.
'The Cantoo System,' said Chucker, running a finger across a
monitor, 'is dark years (these are like light years only they are a lot
darker) north of the Umpy Bolland System.'
'At least we didn't end up in the far reaches of some other
universe!' added Dong, thankful in the thought of knowing where
the Cantoo System actually lay. A beeping sound below his
blubbery hand signified a wharf had been located due south, 'I've
found one about a dark year away from where we are.'
'How long will it take us to reach it?' asked Chucker, his voice
having been afraid to ask the question.
'With no way of creating an acceleration funnel and Cube only
capable of gravpull 90210, I would go so far as to say, four, maybe
five seconds.' A sole moon passing slowly around the optical
screen, as if having just decided to take an afternoon stroll,
acknowledged that the space wharf was close by.
'According to Cube's specific calculations the wharf should be
behind that moon.' Dong raised his hand.
'How are we ever going to get the bosseye wharf commander to
give us what we need?' said Chucker, moving over to the south side
of the optical screen.
'Grrr ... by simply surrendering!' stated Scank, matter of factly.
'By what?' repeated Chucker, his voice reaching a high pitch.
'If we say that we are pirates ... grrr ... and we want to give
ourselves up, they will allow us to dock!'
'Then what do we do?' the worried vom persisted.

132

'I haven't thought of that yet ... snfff ... but our main aim is to get
the substances the core will need to reach normal power.'
Tossing a soggy cake, which a food robot had just given him, from
hand to hand, Dong purposely threw it over his left shoulder in a
brash manner. 'Who cares? Let's just go ahead and do what Scank
says!' His carefree words rushed quickly from his mouth to smack
each of the others in their completely astonished faces. To have
seen Dong of all squidges throwing away any kind of food was most
unbelievable and indeed a first. 'What are you staring at me for,
let's just do it!'
Upon seeing the wharf, Cube moved into its orbit. From behind
her reflective skin the colours of space seemed to move slowly - as if
in warning - as she proceeded to open a communication channel.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Just when the grass seed had imagined itself, with the help of its
gnome friends, reaching the observation post easily and swiftly, it
threw up several times from its imaginary mouth and began coming
down to the complicities of reality. From somewhere a boy named
Zamo sang, ‘…just say no!’
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'I am Derder, the bosseye commander in charge of this wharf.' The
stranger's unshaven face moved closer upon the optical screen, his
dented and scarred features were not a pleasant sight. 'You say
you wish to surrender. That is very commendable. I would've done
the same had I been in your position.' He laughed, annoyingly. 'I do
have only one question to ask though ... '
'And what may that be?' snapped Dong, clenching his fists tight.
'Make that two questions! Firstly what is the meaning of life ... and
secondly ... who the hell did you say you were?'
'Pirates!' Chucker surprisingly yelled out before anyone else, his
reaction totally artificial.

133

Transmission ceased for a few minutes whilst both sides assessed
the situation.
'I have given clearance for your vessel to dock. But I warn you ...
any false moves and you'll be in my bad book, do you get what I'm
saying?'
'Yes!'
In her own time, Cube pushed nearer to one of the wharf's many
docking-spikes. It was as though someone was forcing her against a
naked flame, feeling all the while as though she wanted to fight her
advancement. The wharf's shape was distinctly, and appropriately,
reminiscent to that of a second world war sea mine - the sight of it
getting closer obviously having the same effect.
The sheer size of the space wharf's central black sphere appeared
daunting enough, millions of pin-pricks of light representing each
lighted window, without the added long docking-spikes surrounding
it. The spikes allowed access for all manner of space traffic, of
which Cube had now become an honorary member.
With a loud pressurising sound the docking-spike slid into place,
Cube's rape was complete; she now lay motionless devoid of
emotion. She was at the mercy of the bosseye and she knew, as did
her crew, that they had none.
From his authoritative position onboard the wharf, from one of
those many pin-pricks of light, Commander Derder could be seen
making a galactic call, at cheap rate. 'Hello, Empress, are you
there?'
'I am here, it is I, we speak together through land and sky!' The
Empress' rhyming answer was unexpected, she sounded a bit out of
it, the commander thought he had better follow her lead. She
continued, 'You are using the emergency channel this'd better be
good!'
'I've captured Pube, I thought you wanted to know, so I'd
understood?'
'I think you mean Cube, you stupid bald prat!'
'Well, yes, Cube, or it's something like that.'
'You are sure you have Cube and she's attached to a spike.'
'I can set her free and blow her up, if you like?'

134

'No, you fool! I'll be there as soon as I can!'
'Okay, Empress, we'll do this according to plan.'
'Rhyme with the end of my sentence again and I'll kill you!'
'Of course, Empress, but you just don't understand what I'm going
through ... going to do ... your tits are looking bigger today!' Whilst
the commander hastily ended transmission, from within Cube's
docking section, from within a small cubicle, her surrendering crew
discussed the fate which would await them on the other side of the
docking hatch.
'Let's get whatever they have in store for us over and done with,'
grunted Dong, fiddling with his lips.
'Agreed,' joined Scank, jumping up to a triangular console. 'The
commander hasn't even recognised us yet ... grrr ... we'll all be back
here with the essential supplies before you can recite The Book of
Infinity!'
Chucker said nothing and continued picking his nasal slits, these
being barely visible to the naked eye.
With a great heaving moan, Dong yanked open the heavy hatch
which was twice his size. Gazing back at the inside of Cube for
what might very well be the last time ever, he eventually turned to
leave.
Without looking where he was going he walked belly-first into the
nozzle of a weapon deliberately having been held out in greeting.
'Cube and her crew are here-by under arrest for the crimes they
have committed within The Star Empress' domain.' Standing tall and
muscled, the arresting soldier pulled Dong and his companions
through to the inside bosseye territory of the wharf. In turn, they
were handcuffed to a wharf security guard and after several loud
orders were given, she, alone, was given instructions to lead them to
a prison cell.
The not so wise prisoners were now chained together with Dong in
second place, Scank in third and Chucker in fourth. The bosseye
leading them was short and fat and this she seemed to be
constantly aware of. The chip she carried on her shoulder was
immense and occasionally she took a bite from it to proverbially
stop it from getting any bigger.

135

Every now and again this incredibly tiny security guard would stop,
and facing her captives, proceed to hit them viciously with her
hand-held stinging bludgeon.
Her overall appearance left much to be desired. Unlike The Star
Empress' four pert breasts, hers seemed to sag into one large lump of
unwanted fat; they seemed to want to get as far away from her
ugly face as was possible.
'Have you ... grrr ... thought of anything to get us out of this mess
yet?' whispered Scank, the guard hitting him for a third time, hard
enough to make him yelp.
'No, not yet, although I'm sure I had thought of something before, I
just can't think what it was?' Dong started to feel his bruises and
stings mixing together. 'It will come to me soon enough.'
'It’d better!'
Pulling their chained wrists abruptly forward with her own, the small
bosseye bitch (which her friend's - if she had any - called her) forced
the three captives, on purpose, into a solid wall as she turned a
sharp corner. 'You do you realise you're all going to die,' she
chuckled to her great amusement, in a demented witch kind of
way, looking out for the next sharp corner to arrive.
In answer to the guard's callous outburst, the high pitched sound
of two twangs ... TWANG! TWANG! ... brought her to an abrupt halt.
'Look, I will kill you all myself if you don't ... ' Turning her head back
to gaze upon the three, she looked completely horrified by the
sudden appearance of a large breasted white giant, her jealousy
and shock were immediate.
Remembering part of her plan, Dong looked downwards at the
guard's face. Upon the floor the handcuffs lay shattered after the
tremendous pressure her expanded wrists had induced.
In ignorant defiance, the small bosseye swung her stinging
bludgeon upwards in a feeble attempt to regain her authority. With
heroic timing, Dong grabbed the weapon and casually snapped it
with one hand.
After witnessing such a feat of strength the guard decided it best
to escape extremely rapidly.

136

Seeing her attempt to flee, Dong quickly bent down, grabbed
hold of the trailing handcuff chain she was still attached to and
gave it a cruel tug, the guard having no choice but to jerk
backwards through the air like a yo-yo.
Remembering her holstered laser canon, the bosseye made a last
desperate effort to regain some kind of authority over the situation.
'Drop the chain, you over inflated piece of blubber! Nice bosoms!’
With the sound of the chain crashing to the floor, she started to feel
slightly more assertive, but the 'canon still shook in between her
hands.
'So you thought you could escape from me,' she smirked, looking
up at the towering squidge and then into her enlarged eyeballs.
'You think I'm small don't you?' she continued, taking another bite
from the chip on her shoulder, poking the end of the 'canon into
Dong's heavily muscled stomach. 'You do don't you?' Her voice
was becoming more and more irate.
'Well all right then, yes! I think you are a short stumpy pot bellied
little alien turd eater, who thinks the whole galaxy has it in for you,
and in your case, it probably does!'
The guard was fuming after this truthful retort. Her temper had
reached boiling point. 'We'll see what size means now that I'm
holding this weapon.' Lashing out, she struck Dong in the side with
the butt.
Dong promptly turned to her friends and winked. The guard soon
realised there had been absolutely no effect, she now knew it was
going to be impossible to break through the shield of muscles which
stood before her. 'You think this is funny! You don't take me
seriously, do you?'
'No not at all!'
'You think a small guard like me can't harm you. Right, I'll just have
to ignore The Empress' orders and kill you all right now, myself, little
tiny moi!' All three watched, it seemed as if in slow motion, as she
placed her fingers around the 'canon's long curving trigger. 'Who
needs The Empress' orders anyhow ... she's tall as well by the way ...
The Tart! And she’s pert! Now you'll see what you're going to get

137

from a short bitch like me ... ' Closing her eyes, she defiantly
squeezed the trigger and the laser canon fired into action.
Dong and the others managed to dive to the floor as a gigantic
power ball blew past them to roll downwards through the corridor,
unfortunately a dust mite was now running for its life on the other
side of it - re-inacting a famous scene from the Indiana Jones trilogy.
Seeing she had missed, the security guard aimed the 'canon down
at Dong and fired again.
The squidge was too quick, in a flash of wobbly bits she was
towering over the quivering bosseye. 'Look,' she began, 'I've nothing
against small people, but ... ' The guard wasn't in the mood for
listening, yet again she tried to fire the 'canon.
Seeing no other choice left open to her, Dong pushed her to the
corridor floor and lifting a leg high into the air, slammed it down and
looked away.
Silence fell as Chucker and Scank finally added something to the
fight.
'She was small ... snfff ... wasn't she?' admitted Scank, looking
underneath Dong's messy foot at the guard's new pancake shape.
'You had me fooled, Dong,' added Chucker, wobbling, 'what a
brilliant plan, knowing you would change at that precise moment.
You know something, you're “all-white” in my books.'
Dong flexed her whitening biceps at the clever double meaning.
'Well, I don't like to brag.' Taking hold of their cuffed hands, one at a
time, she ripped the bindings apart.
'We can use the ... grrr ... guard's laser canon. She won't be
needing it now!' sniggered Scank, picking it up from the discoloured
tiled floor.
'Good idea,' agreed Chucker, 'I suggest we also look for a place
to hide the body before they discover we've escaped. And then
we must find what we need to get Cube back to full strength so we
can get the heck out of here.'
Until any of the above could be done, Scank and Chucker had to
peel the pancake corpse away from the Dong's foot. When they
were finished they dragged what was left of it over to the nearest
door.

138

Before they'd realised what was happening, from in front of their
startled faces, the door opened. They knew instantly that they had
stumbled across a lift because it was already occupied by two
wharf workers standing inside. Both workers gazed in wonder at the
three unknown aliens standing face to face with them.
'Oh, excuse us,' Chucker babbled, trying to think of some excuse
to get them out of this mess, feeling the strong need to explain their
current predicament to these two new strangers. 'We are the
wharf's newly assigned undertakers. Errr ... we've just found this body
lying about. You couldn't carry out her last dying request and give
her a ride in the lift, could you?' Before they had a chance to
answer, Dong threw the dead guard upon the floor of the lift. The lift
shuddered.
'Oh, and mind your feet,' noticed Scank, 'she's still bleeding quite a
bit.' The completely stunned workers, who had remained speechless
the whole time, looked down at the green blood which had started
gushing out, the unexpected tide which quickly formed, lashing
against their feet. 'Thanks a lot, you've been very understanding.'
The lift door began to close. 'Come on, this way,' the leetlesheet
casually instructed, dropping from the cleanliness of the ceiling.
Following his lead, the escapees ran onwards until they came to
an oval opening, this opening, according to Chucker, was the point
to which the base of the docking-spike joined the wharf's central
sphere.
Standing together, and feeling as small as a flea, they walked,
hopped and slid through the opening to find themselves looking
down upon an immense cargo bay. It was a large domed shaped
area, full of crates and boxes ready to be taken to different parts of
the galaxy and in some cases beyond.
'We must be able to find something we need here amongst all
this,' observed Chucker, itching his reddened scales, a few flaking
off.
'We have to get off this balcony and down to the bay floor,' said
Dong. 'There's a ladder further along, let's go climbing, come on,
guys.'

139

Scank gulped at the hundreds of feet they would need to
descend in order to reach the bottom cargo decks.
Taking hold of a metal run at the very top of the ladder, Dong led
the other two down the palm-sweating route awaiting them…
It took a long time before the group of three reached the welcome
feeling of a solid deck beneath their feet. Fortunately their slow
descent had gone unnoticed, this was mostly due to the size of the
place, although, there were a handful of alien workers and robots
working all over; they either hadn't seen the three, or like most, they
didn't like the bosseye and were content to let them go
unchallenged.
'Slinky!' gasped Scank, with sudden and unexpected happiness
upon seeing an unexpected face amongst the workers.
Passing by their now hidden forms (behind several boxes) was
another small - but blue haired - leetlesheet. Scank could hardly
believe his eyes.
'Scank The Atom Climber (a respectable title for a leetlesheet), last
I heard you were nearing the border of the Sopo System?'
The two reunited brothers ran together and kicked each other in
the traditional Trebular greeting.
'I can't ... grrr ... chat for long,' Scank regretted, turning back to his
friends and motioning for them to come out of hiding. 'You
remember my ... snfff ... friends, don't you?'
'Yes, of course, the crew of the infamous Cube are becoming
local heroes for most of the enslaved populations of this galaxy. But
I don't recognise her?' Slinky pointed to the all white giant.
'Take my word for it, it's a long story, but that is Dong.'
Slinky shook his head in disbelief. 'I cannot believe I'm talking to ...
what is it they're now calling you since the messiah's so called arrival
... The Three Wise Aliens. My brother of all people; how proud I am.
My fellow workers won't believe this ... ' Slinky quickly turned around
and shouted, 'Hey! Fellow workers, look who it isn't ... ' As he turned
back upon the three gaping figures most of the workers had already
started to come running, from all over the place. Slinky chuckled, a

140

large smile appearing around his shaggy muzzle, 'They'll love this,
they will!'
'Oh no!' said Chucker, bringing his hands up to cover his eye as he
realised what was about to take place ...
Eventually all of the preliminary greetings were over. A lot of sore
body parts could now be felt amongst the group due to the many
gathered species and their different (traditional) ways of welcoming
one another!
Scank was still in the process of recovering from a Tovarian ug's
headbutt when Slinky came over and helped him to his unsteady
feet. It was now that the blue leetlesheet finally got around to
asking the much awaited question. 'What the hell are you actually
doing here, brother?'
Each of the not so wise three, beginning with the large white
squidge who still had several of the smaller unknown alien workers
hanging from her breasts - apparently this being their own
customary way of greeting - took turns answering Slinky's question,
explaining to the workers why, how and what it was they had come
for.
After they had been entrusted with the truth, the gathered
workers, without any hesitation, dispersed and at the same time told
the Three Wise Aliens to, ‘**** OFF!’ and to, ‘GET A LIFE!’
Even after his rude comrades had all returned to their work places,
Slinky chose to remain behind and help his brother search for what
he and his two friends had said they needed. 'So what was that
again: a cylinder of nitro-gravtons, two canisters of Uranus-eater
urine (this has been proven to contain gravitational properties) and
three pints of ale ... ' Slinky paused. 'What's the ale for?'
'For us!' the three replied automatically, with three matching grins.
'Okay, I will see what I can do, but I'm not promising anything.
Although I think you might be in luck because we are having tenthousand crates delivered sometime today. I am sure there must be
some of these substances inside one of them. You just wait here, I
won't be long.'

141

Several days later, after successfully remaining hidden from the
enraged bosseye soldier patrols, Dong, Chucker, and Scank, were
all becoming slightly impatient with Slinky's rather slow progress.
Scank's blue brother, to his own credit, had actually been through
almost all of the ten-thousand crates and was attempting to open
the last one at this very moment. Fingers were crossed in hopeful
expectation.
Pulling the last lock aside with all the energy he had left, the crate
door slid suspectingly open. Jumping back in shock, Slinky jumped
back in shock because he was shocked with what had so
shockingly shocked him into being shocked.
In complete astonishment - and of course in complete shock - he
looked back across the cargo bay to where Scank and Dong still lay
hidden, seeing their heads momentarily appear and disappear from
above the top of the stacked boxes. Scank briefly waved when he
saw his brother was looking; it was his way of telling Slinky to get a
bloody move on!
'Have I ... grrr ... just waved?' enquired what appeared to be
another Scank, from inside the opened crate.
Hearing a loud hiccup coming from behind, Slinky looked briefly at
the other shadowed companion and closed his four eyes. 'Yes, you
did, but...'
'Please, don't be alarmed, you are not seeing double, we are from
the future. We have ... woof ... brought you the substances which
we need in this time. For the moment this is all I can say to you, dear
brother.' Scank pushed the needed supplies forward from the
shadows of the crate. 'Quickly, take these to our good selves.'
'Okay,' puzzled Slinky and grabbing the supplies, hastily loaded
them onto a hover-trolley. 'BBBye then,' he stuttered.
Pretending he hadn't seen what he'd just seen, he pushed the
hover-trolley briskly towards The Three Wise - and still waiting for him
behind the boxes - Aliens.
'I have finally found what you wanted,' he said upon reaching
them, trying hard to forget that he was pretending he hadn't seen
what he'd just seen.

142

'What? All of it!' replied Scank, pretending that he hadn't noticed
that his brother was pretending he hadn't seen what he'd just seen.
'Yes, believe it or not… Anyhow, I must be going, things to do,
aliens to see…' In sudden haste Slinky kicked Scank emotionally
hard, stumbled backwards, and left them to their own devices.
Dong took the liberty of grabbing the supplies off the hover-trolley,
the trolley lowering with each supply her huge arms lifted away from
it, in the end it hissed viscously before dropping down upon the floor
to wait for its next load. 'I can't believe this. The supplies couldn't
have been better if we had walked up to ourselves and handed
them over. There are even three back-packs so that we can climb
back up the ladder more easily.' The squidge was just about to
head for the ladder when a hairy hand pulled her backwards. It
was Scank.
'Before we have to go all the way up that ladder,' he said, smiling,
'do you think we should have some of the ale now. It would make
the climb less of a drag?'
'Sure! Why not?' Dong beamed, already in the process of taking
the first swigs from the cylindrical container.
Like a North-American Indian’s pipe of piece, the container was
passed from one hand to another until it had been completely
emptied. The Three Wise Aliens quickly became “The Three Piss
Heads”.
'Wha' the hell's goin' on?' Dong hiccuped.
'Yours ... grrr ... boody ... ' Scank laughed at his verbal mistakes
before struggling to correct them. 'Your body ... is doing somethin' ...
I think ... grrr ... I hope?' Having made his observation known, he
leaned onto the bent puking figure of Chucker. 'Hey, Chuscker ...
grrr ... my good friend. Look at Dongy's boody!' He staggered upon
his unstable legs.
Chucker, wiping his lips with his two right arms, looked up. 'Blooody
hell!' he burped, just in time to puke again. His colour was now in a
constant swirl, his eye-ball having joined it.
Dong staggered across to a shiny glass panel and used it as a
mirror. Looking at his/her distorted reflection, his/her mouth dropped
open. 'We's aren't at a galactic fun fair, is we ... blooody hell!' Due

143

to the food properties ale contains, his/her body had taken on a
new shape all of its own, he'd/she'd never drunk ale whilst in his/her
heroic form before and this was obviously the result.
Parts of Dong's new body shape had definitely remained white
muscle whilst other parts had deflated back to black blubber,
his/her chest looked most confused. He/She looked distinctly like a
futuristic type of dairy cow. His/Her height, too, had shrunk, about a
foot, although, he/she was still the taller of the three. 'Let us gets
back to Kebab ... I mean ... Cube.'
With the back-packs safely in position on their fronts, the reason for
which I won't go in to, the Three Piss Heads started to make their
climb back up the ladder, the same one they'd used to get down.
'But Empress,' Commander Derder grovelled, 'the prisoners may
have escaped but somewhere in this wharf they still hide, and we
hold that to our distinct advantage. Don't you agree?'
The Empress stared hard. 'No not really. I will say this, though, if
you don't find them you won't be speaking to me again, or anybody
for that matter, understand?!'
'Yes, Empress, I do. Thank you. Thank you ... ' No sooner had the
transmission finished, Commander Derder put the space wharf on
an even higher security alert. He hadn’t wanted to go this far but
The Empress had arrived faster than anticipated. Apparently her
half-missing destroyer was aided by a freak solar wind and, as a
result, had been propelled through the stars at extreme speeds.
'Those bloody wise gits! I knew they would be more trouble than
they're worth, I should never have allowed them onto my wharf.'
The commander slammed his fist against the nearest wall. 'Where
can they be hiding?'
'Weh'hey!' echoed Scank, swinging from halfway up the ladder.
'SSSShhh!' Chucker hushed loudly. 'We've gots to gets back
onboard what's her name?'
'Cube,' said Scank.

144

'No thanks, I don't take any when I'm drunk!' Completely
forgetting the point of the conversation, Chucker resumed climbing,
leaving Scank quickly behind.
Meanwhile, some distance above both of them, Dong was on
his/her own top secret mission. On this made up top secret mission,
he/she was imagining being a spy on a top secret task to do
whatever the hell he/she liked to complete the top secret mission ...
It makes sense if you're drunk.
Having left the others way behind, the squidge had already
reached the top of the ladder and, in a kneeling position, was
tapping the balcony railing in what he/she thought was morse code
but was in fact turning out to be a rather funky beat.
'Hey, Dongy, nice sounds!' approved Chucker, before throwing up
over the ladder and onto the balcony which appeared to him to be
moving. After a while he managed to crawl over to the stability of
the far wall.
By the time Scank appeared, Chucker was still propped against
the wall and was wobbling his head to the groovy beat radiating
from the squidge's moving hands. 'Wow!' gasped the leetlesheet,
also impressed by the vibes. 'Are you ... grrr ... we ... snfff ... stayings
here then?'
'No, we were waiting for you, Scanksy,' replied Dong, one eye not
quite open. 'We needs to get some supplies for Cube. She's having
troubles with her core gravitational.' Stopping his/her drumming, to
the other two's utter distress, he/she got to his/her feet, one being
deflated the other inflated. 'Come on, we can gets to the lower
cargo decks the way you just comed up - or is that - came up?'
Having taken his fat muscular friend's word for it, Scank was just
about to descend back down the ladder when he noticed
something rather relevant. 'Hangy on a minuter? We've already
gots the stuffs on our fronts, look!'
'Oh yeh?' snuffed Dong. What is we waiting fors then, let's return to
Cubes?'
'I doesn't know what we is waiting fors ... grrr ... but before we go,
can we be sick?'

145

'I don't sees why not,' belched Dong, 'why shoulds Chuscker have
all the fun.'
'EEEErrrrrgh!'
'Arrrrgh!' ... SPLAT!
'What about me,' joined Chucker, 'Eeeeeeeerrgh ... ergh!'
Leaving most of their insides upon the balcony floor, the three ran
unsteadily towards the oval opening they had arrived through.
Chucker was the last to trip successfully into the docking-spike and
it was he who almost had his legs blasted off by an exploding power
ball. 'Goodness gracious me!' was all he mumbled, his mind and
senses numbed.
Rushing back to the fallen vom, Dong peered around the left side
of the opening, but he/she soon pulled it back again as another
yellow ball of power shot past and ripped into its surrounding plastic
rim. 'I think we has been spotted, lads. Runs for it!'
The three inebriated aliens had thankfully kept hold of the lasercanon they'd taken from the dead security guard days before.
Without its help they would have been captured or killed for sure.
Dong volunteered to hold up the rear with the canon held firmly in
both hands, giving his friends the much needed time to stagger
ahead.
Scank and Chucker could quickly hear, from behind, as they
staggered through twists and turns, that more and more bosseye
were ganging up on their valiant friend. Suddenly gaining their
bearings, as they passed by the blood-stained lift door, they ran on
and on and on until finally they were in sight of Cube - who still
remained punctured by the docking-spike.
Surprisingly, seeing the hatch to her wasn't guarded, they both
clambered over and opened it. They swiftly fell safely inside.
Together the vom and the leetlesheet waited and waited and
waited for Dong to appear. They could still tell that he/she was alive
due to the deafening sound of weapons exchanging fire, the noises
of battle echoing down through the corridor and into the cubicle
they lay in.
'Get ready to close hatchy Scanksy,' slurred Chucker.

146

Hearing the vom's sudden request, the leetlesheet began to close
the hatch immediately.
'Wait for what's his/her name!' Chucker shouted.
'Who?' asked Scank, struggling to see who was speaking to him.
'Erm? I can't remembers!' Chucker toiled with his brains for several
moments. 'Oh well, keep closing the hatchy then.'
Whilst Scank was having trouble closing the hatch, the sounds of
firing got louder and louder, Dong was almost there, fighting his/her
way nearer and nearer to Cube.
Scank was just about to lock the hatch when he was suddenly
pushed backwards with great velocity. Dong's peculiar figure shot
through into Cube closely followed by a yellow blazing power ball
which splashed against some panelling, sending sparks flying and
flames leaping.
In their drunken state it had looked to Scank and Chucker as if a
freak comet had just flown into Cube's docking cubicle. It wasn't
until Dong leapt back to the hatch, sealing it completely shut, that
they realised who it was. 'Dongy!' they both cheered.
Scank, staying in the unflattering position Dong had pushed him
into, lifted his head up from the hard floor and said, 'Tha' were ... snfff
... easy enoughs!' Releasing some wind he closed all four eyes and
blanked out.
Huffing and puffing from the fighting, Dong shrugged his/her
shoulders at the comment and grabbed the other two's backpacks. Feeling more sober now than Scank and Chucker
combined, which wasn't hard, he/she made his/her way to the
observation post via an unnecessary extra fifty sections - perhaps
he/she was more drunk then he'd/she'd thought after all.
'CUBE,' he/she typed, relieved at having finally made it, 'NAVIGATE
US AWAY FROM THE DOCKING-SPIKE AND HOLD POSITION JUST OFF
THE WHARF. I'M GOING TO FIX THE CORE SO THAT YOU CAN GET OUT
OF HERE.' With that typed and done he/she took a gravitational
chute, and fifty different suck-holes, to eventually find himself/herself
inside the main part of the motion section.

147

Feeling the last traces of alcohol leaving her body, she slid across
the floor to a protruding cubic terminal and proceeded to open the
core.
Not forgetting about the messiah, she put a blue visor on and
walked over to the encased gravitational core (which for some
reason she suddenly thought looked rather like a chimney) and
waited for the confinement door to slide upwards, its burping sound
copying her own.
The lethal rainbow coloured glow gradually lessened in automatic
response. It would soon be safe to enter whilst wearing the
protective visor. With a sound of foreboding the door reached the
very top of the arched opening (which again for some reason
reminded her of a mantle-piece). The gravitational core was at last
fully accessible.
Taking a deep breath, Dong took another before stepping inside.
Rubbing her eyes from behind the visor, she couldn't believe what
she saw. 'Cryst, almighty!' she cried, rubbing her eyes for a second
time.
Having been left to the relentless energy emissions, Cryst and her
legs had become joined to the core itself. Robottom was sticking
out from the bottom, literally, whilst Cryst, in the worst position of all,
remained trapped as part of the fading ball of which she promptly
told Dong was the blueprint of a mostly undiscovered atom.
'Ball or atom, it's all the same to me,' smiled Dong, heroically.
'Things haven't gone too well since my appearance,' responded
Cryst, hiding her obvious concern, 'have they?'
'No, I suppose not,' admitted Dong, still surprised by what had
happened to the messiah. 'Is there any way of getting you out of
there? Alive?'
'Only the one, but you won't like it.'
'What is it then?'
Cryst felt slightly embarrassed. 'We would have to go and see
God.' She waited for a reaction.
Dong, even as the heroine she was, remained quiet, walked over
to a robot who was about to eat something disgusting and

148

snatching the snack from its pincers, ate it. Waiting for a few
seconds, he returned to the core. 'You bloody what?'
'We would have to see God,' the messiah repeated, as softly as a
mouse being trodden on, the last air of its lungs being expelled
rapidly, rendering its speech useless.
'In other words, we will have to go through another black hole?'
'Yes!' she squeaked.
'Let's just forget about this for now, we have to deal with more
important matters. If we don't get Cube away from this wharf every
one of us will end up dying! Cube needs the core at full strength if
she's to stand a chance of breaking free from the wharf's magnetic
shield.' Stopping, he stared hard at the messiah. 'But how the heck
am I going to do that with you like you are?' The motion section fell
thoughtfully silent.
'The only route open to you is to leave us inside the core. Go
ahead and do what you have to do.' Cryst closed her eyes,
Robottom flashed.
Dong didn't have time to argue, not that he would have under the
circumstances, so he quickly set to work, trying every now and
again to ignore the presence of the other two.
At times it proved extremely difficult as Robottom kept farting, the
smell driving him mad and the sound given off was something like a
blown up balloon being released every few minutes.
Having almost completed all of his set tasks, from out of a suckhole popped Scank, grinning profusely. 'Blooody hell ... Urp! ... Oops
... grrr ... excuse myself. Wha' the blazes happened to you two ... or
is that four of you?' The leetlesheet was desperately trying to make
out the messiah and Robottom from within the ball of faded tubes
and wires.
'I'll tell you later,' interrupted Dong, 'right now we've got to get out
of here ... Scank?!' The squidge turned to see the leetlesheet falling
into a heap on the floor, his black and tan body hovering as it
sagged. Dong turned back to face the messiah. 'Well, my work is
complete for now, I hope you don't find the next few minutes too
uncomfortable?'

149

'Don't you worry about it just you get Cube out of here!' Robottom
flashed his eyes several times but Dong didn't notice.
Having said his rushed goodbyes, he re-established the
gravitational core, went over to Scank's sleeping form and just in
case, placed a visor over his four (firmly shut) eyes.
It didn't take long for the quickly established glow to brighten, at
the same time the confinement door moving into position.
The squidge waved goodbye to the two trapped forms for the last
time before pushing Scank into a suck-hole.
Reaching the observation post a lot faster than it had taken to
leave, he left Scank to lie within a comfortable gripseat and went to
sort out the next awaiting problem. 'CUBE,' he informed, 'CORE IS
BACK TO NORMAL LEVELS. YOU HAVE PERMISSION TO TAKE ANY
MEASURES OPEN TO YOU TO ESCAPE THIS WHARF. YOU KNOW THE
SITUATION.'
As if they'd been magic words in a spell, Cube immediately
complied with his request. First she powered up the core, as if a
racing driver revving their engine, then (with Cryst almost shattering)
holding the power for several more minutes, she waited for the right
time and let rip - taking the hopeful consequences.
Looking somewhat like a fly, a rather square one, caught in an
invisible web, Cube struggled to break free from the wharf's strong
outer magnetic shields. Several tense minutes passed by (again in a
taxi, the driver now slumped over the steering wheel), until, with a
sudden jolt, she broke through the imaginary web and burst free into
the welcoming stars.
Inside the depths of the docked galactic destroyer, having turned
on her personal view screen to see what all the commotion was
about, The Star Empress watched with disgust as Cube disappeared
into an established acceleration funnel, instantly becoming a speck
in the distance.
After having given a classic demonstration of being "out on the
piss", the completely knackered crew retired to their personalisation
cubicles. By the time Dong arrived at his there was a queue of food

150

robots lining the corridor so he gratefully snatched all that he could
carry and went to lie on his bed.
Having remained in charge, Cube happily welcomed the crew's
eventual appearance some twelve hours later, the group of them
arriving in mid conversation, something appeared to be troubling
them.
'Honestly,' repeated Chucker, 'I have been hearing things.'
'Come to think of it, I have been feeling as though something is
watching me from time to time lately.' Dong scratched his chins in
thought of what the others had said. 'It must just have been the
after effects of the ale we drank.'
'Yes, you are more than likely right.'
'Grrr ... maybe?' concluded Scank, using two of his four legs to
scratch an itch which had settled behind his ears.
Taking their places - basically anywhere they liked - around the
post's many levels (their eventual positions looking like a new
Nintendo level game) The Three Wise Aliens went to work on the
impossible task of releasing the messiah from her current
predicament.
Cryst had several visits from Dong throughout the full twelve hours
whilst the other two had slept. During their awkward conversations
the squidge had asked if she was okay, she bravely responded by
saying she was in good spirits but was there any chance of drinking
some. It was also during these discussions, through the sealed core,
that Dong took the time to ask her more questions about getting her
and Robottom free.
'So ... woof ... what was it again the messiah said to you?' Scank
asked from his hanging position on the above levels of vibrating
circuitry.
'Actually,' replied Dong, 'she will be able to tell you soon enough
because I'm going to put this communication device, this one I'm
holding like a gun, inside the core with her. The messiah will then be
able to speak directly to us and give us some much needed
information and navigation as we go through the black hole.'

151

Scank dropped to the floor and took the device from the
squidge's sweaty hands. 'Good idea ... grrr ... but won't it melt when
the gravitational core is at full power?'
'No. It is made from the same materials as the casing around the
core.' Dong snatched it back. 'So if you both would be so kind as to
cut all power and search for the nearest black hole, I will see to this.'
Without waiting for an answer he plodded off to the motion section,
this time using a ladder chute, the exercise being much needed.
'Chucker? Can ... grrr ... you pass me the compu-maps from
where you are in the back of the post ... woof ... please.'
The vom obliged. Pressing the appropriate button, several hard
rectangular objects slid out of their hiding place. Wanting to help
Scank in the search for a black hole, he walked over to where the
hairy git had sat (on a spongy part of the floor) and handed him
one of the two maps whilst he looked at the other. Lifting it high
above his head, he struggled to operate its intricate systems.
'Here ... grrr ... let me demonstrate ... woof ... you operate it like
this.' Scank pointed out the “On” and “Off” switch and proceeded
to turn the compu-map to the “On” position.
Instantly the map's surface lit up, an index appearing for Chucker
to view. Pressing the appropriate pressure key for the location of
black holes, the greying vom stared as several more options
appeared to confuse him even more.
'Woof ... I've found one!' shouted Scank, to the vom's relief. 'The
Bunyag System. Situated north-east of here. It is a smaller one than
the others we have come across ... woof ... but it will do the trick.'
Placing his compu-map abruptly to the floor he began (officially for
the first time in this adventure) to scank around. Nobody could
scank like Scank could, with his head lowered he showed several of
his teeth through his muzzle and also began to slink (which his
brother, Slinky, does better) around the post, Chucker decided to
puke (which is something he does best).
'Everything's now complete, Cryst. As I've explained, you'll be able
to communicate with us from now on.'

152

'Brilliant,' responded the messiah, in true sickening spiritual gaiety.
'Don't worry, I'll tell you what you want to know when we're within
the pull of the black hole.'
Dong looked abruptly around, but saw nothing. 'Did you just hear
something?' he asked, seeking confirmation.
'No,' replied Cryst, Robottom wriggling.
Initiating the necessary safety measures, the squidge quickly
returned to the observation post.
Thank goodness he be gone, thought Pugjaw, sneering with his razor
sharp teeth, his reddening eyes still hurting from the momentary
glimpse he'd caught of the gravitational core. Clamping his jaws
tighter together in an attempt to ease the pain, he waited until it
lessened. To help him block his reaction sensors the metal creature
decided to once again go over his new assignment.
'I thought I heard something move behind me when I was in the
motion section,' remembered Dong, bringing full power back to
Cube with a little help from his friends.
'Did you see anything?' asked Chucker, thinking it strange, tapping
several codes into a holographic-data-grid-type-thing with wobbly
bits on it.
'No, I'm afraid I didn't.'
Keeping quietly to themselves each of the wise three thought for
several boring hours about these inexplicable, and rather spooky,
mysterious incidents. After a while their minds turned back to more
important and substantial things.
'Black hole sighted,' observed Chucker, running up a spiral
walkway which led to a dustbin.
Dong and Scank stopped what they were doing to look at the
accretion disk, its spiralling gases producing an immediate hypnotic
reaction, the optical screen zooming closer and closer.
'So beautiful ... grrr ... and yet so deadly,' Scank sighed, his voice
soft and distant.
'But hopefully not for us,' added Dong, shaking his weary head.

153

Chucker, turning to white, gulped at the thought of what they
were about to do.
'Is anyone in the post?' interrupted a worried voice. 'Is anyone
there? Hello?'
'Yes, Cryst, of course we are here! We're about to enter a sodding
black hole.' Dong moved across to a round monitor and gave it a
satisfactory headbutt. 'And we've just sighted it. Cube will feel the
gravitational pull in five minutes. Okay?'
'Okay, okay, please, keep your flab on. Inform me when we enter
the point of no return.'
‘I think we already have!’ stated Chucker, terminally.
Dong didn't like the sound of the messiah's last remark but he
added, 'We will.'
Cube slid closer and closer, keeping at a steady and controlled
gravpull 1111111, she was taking a more cautious approach after
what happened the last time.
Turning to the optical screen above, Chucker looked at the far off
galaxies that lay in the surrounding distance.
'We are in its grasp,' informed Dong, the eight corners of Cube
feeling the first pull of the outer layer. 'Everybody,' he said,
remembering before, 'secure yourself into a gripseat.' Scank was
already in one, Chucker went quickly to sit next to him whilst Dong
just sat in the 'seat nearest to his arse. Scank had been unconscious
the last time so this was a new experience for him.
Due to the black hole being that much smaller, Cube felt herself
being pulled quicker and quicker towards the CenTre.
'This time,' said Cryst, feeling the time to help was about right,
'don't use any directional power. Let Cube drift and be pulled by
the energy of the hole itself or, if you prefer, by the holy power itself.
Anyway, it will still be a rough ride, so make sure you are all
comfortably secured.' The crew looked at one another already
seated safely and tutted. 'If you become unsure of any floating
debris then initiate blocking.'
'Understood,' affirmed Dong, not so sure now that they were safer
even with a crystal being guiding them.

154

ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
With reality having hit it hard (by way of a fire-extinguisher’s jet) the
fugitive grass seed was blown into the outer corridor and into a
ladder chute. The scientific robot holding the extinguisher hadn't
noticed it lying next to the wall which due to the Bunsen-burner
having fallen against it was now covered in flames and rolling layers
of smoke.
The grass seed couldn't believe its luck, or rather lack of it. Out of
the two chutes positioned side by side, a gravitational one and a
ladder one, it had landed inside the one which, for something with
no limbs to climb with, would only double its feelings of bionic
uselessness.
Whilst it was deciding how it could go about being unborn, it felt
itself moving higher and higher. To the grass seed's astonishment it
was getting lifted nearer and nearer to its destiny; a destiny to be
fulfilled once safely inside the observation post.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
With the circle of gripseats raised, Scank, Dong and Chucker were
given the chance to observe their advancing destination, thanks to
the optical screen which this time was functioning as normal.
The beginning of their incredible journey soon revealed layer upon
layer of different coloured gases. Chucker was astonished by the
variety and the fact that he hadn't been some of the colours during
his life.
'Debris!' remarked Dong, upon feeling and seeing Cube shake.
'Woof ... initiating blocking,' reacted Scank, using a new gadget
which Cube's scientific robots had coughed up. The gadget was
something like a bracelet but instead of jewels it was covered with
lights and several numbered and lettered touch sensitive grids.
Having to learn how to use these new inventions was all part of
being one of Cube's crew, she was constantly changing and
improving her technology.

155

The now constant change in outer pressures was starting to shake
Cube about like a lethal cocktail. A few comforting words from the
messiah would not have gone amiss at this point in the voyage.
'Cryst, how long is it actually going to take us to reach this so
called CeNtre - or Heaven - as you once called it?' Dong, along
with the others, kept calm as he waited for her reply.
'Oh, not too long. About ... let me calculate it ... about a couple
of centuries, perhaps a little more.'
'Several what?' spluttered Dong, squeezing the corners of his seat
in an open display of anger.
'It's okay, it'll pass soon enough,' calmed Cryst, her voice
completely unconcerned for how the others might be feeling.
For more than an hour the crew stared blankly out of the optical
screen, their state of shock evident.
When eventually finding his voice Scank mumbled, 'Cryst ... grrr ...
let me get this into perspective. We have entered a black hole and
will not reach its event horizon and core, if ever, until we are old and
smooth skinned, or dead, so how come you didn't mention this fact
to us before? And how can you sound so ... grrr ... damn calm?'
Dong and Chucker lifted their arms forward and moved their
differently shaped fingers in a sign of moral support.
'You tell her!' whispered Chucker, leaning his head over, letting a
Trebular flea jump across the visible distance between the two
companions.
'Don't worry you won't age anymore than normal. Time in a black
hole becomes less important the further inside one goes. And as for
any other complications, well, I'll sort them out - after all, I am the
Galactic Messiah!'
'But what are we going to do for all that time? We'll be bored stiff.
We can't even leave these sucking gripseats, we may also be struck
by a floating comet or something just as destructive. You know as
we all do that black holes contain endless amounts of matter which
has, like us, been pulled into it.' Dong was beginning to sweat. 'And
all of it is spinning around the vortex ready and able to hit us
anywhere at anytime!'

156

Peace be with you,' smirked Cryst, in her own crystalline whim.
'Oh, of course, one more thing, you will all be blanking out in an hour
or two and probably won't wake until we are out of the Centre.
Don't panic, Cube and I will take over when you are unconscious. I
would suggest, before you do, blank out that is, you had better
program several of the duty robots to take care of each of you for
when you are unconscious. You understand for what reasons I
hope, natural processes and all that smelly sort of stuff. Please let
me know when you have arranged it all.'
With only two hours and worsening conditions to complete their
additional tasks, the three rushed around the sections in mass
panic…
Finishing his last errand, stepping out of a ladder chute onto the
spongy part of the observation post's floor, Chucker felt something,
something rather like a piece of grit, from underneath his right foot.
Due to this little annoyance, before joining the others who awaited
him in the circle of gripseats, he wiped his sole several times until the
feeling had gone. Looking quickly down, he saw a small amount of
his own vomit and something which looked like a grass seed.
Ignoring the small insignificant mess he'd just left, the vom wobbled
off towards his companions at the same time having to cope with
the unsteadying vibrations the black hole was sending around the
observation post.
All three of them had now finished their preparations for their
somewhat longer than expected journey. They each had blow-up
neck pillows, bags of sweets and not forgetting their knee blankets.
The robots had their instructions and had, for and extra payment of
mere electricity, agreed to wipe certain body areas clean; so whilst
the Three Wise Aliens were inside the black hole, they would be
around their brown holes.
'Okay. Everything has been arranged,' growled Dong, still in a
state of annoyance.
'Before you all leave me,' came Cryst's voice, 'I must add, certain
things will happen to you whilst you are unconscious. The different
stages of a black hole have their own warped sense of humour ...'

157

'What do you mean?' shrieked Dong. 'You ... ' Before he had time
to say what he thought of the messiah, he blanked out, the other
two quickly joining him.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Being a robot of strong disposition, Pugjaw was able to remain
awake. He had actually watched the three main crew members
loosing consciousness and knew everything they were trying to do
for the trapped messiah.
For days on end, weeks on end - time wasn't much of a factor
whilst inside the black hole - he had attempted to access Cube's
navigatory chips in the hope he could turn her back around; he
hadn't liked the idea of going to the CeNtre. Eventually though he
was forced to give up after Cube warned him off with a thousand
volts of static energy. But when he finally recovered he saw his
current predicament as a blessing in disguise, he realised he now
would be able to accomplish his assignment with unforeseen ease.
Pugjaw's mission was to explore Cube for weaknesses and compumap her interior. Without anyone to get in the way it could be done
as easily as easily is easy to do. Cube's remaining crew of robots
would cause him no trouble; they had their own assignments to fulfil.
The dog-like creature tried, at first, to make his way around on his
claws, but this proved too difficult under the extremely shaky
conditions the black hole was creating. There was no other choice
left for him but to change into a shuttle and use his thrusters.
A week into his exploration, without thinking - an illness most aliens
in this book suffer from - whilst he was exploring the highest circuitry
domes of the docking section, his thrusters ran out of fuel. It actually
wouldn't have been too bad if it wasn't for the fact he was several
hundred metres above the extremely hard looking floor below. The
phrase "Oh sheet of metal!" was said several times over before
Cube's well mannered floor greeted him with a firm slap on the
back. They both hit it off extremely well for their first meeting, in fact,
Pugjaw was completely shattered after all the preliminaries were
over with.

158

Whilst he'd had this sudden need to examine all parts of the floor,
within the gripseats inside the observation post, The Three Wise, and
pretty vulnerable, Aliens were encountering something rather
strange; the messiah's last comment was being fulfilled ...
What you have to understand is that there are consequences for
those who enter a black hole when they are not supposed to. It is
rather like the old adage of being able to see things in a desert and
by this I mean a mirage, not camels and sand.
In a black hole, compared to a mirage, the main difference in
what you see and do is it can actually become reality. This is due to
all the layers you have to pass through on the way towards the
Centre.
It is because of this close combination of universes that there
seems to be a chemical reaction which causes time distortions and
the likes to exist. These can actually have a profound effect upon
any objects moving within the hole and Cube and her crew were
indeed objects, and moving ones at that.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
So it was that Cube found herself being pulled towards the CeNtre…
For the first century she monitored the ever changing colours like a
Japanese group of tourists armed with cameras, coming across
some most peculiar sights. Entities clung to her and circled her but
thankfully the messiah was always at hand to help them carry
onwards, her spiritual guidance taking on a more literal meaning.
For the middle centuries of the voyage, Cube passed through
several storms of unknown origin. Some could be defined as energy
formulations caused by the joining universes, others time affecting this last point Cube knew to be true because her internal time
processor kept on changing...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
So it was that Cube found herself being pulled towards the CeNtre…

159

For the first century she monitored the ever changing colours like a
Japanese group of tourists armed with cameras, coming across
some most peculiar sights. Entities clung to her and circled her but
thankfully the messiah was always at hand to help them carry
onwards, her spiritual guidance taking on a more literal meaning.
For the middle centuries of the voyage, Cube passed through
several storms of unknown origin. Some could be defined as energy
formulations caused by the joining universes, others time affecting this last point Cube knew to be true because her internal time
processor kept on changing...
It was during the last centuries Cube felt mostly alert because Cryst
was using all her own power and knowledge to guide them through
the previously encountered, and much dreaded, Edge.
Passing through dark distortions, they were surrounded with a vale
of blue light, the messiah creating and holding this light securely in
place until it was safe to be extinguished. Everything had been
protected by it, all except one thing, one creature, and his time was
most definitely up, for now. Pugjaw's scattered remains were pulled,
like a baby being born, through the blue light and into the arms of
the Devil. His destiny was about to be twisted, as were his limbs...
As Cube finally left the Edge behind it felt as though her sensors
had just broken out of a wall full of varying levels of evil. Most of
these levels had made her want to stay and maybe she would have
had Cryst not been there to push her on. The levels which had felt
repulsive and sadistic especially had made her want to stay, but the
messiah would have none of it!
Whilst inside the Edge, Cube thought its temptations couldn't
possibly be equalled, but she couldn't have been more wrong. The
closer she continued to go towards the CeNtre, the less like a
spacecraft she felt. As she continued inwards her sensors dimmed,
until she surveyed no more as a solid form. Passing through the eye
of the black hole, the Gate, she simply just became!
Whilst wandering around the preliminary stages of the CeNtre, she
bumped into Captain Rugga of the former, aforementioned “out of
control”, refuse ship 7821ARSE. It was yet another name in the soup
of Heaven and that too seemed to fade into the swirl of things.

160

It was like being born again - you are at first unsure of the world
you've been brought into - then with experience you find you can
do things you hadn't even considered. Things just happen, develop.
Just as Cube had become aware of some of her new abilities she
was suddenly taken roughly aside, spread-eagled against a smell,
and questioned.
'HOW HAVE YOU MANAGED TO COME THROUGH THE EDGE,' said,
or is it felt, something, someone, everyone, everything ... 'IT IS NOT
YOUR TIME, AND THE DEVIL WOULD HAVE TAKEN FULL ADVANTAGE
OF THAT OBVIOUS FACT!'
'I BROUGHT THEM!' the messiah reluctantly owned up, her soul
joining the interrogation, ‘Do we have to talk so loud?’
‘WHAT DID YOU SAY, SPEAK UP, DON’T SPEAK IN THAT MORTAL
TONGUE!’
‘NEVER MIND!’
'AH, THE LATEST GALACTIC MESSIAH, WHY HAVE YOU RETURNED?'
'I NEEDED A FAVOUR,' coughed Cryst, feeling a little more than
embarrassed about the reason for coming. 'I NEED TO RETURN TO
MY MORTAL FORM ONCE AGAIN. UNFORTUNATELY I HAD TO
SACRIFICE MYSELF IN THE MORTAL WORLD AND IT LEFT ME IN A
RATHER AWKWARD POSITION, LITERALLY! SO I NEED SOME HELP?'
'MMMMMM … I'LL SEE WHAT CAN BE DONE, BUT IF FOR SOME
REASON "WHAT CAN BE DONE" ISN'T IN HIS OFFICE, I'LL TALK TO GOD.'
Suddenly, or it could have been slowly, because of the non
existence of time, Cube found herself being sucked backwards
through a hole until … POP! … she found herself back in solid reality.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Cube had asked the messiah upon their sudden return why God
seemed to speak differently compared to the immortals they had
experienced near the Gate; the messiah quickly explained that part
of the language that is spoken in the immortal CeNtre is lost in mortal
translation.
Spotting a criss-crossed one thousand ringed planet (five hundred
of the rings running north to south, the other five hundred east to

161

west) Cube slammed on the grav-brakes and shifting the
gravitational core into reverse, went into orbit around its glow.
Once the anchor had been initiated she waited patiently for The
Three Wise Aliens to wake up from their unconsciousness.
'Where are we?' yawned Dong, seeing Cryst and Robottom free of
their previous affliction.
'In space!' leaked the messiah's unhelpful answer.
'What the heck has happened in here?' the squidge gaped,
leaping onto his unstable legs and falling (in the same motion) to the
soft grass covered floor.
'You must be careful,' Cryst pointed out, 'your muscles will have
become weak after sitting still for so long. You are fortunate that the
exercise robots managed to keep your body from completely
deteriorating.'
Throwing his refuelled angry thoughts aside for the moment as he
wiped his mouth free of the stains which the food robots had made
when trying to feed him each day, Dong ran around the other side
of the lowered circle of gripseats to check on his friends.
Seeing Scank and Chucker still asleep, he slumped his tired body
onto a seat next to them and stared aimlessly at the observation
post's new green hair style.
Over the centuries the bionic (no longer a fugitive) grass seed had
taken root, and thanks to Chucker's nutritious puke and the spongy
moist part of the floor, it had fulfilled its long awaited destiny, like the
tale of the ugly duckling it had come up trumps. The post now
looked like a cross between the hanging gardens of Babylon and a
crazy, really crazy, golf course. The bionic faculties of the initial seed
have yet to be discovered by the crew.
'The first thing I did,' explained Cryst, seeing Dong looking at the
greenery, 'was check if any of Cube's systems were damaged but
they were working perfectly fine, actually, I would go so far as to
say, even better than normal. In disbelief, I again tried out several
more of Cube's operations and found they were in excellent
condition.'
'Can it be removed?' asked Dong, out of curiosity, stroking a grassy
panel.

162

'No, it's embedded itself into the floor and in some cases beyond.
Robots from the agrarian section tried to clear some of it away but it
turns out this particular grass cannot be removed without using acid,
an acid which would probably get rid of the post and half the
observation section surrounding it, so ...'
'So we are left with liking or lumping it,' stated Dong. 'Well I have to
say, after my initial reaction, I actually quite like it! There's something
about being surrounded by lots of grass that makes one feel happy
and relaxed.'
'So,' Cryst carried on, 'I got the robots to give it a bit of a trim with a
lawn mower and strimmer.'
'Eeeerrgh!' puked Chucker, starting to stir from his sleep, the
wafting odour - acting like smelling salts - leading Scank to opening
his nostrils and then his eyes.
Standing shakily upon Robottom's legs, the messiah, remembering
what each of the crew had just gone through because of her, warily
welcomed the two of them back and explained to them, regarding
the post's green coloured decor, exactly what she had told Dong.
'Oh ... snfff ... well,' yawned Scank, stretching his arms behind his
head and looking directly at Cryst. 'There's nothing wrong with
having a little grass, but what I think is important is that you are out
of the gravitational core and back safely with us.' The messiah
smiled religiously. 'So now we can all beat the complete and utter
crap out of you without the need to wear protective visors over our
eyes. Come here!'
'Yeh,' joined in Chucker, with a “was it all really worth it” tone.
After a severe amount of grovelling and a lot of miracles, the
crystal being managed to reach their sense of mercy and they all
managed to slowly calm back down.
'According to this read-out,' explained Chucker, running his hands
across its brailled surface, 'the only planet with one thousand rings
around it, in this galaxy, is the planet Dungheap. Therefore we must
roughly be in a south-easterly position on the farthest reaches of our
own galaxy. I'm confused though as to which system we are in due
to the ongoing war which has been going on between the three

163

local systems; each one of them declaring this particular area of
space to be their own.'
'But why ... grrr ... have we been dumped out here of all places?'
Scank was most puzzled by their distant location.
'Wait a minute!' snapped Cryst. 'I think I'm being told something by
God.' She furrowed her crystal edges and concentrated in the
following silence.
'What is it saying?' Dong sarcastically enquired. 'No, hang on, let
me guess, it's telling you you've left your keys behind in the CeNtre
and we will have to go back and fetch them.' The squidge
chuckled to himself, holding his belly in both hands as it shook up
and down.
'How did you know?' gaped Cryst.
Dong's expression suddenly went blank; he could very well believe
it to be true.
'No, really,' continued the messiah, her sense of humour improving,
'God has informed me this ringed planet is opposite the white dwarf
I once had the privilege to call my home.'
'But shouldn't you have known this yourself?' Dong stated.
'Yes, but I had to say it for the reader's benefit.'
Not in the slightest bit interested with the messiah's and Dong's
ongoing arguments, Chucker thought over what Cryst had said that
God had said, and after a small bit of detective work had been
done, which involved turning the optical screen on and then using
his eye to look around it, he came up with a niggling question.
'Where actually is this white dwarf? I can't see it anywhere!'
'I am not exactly sure, now you have come to mention it,' frowned
Cryst, 'because according to Cube's sensors we are supposed to be
facing it?' The four of them looked at each other in surprise and
then tried looking out of surprise.
'If that's the case, where has it gone to?' rebuked Dong, happy to
throw a proverbial spanner in the works. The question was a good
one and demanded analytical robots and other adequate ways of
investigating the problem should be immediately carried out and
routinely examined.

164

'What have ... woof ... you found out so far, Chucker?' asked Scank,
having found nothing which could relate to the white dwarf's
disappearance himself.
'The only clue I've got as to the disappearance is these small
traces of electrons, photons and protons. They appear to have left
a trail which is just under a dark year in length. In other words the
white dwarf star has simply vanished!'
'There are,' begun Cryst, swivelling around Robottom's waist in the
same way a psychiatrist would clasp his or her hands together
before getting into intricate detail on a subject, 'certain interesting
facts to do with stars. Black holes tend to ... how can I put it ... ' The
messiah paused and made a few noises in her attempt to think of
something good, to make the others believe she knew exactly what
she was actually talking about. 'No, I can safely say, this definitely
baffles the religion out of me.'
More tests were quickly undertaken until, after a full day had
passed by, Dong decided they weren't getting anywhere. 'We'll
leave it for now,' he said, stretching his rubbery blubber and
releasing it with a ... TWANG! 'We can think about it all after some
much needed food and rest.'
'That's all you ever think about!' cracked Cryst, still concerned with
getting to grips with the matter at hand, the white dwarf had once
been her home.
'No, Dong is correct,' added Chucker, in ambassadorial grey, 'we
would be doing ourselves no favours if we carry on. We are mere
mortals.' The vom quickly made Cryst see the delicate situation by
throwing-up several times.
In a rush to suddenly leave the post, the four of them found
themselves fighting each other to get to the nearest exit first.
Reaching their accommodation personalisation cubicles one after
the other, they disappeared out of sight like the start of a greyhound
race in reverse.
'Maybe the Ark will have the answers?' contemplated Cryst, to
Robottom, as the door of her cubicle belched itself closed behind
them.

165

One- two- three- four- five seconds passed by (now on motorbikes
after their taxi crashed) before the messiah came rushing back out
into the empty corridor, screaming.
It must be serious, thought Scank, dropping to the floor, or was it
the ceiling, or perhaps the walls, of his cubicle.
'The Ark! It is gone!' she cried, running back and forth on an upset
Robottom, the other three figures now watching her from their
opened doorways.
'I guess we must return to the observation post,' sighed Dong,
dragging his tired limbs away from his leaning position. 'ARK! Did
you say, ARK!' he repeated, looking slightly more awake. 'The what
... you say it's missing?' Upon realising the severity of the situation, his
eyelids rolled upwards like a blind flapping open to reveal a ray of
morning sunlight. Joining the panicking figure of Cryst, they both ran
aimlessly around the corridor like a pair of chickens with their heads
cut off.
Chucker and Scank stepped into the corridor, leant on each other
and slowly followed after the hysterical duo who had already run off
into a gravitational chute.
'This explains a lot of unanswered questions,' thought Cryst, openly,
gradually calming herself down as she walked towards a terminal,
the observation post groaning at her return. 'The Ark is one of the
few God-sent objects in the mortal world. It contains parts of a
black hole.'
'In ... snfff ... what respect?' snuffled Scank, leaving Chucker's
uncomfortable shoulder to collapse upon a turquoise gripseat whilst
massaging his feet on a prickly stem of grass.
'It contains such powers as entities and their likes and these can be
released if opened by the wrong alien. It acts as a gateway,
unleashing the same dangerous effects as a black hole. If you open
it, and it was not meant to be, you and your current surroundings
can be completely destroyed.
'The Devil has a role to play in all of this, of course, for he is able to
add the dead that the opened Ark causes to his so called Edge. If
he was to gain control of the Ark he would be able to suck in most
of our souls.' Chucker looked shocked. 'I said "our souls", Chucker,

166

not, never mind, basically the Devil could suck every soul out of the
universes. The more souls he gains the more the Edge will spread,
until the inevitable merging of dark and light come together as one.
We would all be ... be ... GREY!' Chucker fainted.
'So ... snfff ... it's not looking too good?' sniffed Scank in conclusion,
eventually sneezing and then having a good, long scratch.
Chucker groaned on the floor whilst thinking what it would be like
“to be ... be ... GREY!” The colour limitations were most
unsatisfactory to the vom.
'What would you say caused the white dwarf to vanish, with all this
incite we now have?' munched Dong, eating a coiled worm-like
worm thing which had once been a worm-thing worm like that of a
worm-like goat.
Before answering the question Cryst examined the last of the
gathered data the terminal had just vomited up from its buzzing
metal stomach. 'It seems to me as though it has something to do
with the time and directional distortions we encountered when we
were going through the black hole. Apparently,' she added, her
form reddening as she read the remaining data, 'we have been in
the wrong place.' Coughing, she lowered herself further inside
Robottom. 'The white dwarf is actually on the other side of this
ringed planet we call Dungheap, Cube's sensors must be offline.'
'So we've just wasted almost two days,' shouted Dong, his anger
reaching a crescendo.
Cryst quickly changed the subject. 'About the ARK! Where do you
think it is?'
Chucker, Scank and Dong, completely fed up, turned, and
without speaking, walked back to the comfort of their beds.
It didn't taken long for the three of them to rise and fall asleep, the
messiah choosing to stay awake on the observation post, watching
dirty movies on the optical screen, the first one titled, “Mud”.
The Ark had been entrusted to the messiah by God, how in the
universes was she going to be able to explain this latest conundrum
after everything else that had recently happened; not very easily
was what she concluded whilst on the optical screen the sound of

167

whimpering and a flash of moving fleshy mud stole back her
attention.
While Cryst was rubbing her crystal edges with intense passion,
from below, underneath Cube, something strange was happening the same could actually be said for Robottom who was also situated
below the wide eyed crystal being.
At first a series of sparks vanishing into space flashed at Cube’s
base. These sparks quickly grew in strength until, from all four corners
of her square base, a series of different coloured beams shot
outwards, joining together at an equal point in the distance (less
than a dark year away).
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Eeeeh! Arrrrgh! Eeeeergh! Ah! Oh! Huh! Eeeeeeeeerngh - Ah!'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'What a ... grrr ... dream I just had,' yawned Scank, biting off a loose
part of his suction pads.
'Me too!' replied Chucker, wishing he had remained asleep.
In their own time the three sleepy figures climbed up the
observation post's ladder chute, descended, then climbed it again.
'At least you had a dream,' moaned Dong, slow in reacting, 'I
twisted and turned all the time, right up until this wondrous messiah
of ours summoned us to report to the post, yet again!'
'Between you and me ... grrr ... this God thing is starting to annoy
me!'
Dong and Chucker nodded in agreement with Scank's unsurprising
comment.
'Ouch!' they yipped, as each of their heads were smashed
together by an invisible force. Vigorously rubbing their painful
injuries they staggered across to Cryst's hunched-over figure.
'What is it this time?' asked Dong, an arrogant tone floating around
the top of his voice.

168

'Please come over here and look at this,' said Cryst, too engrossed
at what it displayed to even look at them.
'Is that coming from Cube?' questioned Chucker, feeling blue.
'Yes,' replied Blue, feeling Chucker back.
'Do you ... grrr ... know what it is?' asked Scank, wondering who
Blue was.
'I do ... It is a Time Point.' The messiah turned to look at the three
startled faces staring back at her like the pose of the former US
presidents cut into Mount Rushmore.
'How could ... woof ... this happen?' Scank stepped closer to the
image, his feet soaking up some dew from the grass below.
'I know this pattern of light only to exist within black holes,' Cryst
continued, with renewed enthusiasm.
'Does it have something to do with the missing Ark?'
'I don't think so, but a good point. No, I believe it has something to
do with the white dwarf and me being in such close proximity. It has
triggered a reaction via certain scientific facts too complicated to
get into right now.'
'Can you explain in layman terms?' Dong requested.
'Well, when you were unconscious the time distortions we
encountered in the black hole must have reacted with Cube's
blocking system. The system appears to have stored some of the
energy they dispersed. My being so close to the white dwarf,
because I'm a refractory crystal being, has triggered this so called
energy into the connected beams, which we can see joining
together into this pyramid shape below Cube.'
'So why ... grrr ... has the energy drawn together into a point, or as
you said, pyramid?' asked Scank, looking from the optical screen
and back to Cryst, its image reflecting in his tired eyeballs.
'It's using the Time Point, the tip of the pyramid, to escape back to
where it should be. Imagine if you will what effect a large magnet
has on iron pilings - how it pulls every last fragment away from its
surface - what we are seeing now is roughly the same effect. This
effect will last only for as long as there is energy to be sucked, and
until every last bit has all been sucked, the Point at which the four
beams of energy join could be used to travel through time.'

169

'You're saying we can travel backwards and forwards throughout
history if we so wanted,' gasped Chucker, gasping. 'But how could
we know whereabouts in time we would be sent?'
'You are forgetting. This creation we look upon is from the other
side, all you need do is think of where you wish to go and you will be
sent there!' The messiah's words seemed to roll and roll upon the
three's ear-drums, echoing, echoing. Even though the three were
wise, they couldn't even begin to imagine what powers lay beneath
their feet - so they didn't.
'Never mind, hey,' shrugged Dong, not really bothered, having
seen it all before, 'I'm going to go down to Dungheap.'
'What for?' asked Cryst, surprised by the sudden lack of interest.
'Some supplies! We weren't ready the last time. We had thought
Cube had everything she needed, but it turned out that she didn't.
It's going to take the scientific robots several months to replicate the
materials the gravitational core uses so until then I want to be on the
safe side. The last thing we need is you to become an excess part
of the core again. Besides, I also want to buy some of the planet's
local brew, some ale perhaps. Yes, some ale, it might just help me
get on with you a little better.'
'Good idea, can I come?' pleaded Chucker, flattering the squidge
by turning a similar dark colour to his own.
'Woof ... and me!' added Scank, jumping on a gripseat, spreading
his arms wide as if he were pretending to be an aeroplane. 'Woof ...
and can we surf down through the atmosphere?'
'Look, you can both come, but it will be safer if we take the pods.
We'll leave the atmospheric surfing experience alone this time
around. I still haven't recovered from the last wipe-out I had when
you dragged me out to Hul Hula Waver Bigga Thanna Shitta. We'll
ride some magnetic waves when we get back. Oh, and remind me
to check out what moontain bikes they've got when we get down
there.'
'Okay, but about your promise of surfing, let's not ride the
magnetic waves on the motion section's floor! I want to feel the
freshness of space ... grrr ... blowing over my organic spacesuit as I

170

ride one of the big gravity waves Cube kicks out when moving
along a gravitational line.'
'You’re on! But until then,' agreed Dong, rubbing his hands
together, 'let's get going before the bloody planet closes!'
Turning to leave, they stopped and waited for Cryst, well it was
actually really Robottom they wanted and missed more and more; it
wasn’t that Cryst was awful but more a case that Robottom was
more fun without a host. 'Are you coming with us?' they asked,
looking directly to the legs not the host which was a bit rude.
'No,' replied Cryst, not noticing, 'I'm going to stay and observe this,
and perhaps finish the movie I was watching. Robottom's bulge
moved into a smile.
The pods quickly blasted away from Cube, making certain they
were as far away from the Time Point as was safe.
'Let's ... grrr ... hope,' prayed Scank, raising his communication pen
forwards and back, 'by the time we return ... woof ... all that
mysterious energy will have drained away.' His friends moaned in
agreement and continued on their zigzagging course downwards to
Dungheap.
Cutting through the five hundred (north to south) rings one after
the other, with the protection of the blocking mode initiated, the
pods soon became part of the huge planet's normal flow of traffic.
'Where do you suggest we get the supplies?' asked Chucker.
'Your guess is as good as mine,' answered Dong, 'I've only ever
heard of this planet, I've never actually visited it before. The only
thing I do know is that it is among the few planets the bosseye
haven't taken control of.'
'Do you know why?'
'No! But who cares, as long as we get what we want!'
'True.'
Protruding up from the planet's shanty architecture, if you could
be so polite as to call it that, stood, or rather leaned, a fluorescent
building which showed the most adequate facilities for docking.
Most of the different shaped flying crafts seemed to head for it so it
appeared the best, even if the only, place to land.

171

'The inhabitant species ... grrr ... are called what?' Scank repeated.
'Moodies,' screamed Dong, his voice rattling the speakers. 'They
are said to be related in some way with my own species. I can't
imagine why, but I'm sure we will find out soon. Get ready to dock
...'
Entering what turned out to be a multiplex shopping dock, in a
matter of seconds the pods found themselves having to rely on its
artificial lighting as they looked for a convenient space to park.
With little distress the small cubes settled in amongst the endless
rows of vehicles lining the area. Feeling pleased with their unhassled
parking, all three jumped out onto the green and red gravel floor.
'Let's ... grrr ... get what we came for and then leave,' said Scank,
trying to take in the peculiar patterns the moodies painted their
interiors with. He had subconsciously already developed a disliking
for this run-down planet.
'Look!' noted Chucker. 'The majority of those aliens must be
moodies and they all seem to be coming and going from that
specific point over there in that corner.'
What seemed to be the usual traffic of moodie locals flowed back
and forth throughout a slippery walkway. Their short, wide, smooth
skinned bodies were squarely shaped from their head down to their
feet. Like squidge they are also a binary structured race, they could
be more or less described as a stunted - very stunted - Frankenstein
and it's due to this all their hallways, doors, and buildings, tend to
give you the impression you are looking at a wide-screen film.
Getting used to the design of everything, the party of three
walked over to some large door-flaps Chucker pointed out and
slipped through. Once through to the other side of the flaps they
found themselves having to stand upon a hydraulic floor which
slowly lowered them downwards to the many levels situated below.
'I don't like the way they stare at us!' observed Chucker, whispering
so as not to offend the moodies surrounding them whose bodies
were pressing The Three Wise Aliens closely together. From behind
the vom's scaled form an elbow suddenly, and he hoped
unintentionally, rammed into his back. 'Ouch!'

172

'Grrr ... I know what you mean,' growled Scank, looking angrily at
the elbow responsible for his friend's grief. 'I've not seen many other
species around this place so far, I wonder why?' His voice
considerably shook as the floor came to its last downward stop.
'Good,' said Dong, peering above several square shaped heads
similar to his own, 'this level looks like it should sell the things we need.
Scank, grab one of those hover-trolleys from over there and follow us
two.' He quickly pulled Chucker away from the hydraulic floor and
by the time he glanced back around he could see Scank was
already in hot pursuit.
Clasping the trolley's unusually shaped handle in his hands Scank
attempted to push it forwards through the growing crowds. The
leetlesheet felt a bit threatened when a large wedge formation of
moodies suddenly shuffled in between him and his two companions.
Plunging the trolley forcefully through the wedge so they had no
choice but to move, he managed to scurry through the momentary
open space to eventually come to a halt behind Dong's welcome
form. 'Which way?' he could hear him asking Chucker, who in turn
shrugged.
Once again moving slowly forward they began to realise more
and more that every small step they took had to be painfully fought
for with a push and a shove. Dungheap was over-populated
beyond any expectation they might have had.
After just half an hour of their continuous battling, the Three (not
so) Wise Aliens had carelessly made their way to being completely
lost.
Scank found himself being pushed backwards, almost retracing
the steps he had so tiringly fought for, now having to cope, all by
himself, with the middle part of the crowded level. The trolley was
rapidly becoming his only chance to survive the foot traffic. Before
he had time to think how silly he would look, he jumped into it and
waited to be pushed over to an exit. He couldn’t see the others.
Whilst Scank was in the trolley, Chucker had been tripped to the
floor and quickly swept in a current of moving legs onto the awaiting
dangers of the level above.

173

Unlike the other two, the heavily blubbered Dong had pretty much
held his own in the crowds and was walking confidently forwards, still
foolishly believing that his two friends were in tow safely behind him little did he know what fate was about to befall them.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Who's going to give me a big bolly for a colourful sex object?'
shouted the auctioneer into the growing crowd of buyers.
With his own unique wobble, Chucker stood tall and skinny, his
colour changing with each emotion he was being subjected to.
It had been only three hours and yet in that short amount of time
the vom had managed to be forced by a gang of moodies to either
die or go on sale as a sex object. He eventually opted for the
second choice as it was the only one which meant he would still be
allowed to breathe.
Many moodie females were scattered amongst the perfectly legal
gathering; it was actually quite hard to tell them apart from the
males. Everyone had their eyes stuck on the vom's unusual, but
arousing, form. Chucker kept trying to peel the eyes off, but they
were immediately slapped back like silly putty, their pupils enlarged,
each vein flashing red. The many males that were showing an
intense interest in him were making him start to feel sick, it was all
becoming too much to take in.
'Do I hear big bollies?' directed the surprised auctioneer to the
back row.
'I do!' gasped the new bidder.
This was turning out to be the biggest sale of the year! Chucker
was proving beyond a shadow of a doubt that he held more sex
appeal than the auctioneer had first thought possible. She was
already even considering buying him for herself, but sadly she had
already reached the maximum limit of twelve husbands.
Finding himself turning blue the bids increased - with yellow there
was unstoppable screams of lusting want - the chunky result of
green was the final straw - in her greatest sale ever the moodie
auctioneer slammed her bum and then her head against a board

174

she was holding to end the bidding at the amazing call of, 'Many,
many, many, many big bollies!'
With the new record-breaking price tag added to his name,
Chucker was instantly taken behind the scenes to be made ready
for delivery to the lucky, probably blind, bidder.
Without knowing the terrible fate of her scaly friend, the heroically
handsome alien figure (of the much starved Dong) arrived at the
pods with the needed supplies piled loosely upon a hover-trolley.
'Where the heck have the guys got to?' she thought silently to
herself, but yet loud enough to be in speech marks. She had been
hoping they would have met her back at their pods.
'Hey! You!' beckoned a droid about to leave the dock. 'You had
better get to the second level and make it snappy!' With that said
and done it fired its thrusters and shot into the air.
Having nothing to lose, Dong carried out the droid's suggestion.
With each of her leg muscles expanding and contracting, she ran
across to the door-flaps, leaving a cloud of green and red gravel
behind her as she went. Jumping onto the already lowering floor,
she waited impatiently under the watchful eyes of its compressed
passengers as it descended each level.
'Holy schamoly!' Leaping from the hydraulic floor onto the second
level, some twenty feet before it had even reached it, the squidge
rubbed her eyes for a third time, then a fourth time, and finally a fifth
time. Over to her left, whilst on the lowering floor, she had seen
Scank's familiar figure being forced, with a stinging-whip, to turn
round and round for the ecstatically charged bidders pressed tightly
around his auction platform.
Feeling great anger at his friend's humiliation the squidge took
heroic action. Like a gorilla having broken free from its cage to
plough its way through a gathering of monkeys, Dong powered over
to her hairy friend.
Pretty much in shock by the sudden change in events, the crowd
stared after the giant who quickly took off with their second most
wanted sex object. Several carelessly aimed laser beams were

175

desperately fired from the unruly audience as the two of them
headed behind the scenes.
Seeing what had just taken place, the enraged gang, responsible
for the capturing of both Chucker and Scank, grouped together
and raced off after them.
'They're ... woof ... worse than the bosseye!' panted Scank, in the
process of being untied. 'They've already auctioned Chucker, as
well!'
'"Auctioned" you said, in the past tense; where is he now?' worried
Dong.
'I'm not sure ... grrr ... he had just been sold before I was put up for
bidding. That man over there might know?' Scank pointed to an
old moodie sitting at a triangular desk.
Dong wasn't in the mood to be polite. Marching up behind the
hunched up figure she grabbed him and lifted his body away from
his swivelling seat until both his legs dangled in the air.
'You auctioned a tall skinny alien who changes colour!' the heroine
demanded, raising the moodie even higher and at the same time
giving him two black eyes with a left and right from her heavyweight breasts. 'Where is he?'
'He has been sent to The Great Dung. He, he's only just been
taken above to an awaiting transporter ...’ Throwing him mercifully
to the ground, Dong saw some of the angered gang members
appearing from around a round corner.
'Death!' one of the members - dressed in nothing but blue skin screamed, running madly towards the white giant with a circularbladed knife held tightly in her fingerless hand which resembled
something like a boxing glove.
Scurrying to one side, Scank managed to trip the aggressor over
as she ran forward. With several untranslatable swear words yelled her ugly features had their first and final meeting with Dong's
clenched fist - she was out for the count.
'Quickly ... woof ... this way!' motioned Scank, beckoning the
squidge across to a round hatch resembling something out of a
submarine. Opening and slamming it shut behind them, from the
other side, they were able to wedge it closed with one of those bars

176

- you know - the ones which are always conveniently left lying about
especially for these life threatening escape scenes, the ones which
heroes can jam against a door and still have time to make their
hasty escape bla bla bla.
Hot and out of breath, the wisening two raced to the nearest
hydraulic floor as it was about to rise. Scank was finding it a lot
easier to run and stand in the powerful shadow of his muscled friend;
the squidge seemed to have the distinct knack of making room
wherever she went.
'Woof ... what if the transporter has already left?' Scank queried.
'We may lose Chucker forever,' replied Dong, looking down at the
red and black mosaic lying below her feet. 'Let's hope it hasn't!'
Before the floor reached the docking level Dong was able to
boost Scank up to it and quickly followed after; if they hadn't done
this they would have never caught a hopeful glimpse of their skinny
friend being pushed aggressively inside an oval craft.
Running as fast as they could they were still too late to stop the
transporter from leaving. Lifting up in a hiss of air its glowing exterior
abruptly left the dim lighting of the dock, leaving them both staring
after it in dismay.
'The pods!' cried Dong, already scrambling to get to them, 'we
may yet have a chance to save him.'
Making full use of his natural abilities, the leetlesheet, as if having
just been challenged to a race, cheated by climbing over several
short cuts to reach them first.
After programming Chucker's pod to return to Cube, with their
own craft up and running, the pods rushed forward like a severe
case of diarrhoea and shot away from the dock.
'Woof ... where's it gone?' shouted Scank, desperation filling his
voice as he searched for a glimpse of the transporter in the green
coloured sky.
'East!' answered Dong, spotting its shape slowly descending upon
the slanted roof of one of the taller of the distant buildings.
Purposely keeping their distance the two pods hovered out of
sight, waiting for the emergence of Chucker. With the vom in the
open they would be able to dive down and rescue him more easily.

177

'What do you ... grrr ... think is wrong?' demanded Scank. 'Where is
he?'
'Dong looked the craft over again, zooming in on its location with
the use of her dynamic optical head-screen. Feeling her hearts
rapidly thumping through her chest, getting more and more highly
pitched, she watched the nose of the transporter suddenly open
down onto the assortment of rubbish which she could see littering
most of the roof-top.
'There he is!' shrieked Scank, his own head-screen focusing on
Chucker's sad face and bringing its image closer. 'Come on ... grrr ...
let's get to him before they see us!'
Just as their pods were about to descend two balls of flying metal
shot past, heading directly for the roof. 'Globular fighters?' Dong
remarked, flabbergasted, literally. 'Oh my god ... they're going after
Chucker! That gang of moodies must have followed us. Damn! We
have to get to him before they do!'
Dong and Scank's heads quickly filled with blood as they
plummeted downwards at maximum speeds in their desperate
attempt to save their friend.
'GGGravpull 6414646441,' shuddered Scank, his face feeling the
pressures, '6414646442 a-a-and holding...' With sheer determination
they managed to hold their course for several more seconds - but
this time it would not be enough - they were too late!
The slanting roof had become engulfed with roaring flames, its
image, although still some distance away from them, burnt into their
eyes.
The transporter hadn't known what hit it, the unexpected explosion
having crunched its shape like a recycled can. The attacking
circular crafts responsible for this deliberate carnage had long since
vanished into the growing layers of smoke curling into the sky, the
colouring of the two together making even the English channel look
clear. Giving chase would be useless. Chucker had just been
murdered in cold blood and there was nothing more his gobsmacked friends could do about it.

178

'We ... snfff ... better return to Cube,' snivelled Scank, holding back
the awaiting tides of uncontrollable laughter - laughter being the
way leetlesheet’s come to terms with grief!
As a sign of respect the pods shot towards the right, to the left, and
to the right again, until finally moving back to the left and then with
immense speed disappearing into the green haze scattered above
them in the gaseous ceiling Dungheap has the audacity to call its
sky.
Reaching the familiar layers of dark space, the two square craft
fitted themselves back inside Cube, their pilots waiting for a while
before stepping out and walking hand in hand to the observation
post.
'Where's Chucker?' asked Cryst, noticing his obvious absence by
the distinct lack of smell. 'I thought I saw his pod dock several
minutes ago?' The messiah could sense something was wrong and
moved awkwardly within Robottom whom in turn moved awkwardly
within a gripseat.
'He wasn't inside it!' explained Dong, erratically. 'He's just been
burnt alive. Whilst his flesh was reducing to something similar to
smoked ham, his eyeballs were exploding like balloons full of puss,
and whilst his guts ... oh yes, his guts ...'
'Woof ... he's been murdered!' Scank quickly cut in, his laughter
unbearable.
'Murder?' repeated Cryst, an abrupt fart escaping in shock.
'Gritting her teeth in anger, Dong made her way towards the
optical screen as if she'd suddenly been possessed by Donkey Kong.
Bouncing from one terminal to another, from one grassy platform to
another, she jumped closer and closer to the screen until her face
was pressed forcefully against its cool surface. Smearing squooshed
nasal snot from one direction to the other, she remembered the
Time Point! 'What if we were to go back in time and warn Chucker
that he should have stayed on Cube?'
'Woof ... we could prevent him from being killed!' added Scank, his
laughter subsiding for a moment.
'It could work,' screamed the messiah, running frantically around
the post smacking her head against everything she saw, including

179

Scank, until finally calming down. 'But! You would only be able to
go back to a recent event. The energy is running out so you don't
have much time left in both meanings of the phrase. So, if you must
go you'll have to leave quickly, or perhaps faster than that.'
'All right, all right,' sniffed Dong, 'before I change my mind ... Let's
go, Scank! Once we get outside we will go into the Time Point in
joined formation, it will be safer that way.' Scank nodded his muzzle
and flapped his shaggy ears.
Having climbed inside their pods and blasted them back out into
space, The Two Wise Aliens gave instructions to join up. Like two
square magnets held the correct way around the pods purposely
came together, the two small cubes eventually forming a solid
rectangle.
Inside the now single craft Scank patted Dong on the forehead as
he was now seated directly behind the squidge like a pilot in a
scene from Top Gun, the central wall of the joined pods having
moved to one side after they'd come together.
'Are you ready?' checked Dong with bated breath, turning her
gripseat around to face the leetlesheet before punching him in the
face.
'I am!' exhaled Scank. 'You take us ... hey ... grrr ... ouch ... in!'
Reflecting Dungheap’s many rings upon its shiny surface, the
rectangular shape of the joined pods slowly manoeuvred until it was
directly underneath Cube, positioned at her innermost centre.
Waiting at the base of the time pyramid, whose magical shape
the four beams of energy continued to outline in the darkness of
space, Dong set a course for its time-pointed tip and shot
downwards at gravpull 8697111.
'AAAbout our ... woof ... dddestination,' Scank screamed, as if on a
roller-coaster ride just having gone over the edge of the highest part
of its run, 'I cccan only think of ttthe space wharf?'
'MMMe too!' shuddered Dong, letting the increasing vibrations do
their worst.
....suoicsnocnu meht dekconk ti ,elohw kcalb a sa tceffe emas eht
fo rewop eht tlef yeht ,denibmoc dnuos dna thgil fo deeps eht naht

180

retsaf ,meht tih tahw wenk yeht erofeB / Before they knew what hit
them, faster than the speed of light and sound combined, they felt
the power of the Time Point and, yes as you should know by now,
having the same effect as a black hole, it knocked them
unconscious ...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Ah!'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Struggling to open their eyes, Scank and Dong looked for any signs
of damage before they carried out their appointed mission.
By logging their exact coordinations into the pods' memory
collective, they hoped to be able to return to the future through the
same place they exited. Of course, for them to get back home they
will be dependant on the energy still returning from the other side of
the Time Point.
'Look ahead of us!' remarked Dong, locking her optical headscreen upon a moving distant image. 'It's Cube!'
'It,' recollected a stuttering Scank, 'it ... grrr ... looks like we are just
about to give ourselves up to Commander Derder to get the
supplies we needed so badl ... '
'We don't, didn’t, have to! I have the supplies I bought on
Dungheap. They're in the trunk at the front of my pod.'
'Quick then ... grrr ... we must try and get to us before we
surrender.'
The stressed pods began to glow at their constant full speeds. The
Time Point had placed them too far away; they weren't going to
catch themselves in time.
'Damn! We are giving ourselves up,' Dong cursed, squeezing her
communication pen in frustration.
'It doesn't matter, we should still be able to get to us inside the
space wharf and be able to warn Chucker.' As he was speaking,
upon his head-screen, he noticed a freight vessel starting its steep

181

approach toward the base of a docking-spike. 'I've just had an
idea!'
So as not to be seen the pods kept in joint formation and floated
into a position just above the freighter’s steel mast, avoiding its
sensors and hiding the pods.
'You see ... woof ... those crates stacked on deck,' Scank pointed
out, using his communication pen to place a circle around them on
Dong's head-screen, 'they're big enough for us to hide in!'
'Ah yes, I'm with you,' understood Dong.
Before the wharf came close enough to be able see them visually,
Scank, sealing off the middle of the joined pods, flooded his own
pod with space and, in his organic spacesuit, went outside and
guided Dong and the pods, like a camel to water, into one of the
crates, out of sight.
Leaving the rest down to the freighter, the two stowaways relaxed
as it cruised through a large opening which had appeared just
below the docking-spike Cube was now joined to. Once positioned
inside, the opening vanished behind them, replaced by a complex
wall of molecules.
All Scank and Dong had to do now was wait inside the crate, and
knowing Slinky was going to be looking through them all, they would
be able to give their past selves a discreet hand written message
telling themselves about Chucker's unhappy future event.
'We mustn't forget it took nearly three days for Slinky to go through
... grrr ... all these crates,' reminded Scank. 'We can eat the pods'
emergency rations until then, okay?'
'Umm ... err ... ' Dong had already given in to temptation, his
blubber bouncing back to full stretch with each mouthful of food.
Several days quickly passed by. Scank and Dong had eaten all their
emergency rations and were now left with two containers of ale.
Dong lifted one of them above her head, feeling its weight, 'We do
have two lots of this ale; we could drink one and give our past selves
the other?' The squidge struggled to look at her friend in the dim
light of the closed crate - they had both only just left the
confinement of their pods.

182

Scank remained mysteriously silent ... 'HICCUP!'
'You mean to tell me,' Dong shouted, guessing what Scank had
done, 'that you've been drinking from the container already and
you didn't even bother to tell me, cheers, thanks a bundle.' To make
up for her loss, knowing what the consequences were for drinking
ale in her current heroic state would be, she took a huge gulp from
the container. 'To Chuscker!' he/she toasted, his/her speech
already slurred, his/her body having undergone the (black and
white) mad cow transformation.
'Yes ... groof ... to Chuscker!' repeated Scank.
By the third day they were still completely inebriated. Having gone
to try and sleep unsuccessfully back inside the pods, Scank opened
the side of his own completely down to the floor of the crate and fell
out. 'Dongsy, we haved to gets the supplies we is needing in this
present times ... wgrr ... froms your pod's trunk. Dongsy?'
'Oh there was a drunken runt who dids play with its ... '
'Ah ... grrrup ... there you is,' Scank broke in upon seeing his black
and white friend's form appearing in the opening of his dimly lit pod.
'Get the damn stuff out of the trunk! I thinks my broother is finally
comin' ... Shhhh!' Stumbling around in the darkness, the leetlesheet
placed his sucking fingertips on Dong's thingy-me-bob. 'Oops! That
is nots the door handle?'
'Oi!' Dong cried, smacking Scank's hand away from where it wasn't
wanted. 'Have you gots the note what we dids write ourselves?'
With a drunken smile Scank shook his head from side to side several
times before getting the utter poop beaten out of him for having
touched the squidge's protruding thingy-me-bob without his/her
prior permission.
'No ... gwoof ... Dongsy, you haves gotted the notes we dids wrote
ourselves!' With his eyes having only just become accustomed to
the poor visibility, in an instant of pain - caused by Dong and the
following experience - the crate flooded with a wedge of light as he
and Slinky opened its door at exactly the same time, him from the
inner side; Slinky from the outer side.

183

Scank immediately saw his blue brother turning his head around in
complete astonishment and of course in complete shock because
he had been shocked with what had so shockingly shocked him into
be shocked. Slinky was looking back across the cargo bay to where
the current Scank and Dong still lay hidden and could see their
heads momentarily appear and disappear from above the top of
the stacked boxes.
'Have I ... grrr ... just waved?' enquired Scank, from inside the
opened crate, his attempt at sounding sober appearing to work.
Hearing a loud hiccup coming from behind, Slinky looked briefly at
the other shadowed companion and closed his four eyes. 'Yes, you
did, but ...'
'Please, don't be alarmed, you are not seeing double, we are from
the future. We have ... woof ... brought you the substances which
we need in this time. For the moment this is all I can say to you, dear
brother.' Scank pushed the needed supplies forward from the
shadows of the crate. 'Quickly, take these to our good selves.'
'Okay,' puzzled Slinky and grabbing the supplies, hastily loaded
them onto a hover-trolley. 'BBBye then,' he stuttered.
Pretending he hadn't seen what he'd just seen, he pushed the
'trolley briskly towards The Three Wise - and still waiting for him behind
the boxes - Aliens.
'Blooody nice bloke is your brother,' slurred Dong. 'Now all we has
to do is hope that the Time Point is still ... Wait a moment!' Stopping,
he raised his voice a couple of feet and leant upon the side of the
crate. 'We needs to get our future selves outs of this bloody mess
first!'
With a continuous spray of spit, both drunks fell heavily to the floor
with a bout of self-absorbing laughter. It took them a while before
they attempted to, after relieving their bladders in one of the many
corners, climb, fall, and climb again back inside the pods.
'Oh dear,' hicupped Dong, trying to be serious for a moment.
'WWWWhat is its?' asked Scank, desperately trying not to burst into
another fit of the giggles.
'I didn't give Slinky that note we wrote ourselves!'

184

Within a matter of seconds the leetlesheet sobered up pretty fast.
'You didn't ... woof ... what?' he barked.
'I forgot to give Slinky the note.'
'I heard ... grrr ... you idiot!' Scank thought their new situation
quickly over in his minds. 'If we hurry we still might catch up with
ourselves.' Falling back out of his pod onto something wet, warm,
and smelly, he reopened the crate door.
Looking in surprise at the sudden opening of the crate, a patrol of
bosseye soldiers trained their weapons on Scank's equally surprised
head.
'Oh bugger!' Scank slammed the door closed, dived inside his
pod, and informed Dong of their situation. 'We're right in the ... grrr
... sheet!' Several loud laser blasts confirmed this to be so.
'All right,' boasted Dong, for a brief moment the heroic side
dominating his blubber, 'times to get somes action!'
'Sir?' shouted one of the soldiers who'd been ordered to go on top
of the crate, 'something's happening inside?' The soldier was soon
proved to be right. Breaking out of their concealment the pods sent
her body hurtling backwards through the air, the squad of surprised
bosseye acting as her primitive brake as she landed on their held
out arms.
'DESTROY THAT SPACE CRAFT!' screamed the angered sergeant in
charge, leaving the things of the CeNtre to say “WHO THE HECK
SAID THAT?” at the same time the sergeant lifting himself up from the
floor and brushing down his dirtied uniform.
A stream of power balls quickly followed the rejoined pods
throughout the bay, at one time getting so close that it looked as
though the soldiers were holding a flying dragon by a leash.
A continuous line of fire soon took on the appearance of a weird
sprinkler system watering the cargo bay, except this particular
sprinkler was destroying rather than replenishing whatever it
touched.
'Woof ... we're hit! We're hit!' cried Scank, flicking several switches
up and down in reaction with the use of his long haired pointed tail.
He flicked the same switches once again - they weren't about to do

185

any use he just liked the feel and sound they were making. 'We're
hit!'
‘We've only sustained minor damage. We'll be fines as longs as we
don't moves ... Only joking ...' BOOM! 'Shits! We're hits! We're hits!'
‘Grrr ... we’re stuffed!' shouted Scank, trying to realign all major
functions and regain control of the situation. ‘I need more ale!’
Like a trapped insect the pods continued to fly in crazy circles,
closely followed at all times by the increasing fire-power of the
growing amount of bosseye below.
'We can't use our weapons ... woof ... we might hurts the workers?'
worried Scank, thinking about his brother. 'I knows it looks like a
tights squeeze, but do you thinks we woulds be able to fits into the
opening of that passage-way, downs there?' The leetlesheet quickly
transferred the image which he was talking about onto Dong's
optical head-screen.
'There is only ones way to finds out!' replied Dong, desperate to try
anything.
Leaving the power balls in a blinding flash, the pods burst forward.
'Oh ... grrr ... dooglash!' screamed Scank, his pod monitor showing
their direct course set for the small opening.
Dong didn’t bother scanning for measurements he/she flew
directly into the passage-way and just hoped they'd fit.
There was a slight clink as the left side of the pods touched. Dong
was slow to compensate and finally levelled out after rein-acting a
bouncing bomb. Several unexpected wharf personnel were forced
to dive into open doorways as the rectangular spacecraft
continued to push through the inner passage-way like a turd
exploring a rectum – hey I didn’t write this stuff … sorry.
'Solid barriers have just sealed the passage behind and in front of
us. We have ... grrr ... no place to go!' Scank watched as the two
barriers began to move inward from the front and rear.
'It looks like the bosseye want to burst these particular pods open,'
observed Dong, making a joke out of the crisis as her sobered heroic
form finally completely came through.

186

'What if we ... woof ... were to fire sequential laser squares?'
suggested Scank's quivering voice, the barriers almost at the point of
touching the front and back of the pods.
'Once again, my hairy friend, we can but try ... Firing now!' The
long craft began to brighten as the barriers finally made contact
with each glowing end of the pods. With a sudden and deafening
explosion the surrounding passage-way blew outwards, dented by
the released forces.
'Few ... woof ... that seems to have stopped us being crushed,'
Scank sighed, 'but we're never going to reach Chucker or the Time
Point ... grrr ... that’s if it still even exists after the amount of time we
have been on this wharf ... grrr ... in time!'
'We might just have a chance,' said Dong, doing a defiant
Sherlock Holmes impersonation. 'Tell me what your head-screen
shows you when you look above us?'
'I don't understand it? The metal ... woof ... it appears to be
moving like waves on a rippling pond which is full of water which is
rippling and wet and all that sort of thing?'
'There's only one explanation I can think of which could make this
happen. The pods' blast must have weakened the compounds
within the space wharf's molecules. My dear Scank, I do believe we
have struck space!'
Abruptly, from directly above them, a rectangular patch of metal
ripped free and floated away into a sea of glittering darkness, the
pods followed.
'That's ... snfff ... that sorted out,' sniffed Scank.
'Time to find Cube!'
'Damn ... grrr ... right it is. Have you still got the note?'
'Yes,' answered Dong, 'it's held safely in-between my bum cheeks.'
Surfing across the lowest layer of the space wharf's magnetic
shield, the pods could see Cube was thankfully still attached to the
docking-spike like a golf ball on a tee.
From the corner of his head-screen Scank sighted something that
both mystified and shocked him. 'Pugjaw!' he gasped. 'He's ... woof
... managed to break through Cube's security web.'
'She hasn't got one?'

187

'I know ... grrr ... but it sounded good. Anyway, that metal cretin
has just got onboard her.'
Dong felt the heat of the situation getting even hotter. 'Damn!
We have to reach ourselves more than ever! Who knows what that
evil creature's up to now?'
'She ... woof ... is powering up,' cried Scank, 'Cube's going to
attempt to make her escape. I'm trying to communicate but the
wharf seems to be ... grrr ... distorting the signal.'
The pods skidded to a standstill, the surf coming to an abrupt end.
Watching helplessly, and knowing the implications it would cause,
Scank and Dong stared through their head-screens whilst Cube
successfully blasted away from the space wharf. Seeing her
disappear into an acceleration funnel they felt the last nail had
sealed their - or more appropriately - Chucker's coffin.
'We have lost our last remaining chance,' screeched Dong, with
growing anguish.
'Let's not torment ourselves by thinking about it now. We have to
leave the wharf now, before it re-establishes its broken magnetic
shield.' The leetlesheet clutched his gripseat as he was quickly
pushed back with the obliged acceleration Dong had immediately
initiated.
'We are ... grrr ... approaching the Time Point,' Scank observed,
moving his hands up and down the communication pen to relieve
his built-up stress. 'I hope it's still open for business?'
In between the clusters of stars and formations of planets the pods
centred in on its recorded location.
Feeling all hope had left her body, Dong said, with a sad tone to
her voice, 'Well, my scanky friend, here goes nothing ...'
Reaching the navigated co-ordinates the joined pods were
sucked back inside the existing time distortion that thankfully still
existed in time.
Once again both pilots lost consciousness, although this time they
were quicker to regain it once they were safely on the other side of
the Time Point.

188

Unwanted feelings started swimming round and round and round
their minds like a school of piranhas eating away at their fond
memories of Chucker. They now found that they couldn't quite
picture his face without their own minds adding something here or
there. In the end his face looked something like a demented dwarf
who'd had plastic surgery to extend his nostrils. The death of anyone
is bad enough, but a close friend was difficult to cope with.
'Woof ... where are we?' asked Scank, surfacing from his thoughts.
'I think we are back onboard Cube,' marvelled Dong, double
checking her own statement. 'It feels as though we never left!'
Opening the pods, the glum pair of time travellers made their way
to the observation post, hand in hand, to tell Cryst and Robottom
the unchanged sad news.
'How long ... grrr ... were we gone?' laughed Scank, in extreme
sadness.
Cryst looked at the two of them in surprise, 'But you've only just left
the post!'
'Never mind,' muttered Dong, 'it doesn't matter about the endless
theories and explanations. We have failed so therefore Chucker's
still dead!'
Focusing on some images moving around the optical screen like
goldfish around a bowl Scank felt anger pushing through his eyes, to
land heavily on the tongue of his opened mouth. 'Those are the
globular fighters that murdered Chucker! They are heading our way
... grrr ... at an aggressive speed.'
Dong turned abruptly. 'CUBE!' she demanded, her fingers filling
with hate. 'BLAST THEM OUT OF THIS SYSTEM. DESTROY THOSE TWO
MOVING GONAD IMPERSONATORS ... NOW! NOW! NOW! ... DID I
MENTION, NOW!'
'No, stop!' Cryst counteracted. 'Even after everything they have
done, you still cannot kill a fellow alien in cold blood, well, at least
not like this ...'
'Why not? They did!'
'It's too late to fire ... snfff ... now anyway,' informed Scank, 'they're
too ... grrr ... close!'

189

Looking up at the flashing terminals, Dong smiled. 'Cube's bringing
them aboard! What a good idea! That's much better than quick
death; we can torture them and then kill them. Come on, follow
me, let's go and get the bastuards!'
Having left the observation post behind them in a blur, feelings of
their (except Cryst's) anger grew and grew with each gravitational
chute they entered and left. By the last one they were ready to kill.
'Quick,' screamed Dong, 'there they are - Cube has kept them
inside their crafts.'
Running towards the small globes, similar in size to their own pods,
the angry gang of four skidded to a halt, leaving several marks upon
the floor. Their facial expressions looked startled as one of the
fighters quickly opened.
Dong and Scank were now face to face with what looked like
themselves, except for a few minor differences here and there.
'Not much times to explains,' slurred the visiting DoNg his/her black
and white figure shifting from side to side as if needing the toilet.
Turning to face what turned out to be his/her round pod, he/she
proceeded to pull out the sagging skinny figure of Chucker like a
maggot from out of an apple.
'But ... but ... but it was you who flew down and killed him?'
recollected the sober and more attractive Dong.
'Woofgrr ... no!' stated the new ScAnk stumbling to lean heavily
upon DoNg’s lowered shoulder. 'We was saving him! The Great
Dung he was sold to ... hiccup ... groof ... is a much hated alien; the
explosion you dids saw was actually caused by the Opposers. The
Opposer's sideline in terrorism has proved very profitable in recent
times ... woogr ... and it was thems who did plants a series of bums ...
I mean ... bombs, and so it was them who dids blows up the
residential roof-top Chuscker was standings on. We were flying
down to saves the vom ... gr ... not kill him!'
'But how do you know all this?' asked Dong, his counterpart looking
her up and down.
'I am afraids we cannots tells you where we is comed from and
hows we knows all this. The universeseseses hold many secrets and
so do we ... hiccup ... I can only tells you that we dids comed from

190

the Time Pointy thing out there ... speaking of which ... we must be
goings before it's goned, I tink I’m getting a cold!'
Jumping back inside their pods, or rather, falling back inside their
pods, ScAnk and DoNg said their brisk farewells and left Cube
quickly behind.
Not long after the two visitors had disappeared through the Time
Point, as DoNg had predicted, the last trail of residual energy
vanished back to where it had come from.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'Stinkz, do you realise what I can do with this box ...'
'Ark!' corrected the scruffy alien, shifting about on its many legs.
'What?' The Empress snapped. ‘Have you turned into a bird?’
'Ark,' Stinkz repeated, 'it is called the Ark! That was fantastic the
way you stole it from Cube when she was docked at the space
wharf ...'
The Empress struggled with her mind, trying to think if she should kill
the little yuck for entertainment. With her eyes wobbling in the
middle, each of the pupils fighting one another to get closer to her
perfect nose, she finally said, ‘I knew Pugjaw would prove
rewarding, thanks to him spotting the Ark I will go down in bosseye
history!'
Turning, she wandered over to a blue sponge-like seat and sat
down, letting her buttocks soak up its perfumed base. Stinkz, as
usual, followed to grovel in her slender shadow. 'I wonder what my
chief spy is up to at this very moment?' pondered The Empress,
thinking aloud so as to get an answer from the small yuck breathing
heavily beside her. When she didn't receive one, she peered down
at the miserable git and kicked it in its precious particles.
'What was that for?' winced Stinkz, the pain rapidly growing with
each breath.
'I just felt like it,' hissed The Star Empress. 'At least now you can't
follow me around the place.'
Stinkz was determined to prove her wrong and, in agony, crawled
after her as she marched out of the throne room.

191

With its pain lessening, the yuck managed to follow The Empress'
tight gripping figure into a nearby lift and down several hundred
decks, every soldier soluting her beautiful body as she walked
elegantly past each of the male bosseye's pounding pants. After
much effort had been undertaken they finally came to a halt
outside of a heavily guarded doorway.
'Ah, here we are at last. We have reached my wonderful onboard
prison.' The bosseye ruler smiled in gratitude as two guards allowed
her entrance into the awaiting corridor positioned, as one would
expect, on the other side of the door.
Hopping through the round opening, Stinkz followed The Empress'
every move, walking past different smelling doors and teasing the
unfortunate occupants like Commander Derder who were held
captive inside them. But the yuck knew where The Empress was
heading, she had promised she'd be back, and the captured Slinky
knew this as much as anyone.
'Oh, Slinky, it's so good to see you again.' The Star Empress
delighted in seeing his blue image cowering in a corner, bruised and
battered after his many previous visits.
'I have told you, I didn't help them!' slinked Slinky, desperate to be
set free.
'So why have my spies told me that you were seen talking to
Cube's crew before they escaped from the space wharf?' She
looked hard at his burnt face, his hair no longer covering his once
shaggy muzzle. 'You lie!'
Slinky winced as his interrogator slowly undid her top. Reaching
down inside, she pulled out her four erect pets and began playing
with them in a teasing manner.
Bouncing within her gentle grip, these pets lived around her and
protected her. The Empress loved the feel of their webbed feet and
scaled bodies as they tended to run all over, and sometimes within,
her bare skin. Holding them up above her head, letting their
droppings roll down her long white hair, Slinky began laughing, in
terror! 'Tell me what you know!' she demanded, not knowing the
leetlesheet was Scank's brother.

192

Stinkz sniggered from within the shadows; it knew its mistress was
going to kill the blue alien whatever the outcome.
'I don't know anything!' Slinky repeated with leetlesheet
stubbornness and pride. These were to be his last words.
Throwing her pets to the floor, they scurried across to Slinky's
hunched-up form and immediately got to work. Screams quickly
filled the air whilst his weakened body was subjected to their
unbearable tickling. Eventually his hearts couldn't cope under the
continuous strain and he lay dead, his body, the remnants of his life,
lay twitching to the immense delight of the spectators.
'Excellent,' screeched Stinkz, with climactic excitement.
Seeing The Empress bending over, each of her babies quickly
stopped molesting Slinky's dead body, stood erect, and leapt back
up her slightly raised dress. 'Good to have you back,' groaned The
Empress, feeling their bodies close to her own. 'I suppose it's time for
me to return to the home world,' she proudly stated. 'I will send word
of the box ... Ark. By revealing it to my people I shall become even
more of a living legend. Cube will be nothing more than a gravy
block ready to crumble within my powerful grasp.' She turned to
Stinkz who was licking Slinky's blood-stained lips. 'Come, we must
leave before he's thrown into outer space.'
'Can I stay outside the door and watch through the viewer?'
pleaded the yuck.
'Very well,' conceded The Empress, knowing that it would mean
she would have to walk back alone to the throne room.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'You have been lucky!' boomed the Devil, trying to give a reason for
his confused guest's current situation. 'You have been chossssen to
be one of our ... my, perssssonal sssspiessss - ssssecret agentssss ... oh
what hassssn’t got an ssss in ... sssslavessss - oh bollockssss! In fact, I,
we, want you to be one of the highest ranked, to prove thissss I, we
have changed your name. Only one before you hassss ever
achieved two capitalssss in hissss name sssso quickly, only one! The
higher up the rankssss you climb the more capital letterssss you will

193

achieve, before long you could be known assss “PUGJAW: THE
IMMORTAL!”'
PugJaw shook his head several times as if it had just been
drenched with a bucket of ice-cold oil. The dog-like creature
couldn't believe what he was hearing through his mind, one
moment he had remembered being in the air, the next he was
falling to the floor of the docking section and the next ... well, he
was here, wherever "here" was. 'Where this I be?' he asked the
invisible voice in his malfunctioning accent.
'The Edge!' came the proud answer.
'Be I alive, or be I dead?'
'Neither!'
With his mind still struggling to understand where he was, PugJaw
felt himself once again being left in his own desired surroundings until
the voice of the Devil returned trying to offer, yet another, long
winded explanation.
'You were brought here becausssse you were not ssssupposed to
have died sssso ssssoon, and I, we knew thissss when I, we felt you
enter the Edge, and sssso therefore you became mine, ourssss!'
PugJaw continued to look defiant as a chorus of laughter swarmed
around his metal ears like an angry hive of wasps. 'Don't worry,'
hissed the Devil, 'you will be allowed to live again amongsssst the
mortalssss, but! But only assss my, our sssslave and sssspy - agent yessss - agent!’
PugJaw felt weirdly relieved upon hearing the Devil's last
comment, he hadn't wanted to question the deep feeling of evil
any further. 'I think I be understandin' yourselves, yourself? So when
do I be leavin’an’wher' do I be goin'?'
'I'm, we're glad that you have come to termssss with your new
possssition and that you are eager to carry out an assssssssignment,
but before I, we ssssend you gallivanting acrossssssss the galaxiessss,
there issss ssssomething in my, our contract which I, we musssst notify
you of. I, we will sssskip mosssst of the jargon and come sssstraight to
the lasssst few ssssentencessss, which, if you're interessssted, go
ssssomething like thissss ... ‘PugJaw had no choice but to listen and
feel what the Devil had to say.

194

' ... Bla bla bla ... You sssshall know what I, we want you to know!
Bla bla bla ... Your mind belongssss to me, ussss, and that'ssss about
all of it really. Oh, yessss, of coursssse, I, we nearly forgot; regarding
your next missssssssion, assssssssignment - job, I'll, we'll be ssssending
you back to pretend to work for that bosssssssseye empresssssssss
with the nice titssss.' The Devil paused in admiration, he liked what
he'd heard about The Star Empress from his many secret agents
based in the mortal world. 'SSSShe hassss the Ark and I, we want it! I,
we think the besssst time for you to carry out thissss missssssssion,
assssssssignmet - job, would be ssssometime around about - NOW!'
Suddenly the vision in front of PugJaw changed, revealing a half
remaining galactic destroyer instead of the void of floating emotions
he had become used to inside the Edge. This, he presumed, meant
that he was now back in mortal space...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Dungheap and its problems were three days gone, Cube and her
crew were heading north-west at gravpull 894618452 in an effort to
reach the central part of their own galaxy.
Positioned at the very centre is where the home world of the
bosseye spins. It spins under the strong influences of the two small
suns surrounding it - these having the power of making you cross
your eyes if looked at long enough; as do the two small moons and
two north stars...
'We ... grrr ... definitely saw PugJaw entering Cube...'
'Say that again!' interrupted Chucker.
'That again!'
'No!'
'PugJaw!' repeated Scank.
'Yes! It sounds different? Dong, you say it!'
'It!'
'No!' snapped Chucker. 'Say PugJaw ... There, did you notice the
difference?'
'Something has happened, I can feel it,' stated Cryst, her voice
distant as she repeated the name over and over again in her mind.

195

'So, anyway, as you were saying,' reminded Dong.
'Oh ... grrr ... yes, I was saying that we definitely saw PugJaw
entering Cube,' repeated Scank for a second time, going over in
detail what he and Dong had witnessed on the other side of the
Time Point. 'But the fact remains that he's not still onboard. We've
checked everywhere.'
'If you are right about what you witnessed,' summed up Cryst, 'it
seems to me that we should soon be on course to retrieving the Ark.
If PugJaw's not still onboard then he must have returned to report to
The Empress, perhaps along with the Ark?'
'Or perhaps,' added Scank, 'perhaps ... grrr ... The Star Empress
found it and took it from Cube when she was connected to the
space wharf? Which reminds me, we need to step up security a
little if we are to have future peace of minds. I'll ask the scientific
robots to create a security web.'
'I agree,' replied Dong, 'I'll set about writing a computer program
for the sci-robots to develop something.'
'Good idea!'
‘So, really, either way we think about all this, The Star Empress is
who we have to aim to find.’
Chucker, still feeling a little queasy after his one minute celebration
party which his companions had held in honour of his unexpected
resurrection, thought about the stolen Ark and the consequences
before asking the messiah, 'How much time do we have?'
'I can't say. We just have to hope the Ark is not opened - or worse
still - found by the Devil. It has no Guardian ... because I was that
Guardian ... and I'm ...' The messiah burst into tears, crying a shower
of tiny crystals. 'With nobody guarding it nothing can stop its power
from overspilling!'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Leaving the sight and feelings of PugJaw, the Devil turned his
attention towards Cube and what she and her crew were up to. He
knew he would have to delay them somehow, otherwise they could
ruin his plans and that would really tick him off something chronic.

196

He had already come up with an idea and it was about time he put
it into action ...
Cube was currently hurtling through space at her maximum speed,
she was making good time, it wouldn't be long before she could
possibly open up an acceleration funnel and reach the border of
the bosseye home world.
'Holding gravpull ... 9999999999.9 ... gravpull 10000000000
reached,' Chucker informed the others, his middle half turning
yellow, his two feet a contrasting red.
'We have got to get there as soon as possible!' declared the
messiah, obviously still worried about the Ark and its unguarded
powers.
'Can ... grrr ... we open an acceleration funnel ... ahhh ... now?'
suggested Scank, brushing a blade of grass away from his nostrils
before sneezing several times in succession.
'We can't,' explained Dong, 'a freak storm appears to have
pushed us too close, it wouldn't be wise!' All of The Three Wise Aliens
quickly raised their arms forward and wriggled their fingers upon
hearing the word “wise”...
CRASHING SOUND!
AN EVEN BIGGER CRASHING SOUND!!
'What in the CeNtre's name was that?' screamed Chucker, the
post's internal lighting fading to a dim haze.
FWERP! FWERP! FWERP! ... came the sound from the
communication light which had started to flash. 'I see you
remembered to turn the siren back on,' said Cryst, looking at Scank,
raising Robottom away from the grassy floor which now had skid
marks cut into it.
After pressing the correct sequence of buttons, an angry voice of
somebody angry at being angered, belched out from all the
surrounding speakers. 'Boy ... hhhaw ... are you lot in trouble now!
You've definitely crashed into the wrong alien this time. I'll have you
in universal court before you know what hit you ... hhhaw ... or in this
case after you know what hit you.' Pausing to breathe heavily, the
mysterious speaker caused Cube's internal speakers to crackle.

197

'Who are you?' demanded Dong, completely clueless. 'What are
you talking about? Universal court?'
'Space-rage ... hhhaw ... is it? Well two can play at that game!'
'What?'
'Space-rage! I've seen it ... hhhaw ... all before. I've been flying
around the universes before you were even born. You may have
heard of my name, it's Fader - DaFt Fader, and I'll have you know I
can crush you like an empty can. I used to be an Imperial Dark Lord
... hhhaw ... well I suppose I still am, but now I also sell space
insurance ... to get to the point I'm trying to make ... you were
speeding! That means you were in the wrong and I can claim from
your insurers!' Gasping, he paused to breathe, again deeply, as if
using an asthma inhaler. 'I've only just borrowed this fighter craft
from my storm pooper friends because mine broke down. What ...
hhhaw ... am I going to tell them when I get back …
'Oh well, I didn't really like flying it anyway because until one
reaches light speed one doesn't realise it ... hhhaw ... uses a twohanded bloody gearing system. This caused me a few problems
because one of my hands was cut off in a sabre fight and ... hhhaw
... well, the rest is pure history. I was attempting to change gear
when your sodding spaceship came out of nowhere and hit me. So
I'm suing you for negligence and dangerous driving, and I bet you
don't have any space insurance?'
'Well ... er ... no! But - '
'No buts ... hhhaw ... that's all I ever hear from you boy racers and
you obviously are boy racers - just look at your vessel's shape; one
big furry dice if you ask me.'
'What are we going to do?' asked Chucker, whispering to the
others. 'I didn't see any fighter craft? It must have appeared out of
nowhere?' He didn't realise how right he was with his last comment.
'He won't do anything if we explain the situation,' remarked Cryst,
slightly worried that the alien might have a justified case against
them.
Taking some time to think it over, the wise aliens, and their two
legged messiah, paced about the post until the internal lighting was
fully restored.

198

Cube was still continuing at gravpull 10000000000, the crashing
sound hadn't stopped her from decreasing her speed; she still had
instructions to get to the bosseye home world.
'Look ... hhhaw ... if you don't decrease your speed this instance I'll,
I'll lift you all off your feet and suffocate you by squeezing your
throats! But before I do ... hhhaw ... would you be so kind as to peel
my fighter away from your north side ... hhhaw ... now!'
'We better do as he says,' gulped Chucker, turning completely
yellow.
'If we cut our speed now we'll not reach the Toesuck System for
another two hours! It could result in the destruction of our galaxy!
Everything we know could be destroyed in a shower of intense pain
... ' Cryst stopped herself short of the full explanation, thinking over
everything she'd just said. 'But then again,' she smiled, 'we must help
our fellow alien in times of trouble. He does seem rather distraught.'
With a lot of moans and groans Cube slowed to a standstill and
within seconds of having stopped, Dong, Cryst - and her lower metal
half - and not forgetting Scank and Chucker, each took four pods
outside and started to chisel DaFt Fader's squooshed spacecraft
away from Cube's dented bodywork which after a while repaired
itself.
Dragging the compressed fighter inside the docking section,
Cube's crew had to then use a can-opening device to be able to
release the trapped pilot.
With the last piece of metal severed from the craft, the Dark Lord
stepped out onto the docking section's glowing floor, which seemed
to dim in brightness upon the spot where he stood. At his full height
he stood defiantly still, making Chucker feel even more uneasy,
especially as the mask which covered his face made his eyes glint in
a black evil shine. 'I need you to take me ... hhhaw ... immediately
to the Dagobah System. I am late for my Jetty class! I've been
learning to build them in outer space with the help of a small green
alien and his one-eyed snake. I am one of ... hhhaw ... his most
accomplished Jetty Knights would you believe.'
'Excuse us for a minute or two,' Chucker politely interrupted,
coughing, dragging his companions discreetly to one side. 'We

199

cannot waste time taking him to the Dagobah System! We'll just
have to knock him out, or something?' The group huddled closer
together, for a moment turning their gazes upon the menacing
figure tapping his foot impatiently upon the floor.
'How would we be able to knock him out?' asked Dong,
swallowing the last of his sludge bar. 'My other half won't be able to
merge for at least another hour, besides, this bloke has the “Force”
on his side!'
'What “Force”?'
'The “Insurance Force” of course!'
'Sorry to have kept you waiting,' said Chucker, the group
dispersing. 'I'm afraid we have discussed your request and we have
decided we will not be able to take you to the Dagobah System.
We do have our reasons ...'
'Reasons!' screamed DaFt Fader. 'I'll give you reasons!' Raising his
only hand he began to lift all four crew off their dangling feet
without so much as touching them.
'Dooo something,' gurgled Chucker, looking to the messiah who
was also starting to choke.
'I'm sorry but I caaan't hurrrt my fellow aliennn.'
'Scank,' gasped Dong, lifting his blubbery arm to draw the
leetlesheet's attention, 'the pppressure valve, behinddd you! The
pressure vvvalve!'
After a painful thirty seconds had passed, Scank eventually
realised what the squidge had been trying to say. Turning around in
the air, he managed to reach a large round tap and turned it.
Shining with evil, like a black mirrored skull, DaFt Fader's masked
face turned its gaze to see what the hairy alien was up to.
Thankfully he was too late.
Forcing open the pressure valve Scank desperately released a jet
of burning steam all over the darkly clad evil doer. Falling heavily to
the floor, the desperate crew quickly made use of their current
freedom. 'Run!' shouted Dong, already halfway to leaving the
section.
Recovering himself DaFt Fader pulled out his favourite weapon ...
make that second favourite ... from his shiny trousers. Within less

200

than a second a large glowing rod had erected itself into the air - its
red glow - glowing red. 'Death!' he breathed, walking slightly off
balance as he gave chase to the fast, frightened four fleeing
friends.
'Where do we go?' asked Chucker, scared almost into mustard
coloured shadings.
'We need ... grrr ... something to defend ourselves with,' said Scank.
'We'll go to the safety of the observation post and get some cube
blasters.' The other three quickly followed his lead as he dived head
first into a ladder chute.
Nearly reaching the end of the ladder chute, Dong, being last,
caught a glimpse of the dark pursuer beneath him in the chute as
he continued to climb. It suddenly felt as though his feet were
dangling in a pool of Tovarian sharks ready at any moment to be
grabbed helplessly from below and dragged downwards to their
inevitable death.
'Hurry! Hurry!' cackled the mustard coloured vom as he saw DaFt
Fader's hand reach up to grab one of Dong's legs. Luckily for Dong
the Dark Lord had forgotten he only had one hand and so fell
helplessly downwards, his light sabre cutting away parts of the
ladder as he continued to fall in a spiral motion.
Upon reaching the solid floor of the observation post, wishing they
had used the gravitational chutes in their escape, Dong pushed
Robottom and Cryst out of the way. Turning back to the chute he
had just come through, he proceeded to press four digits on a
brightly lit keypad. Immediately after the fourth digit had been
pressed, every chute in the observation section securely sealed
safely shut.
'Woof ... good idea,' noted Scank, realising that the squidge had
used the four-digit-lock-out-code which is more appropriately known
as the lock-out code with four digits.
Grabbing an arm full of cube blasters Chucker handed them out
to his companions, except of course to Cryst who didn't want to be
seen dead with one; only by one it would appear.
'CUBE, RESUME GRAVPULL 873465827 TOWARDS THE TOESUCK
SYSTEM.' Dong looked into the others frightened eyes. 'We should

201

be safe now. That weirdo won't be able to get to us with all the
entrances sealed off ...'
'That's where ... hhhaw ... you are wrong!' DaFt Fader snorted,
emerging through the solid floor.
'Ah?' observed Chucker. 'So that's why you are called "Fader" because you can fade through solid matter!'
'It has ... hhhaw ... been fun,' he breathed, taking no notice, 'but
now you really all have to - die!' Sounding like an over enthusiastic
pervert, DaFt Fader's heavy breathing increased with each step he
made towards them.
'I like ... woof ... your black shiny boots!' exclaimed Scank, trying to
calm things down a little.
Dong raised his cube blaster to fire it in an attempt to stop the
Dark Lord from advancing any closer. With immense pain shooting
through his arm the blaster was immediately thrown, along with him
and the others, against some slit panelling.
'Heaven help us!' yelped Chucker, turning away from the dark
face, feeling his honky breath coming closer.
Shoving his glowing rod back inside his pants, DaFt Fader began to
raise his hand in a threatening manner.
'Woof ... make a dash for it!' barked Scank, jumping to the above
circuitry and sticking to it.
Everyone, apart from Chucker, dashed in different directions, the
vom's wobbling figure staying glued to the spot, he had never been
any good at hide and seek - unfortunately this time his life was at
stake.
Seeing his trapped prey frozen in front of him, DaFt Fader sprinted
to grab the pathetic vom. But as he hurtled towards Chucker with
gathering speed, he was suddenly hit by the full effects of a galactic
shock wave which lashed against Cube in a spray of scattering
smells.
With the shuddering onslaught of what appeared to be some type
of storm continuing to pour over Cube's body and into the
surrounding distances, DaFt Fader completely lost his balance and
was propelled through the air to quickly fade, to everyone's relief,
through each and every wall of each and every section.

202

'Quick ... woof ... the optical screen!' pointed out Scank, dangling
from its middle. Everyone, except again for Chucker who was more
concerned with getting on a toilet on time, came running to see.
The remaining three looked at the screen, all eyes fixed upon the
wriggling dark form being carried off on the ever spreading shock
waves. 'What a ... snfff ... horrific way to die!' sniffed Scank. 'All
those waves and ... grrr ... no board to ride them with!'
Before they could rejoice at their narrow escape from death,
another tremble, of equal severity, threw them to the floor like sacks
of dirt.
Cube eventually stabilised but not after several terrifying minutes
had gone by (this time on surfboards).
Dong was the first to pick himself up. Limping across to a chair
which had some sort of helmet dangling above it, the squidge sat
down (the helmet lowering instantly to cover his head) and began
to search for information as to what was causing the outside
commotion.
'What does your analysis tell you ... grrr ... Dong?' asked Scank,
dropping to the floor.
'I will be able to tell you that!' interrupted Cryst, coming across on
Robottom to stand beside the two of them. 'The Ark has been
opened. The destruction I warned you about has begun.' The
messiah stood still throughout the following eerie silence; apart from
the noises made by the background sounds of Chucker flushing the
toilet. 'CUBE, PLEASE DROP YOUR SPEED TO GRAVPULL 1 AND KEEP
CURRENT NAVIGATORY DESTINATION.' Looking at the others, the
helmet having lifted away from Dong's head, she added, 'I have a
bad feeling there's more to this than I anticipate.'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
The Empress had docked upon her home soil to be greeted by
welcoming jeers. No sooner had she stepped off her galactic
destroyer, planned parades were led through endless streets, and
then as a sign of how big an event it was, endless streets were led

203

back through the planned parades, the obvious presence of the
golden box finally bringing the doubting whispers to an end.
The bosseye population had been forewarned of the Ark's arrival,
but many had disbelieved what they'd been told. The Empress had
a way of exaggerating and so there were a lot of officials who'd felt
sceptical as to whether or not she had been telling the truth. But
after seeing the holy box paraded through the streets in full public
view, the nation rejoiced and immediately set to work on the
celebrations which would come before its grand opening.
Several days of preparation passed by until the eventful day had
finally arrived. The Ark was to be opened publicly by The Star
Empress in front of the entire bosseye population. No other species
had been allowed to remain inside or on the outside surface of the
home world. Only if you were a bosseye were you to have been
permitted to observe the ceremony. Even Stinkz, having been
ordered rather forcefully, had to wait inside the repaired destroyer
until the celebrations had finished.
From all over the galaxies more and more bosseye flew back to
the Toesuck System. The big event played host to more aliens than
an annual Star Trek convention. There'd been endless rows of
spectators sitting on spectators who had sat on the endless rows first
(there had been a lot of bosseye to fit in). Positioned in a place of
honour The Empress' best generals and worst generals (those of
which were dead, having been dug up and brought along in their
coffins) stood (or in the latter cases laid) by her side ready for the
experience of their lifetime (or indeed deathtime).
Having fallen silent in anticipation, the whole planet watched and
waited as The Empress placed her hands upon the lid of the Ark.
Several generals moved from their ranks (not the dead ones I hasten
to add) when they saw her struggle to move it, but when a few of
them had been disintegrated, the rest stayed where they were. The
Star Empress had wanted to open the Ark all by herself so she alone
would be the one to go down in bosseye history.
Several hours passed tediously by. A few generals had fainted
and the crowds had half fallen asleep, when suddenly, The Star
Empress had been able to move the golden lid to one side, its

204

smooth structure quickly sliding open with a forbidding sound ...
FORBIDDING SOUND! ... and, in an instant, everyone had become
alert with the excitement which the forbidding sound had given
them.
From the high position where the Ark had been placed, its heavy
lid toppled onto the ground, and the moment it touched, every
single bosseye had felt their hearts stop. The Empress, at that initial
time being the only one who was able to see inside the Ark,
uncrossed her eyes, her stunned facial expression televised for all to
see.
With its power unleashed to her uncrossed eyes, The Star Empress
was abruptly thrown into the row of soldiers standing several metres
below. One by one they fell like a line of dominoes whilst from out of
the Ark a wave of lights swirled around in the reddened sky above.
With a terrifying sound ... TERRIFYING SOUND! ... the lights soon
turned into creatures. Acting like a load of drunken genies having
just been released from their tormented years of captivity, the
entities started to sing.
As they continued to spurt out from the Ark like a gusher of
untamed oil, sounds of screams and farts ... SCREAMS AND FARTS! ...
rose from around the bosseye home world as the evil set about its
destruction.
With something similar to a nuclear detonation, the planet was
levelled to the ground. Where there had stood generations of
architecture there now lay rubble, and eventually even the rubble
began to bubble and disperse under the intense powers that
persisted to rape the planet.
Storms of laughter were vomited from the entities as they danced
through the destructive hours. Finally, when the Edge had collected
every soul, they turned on the planet itself, its apocalypse having
sent shock waves rippling out into the blinking stars...
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...

205

'I've located a small unidentified object floating due east,' notified
Chucker. 'Should we see what it is, or should we carry on to the
bosseye home world?'
'We must stop,' said Cryst, an angelic tone ringing around her
voice, 'it could be somebody, or something, in need of our help!'
Dong stared at the messiah and whilst smirking, said, 'Then again, it
might not!'
'CUBE?' she responded by running to the nearest keyboard.
'PLEASE, IN THE NAME OF GOD, GO EAST!'
Scank quickly added, 'DO AS SHE SAYS, CUBE,' typing his
command with the use of the bracelet gadget-type-thing he had
just placed on his arm. He quickly motioned for Chucker and Dong
to sit in a gripseat.
Carrying out the request, to the letter, Cube jerked from side to
side, up and down, until she was in visual sight of the small object.
'What the blazes just went wrong with Cube's navigation?' gasped
Cryst, her face indented into some cracked circuit boards. The
optical screen responded by displaying a trail of cosmicdust mites
(with the use of Cube's particle refractor) mapping out the bumpy
route they had just taken. Catching a distant sun's glare the outline
of the word "GOD" was lit up for all to see clearly.
'Sometimes ... grrr ... you have to be careful how you order Cube
to do something,' Scank chuckled from the comfort of his gripseat.
'PugJaw!' shouted Dong, his voice filling with a mixture of surprise
and hate as his minds fought for the reasons as to why the metal
creature should be found floating aimlessly around this particular
quadrant of space. Keeping his enlarged eyeballs focused upon
the image, he used the optical controls to zoom in on the sighting.
'It looks like he's ... grrr ... run out of fuel,' Scank noted, astutely,
noticing the creature's distinct lack of movement.
'The question is,' added Chucker, 'he's dangerously devious, do we
bring him back onboard?'
Dong tapped his hands on the edge of a pink gripseat and
contemplated the answer.
'We haven't much time,' reminded Cryst, worrying. 'He may be
evil, and would probably rip your throat out if given the chance, but

206

I say we bring him into the warmth and loving safety of Cube.'
Before anyone could react she initiated a grappling light and with
the added touch of the grip ray, pulled the creature aboard. By the
time she turned around for the others' reactions she found they had
all left the post. Knowing where they had run to she leapt into a
gravitational chute and headed for one of the docking cubicles.
'He's been deactivated,' sighed Dong, looking down at the
motionless metal spy.
'I suggest before we ... grrr ... activate and question him we secure
him to that hover-trolley. Also,' Scank added, noticing something
useful, 'we should use the straps around those crates and tie him so
that he can't move his limbs. We don't want him changing into a
shuttle ... grrr ... or anything else we don't know about ... woof ...
whilst we're questioning him.'
'What about his sharp jaws?' Chucker was quick to point out.
'Put this protective mask on him,' offered Dong, picking it up from
where it had been hanging around a couple of nearby fire
extinguishers.
'What are you doing to him?' gasped Cryst, in usual pity as she ran
to join them.
'It's for our ... grrr ... safety!' snapped Scank, really getting fed up
with her religious goodness. 'You know very well he can be quite a
dangerous handful.'
'Still, all the same, being the messiah and all I would prefer him to
be set free to wander around the place.'
Dong quickly intervened, 'Have you ever been headbutted?'
'No,' answered Cryst, innocently, 'why?'
HEADBUTT! ... CRACK!
'Ouch!' yipped the messiah, feeling the force of Dong's head
rebounding off her own.
'He stays tied up or we send him back out into space?'
'Okay,' she relented, 'you win.'
Double checking the robotic creature was firmly secured, Chucker
reactivated his operational circuitry. 'That should do it,' he sighed,
stepping a safe distance away.

207

From each side of his enormous jaws PugJaw's eyes began to
flicker into operation. 'You lot!' he yelled, immediately struggling to
break free from his restraints once he realised where he was. The
mask they had placed over the front of his face seemed only to add
to his demonic appearance, making his voice sound distant and his
face less readable - if that was at all possible.
'Why were you deactivated?' said Dong, starting the interrogation.
'Thee Star Empress were deeply disappointed with the lack of
information I'ad concernin' this‘ere square shaped tub of yours.'
Cube shook a little as if in acknowledgement. 'She, and the small
shite that be walkin'in’er shadow most of thee time, cast me out into
space to be driftin' forever, but it be lookin' like she failed thanks to
your kindness.' Dong grimaced at him, Cryst smiled.
'You say ... grrr ... you didn't have enough information on Cube ...
so you did come onboard!' said Scank, him and Dong knowing this
to be true.
PugJaw looked startled. 'How did you be knowin' tha'...'
'Never mind,' interrupted Dong, 'we just do.'
'Okay, you've got me, I did com'aboard.'
'Do you know ... grrr ... where the Ark is?' Scank persisted,
desperate to get to the bottom of the riddle concerning the space
wharf.
'Thee Empress took it from you when you was on the dockin'-spike.
She'as it.'
Even with all this easy cooperation PugJaw was definitely hiding
something from the crew and they, except for the happy-clappy
messiah, could sense it.
Dong decided it best to ask more questions. 'We entered a black
hole and yet from the time we left the space wharf we never
logged anyone leaving Cube. So how did you?' In answer to the
squidge's clever question PugJaw reacted violently, it was as though
the Devil had possessed his body, as a matter of fact he probably
had, but the crew wouldn't have known that.
After several minutes of the same set of disturbing movements, the
four wide-eyed spectators seriously started to worry about their
prisoner's mental health. Stopping himself from his fit, PugJaw

208

continued to look at each of the crew one at a time, and seeing he
had their attention he proceeded to make a sucking sound from inbetween his metal lips with the use of his metal tongue. The four
quivered as thoughts of him eating their flesh suddenly raced
through their minds. After his vacuum impression was over, he
flickered his eyes shut and remained quiet.
'Scank?' asked Dong, feeling lazy. 'Can you take this metal git to a
containment cubicle, a con-cubicle, and have him contained.
We'll leave him there till we have further need of him. I think he's
had enough for the moment.'
Grabbing hold of the hover-trolley PugJaw was still tied to,
remembering his last experience of pushing one with much distress,
the leetlesheet obliged his friend by hovering it out of the docking
cubicle.
On his short journey to the containment section, a section only
recently designed to suit the more aggressive species Cube
encounters, Scank felt several more of his own questions needed to
be answered. 'You seem more aggressive ... grrr ... if that's possible,
from when we last met. Why is this? Is it something to do with your ...
woof ... halitosis?'
PugJaw wriggled violently but remained silent. If only he could get
free he would wipe the smile off their faces, preferably with the use
of his large teeth and a nice glass of Chianti.
'I know you hate us and you don't want to talk, but can I just ask
you one last thing, and then I'll promise to leave you alone?'
PugJaw looked at the brown shaggy alien for a long while through
his blood-red eyes and slowly nodded. 'Why are you such an ugly
bastard?'
Feeling rather content with his last question and the spasmodic
reaction it got, Scank pushed his captive forwards, and after
negotiating several gravitational tunnels which proved a lot easier to
hover the fairly wide trolley through, made his way along one of
Cube's slanting corridors until reaching a plaque which had
"Containment Section" written on it in neat lettering, a plaque which
could translate its meaning to any species that looked at it.

209

'Woof ... here we are,' Scank joyfully informed his metal prisoner,
approaching an opening bubble-door, a door constructed from an
impenetrable see-through blob. 'This is your con-cubicle.'
Pushing PugJaw inside, they both looked around its empty layout,
the floor, walls, and the ceiling, consisting of the same substance as
the door. 'Perfect!' exclaimed Scank, safe in knowing that there was
nothing in the cubicle which PugJaw could use to escape.
With his thoughts returning to the plight of the Ark the leetlesheet
knew he must hurry up and meet the others back on the
observation post. Unfortunately, upon turning to leave the concubicle, he absent mindedly dropped his Psychopath’s Escape Kit the kit he'd received in his Virtual E-mail not all that long ago consisting of a laser drill, chain saw and many other useful and nasty
objects. For some reason when it had been delivered, he hadn't
noticed the postal code SIX SIX SIX printed on the back of it.
As the heavy kit bounced clumsily upon the bubbled floor,
PugJaw's eyes shot open. Rocking the trolley back and forth, he
was quickly able to jerk forwards; this motion sending him face-first
on top of the fallen objects. With the same action an Italian uses to
suck up his Mama's home made spaghetti, the kit quickly
disappeared through the hole in his mask.
Hearing the disturbance behind him Scank quickly spun around to
see what the prisoner was up to. 'You ... woof ... won't be able to
escape by throwing yourself to the floor,' he chuckled, a long and
nervous chuckle, not realising what had just taken place. Lifting
PugJaw quickly back into a hovering position, he said his goodbyes
and skipped off down the corridor doing his end of show Morcambe
and Wise impersonation; a rather good one too.
With the containment section fading from his minds, Scank scurried
towards the observation post, descending and climbing ladder
chute after ladder chute until eventually popping out onto a
welcoming part of its green coloured floor.
'Is that metal mongrel secure?' worried Dong. 'I still don't trust him!'

210

'But you should!' joined Cryst, desperate once again to stick her
jagged edges in where they weren't wanted. 'It is this lack of trust
which makes this galaxy so full of evil.'
Dong turned to Chucker who was promptly being sick and, for the
first time in a long while, accompanied him in the vom national
anthem. 'Ergh eerghee ... Ergh eerghee ...'
'Anyway,' continued Scank, returning to Dong's understandable
enquiry, 'PugJaw ... grrr ... has no way of escaping, so don't let it
worry you. The con-cubicle I locked him in is completely secure.'
Noticing something odd, the leetlesheet quickly clambered around
the base of the optical screen like a hamster around an exercise
wheel with its eyeballs starting to burst. 'CUBE INITIALISE BLOCKING,'
he typed into his bracelet, 'IMMEDIATELY, WITHOUT QUESTIONING ME,
NOW, THIS MOMENT WOULD BE NICE, HURRY!' ... FART!
Hearing the different tone in Scank's voice, Chucker, Dong, and
the messiah stopped what they were doing, which once again was
absolutely nothing, and joined the leetlesheet where he had come
to a halt in the central part of the circle of gripseats, directly
underneath the optical screen. As the circle of seats moved
upward to taste the rainbow, making a lovely belching sound, Cube
shuddered.
'It looks like some sort of debris?' Chucker remarked, seeing the
advancing cloud of mixed particles behaving like a swarm of
hungry locusts.
Dong instantly took a closer look with a pair of examination
spectacles he had just pulled from out of a Jim’ll Fix it-type sidedrawer positioned inside one of the gripseats. 'Parts of the cloud
appear to be from a large vessel, but I can't make out what
category it is, or was. I suppose it would be safe to presume it was,
previously, fairly large and maybe even larger, perhaps with some
colourful sticky bits on it. Some of the waste appears to be made up
of dirt particles.' The squidge pointed to the small specks, after
taking off the spectacles, which were now showering upon Cube's
sides along with the remains of what once had been a small alien more than likely from the yuck species. It wasn't long before the

211

crew could hear a distant rumbling from where they stood deep
inside the observation section.
A strip of light suddenly flashed on the panelling to the right of the
four, followed closely by a high pitched beeping. HIGH PITCHED
BEEPING! HIGH PITCHED BEEPING!
'According to Cube we have just crossed the border line of the
Toesuck System.' Chucker gulped a deep and gulpy kind of gulp.
'This is ... was ... where the bosseye home world should be!'
'The bosseye home world, but how could it ...'
'The Ark,' reminded Cryst, her voice low and solemn, 'the Ark holds
more power than you can imagine. You can now see what
destruction it can wreak if it's abused. We must find it quickly. The
Devil will be well aware of its location and will have sent one of his
best secret agents to retrieve it.'
After the circle had lowered back down from tasting the rainbow,
Chucker wobbled to the far reaches of the post. 'I'll scan the system
for any emanating traces it may have left.'
'It could have been blasted light years away by its own power,'
noted Dong, seeing more sign of clouds full of rubble and dirt
floating ominously towards them.
'We still need to try,' persisted Chucker. 'We must never give up
hope, never, we were meant to succeed; we were meant to live
amongst the flowers and trees and little bumble bees!'
'Chocolate ... grrr ... on the paper frogs don't cry!'
‘Okay! That's enough!' shouted Dong, bringing Scank and
Chucker's weird conversation to a necessary halt. 'That's enough
craziness for today; let's just get on with what we do best, which as
we all know is mostly nothing. But before we do, eggs sitting on a
wing talking what apples fly around the dog basket in which heaven
flowers and trees and little bumble bees! You said black?'
Inserting Robottom into an interface Cryst ignored the others and
searched for any additional clues Cube may have to offer.
Meanwhile, Scank and Dong had folded their arms and assumed a
concerned stance beneath the optical screen, now and again
pretending to search through the layers of oncoming destruction
floating outside in space.

212

‘Arrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrgh!' screamed Dong, jumping away from the
west side of the screen. He was certain he had seen something
moving from within the gathering haze, it had been ghastly
whatever it was.
'Woof ... what is it?' demanded Scank, worried by the squidge's
overdone reaction.
'Oh nothing,' Dong replied, shaking his head, trying to tell himself
he'd been imagining things.
'Arrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrgh!' repeated Scank, before leaping up to the
central part of the domed screen. He too had just caught a glimpse
of something horrific. 'There is definitely something out there!'
Cryst ejaculated what information Robottom had collected back
inside the interface and came sprinting over to investigate the
situation further. 'Arrrgh!' she screamed, not as scared as Scank. 'It's
an entity, I think? I can't be sure!'
Making all three of them jump, especially Scank who found himself
dangling beneath the middle of a large eyeball belonging to a
grotesque face which briefly appeared and disappeared upon the
optical screen, they all began to scream. 'Arrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrgh!'
'Now I'm sure! No I'm sure!' concluded Cryst as Robottom quickly
dispersed of a long and underpant-staining odour.
Cube soon began shaking under the pressures the entity was
starting to emit as it held her firmly against its rippled skin which I
think, especially for the younger readers, is best described as simply
that.
'Cube, evasive action!' bellowed Dong, switching to voice
activation, seeing the entity placing its grotesque tongue against
her trembling surface - mechanical rape not being all that
uncommon to these creatures of evil!
Shooting upwards like a jack in the box, Cube tilted, and fired. Ten
powerfully packed laser cubes sparkled through space without even
affecting the only slightly startled space monster.
'Nothing happened!' stated Chucker, taken aback with growing
fear, his middle turning brown.
'Where's that thing come from?'

213

'It must have somehow survived the suction of the Ark,' explained
Cryst. 'The Ark should have vacuumed up all the entities and
returned them to their own black hole once their task of destruction
had been completed ...'
'Well, this one's still free!' Dong pointed out, falling to the floor with
a jerk, clutching his rumbling stomachs...
After picking up a few grass stains on her white body, the giant
squidge sat in a cross-legged position and announced her timely
appearance. 'High, guys! I'm at your disposal once again. Ready
to do galactic heroic things.'
The heroine quickly stood, taking up a similar stance to that of an
ancient Greek statue. Placing her muscled legs firmly apart, her
finely chiselled body flexed and popped its many tightened lumps
and bumps with all the prowess and noise of a popcorn maker. Her
melon sized pectorals started bouncing up and down in joyous
rhythm as she started to dance in a trance.
'This is actually a good sign,' said Cryst, totally ignoring the grinning
white form jiggling beside her. 'If the entity is here then maybe the
Ark is still in close proximity, and with the Ark's help we might be able
to suck that monster back to where it came from. Being a blackbelted messiah I have the ability to do so.'
'Found it!' cheered Chucker, having remained working at his post.
'I have located some frequency distortioning across this system's
expansion fields. It must surely belong to the Ark.'
'Can you detect its exact position?' enquired Cryst, hopeful.
'I think so?'
Reappearing upon the east side of the domed optical screen the
entity lashed out in an attempt to disable its new cubic play thing.
Cube, adrenaline still flowing through her circuits, managed to
swerve to avoid it. For the annoyed entity it was like trying to swat
an over-active fly in mid flight, even so, it tried again and again but
without much success.
'We can't afford for it to hit us,' remarked Cryst, stating the obvious,
'it could destroy us instantly. We need a cunning diversion to give us
the time we need.'

214

He was finding his hike around the inner most part of the galaxy a
little boring, so when the shock waves and vibrations passed him by,
he was more than eager to go and investigate. The Uranus-eater
did not, to the luck of Cube's crew, know what he would be letting
himself in for.
Gliding through the particle clouds and churned up layers of
fragments, the shark-like form, blindly, searched onwards until finally
stumbling into the path of a surprised entity, who appeared to be
trying to squat a small moving sugar cube.
Had he been any other Uranus-eater, the impatient entity would
not have stood a chance but – unfortunately - although fortunately
for Cube - this particular Uranus-eater was a member of the U.N
(United Nebulae); this meant he was prepared to take action and
defend himself only if it proved absolutely necessary. The entity
would therefore have to
be very, very careful how it handled this untimely confrontation; it
wouldn't want the Uranus-eater to put an end to all the fun it was
having trying to rape and destroy the cubic play thing.
Cube and her shaken crew watched the cautious entity struck the
Uranus-eater like a coiled snake (its unleashed power worse than
any venom).
In response to the entity's act of sheer violent provocation the
Uranus-eater used all his own formidable powers and stayed
completely, completely still.
The entity, who was now starting to feel pretty frightened by his
foe's actions, decided to lash out once again even if it meant taking
the consequences. This time around it managed to cut a few of the
Uranus-eater's limbs off, gallons of his blood bubbling out into space.
The Uranus-eater, who on the other hand was now extremely
angry, rolled over and showed the entity his heavily armoured belly.
He had experience of many former conflicts and so knew exactly
what he was doing, or so he thought.
In blind panic the entity burst through the revealed stomach and
blasted its dumb owner into millions of tiny pieces, joining the rest of
the debris floating in a complex combination of swirls around them.
The largest piece, which was what was left of the Uranus-eater's

215

head, flew at high speeds towards Cube and splattered, like a
dollop of bird's muck, against the display on the optical screen.
'Incredible?' marvelled Scank, feeling a political lesson coming on.
'It was a close fight ... grrr ... but it's a pity the Uranus'eater didn't
actually bother using his formidable powers how they should have
been used. If he had he might of finished the conflict sooner and
with a more satisfactory outcome. Oh well, never mind, eh, such is
the stupidity of these mad universes of ours. Remind us not to pay
the next annual subscription fee for the U.N - if his actions were
anything to go by it seems to be a waste of our money!'
'The entity is turning back towards us!' laughed Dong, displaying
her shiny teeth in a cheesy grin whilst flexing a stimulated muscle in
and out.
BEEP!
'I've pinpointed the Ark,' confirmed Chucker, in response to the
beep.
'Great! Where is it?' asked Cryst, hastily.
'Exactly ten thousand feet below our current position.'
Dong saw the entity was hurrying towards them at an increasing
speed. She quickly ran to lie beside a keyboard with one hand
placed upon the keys whilst the other propped the side of her
leaning head. 'CUBE, DROP NINE THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND
NINETY-NINE FEET. AND THIS TIME, NOT LITERALLY!' Feeling her
stomachs reaching her head, she knew Cube had obliged her
request. 'What should we do now, Cryst?'
'I must go out in a pod and lure the entity back inside the Ark.'
There was no time like the present so, with Robottom facing the
correct way, the messiah made a run for the pod cubicle. The Three
Wise Aliens watched her weird figure dash inside a ladder chute, the
figure then appeared to tilt unexpectedly as the sudden pressures
pulled her down. ‘Not again!' the messiah echoed, upon hitting the
hard floor at the bottom.
'We really ... woof ... should have said something,' laughed Scank,
'for Robottom's sake at least. ‘She may be able to pick up and use
objects but she just can’t seem to get the hang of those ladder
chutes. I don’t know what’s going to happen if she falls down one

216

of the ladder chutes which lead down several sections, she, and
Robottom, will be shattered to bits. I'm telling you, we should have
warned her.' Looking at his friends and seeing their cheery
expressions he added, 'No ... grrr ... maybe not!'
Positioning herself inside a burping pod, unaware of the laughter
she'd caused, Cryst attempted to communicate with the three in
the observation post. 'When I leave, you must move Cube away to
a safer location. I'll stay here and take care of matters.'
'Very well,' confirmed Scank, 'we ... woof ... shall leave everything
down to you.' Bursting northwards Cube left her baby pod hovering
directly above the Ark, the entity having mysteriously disappeared.
'Initiate arms!' requested Cryst, moving the communication pen
away from her mouth and up to a set of watery holes. As instructed
the pod grew (with the use of organic technology) long arms from
the middle of each of its sides. 'Place pincers on the Ark lid and be
ready to move it away as fast as you can, but only upon my
command.' Moving the optical head-screen around she looked for
a sign of the entity in the surrounding haze with the help of a number
of visual filter lenses. 'Pod? Fire, from above, laser squares, releasing
ten.'
With the laser squares acting like pieces of bread being dropped
into a murky lake, this time, instead of a few fish being disturbed, the
entity was.
Taking the bait, the colourful entity's changing form dived towards
the pod, the Ark purposely held beneath it away from view.
'Hold position and wait command!' Cryst repeated, reaffirming her
orders to the pod, sweat starting to glisten down her jagged sides
and onto Robottom's quivering bulge. She watched as the entity
coiled itself ready to strike. 'Hold ... Hold .............. Now!' she
commanded as the evil wrath shot downwards, and then forwards,
until every direction had been shot dead and it was able to turn its
attention on destroying the pod.
Moving to the side, revealing the opened Ark, the pod's protruding
arms kept hold of the heavy golden lid. Cryst quickly used her
sucking power and combined it with the Ark's own unleashed
suction. The startled entity disappeared within the awaiting tardis-

217

like darkness of the solid gold box. Making sure the lid was sealed
tightly into place, Cryst signalled for Cube to return.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
'That proved no problem,' puffed Cryst, safely back onboard inside
one of Cube's relaxation cubicles.
Everyone had left the stresses of the observation section and took
this decisive time to rest and contemplate their adventures.
'You see what greed can do to you!'
'No, what?' said Chucker, stroking a passing wisp of smoke.
'The bosseye and their need for more power, don't you see what
has happened to them? The Ark has wiped out about ninety-nine
percent of the bosseye race from existence. This galaxy is finally free
of their tyranny. What is left of their power will fall when aliens hear
of this drastic and most sudden change in events. The balance of
power has been tilted.'
Dong, Chucker, and Scank, sat, lay, stood, whatever felt
comfortable, on the floor of the relaxation cubicle pondering what
the messiah was trying to say.
'Cryst ... snfff ... what happens to the Ark now?' Scank wondered,
curling his shaggy ear hair with one of his twirling fingers.
'I think it best for me to take it back to God, before any evil should
find it.'
'Does this mean ...'
'Yes, I'm afraid so. I will be leaving you to your own adventures
once again.'
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
It was several hours before the four figures emerged from the
fathomless depths of the relaxation section. Focusing their thoughts
on Cryst, each of The Three Wise, and secretly happy, Aliens said
their goodbyes to the sniffling crystal being.
Using areas of Scank's shaggy hair Dong wiped his lips free of the
remains which their last supper together had just left. 'We'll only

218

come down ... snfff ... as far as the entrance to the pod cubicle to
see you off,' smiled Scank, not knowing the squidge had just used
him as a napkin.
'Good! I mean ... very well,' sighed Cryst, with a strange sucking
sound coming from in-between her lips.
Reaching the cubicle doors shortly afterwards, the group were
feeling quite emotional; the curry they'd just eaten was probably
responsible for this feeling.
'We'll wait for Robottom out here,' added Dong, dying to see,
smell, and hear those likeable legs once again without an annoying
host interfering. On mentioning his name Robottom appeared to
shuffle around as if he was being drowned under water, but Cryst
soon calmed him down, like a jockey whipping a horse. 'So then, it is
goodbye from here on,' repeated the squidge, differences set
aside.
'Yes, farewell,' contributed the other wise two, patting the
messiah's crystal body softly upon the back.
Turning tearfully away, the docking cubicle doors burped open,
allowing Cryst entry. Stepping through, leaving the others waiting
outside, she waited for the door to seal shut.
Once out of sight, the jagged host quickly broke free from
Robottom's waist and began peeling parts of the crystal shell which
covered her, away. It was as if she were treating herself as a hard
boiled egg readying itself to be pickled. 'Thank bleedin' goodness
tha’be all over with. I were gettin' fed up with tha'bloody righteous
accent.'
It wouldn't be long now before PugJaw would complete his
mission. With his new found abilities, turning to Robottom, he froze
the legs to the floor in a spell of sheer terror and carried on with the
rest of his plans.
After escaping from the con-cubicle, sticking to his orders, the
Devil’s spy had eventually come to wait in the docking section until
the moment Cryst returned from her battle with the entity, dragging
the Ark.
The messiah had been caught totally off guard. Helped with
powers from the Devil, Hannibal "The Animal" PugJaw was able to rip

219

the messiah's very soul out from her crystal shell and, following a
great suck, banished her into the Ark, and subsequently the Edge;
the Devil hadn't forgot their last meeting and had a few things to
get off his chest.
If it wasn't for PugJaw's growing hatred for The Three Wise Aliens he
would have taken the Ark and escaped long ago. But now that his
revenge had been set (literally in the form of a bomb) he could feel
rest assured that this was indeed a good time to leave.
Turning to gloat at Robottom's knee knocking figure, the evil spy
leapt onto the Ark as if it were a flying carpet and after a
thunderous clash ... THUNDEROUS CLASH! ... he disappeared through
the opening docking doors and floated out to space.
Freed from his spell Robottom used the ability of his thrusters to stop
himself being sucked away.
Having heard the recognisable sounds of the docking doors
belching shut, the anxious crew of three came running in to greet
their old friend.
'You survived the separation then,' observed Dong, pinching his
nostrils shut.
With flashing lights and a grimaced bulge Robottom blasted
everything he'd just witnessed at each of his companions, using both
ends...
'PugJaw's ... bleep ... working for the Devil now,' he continued to
bleep, his volume so high it was deafening. 'He's taking the Ark to
the nearest black hole. We have to stop him!'
Without so much as another word spoken by any of them, they
raced off to the observation post, cutting what should have been
Robottom's own one minute celebration party about one minute
short.
'CUBE,' Scank rapidly typed, 'NAVIGATE TO THE NEAREST BLACK
HOLE.' He paused whilst Dong searched through a Compu-map for
the nearest. Upon finding one he quickly held the 'map up for the
leetlesheet to see. 'IN THE BUNYAG SYSTEM, SITUATED NORTH-WEST.
ESTABLISH AN ACCELERATION FUNNEL AND MAINTAIN GRAVPULL
10000000000.' Scank began to grind his teeth. 'We should ... grrr ...

220

hopefully be able to out run that little bastuard even with the Devil
helping him.'
Seating themselves within the circle of colourful gripseats the four
adventurers waited for the usual thrust forward.
This time instead of the normal vortex of blurred atoms the
acceleration funnel naturally created, Cube shot forwards in a
bright flash and deadly silence instantly followed...
PugJaw stayed glued to the top of the Ark whilst stars streamed past
his eyes. He knew his revenge had been fulfilled by the flare of light
which, from behind him in the distance, had sent with it the tale
telling vibrations of the explosion he'd placed in the gravitational
core. The bomb had been set to blow-up from the moment an
acceleration funnel was initiated.
Gazing into the approaching outer rim of the black hole he felt his
new master would be pleased by all of his recent success. He even
believed that he would be awarded another capital letter to his
name; it would be a great honour to be called PuGJaw so early on
in his early career of evilness.
'I don't believe it!' he whined, catching a glimpse of a spacecraft
speeding towards him from the black hole.
Upon closer inspection the spacecraft was seen to be as round
and nearly as large as a small moon and it was being accompanied
by two smaller globes.
PugJaw quickly stood up, the Ark momentarily rocking from side to
side.
The three globes continued their confident approach. It wasn't
long before they surrounded his out-numbered form.
'Evers ... groof ... heard of reincarniti ... reincarnyu ... reincarnation!'
stated ScAnk, a little inebriated. 'No? Well neither haves we ...
hiccup ... We is actually froms the future, and with ways even ours
good friend the author doesn't understands, we is here to ... hiccup
... to ... wogrr ... to stop you! Please meets, for your current
interpretation, Cube - Cube’s outer dimensional spherical
counterpart- and not forgetting her pods. She and we are abouts to
become your worst nightmare ... hiccup!’

221

Breaking away from their mother's smooth round belly the two
smaller globes swarmed around the Ark and its unbalanced rider.
PugJaw had no choice left but to fall off as if he’d been hit by a
freak wave. Transforming himself into the shape of a triangular
fighter craft he rocketed away from the golden box. From out of
two small flashing holes positioned below each of his wings he
began firing serpents of glowing matter at his new enemies' every
move. He mustn’t fail his mission now that he was so close to
completing it.
Seeing the Ark drifting away, the large spherical Cube, under the
direct command of RoBottom’s inserted bulge, snatched her
chance. Throwing out a grappling light from her side, she attached
a grip ray and reeled it safely inside an opening which briefly
appeared and disappeared. With her main task successfully
completed she focused her attention on destroying Hannibal "The
Animal".
PugJaw began to scream; from inside each of his pointed wings
something was attempting to break through. After a sheer amount
of distress had been endured, the violent throbbing suddenly
stopped as something burst through his metal skin in the shape of
two gigantic laser machine-guns. Before he knew what was
happening the guns' circular shape began to rotate, releasing
infinite pulses of laser bullets into the surrounding space. In the
continuous bombardment the bullets circled in search of their
targets.
'I've beens ... snfgrr ... hitted!' screamed ScAnk his pod spinning like
a basketball on Magic Johnson's fingertip.
'So has I!' gulped DoNg, as sparks fell from his/her head-screen
onto his/her shattered communication pen.
PugJaw watched with interest as the crippled spherical pods hung
motionless in space like a pair of sagging gonads. 'Now yee all shall
die!' he screamed insanely, taking on the accent of a sea-faring
pirate about to board a ship full of treasure. Realigning the barrels
of his new invincible gun, he set about their destruction.
'We is nots doing too well ... groof ... is we?' laughed ScAnk.

222

In answer to the leetlesheet's question an acceleration funnel
opened up and spat out several crafts, one of them, a small round
pod, raced over to help.
‘ChUscker' sighed DoNg, relieved by his timely appearance. 'You
gots to them in time.'
'Of course I dids, but let's not worries about that now, we has to
gets you boths to safety. Pod! Initiate armsies!' His pod responded
by moving its arms downwards in an attempt to grab each of the
powerless gonadic pods. 'Damn!’ ChUcker, cursed, seeing the
closing pincers sliding away from the pod's rounded surface. Using
the only option now open to him, he drew back the wiry muscular
arms. 'Guys, hold on to your gripseats!' Shooting abruptly forwards,
the arms successfully punched the pods one after the other into an
opened section within their larger mother-ship. 'Goooooooal!' the
vom screeched. Happy with his new found sport he followed his
friends inside Cube.
'Sheet and dooglash!' swore PugJaw, who had come to a
thoughtful standstill upon seeing the reinforcements arrive, his luck
having slid into a pair of trainers and run out on him.
'And ... grrr ... you are in it!' added a familiar voice from within the
spat out Cube as she released no fewer than fifty laser squares from
one her glowing sides.
On target, the squares lashed around PugJaw's body to explode
like boxes filled with party-poppers and confetti.
From the observation post, on both Cubes, everyone watched in
disbelief as his metallic form began to fade. Appearing in his place
hovered a blood-stained craft, its cylindrical structure curving
upwards into the shape of two large Viking horns - in fact the whole
thing wasn't that dissimilar to a Viking helmet. 'You have pulled me,
ussss right over the Edge with all your anticssss. I, we have had jusssst
about enough of your perssssisssstant ... your consssstant ... your
meddling!’
Cube, having survived the privilege of not being blown to bits
thanks to her round counterpart, thought for a brief second before
firing at exactly the same time as the spherical Cube. This resulted in
a mixture of laser squares and laser cubes plunging into the left side

223

of their new enemy whilst a reflection of laser circles and laser
spheres plunged into the right side. The Devilish object began to
shake and, with a powerful battle cry, tore itself free from their
consistent line of fire.
'The spherical pods!' remarked Chucker, onboard Cube. 'They're
re-attempting to attack.' Bubbling up from the top of the big sphere
three pods burst free into space. In response the Devil fired a single
blast of solid light at their every move and counter move until each
one of them had been hit...
'Whoops!' chuckled ScAnk, 'I is ... woogrrr ... disabled again!'
'So is I!' responded DoNg.
'And ... eeerrgh ayargh ... me too!' puked ChUcker.
Coming to their rescue, ejecting themselves from one of Cube's
flat sides, three of the square pods aimed and fired three tow-lines
from their base.
'Why didn't I thinks of that?' mumbled ChUcker, looking drunkenly
over the blurred controls of his pod for the reason why.
With all six pods successfully connecting to one another via the
three tightening tow-lines, each of them, two at a time (a square
pod leading a round pod) flew to a safe distance where they would
be able to repair the damage.
Watching his colourful ammunition missing their targets
completely, the Devil turned away from the vanishing pods and
fired at the remaining mother Cubes. This time the ammunition hit in
a well aimed set of explosions.
'Blocking has been annihilated!' shouted Robottom, from Cube's
controls. 'The next blast will destroy us, his power is too strong!'
Hearing her counterpart’s transmission, the spherical Cube came
to the rescue with yet another plan in mind. Orbiting the horned
craft she began dispersing mega-tonnes of stored puke from her
disposal section.
Sliding through space, like a scary monster from Scooby Doo, the
vomit settled upon the Devil's spaceship and drip by drip it poured
from the tips of its horns to cover every part, top and bottom. Two
large carrots settled side by side to resemble orange eyes.
'He can't see us!' communicated both Cubes.

224

'Blast him!’ Dong’s voice echoed. ‘It's hammer time!'
Having returned to the battle, all six pods fired directional laser
squares and laser spheres. The noise that ensued sounded like a
million children each banging a pair of symbols to annoy their music
teacher. The colourful projection of lasers lit the darkness of the
surrounding space like a ferris wheel, the Devil acting as an
involuntary hub. Round and round and round and round and round
and round it went; faster and faster and faster and faster and faster
it span.
In mass confusion the Devil moved back and forth, struggling to
see, the carrots still stuck firmly in place. Both mother Cubes
compensated his every move and fired him back into the mini pods'
continuous deadly line of fire, keeping the ferris wheel effect going.
With all pods almost at breaking point, unable to sustain their
actions, in a screeching cry of surrender and pain, the Devil began
to fade back to the Edge. The Cubes tilted at each other as if in
acknowledgement at what was happening and unleashed the last
of their secret weapons to finish him.
Both Cubes juddered. Waited and waited … and waited and
waited … Then suddenly, from each of them, a gigantic kitchen
sink blasted out from their kitchen sections into what was remaining
of the faded Devil’s image.
Having now thrown everything they had at him, including the
kitchen sink, the Devil vanished into the Edge ... a small dust mite
was already writing the history books for its clan as the last sounds
from the Devil screams faded away.
ANALYTICAL PAUSE ...
Both confused but triumphant Cubes hung together in the
tranquillity of outer space; one still drunk and the other still sober. In
the heavenly setting of their background the black hole of the
Bunyag System was doing its renowned Catherine wheel impression
as it span round and round in a display of burning colours which
even the temporary ferris wheel effect, created by the pod lasers,
couldn’t have matched.

225

'What shalls we do ... hiccup ... with the Ark?' asked the spherical
Cube's crew. 'What if we takes it backs into the black holey with us?'
'Grrrr … but you wouldn't be able to guide it through the Edge!'
replied a sober Scank. 'You told us ... woof ... yourself that you'll be
going back through the time distortions way before reaching the
Edge. We can't take anymore risks! You'll have to transfer it back
over to us and we'll deal with it.'
From inside the observation post onboard the time-travelling
spherical Cube, sudden indications were demanding their
immediate return to the future … SUDDEN INDICATIONS! SUDDEN
INDICATIONS! With no other choice left open to her, Cube spat out
the Ark and started reversing into the black hole.
One final communication managed to reach the sober crew
which sounded something like, 'We will try to remember whats you
dids said about asking us to go back and saves Chucker from being
deaded…'
'You’d better!' Chucker screeched, soberly, worried by the
spherical crew’s obvious drunken approach towards his life.
Ignoring her crew’s moans, Cube pulled the floating Ark inside the
opened docking section and moved away from the black hole at
gravpull 007.
ANALYTICAL CLOSING SUMMARY ...
So it was that the square Cube and her uniquely talented crew had
been left alone to ponder the many problems surrounding the return
of the Ark.
'Bleep … Hang on a second!' Robottom shouts over the rising tide
of music which is now starting to play; signifying the end of this
adventure. 'Why didn't we just ask ... bleep ... our future selves what
they had previously done with the Ark?! And why didn't they ...
bleep ... bloody tell us?!'
Cube knew the answers would be waiting for them in the future
but navigating there might prove a problem; especially when
you've got a pregnant squidge onboard!

226

... ANALYSIS UP TO DATE

227

Further Reading
If you liked this book and would like to read more Adventures of
Cube please email: TheAdventuresOfCube@googlemail.com
Also, please don’t forget to visit the CLIC Sargent website at:
www.clicsargent.org.uk

228

