The Realm of Magical Kingdoms
MAGICAL STORY
Book I the Scepter
Written by Christopher Lee Parrish

1

Copyright Notice
Copyright 2005, Magic Film Productions Inc. All rights
reserved. This story and its ideas with accompanying CD-Rom
are copyrighted. No one may give or sell copies of this
Book or accompanying CD-Rom or other works of Magic Film
Productions Inc., to any person or institution, except as
provided for by written agreement with the copyright
holder. Disassembly, reverse compilation and any other form
of reverse engineering of the program CD-Rom are
unauthorized. No one may copy, photocopy, reproduce,
translate this story, or reduce it to machine readable
form, in whole or in part, without prior written consent of
the copyright holder. Any person/persons reproducing any
portion of this story or the CD-Rom, in any media, for any
reason, shall be guilty of copyright violation and criminal
liability as provided by law, and shall be subject to civil
liability at the discretion of the copyright holder.

Story by Christopher Lee Parrish
Written

1/14/2005

Completed 1/07/2007
Published 2/19/2008
Website and Contact info
http://www.Magicfilmproductions.com
honorbyfaith@gmail.com

2

3

Contents
_____________________________
Introduction

05

Chapter 1

Early Morning Day 1

07

Chapter 2

The White Knight

12

Chapter 3

Town of Torrance

24

Chapter 4

The King and His Court

41

Chapter 5

Market outside of Northern Pathonas

51

Chapter 6

The Great Feast

68

Chapter 7

In the Morning

75

Chapter 8

Orcs move closer to the Castle Keep

81

Chapter 9

Arrival at Castle Keep of Psylion

86

Chapter 10

Siege of Castle Keep of Psylion

94

Chapter 11

Princess Accepts Her Journey

110

Chapter 12

Two Join the Quest

127

Chapter 13

Mountains of Dead Valley

133

Chapter 14

The Back Way in

141

Chapter 15

The Escape

165

Chapter 16

Valley of the Halflings

184

Chapter 17

City Of Ladamer

196

Chapter 18

Saving the Realm

212

Chapter 19

The Last Moment

225

Meet the Characters

4

250

INTRODUCTION
_____________________________________________

The Knight must restore his honor; a Princess must save her
Kingdom. A powerful weapon called the Scepter has been
broken and the pieces scattered across the lands. The Evil
Dark Sorcerer wants it for himself and will stop at nothing
to get it. The Knight must protect the Princess while she
searches for the Scepter. Then she must unite the pieces
together to form the mighty weapon to save her Kingdom.
Will the Evil Dark Sorcerer and his Black Knight, who
commands the armies of Orcs, Goblins, and Dragons prevail
and conquer all that is good. Or with the help of a Dwarf,
a Thief a Wizard and the Armies of Pathano’s can the
Princess and the White Knight restore the Scepter and save
the Kingdoms of Kantara?
Maybe.... Just Maybe read on and found out if you dare.

5

Early Morning Day 1
Evil lurks out of the Shadows

6

Chapter 1

The third moon peeked thru the clouds and over the
horizon of The Planet Andaar. The last of its silver light
reflecting in the Sea of Quadroon, calm as the night’s
darkness fell.

There the forest on the edge of the sea is

silent, not even the wind rustles its trees. Suddenly, a
force creeps through the branches, reaching the edge of the
sea and stopping. Out of the nothing, an apparition, a
cloaked figure on a Dragon appears. A bright light engulfs
the sky as the Dragon is snorting fire, which falls to the
sea, extinguishing into the dark blue crystal water. The
Dragon descends down out of the clouds.
As the rider dismounts he removes his hood and reveals a
dark face for he is a Sorcerer.
shiny it is almost glowing.

His skin is gray, but so

The figure’s eyes are black,

no life behind them at all.

7

A bald scalp with a few scattered hairs and a pointed nose
with a cruel mouth complete his face. The figure’s robe is
as long and as wide as the sides of his body, resembling
those of a bat.

An evil grin slides across His soul-less

face. “It’s time,” the creature breathes as another figure
in Dark Iron Armor appears from the shadows to his side.
“Yes, it has come, My Lord. This Voice is that of The Black
Knight, Commander of The Orc and Goblin Legions that
control the Dark Realm. “The night is upon us, and we must
prepare for Battle,” the raspy voice of the Evil Sorcerer
snarls in response. “Yes, And my Legions await your command
my Lord,” Said the Black Knight. The Black Knight has never
been defeated in Battle. With the Black Knight leading the
dark armies every campaign or war that was wagered by the
Evil Sorcerer has come out with a Victory for the Dark
Realm. Thus making The Black Knight the most feared in the
lands.
The Sorcerer raises his hands into the air then in a
figure eight says:

Space-Devine-Earth-be-mine-split-the-

clouds-so-I-can-see-mine. A Shriek of Lightning cuts into
the air.

8

With a Loud pounding of thunder the wind starts to
pick up. The clouds overhead then split without haste as
they look up.

Thru the clouds you can see the gray sky and

the three moons coming closer together. “In seven days the
three moons will align and the Protection of the Scepter by
the Elders will be stripped away for one hour. “The King
will send the Mighty Great White Knights to protect it,”
says the Black Knight. “My dragons along with your Orc and
Goblin Armies the Kantara realm will crumble without the
protection of the Scepter,” replies the Sorcerer. “The time
has come to gather the Armies to capture the Scepter my
lord?” questions the Black Knight. “Yes,” Says the evil
sorcerer. “It will be our greatest hour.” The Scepter has
been in the Control of the Kantara Realm way too long,” Now
it shall be mine.” The evil sorcerer shouts in a loud
cheer. “My power will be unstoppable with the Scepter,” The
evil sorcerer replies. “Indeed,” spoken by the black knight
as he crosses his arms and grins.
Then the Sorcerer scales his way up the large dragon
and leaps onto its back. He pulls back the reins and shouts
“To the air Dragon.”

9

The dragon stands up on all fours leaps into the air
and its massive wings spread apart like a giant kite as it
takes flight. The Dragons wings start to move up and down
like a swimmer in the ocean causing the dragon to lift.
Then two ascend up thru the air and soon disappear into the
clouds. Out of the forest a Black War Horse appears. The
horse was sixteen hands Tall. The horse was Black as silk
with full battle armor from top to bottom. The Horse snorts
a gust of air past the side of the Black Knights face.
“Yes, Blanion we must go.” Then the Black Knight pats his
horse puts on his helm and mounts the horse. He pulls the
reins and the horse gallops into the forest leaving two
burnt marks in the grass where they were standing.

10

Afternoon Day 1
The White Knight

11

Chapter 2

Sunlight streams through the branches as the leaves
fall along side the long and winding dirt road. On one side
a tall Evergreen forest marks the edge of the road for
hundreds of miles.

And on the side are many small trees

and bushes with a few grandfather red oaks here and there.
In the transition of time, fall shows life in a very quite
land. The Wind rushes through the trees moving some of the
branches.
The red, orange and yellow leaves take a little girl’s
breath away as she skips through the forest gathering
berries.

She has sun-kissed golden blonde hair and pretty

ocean-like blue eyes. Her eyes widen as she catches a
glimpse of a beautiful butterfly landing on a berry bush in
front of her.

12

She gives awe to nature’s creation. Its wings come to a
stop and it is motionless for a moment, as to take notice
to the little human girl. As the little girl reaches out to
touch the butterfly it flies away. A smile comes across her
face as she begins to hum and starts to skip again. She is
wearing a worn and tattered old pale blue dress, which
hangs a little on her shoulder, obviously a hand-me-down.
She hums to herself and slowly picks blackberries and
raspberries, dreaming of a world where berries were not
rare, but grew on every street corner for her to eat her
fill of.
The little girl is looking up at the sun when suddenly
a single arrow goes whooshing by above her head landing
into a tree at the other end of the trail. Then two horses
at a fast pace come galloping up the trail. Traveling very
fast, two men one in plate mail armor a knight and the
other in noble clothes his squire, on horseback come into
view. The little girl covers her ears from the loud noise
going by; scaring her she hides behind berry bush. The two
riders are barreling up the path, hooting and hollering as
they are going up the trail towards the arrow.

13

The Squire yells out a small wine… “Aha ayah I will
get there first, Sir Jonathan!”

As he says this, the

Squire pulls up farther away from the Knight, getting
closer to their arrow stuck in the tree. Passing the little
girl in berry bush the squire did not see her.
The Knight passed her but did not give much notice to
her. As they gallop up the path the Squire reaches the tree
where the arrow rested and slows down to a sudden stop.
This was a crossroad sign with the arrow extruding out of
it. The main trail lead straight ahead or a smaller path
went to the left. The Squire then reaches down and grabs
the arrow removes it from the tree and packs it into his
quiver. Alarmed as he stopped Sir John notices a band of
Orcs on the left cutting thru the path heading towards the
section of trees where the little girl was. “Orcs Felix
Orc.” The Knight Roars aloud shouting the Squires name
aloud. Come Squire we must save the girl. As the Knight
kicks his horse and goes barreling down the path in the
direction of the Orcs, passing the Squire.
leave them alone?” the Squire pleads.

14

“Can’t we just

“Nonsense! Exclaims the Knight. Where is shivery?
Besides I need to have my fill of honor for the day!

We

must save that little girl!” the Knight Bellows throwing
his head back with laughter and puts down his face shield
with his hand and charges off. “Killing four Orcs isn’t
going to do it for you, and what little girl are you
talking about?” the Squire mutters under his breathe and
rakes in the reins. His horse begins to gallop down the
path in pursuit of the Knight.
The Squire is closing up behind the Knight; Alarmed
with anger the Orcs who couldn’t help but notice the racket
that the two men were making and started charging towards
the medieval duel. The Knight and Squire stop before a
thicket of bushes just before the Orcs and dismount swords
in hands. The little girl moves up the trail a little to
see what was going on. She quickly hides behind the bushes.
She watches the group through the branches, clutching her
basket she pokes a stick out of the bushes she picked up to
see if the ghost is clear. She could take on those big old
Orcs, as she swirls the stick in the air.

15

She looks out at the two heroes’ that have come on
horseback. Curiosity is in her eyes; she has never seen men
in armor before. There are four Orcs, all dressed in
military uniform one with a great battle axe and the others
with clubs.

The Knight and Squire walk to their foes as

the Orcs stood still holding their ground waiting to attack
the heroes. The Knight lets out a roar of a half laugh and
half yell, “En guard!” Then he stomps his foot and the Orcs
all jump except the largest one. Then the largest Orc
lunges out towards the Knight followed by the rest
screaming and yelling war cries. The Knight smoothly and
arrogantly parry’s the first attack from the large Orc’s
axe and trips him while he pushes him off balance causing
the Orc to stumble and fall into the bushes. Following the
big Orc three other smaller Orcs lunge out after the
Knight.
The Orcs swing there clubs wildly. He quickly parry’s
two, and knocks down and the third with his shoulder. The
big Orc very mad and upset charges back at the knight with
his Axe held way up high.

16

The two clash weapons and the battle begin. “Felix.”
The Knight shouts. “Time to Join I guess,” Exclaims the
squire. Then Felix wastes no time and joins the Knight and
attacks the two Orcs while standing on the third orc. The
two Orcs charge up as the Squire leaps off the Orc strait
in swinging his sword vigorously at booth of them. They
mutter some gross detest words and slobber is drooling down
their mouths as they both block his swings.
The smaller orc of the two, charges at him taking a
swing with his club and misses Felix arm by an inch. Felix
blocks a second attack with a parry and strikes the Orc
with a deadly blow to the mid section. The Orc slowly
topples over. Felix Charges the the Second Orc and the two
fight each other. A few misses and the Orc overextended his
Club and Felix thrusts his sword right into the torso of
the orc. The orc topples to the ground. The other Orc that
was on ground is up now and runs off down the trail ranting
and raving sacredly. Then the Large Orc yelps out a large
war cry then jumps up and down with rage, and with an
attitude as he sees his fallen comrades.

17

Out of the bushes The Large Orc starts to run at
Felix. The Knight steps in front of Felix, and says,
“Better let me handle this one.” Felix steps to the side.
The Knight trails his sword behind him, awaits the attack
from the Large Orc. The Orc pulls his axe back and lunges
forward with all his might and swings the axe. The Knight
slightly turns and leans back as the axe scrapes past his
chest plate of armor barely missing him. The Large Orc
stumbles off balance falling towards the ground; the Knight
turned and lifted his sword up, tilted it sideways bearing
down on the back of the Orcs head and releases it from his
body. “One, Two, and Three… I thought there were four”
Exclaimed the Knight. Out of nowhere an Orc leaps off a
nearby tree stump with his axe overhead growling and
screaming while falling towards the Knight. The Knight
turns his head at hearing the noise while watching an arrow
with white feathers past his nose hitting the Orc in the
forehead.

This stops the Orc in mid air then the Orc

collapses to the ground like a bag of broken chips. The
Squire had made a crisp clean shot and bulls eyed the Orc.

18

The two rants and rave with victory, the Knight’s
hearty laugh bellowing through the woods.

“Now that was

just way too close, says Felix. These guys are getting
smarter as the Knight pulls the arrow out of the dead Orcs
Skull. Remember when those Orcs couldn’t fight and I would
watch you play with them till I got bored then I would jump
in swords a blazing and kill everything that was moving.
These guys really put up a good fight, Right Felix? Felix?
Where did that boy go,” Ponders the Knight. Felix, the
squire, is off in the bushes relieving him self after that
battle.

He is staring at a tree whistling to him self when

something catches his eye.

He looks to the left then does

a double take and rushes to turn around and make him self
decent. The little girl pops up from behind a small bush
giggling and starts to run away. “Wait, little girl, come
back,” Felix Yells. Running towards his horse to follow the
little girl, he is still battling his garments.
The Sir John is already on his horse and leads Felix’s
horse to him.

The Sir John kicks his spurs into the horse

and after the little girl he went.

19

His horse is fast so catching up was no problem. Felix
was still getting himself situated on his horse then he
turned his reins one side to the other and kicked his spurs
into the horse.

Nearly falling off his horse Felix regains

his posture as horse continues at a fast gallop. Sir John
catches up to the little girl and he slows his horse then
reaches down to grab the little girl up in his arms.
“Let me go… Let me Go!” the little girl starts
screaming. “Shhhhh… I’m not going to hurt you, sweetheart,”
Sir John laughs while trying to calm her down. “I’m not
your sweetheart!

Don’t call me sweetheart!” she yells in

an upset voice then kicks and struggles to get loose. Sir
John laughs deeply again. “Ah, a Feisty One.”

Alright, I

won’t call you that anymore if you tell me your real name.”
Felix finally reaches the two; his garments all arranged
and he is out of breath.

“Let me down! I can walk! I’m

fine.” she begins to scream and shrilly and kicks Sir John
in his shin. Sir John groans in pain then let’s loose his
grip and she started to slide down the side of the horse.

20

He tries to catch her but the little girl pushed
free.

Walking towards the sun she was happy and singing to

her self as if nothing ever happened. As she walked she
stretched out her arms to touch the trees that overhung the
path. Pulling some leaves off of overhanging branches she
gently threw them onto the ground. She picked up a yellow
sunflower and looked up towards the sun and she blew all
the pedals off the stem. Slowly as she walked the pedals
fell to the ground all around her. “My name is Dora the
Blue.” She shouted. She shouted out in a joyful way, follow
me and I will take you to my town. Then she started off
down the path. We should follow her to make sure she gets
back safely to wherever she is going. With half a grin
smile there was no hiding it Felix was holding back a
laugh. “What are you laughing at?” Shouts Sir John. As the
Knight says this he looks down and on his tunic he could
see two small handprints from small hands covered in
blueberry stein. “Dora the Blue, Hmm. Ha That’s real funny,
he says.” He Start to laugh. “I don’t know why you had to
go and scare the girl like that, Sir John?” Felix mumbled
out loud in an embarrassed way.

21

“Me?” Confused Sir John snapped back. “I’m not the one who
decided to relieve myself right in front of a girl; no more
than…how old do you think she was? Never mind, follow her.”
Sir John pulls out his water flask then takes a few gulps
to drink. After he had his fill he put some water on a
handkerchief and wiped off his tunic of the blueberries
stein. Putting his flask and handkerchief back in his
saddle he then nudged his horse to keep up with the pace of
the little girl. Felix Chuckled to himself as he trailed
behind.

Sir John the Blue he thinks to himself.

22

Late Afternoon Day 1
The Town of Torrance

23

Chapter 3

Following the little girl about five miles up the road
they soon reached the outskirts of a small town. A sign
reads Welcome to the Town of Torrance.

They enter the

town. The streets are busy, a large marketplace filled with
people, carts full of fruit, vegetables, small trinkets and
furs. There are butchers, Fletcher’s, farmers and
performers. People are walking, talking, selling and buying
goods. The little girl walks by them like there all
friends. They turn and smile and say hi as she passes.
There is a fire eating man with People huddled around him
in a small circle clapping and laughing at the show. On the
right a butcher has a sharp axe in one hand and a freshly
caught chicken in his other and it’s struggling to get
free. The Butcher looks up at Sir John and smiles as he
releases his chop as grins. On the left a man is buying a
new bow for hunting pays his merchant in silver coins.

24

Kids are playing and chasing each other around the market.
Up a little further on the same side of the market an
elderly woman is heading out of the market place with a
small bag of wheat. The little girl heads towards the far
corner of the market place where a small cobblestone road
begins. The little girl sees the two trailing behinds her
and yells back this is road as she points to the right.
“Okay, little one,” Sir John laughs. “Come on,” she motions
to the two. With reins in hand the two follow the little
girl to the edge of the cobblestone road. The old
Cobblestone Road is lined with storefronts and small houses
are mixed in. The little girl stops at the corner then
starts walking down the alley. First the road starts out as
a cobblestone road then narrows down into a smaller dirt
road.
After a few small houses a tavern and a barn they come
to the end of the dirt road. A trail led to a small house
on a hill just above the dirt road. With a white picket
fence surrounding it and a huge Oak tree with golden brown
leaves sit in front of the house.

25

Yellow clay shingles lay on the roof, being held up by
small sandstone bricks built into walls. The Little girl
enters the gate that separated the white picket fence. She
stops, turns around and says. “My name is Dora the Blue and
this is where I live.“ Sir John and Felix stop at the gate
and watch as she walks up to the house. There was an older
woman, standing on the porch broom in hand sweeping the
surface. This was her mother. She stops sweeping for a
moment when her daughter reaches the porch. The little girl
points at the two visitors and the mother looks down the
hill to see who they where. As Sir John and Felix dismount
from their horses the little girl starts to tell her mom of
her adventure. They walk up to the house on the hill. You
can here the little girl telling a story of two men with
swords and war horses in a big battle with the Orcs that
were eight foot tall… and…. She doesn’t finish though. Sir
John interrupts her by saying the Orcs were not really
eight foot tall but only a near six-foot tall. Actually Sir
John was six-foot-eight just a bit taller then the Orcs.
Her mother’s gaze goes from her daughter to Sir John as he
approaches the front porch.

26

The Mother looks at her daughter and smiles asking for
her to go in the house and do her chores. She then looks at
the Sir John and Felix and thanks the heroes for rescuing
her daughter. “Yes, we where Fighting and smacking down
those large beasts…”The first two where hard to kill but by
the fourth it was a cake walk. Felix here took on one or
two at least.” Sir John embellishes. As the Knight stood
there smiling from ear to ear he turned sideways and was
showing off his armor with his right arm resting gently on
his sword. Before Sir John could finish his story the
mother turns around still smiling leans her broom at the
side of the house and walks into the front door closing it
softly behind her. “Wow that was weird," Says Felix. He
looks at Sir John with a puzzled look in his eyes.
Felix smiles and lets out a small Chuckle. “Hmm that
lady was kind of weird…” says Felix. Still talking with no
one listening, finally Sir John stops. “What did you say
Felix?”

Sir John asks. Sir John lost at what Felix just

said was just looking confused. “Huh?” He said. “Oh, yes. I
said “Wow that was weird!" Says Felix again.

27

He was starring Sir John’s pose and clear his throat
to give a hint that Sir John’s audience was no longer
there. “What are you starring at Felix? As Sir John Looks
at Felix with a lost stare. Felix taps his foot on the
ground twitches his right eye and points at the Knight with
his Hand on his sword and standing sideways posing. Then
all of a sudden reality strikes the Knight. “Ya. Ya oh I am
sorry… Drops his pose and his hand off his Sword.”

“He he

he he.” “You know I just love to show off.” He grins from
ear to ear with a Kings smile. Then from out of the woods
behind the house a fairly large man came. Carrying an axe
in one hand and an arm full of wood in the other he walks
up to the two and with a smile he starts to talk. “You will
have to forgive my wife, she’s not all that social able
until she gets to know you. She thinks everyone wants to
steal from us.” My name is Kristian, many thanks for
watching out for my daughter. I was just finishing up
chopping down some trees in the back and needed some wood
for tonight’s fire. He sits down the axe next to the broom
on the porch.

28

Running his hands through his hair to get out the
leaves and dirt from his head he then shakes off the leaves
from his hands and wipes his hands on his pants. He then
puts out his hand for a handshake from the Knight. Sir John
shakes his hand and introduces himself and Felix. Sir John
looks at Felix then raises an eyebrow.
With A smile Kristian says “Would you strangers like a
drink?” Sir John’s eyes lit up like a candle as he turned
his look back to Kristian shaking his hand firm and with a
happy thought. “I sure could use a drink right about now,
he thought to himself.” “We thought you would never ask,”
said Sir John. They tie up the horses around the side of
the house near a watering trough. Kristian gives the horses
some hay and the three are heading up the little dirt road
back to the Tavern just before the cobblestone road
started.
The three stroll there way there in no time. They walk
in the door of the pub and it was scarcely dead. There were
only three other patrons sitting at the bar. They order
their drinks and sit down at a table near the door.

29

The drinks kept on coming one after another and the
talk started to get good. As he gets comfortable in his
chair, Sir Jonathan asks where they are in accordance with
the boundaries. Kristian explains; you are in the town of
Torrance on the outskirts of the Castle of Tureen. We live
on the borders of the town and mostly keep to ourselves.
The Knight smiles at Felix, us too, we like keeping to
ourselves. “Aye.” Kristian laughs. Then he takes a swig of
his ale. You can’t fool me I know your soldiers of some
kind. My daughter would not have been safe if ordinary nontroublemakers tried to save her. If you hadn’t fought those
Orcs who knows what would have happened. She knows that
she’s not supposed to go that far out of the city. She has
this fascination for berries. She is just so lost in her
own world sometimes, picking those berries she just gets so
involved in the forest. She loves the forest you see. Sir
Jonathan looked at Kristian, “You are very perceptive my
friend. He downs almost half of his mug in one gulp. “May I
ask where you acquired such wisdom,” Says Sir John. He
laughs. “It is not wisdom.” Look at both of ya…

30

You have armor bearing a great big White Cross, you
have swords, shields, war-horses, and your companion is
dressed in the same clothes as you uniforms I guess. Every
once in a while my Daughter and her mother will dress alike
but never the same thing. You’re either a Knight or a
Noble.” I bet my money you’re a Knight.” Kristian almost
runs out of breath. “Is that a question or are you
guessing?” the Knight finishes his mug with one gulp and
laughs. “It’s a Question!” Says Kristian as he orders
another round of ale for the group. “Aye, I am not trying
to hide it, Sir Jonathan Mullen of Coralline is my name,”
And I am a White Knight.” The Knight stands to offer a
toast and he notices his mug is Empty.

Before Felix could

get a chance to drink his most recent mug of ale, Sir John
pours a small bit of Felix’s ale into his mug.
Then all three begin to toast. Sir Jonathan lifts his
almost empty mug. Kristian slides his mug in almost tipping
it. Slowly and almost drunk Felix puts his mug in. “Not
sure what where toasting to but here is to just plain
toasting,” Says Felix with a big smile.

31

Sir John says abruptly. We are toasting that we are
White Knights. The mugs hit and ale is spilt. The three
drink until the mugs are empty. Then a waitress places
three more mugs of ale on the table and Sir John quickly
downs his. A bit drunk he starts to talk to the woman
waitress. ”I think we need another round woman,” Burps the
Knight.” “Whoops sorry. HEHEHE” the Knight scrambles for
composure. Felix turns to the woman and says everything is
all right and that they would like another round and pays
in advance for these along with a tip. She quickly trots
off with a smile and an empty tray. Kristian pretty much
holding his owns sits back into his chair and pick at his
teeth with a toothpick. Feet all kicked up onto the table
and just relaxing. “We need to meet up with Lord Rathix
Mullan of Coralline,” Sir John said. “Oh really ya do?

And

who is he,” Says Kristian. Felix and Sir John look at each
other. “That’s John’s father,” Said Felix. “Yes that is my
father,” says Sir John. “Oh I see," Kristian sits back in
his chair and relaxes. “What for?” said Kristian. Then Sir
John tells of the Story of how he has to join his father on
a quest to protect a scepter for a king.

32

This Scepter was used to keep the Kantara Realm from
evil invading it. Amazed at the story and overwhelmed the
man sits there and stars at the two with a blank look.
Three hours later and four gallons of ale gone the two
decide it was time to hit the hay. Sir John and Felix stand
up ready to go. Then all of a sudden Kristian jumps up. He
was moving side to side as to a drunken person would.
Kristian knowing that a Knight never turns down a
challenge due to honor makes a challenge to the Knight Just
for fun. “Well, YA first have to get through me.”

“Every

man who walks into this pub and has a sip of the brew has
to get into the ring,” Kristian smiled at Sir John and
Felix. Felix’s half drunk face got pale and he stammered,
“Well, you, ya, um, ya know that we have a really long trip
ahead of us and we really must be go-g-going,” Kristian cut
him off with a strong poke in the shoulder with his finger,
nearly knocking Felix to the floor. At this time they were
all standing up. “Come on, sissy boy!
Hit me!

It’s all in fun!

Hit me!” Kristian was on his feet, dancing around

Felix, who looked a bit confused.

33

Kristian throws a haymaker at Felix. Felix tries to
block it causing Felix’s hands to jolt back at his face
hitting himself in the nose. Felix then stagers and a bit
dazed he slowly makes his way towards the back of the pub
while trying to get his nose to stop bleeding. Ouch that
hurt. “Let me look at that,” the waitress says. The
waitress has a wet towel and is cleaning the blood off his
face and shirt. Sir John stepped up, swayed for a minute,
for his brew was strong and put much toile on him and Says.
“You should not pick on him he is way to small of a man for
you.” “You should pick on someone bigger then him. “ Then
Kristian pokes Sir John on his Shoulder. “You’re Bigger,”
Said Kristian. . “Indeed I am,” Sir John says with a great
big smile that could only come from a heartfelt foe looking
for attention comes to light. “Oh ya think you know how to
fight do ya? Hey how about you take on a full package?”
Said Kristian. Then Sir John punches several hard blows
into stomach of Kristian and he did not even flinch.
Kristian dropped his hands to his knees and began laughing
at Sir John as he was trying to recover the lack of breath.
Sir John looked at him in puzzlement.

34

“What are you laughing at?” exclaimed Sir John. “Is
that the hardest you can hit?” Then Sir John lunged from
his stooped position straight at Kristian knocking him off
balance onto the floor. Kristian was very surprised and in
much anger jumps back to his feet. Then he starts to grab
Sir John around the waist.

Then Kristian turns around to

gain control of his arms. Breaking

his arms free Kristian

gets out of the hold and pushes Sir John away. Then
Kristian walked right up to Sir John and throws a nicely
right hook to the mid section causing Sir John to double
over. Kristian tries to put his knee into Sir John’s Face.
Sir John catches his foot sending Kristian for a short back
step. Sir John steps up and puts a full bear hug on
Kristian. Looking dazed Kristian tries to break free. Sir
John picks up Kristian over his heads and swirls him about
ten feet into a wall. Kristian as he finishes his flight
crashes loudly into the wall, which did not move nor budge.
Slowly sliding down the wall he reaches the floor and sat
there against the wall dazed. Sir Jonathan begins to
chuckle looks over at Felix and grins.

35

Felix sends an appreciation glance while holding a wet
bloodied towel over his nose. The Knight walks up to the
fallen Kristian. “Think you have had enough for the night?”
Says the Knight. Then Kristian half drunk have dazed smiled
and said. “Enough” Yes indeed “Enough.” The Knight puts out
his hand. Kristian takes the offer and starts to stand up.
As he stood, Kristian gives Sir Jonathan a good pat on the
back. Nicely done, almost had you at first but your
definitely a worthy warrior, “Knight.” See it’s just
harmless fun, No grudges and shakes the Knights hand.
Kristian and Sir John walk over to Felix whose nose has
stopped bleeding.
Later that night, the three stumbled back to Kristin’s
home, where he gave the two men the spare room in their
tiny house. Two beds, two tiny pillows and two thin sheets
and two blankets where the makings of the beds. One small
table with a candle on it complete the room. “This is all
we have.” Says Kristian. “Well its better then sleeping out
side in the weather on the hard cold ground.” Said the
Knight. “Yes Indeed.” Said Felix.

36

“Good Night,” I will wake you in the morning for
breakfast.” Kristian said. Leaving silently from the room
as he shuts the door. He walked to his room to join his
wife and little girl. “Tomorrow we leave for the castle,”
Sir Jonathan tells Felix who was already fast asleep.
In the morning Felix wakes up, notices that the
Knights bed was empty and signs of him sleeping there where
evident. Outside you can see Kristian and the Knight
splitting firewood for the morning breakfast. After making
a big enough pile the two carry the wood into the kitchen
for Kristin’s wife to start cooking. At the smell of food
Felix hops up out his bed and gets dressed to go and eat.
Later that morning after breakfast, the two start walking
to the barn out back where there horses where being kept.
Walking into the barn they see Kristian and notice that he
has already saddled and packed the horses. They mounted the
horses and ride out of the barn. Kristian follows behind
and all three met at the front of the house. On the front
porch the mother and the little girl stand with a small nap
sack in the mother’s hands and a small basket in the little
girls hands.

37

They where just standing there looking so innocent the
two riders had to stop to give awe. The mother walked up to
the Knight and said thanks for protecting her daughter. “I
have a gift for your journey,” she smiles and handed him a
small nap sack. The Knight peeked inside. The inventory
consisted of two loafs of bread some jam two small blocks
of cheese. And a large piece of dry meat wrapped in clothe
finish the inventory. He smiled and deeply gave thanks.
Felix just lost in another world watching the trees and
birds above notices something or someone tugging on his
boot.
There next to him stood the little girl with a gift in
her hands stretched out upwards as to be giving it to him.
Puzzled he sends a look over at the Knight. He shrugs his
shoulders and proceeds to take the small basket. As he
flips over the small towel that wrapped the goods to keep
fresh he notices pretty blues and reds. This basket was
full of berries. They must have been less then hours old
for they smelled so fresh. The young squire takes a hand
full and tosses them in his mouth.

38

The look of enjoyment would be the only thing the
little girl needed for thanks as she skipped off down the
trail with a smile on her face. A stick in one hand and
berries in the other the little girl was sword playing,
skipping and singing you could hear her happy little self a
far off. The squire covers the berries back up with the
towel and packs them into his backpack on his horse. He
hands the basket to the mother and says thank you. The two
start their journey again heading down the trail towards
the sun. As they leave the Knight looks back and watches
Kristian stand next to his wife. With one hand in her hand
he waves, smiles and shouts good luck. The Knight and the
Squire turn around and ride off into the distance towards
the castle.

39

Afternoon Day 2
The King and His Court

40

Chapter 4

Later that evening in another part of that very same
Realm a Great King sits on his throne in the Council Hall
with his Royal Council. The Council sits at two separate
tables in front of the throne. This hall is very large and
has no windows. There are twelve enormous pillars on each
side of hall that run in parallel and they help support the
ceiling. These pillars are light gray marble in color with
a touch of Greek style look in them. A rot iron holder is
set on each side of the pillars and has a lit torch nestled
in its grasp.
“The time is approaching,” the King of Northern
Pathonas proclaimed. “Will we have protectors?” A member of
the Royal Counsel asks the Question.

“The Oracle spoke of

protectors,” the Aged man’s raspy voice questioned. “The
Great White Knights shall come; they will not disappoint
their destiny,” Loudly Spoken by the King. “Do they know
their destiny?” Yet another member of the Council stands
and shouts out.

41

“Yes, they have trained for this for their soul’s
lifetime. It’s in the bloodlines to serve and protect the
Scepter. “Their Quest for eternity is to protect the
Scepter.” “Lord Rathix Mullan the Leader of the White
Knights will arrive with his great armies soon. Together
with the army of Northern Pathonas the White knights will
take heed in protecting the Scepter,” Says the King. “They
must not fail us or there will be Chaos and we will fall
into ruins.” Another Counsel Member exclaims. “Thus
creating, The Realm of Fallen Kingdoms.” Spoken firmly and
just loud enough to echo through the Great hall, as a very
wise educated man spoke. He has pale skin, long white hair
and a small white beard. He is wearing a Long Silver cloak
and a Dark Blue Robe with a silver belt to hold it
together.
As he walks down the great Hall towards the King he
passes the marble pillars one by one. He reaches the tables
set before the King. He then walks between the men and the
tables. With a firm voice, “These Knights are well trained
and are Braving.

42

A well Honored and followed Leader Lord Rathix Mullan
leads them. He has Ambition and Courage. With his Great
White Knights he will lead the two armies against the Evil
Lord. If he fails our destiny is unknown? Spoken as a true
Advisor the King agrees. Then the Head Advisor slowly makes
his way to the Kings side. She looks up with her tears
trailing from her eyes can you help me? The Council members
wrestle in the chairs and speak among themselves in small
conversations. It could almost be heard through the entire
Castle the big question… Will the White Knights Prevail?
In a small courtyard off to the side of the princess’s
sleeping chambers very close to the Council meeting room
three young girls are walking. The Princess in leading and
her two friends trail her walking down the small path
towards the Main Hall. Talking and making jokes the
princess is the center of attention. As they walk through
the courtyard the three stop as they watch little children
playing in the courtyard. A small leather brown ball passes
in front of them.

43

There’s a little girl that is running trying to catch
up with the ball and two boys are following her. She slips
and loses her balance down to one knee and the ball bounces
out of the courtyard past the guards into the Main Hall.
The little girl looks sad then starts to cry. The Princess
notices a slight difference of the little girl’s clothes.
She had a green and white dress on. Her face and hands
where dirty and her dress shows wear from playing. The
little girl turns to notice The Princess of North Pathonas.
The Princess walks up to her and asks why she was crying.
The boys back off and chat among themselves quietly. The
little girl exclaimed that she did not want to get yelled
at by the guards but she wanted to go get her ball, so she
could play again.
The Princess leaned over just slightly to take the
little girls hand. Smiles and with a firm soft voice she
says. Come with me I will help you get the ball back. The
tears come to a complete stop as she wipes her eyes and
then a smile comes across her face. The little girl stares
at the Princess and notices her beauty.

44

The Princess is tall with long blonde hair resting
perfectly on her shoulders. As her womanly features fill
her dress perfectly, she has sparkling baby blue eyes. On
her left shoulder hidden mostly by her hair rests the noble
birthmark. All nobles receive this at birth. A leather ball
bounces into the Main Hall a leather ball that finds its
way to the Kings throne and just stops shortly from his
feet. The Princess walks in with her new little friend. The
two boys follow. Her father the King stops after his
sentence and notices the ball wobbling at his feet. He
leans over and picks up the ball with one hand then stands
up out of his throne. Then he takes a closer look at the
ball. He bounces it twice. As he looks up, he sees his
beautiful daughter with a little girl standing in front of
her. The little girl was being very shy and embarrassed
with her head turned to the side with her arms crossed.
The Princess had her hands laid slightly over the
little girls shoulders for support. The princess speaks in
a calm voice. My little friend has lost something father.
The Kings walks forward with his robe trailing behind.

45

He has a Golden Crown with green and red emeralds
incased on the sides. The King wore golden armor and on the
breast plate there is a Symbol of his kingdom. It’s a Great
Oak Tree. Brown with green leaves it its worn and displayed
throughout the entire palace on Sur Coats the flags and on
the tapestry. The council chats among themselves and the
head advisor smiles advisor smile when he notices the
princess. The King walks up within ten feet of the two. The
king says to the little girl, is this yours, you may
approach little one. The little girl turns her head to see
this huge man they call the King. The King has such glamour
of an outfit on and with a long white beard. She runs up
stretches her arms out. The King hands the leather ball to
her. She then runs and hides behind the Princess. The King
walks up to the Princess and kisses his daughter on the
forehead and smiles with approval. He then turns to the
little girl and winks at her. The little girl with joy and
glee runs out of the council room with the ball in hand.
She runs back into the courtyard and tells her friends of
the exciting news of meeting the King and how the princess
helped her get the ball back.

46

The Princess walks through the Main Hall out the main
doors. Her friends join back up with her, chatting and
continue walking throughout the castle. The Kings sits back
down on his throne. The King almost opening his mouth
almost to speak was interrupted by a loud noise coming from
the other end of the Main Hall. Soldiers march through the
Hall towards the throne Led by the Captain of the guard. As
honorable dressed as a Soldier in this era could be and
well armored too. A Very Tall, Young and hansom Man, “The
Kings Nephew” comes to the throne and Greets the King.
Another noise of footsteps running this time rises from the
Hall.
Coming from the end of the Great hall from at least a
hundred feet away a Guard hurriedly makes his way to the
Captain. The Guard stops and makes his salute to the
Captain and then Captain salutes him back. The Guard leans
over and whispers into the Captains ear. ”Sir,” there at
the South Border.” “Already” Exclaims the Captain. “Yes,”
our South border patrol scouts have reported seeing a large
army approaching the south border.

47

The army is flying the Colors of the White Knights.
The King almost puzzled for a moment. Then realizes what
the Guard has said. Almost completing his sentence, the
King rises to his feet and says.
“Their here?” The room goes into a clutter of everyone
talking and moving around. Then the King scurries over to
the Captain. The Captain and the guard both turn and look
at the King and at the same time respond with “Yes your
majesty.”

The King makes a loud and clear command to his

council. Get my servants and my people and make ready a
feast for tomorrow I declare is a feast day. The Great
White Knights are going to arrive and we must greet them
with the best of my wines and fattest of my pigs for a
feast they shall never forget.
The Captain and the guards left the main hall to
gather the greeting party of Knights and soldiers to meet
the White Knights. The King turned to the council and said
it is late in the day we will have guests in the morning so
we will continue this meeting again at a later date. The
Meeting was adjourned and there was a great movement in the
castle, almost as much as the End Years festival.

48

There are servants cleaning up and tidying down the
castle fixing and preparing the Great Hall for a Dinner
Feast. Chiefs prepare the best foods. The Brewers Making up
the Finest wines in the castle. The bakers are on over time
and it smells of fresh bread in the air. Many of the people
are about in the castle. Some are cleaning the floors,
stairs, and the guest rooms bringing them up to best
presentation. Others taking care of the everyday chores
that keep there lives going day by day. The maids are
making beds and cleaning window seals of dust.
Butlers go around opening all the doors to the castle
to let in the cool breeze. Children help there parents in
the sorting and folding of fine cloth napkins on the Tables
in the Great Hall. Banners of the Great Kings and Knights
are hung above all the tables. Wood Sculptures are prepared
to be set on the food tables to be shown as art. The
evening has just begun. Through Out the night the
preparations will under go for the mornings Feast. There is
laughter and Happiness heard throughout the Castle.

49

Early Morning Day 3
The Market Place of Castle Northern Pathonas

50

Chapter 5

Their journey took them over several valleys and over
some small mountains. Across a small dry baron land similar
to a desert, then through some woods and across two rivers
into the mid day. Finally the last mountain to cross over
before entering Northern Pathonas Castle was in sight. “Are
you ready for this, my Lord?” Felix glanced sideways at the
Knight. “Come, young squire, a Knight is always ready for
anything!” Taking a swig of his flask, Sir John kicked his
horse into action and the two took off for the last hill.
Later that morning as the Sun makes its way past the
mountains to the North the White Knights Camp is about five
miles from the Castle. The massive army was waking up from
the evening camp. Sir John and Felix arrive at the camp. A
scout makes notice of Sir John and He delivers a message to
the Lord of the encampment. The Lord then sends for the two
visitors to meet him at the common tent.

51

Sir John and Felix dismount and hand there reins over
to a stable hand to care for the horses. Sir John walks
into the tent met by guards. He removes his helm revealing
a similar face as to the Lord who was sitting down at his
Lords Throne. The Lord stands and shouts to the guards to
let Sir John and Squire Felix in. Sir John walks in makes a
bow of courtesy then hugs his father. After chatting for a
few hours Sir John leaves the tent and makes his place in
the camp as Head Knight. Sir Jonathan and Felix wash up and
clean there armor and boots getting ready to travel to the
castle.
After a few hours a large group of Knights and squires
prepare there horses for departure of the camp. At the same
time another small group of Knights on horseback was
forming inside the castle to great the visitors. Outside
every castle there was a small town that surrounds it. This
is where all the trading is done. This is called the
Traders Marketplace. Lord Rathix Mullan, Sir John, Squire
Felix and the White Knights with there Squires mount there
horses and start for the castle.

52

Red Banners bearing a White cross flies high above the
Large Band of Knights. This was the White Knights symbol.
As the first few White Knights enter the Trader’s
Marketplace the castle horns were blowing as a sign that
the White Knights were arriving. The White Knights entered
the town with a trail of wind at their backs, which stirred
those in the storefronts to look at the Knights. “What are
they doing here?” A little girl questioned. “Have they come
to help us? A man says. “Look a Knight!” a woman, exclaims.
“Where are the rest of them? Father?” a little boy asked
his Father. Look darling there is an army approaching.
Several hundred horses with Knights trailed in behind Lord
Rathix Mullan, Sir John and Felix. John looked around.
“Great! Peasants.” The Peasants and Knights got along okay,
but the marketplace was always a strange mixture of
emotions and Nobility that was hard to understand. For the
Knight is use to Nobles and not beggars of sorts.
A 17-year old elf boy stumbled out of the crowd,
falling at the feet of Felix’s horse. He fell to a short
bow, his brown pants acquiring a slight tear in the
process.

53

His green shirt was the color of the leaves and his
cap was pulled low on his head, his pointed ears just
barely sticking out of it. “Sirs!” says the boy elf. The
boy was up in a flash and cheerfully welcoming in an
instant.

“Welcome to Northern Pathonas! “This Castle is

the greatest in all the lands and this marketplace has the
finest goods from here to the Sea of Quadroon!”

“Do you

see anything you like?” the elf boy said. The boy started
pointing at bags made of leather, apples, and chocolate
pastries, silk fabrics and little wooden flutes. “We have
it all here, even a show, a magic show!” the elf boy says.
The boy pointed towards a withered-looking older elf, with
a long gray beard and a purple conical hat upon his head.
The man looked up from his sleep and pulled a flower stem
from his cape, missing its petals however then turned over
and went back to sleep. “Sillyboy!” We are important men
and have important business to attend to. I am sorry, but
you must move aside as we are here to see the King.” Sir
John bellowed down to the boy with a smile. “Well, I am
sorry to hold you up sirs, good journey!” says the elf boy.

54

The boy backed away, his hands folded behind his back,
and He disappeared into the crowd from which he came. They
rode on, John turned to Felix. “Silly Elf, he should know a
Knight does not stand for such nonsense.”

“We have

important—“ Sir John reached for his flask interrupting him
for it was gone! He looked in both his saddles franticly
but could not find it. Then he looked back, as his horse
rode on saw the Elf waving, flask in hand. John just
sighed. Serves him right the elf boy says to himself. Well
he will sure be back young one the old man said as he
turned over and laid on his side arms all tucked crossed
into his sides.
Shortly after the Group of White Knights arrive at the
Castle Gates. A half a sleep soldier yells out from atop
with a crackling voice. “Who be yea?” “And what businesses
do yea have here?” Almost knocking him over the wall, his
fellow soldier of higher rank recognizes the Banner of the
White Knights and the Crest of the Lord Rathix Mullan of
Coralline, and Yells down. “We have been awaiting thy
arrival.”

55

“Please wait while my men lower the Draw Bridge and
Raise the Gate.” This gate is very old and has twenty-five
steel spikes resting on the ground below. The gate is very
heavy and has years of age on the dark black iron metal
chain the drives the machine. With a loud voice the Soldier
yelled down to a group of men deep in the castle walls to
lower the wooden drawbridge and raise the iron spiked
massive door. And so they did. From inside the walls a loud
clear voice could be heard. “Gate going up.” Appearing over
the top of the wall leaning out a window a soldier of the
guard shouts down to the soldiers inside the gate. “Let
them in, it is the White knights, for the King is expecting
them.” They crossed the moat and to the other side and
passed through the castle gates to reach the inside of the
castle walls to the main courtyard.
Standing at the other side of the Gates were several
solders standing guard, these Knights were expected so the
guards gave them no quarrels and let them enter. Lord
Rathix Mullan started in thru the main gates after the
scouts followed by Felix.

56

Sir John had passed the guards and he moved his crest
on his shield where it could be plainly seen and the all
the Guards came to quick attention and cheered the White
Knights as they entered the castle. Once the White Knights
passed the soldiers went back to war ready hands on swords
and shields held high. The soldiers chatted among them
selves very loudly and very happily.
The White Knights entered the Castle of Northern
Pathonas. The Captain of the Guard and forty Knights on
Horseback greet the White Knights inside the courtyard
arches of the castles entrance. The Captain Greeted the
Lord and the White Knights riding closes to him. Welcome My
Lord Rathix Mullan of Coralline and Hello Sir John Mullan
son of Lord Rathix Mullan of Coralline. “Jonathan It has
been a long Time since we last met.” The Knight ponders
while remembering playing as kids in the Gardens of the
Castle. Sir John shakes the Captains hand. As both men
laugh while riding along Sir John Says. “It has indeed.”
Sir John and Lord Rathix follow the Captain and his men
into the city gates.

57

The Guards open the Castles inner gates As the huge
wooden gates slowly open, hundreds of cheers and shouts of
happiness poor out thru the door way. The inner Castle
gates open and they pass into the main street of the Castle
where there are many nobles, peasants, children and
soldiers cheering their arrival. People are shouting,
praising and cheering aloud as the White Knights passes by
them. Thru a market into even yet a bigger courtyard where
people of all kinds mix and mingle carrying on there market
duties of buying and selling. Crowds of people stare as the
great white Knights approaches. A Little Girl runs up to
one of the knights and offer flowers.
The town’s people gather around to see the Great White
Knights. Pushing and shoving and trying to get a closer
look they are amazed at the beauty of armor that surrounds
each white knights body. Sparkling and glowing of sunlight
the armor has a perfect white cross that lies on every
shield, every chest plate, and every sword that is carried.
Even the great battle horse dawn blankets and armor with
the symbols.

58

Beautiful young women walk up to the horses and offer
wheat and apples for them to eat. They offer blankets made
with pretty colors and soft to the touch for the knights to
keep warm. The bakers and meat cutters offer there goods
all wrapped up in skins or parchment for the knights to
take to battle.
An elderly man walks up to Sir John and offers him a
beautifully hand made Wine Flask that was much larger then
his previous one, that had some five year old mead in it.
He said to the knight fight hard and fight brave this is
all I ask in return for the flask. The Knight gladly
accepted and put the flask away in his side pack on his
horse. As the White knights slow down to gladly accepted
the offerings of fruits, bread, wine, and flowers they move
up the courtyard and dismount at the stairs to Castle
Northern Pathonas. Horse handlers take the Steeds away and
the knights begin up the stairs to the gates to the Castle.
As the White knights reach the top of the stairs they
come to two huge doors that are closed and are being
guarded by soldiers.

59

The soldiers see the captain of the guard and quickly
open the doors to let them in. The group enters the Castle
of Northern Pathonas, and the captain of the guard and his
men are in the lead. Then followed by Lord Rathix Mullan,
with his son Sir John and a small group of the White
knights. Trailing the group was a small group of the Kings
Personal Guards. Sir John walking with an air of valor into
the Castles Grand Hall looks around with awe at the
magnificent Castle. Lord Rathix Mullan thinks. “This place
looks as beautiful as it has always been since I could last
remember.”
Just to the side and not a step behind follows his
Generals, made up of his truest friends who have fought
many of battles with him and have been through the Chronic
Wars. These were truly the best swordsman, axe man, and
archers that the White Knights have to offer for
protection. The rest of the white knights have never seen
this castle. They look in amazement for they have not seen
a castle in such clean and kept up shape in a long time.

60

The castles they have seen have been rotten away from
battle and long time war. This Lord and his White Knights
so shinning, looking as magnificent as victors from a royal
battle between men with swords. With Armor made from the
best Blacksmiths the realm could offer. Swords made of
white gold and platinum and decorated with Jewels of Rubies
and Emeralds hung loosely in their sheaths. Next to the
knights side the swords sways back and forth like a
pendulum with a right hand atop keeping pace as they walk
in towards the Throne Room. On each the knights Armor Chest
plate lays a painted Picture of a White Cross on a small
red shield that represented The Lord Rathix Mullan of
Coralline Family Crest. His Father past this crest to him,
from his father and his father’s father to which almost
seems an endless past of generations. The party approaches
the end of the great hall and they reach a crowd of people
talking and having conversation. The Captain of the guard
breaks through the middle and the group of people split in
too. Soon after they see the White Knights they become very
quite.

61

The Knights follow the Captain past the crowd to where
the council members where standing. The Council members
move to one side reveal a King with his advisor to the left
of him. The Captain takes his side at the right of the
King. In front of the King a small group of city nobles are
gathered to the white knights. They are well dressed and
where his or her clothes in a very tasteful style. There
are many servants all around the throne room dressed in
very Upper-class clothes. Two small children are waving
tall fans above the king to circulate the air. A welldressed older man brings the King a picture of water and a
glass. Another man brings in a fruit plate for the king.
Some women are standing off the side of the king with veils
over their faces to hide some of there beauty. And on the
other side a jester is telling singing and twirling three
small colorful eggs in a circle. A black smith brings a
finished assortment of well-crafted swords for the Kings
approval. Refreshments to eat and drink are being brought
to for the Nobles several women servants. As the party
approach servants are offer wine and bread to the knights
too.

62

Lord Rathix and Sir John Approach the King. At the
Kings command the Knights along with the Kings personal
guard stay back allowing the two to approach the throne.
The King stands and says welcome to the White knights.
Welcome to my Castle. They bow and touch one knee to the
ground along with one hand over the Cross-on the armor.
Then as the King acknowledges their presence they raise
their heads and Lord Rathix Mullan proudly removes his
helm. Resting his helm beside him as he approaches the King
to kneel again. Lord Rathix says in a loud and clear voice.
“And Greetings, to you Your Majesty.” “I” “Lord Rathix
Mullan of Coralline Commander and Head General of the White
Knights hath come to your beckoning to fight for the Realm
of Northern Kantara to protect the Sacred Scepter of
Psylion.” With all my strength and with a great Army I
shall protect the scepter down to the last unearthly Evil
creature. I will serve Even till my death. The Lord pulls
out his dagger and cuts into his right hand offers a
Knights blood oath to the King. He then places his Dagger
as a symbol with a bloodstain in the first stair at the
foot of the throne.

63

No sooner then the words were spoken Sir John Mullan
steps out from Behind Lord Rathix Mullan of Coralline.
“Father I too offer my oath to this cause.” As the Knight
bows in front of the King, He removes his helm letting down
his long dark blonde hair and shows his deep emerald green
eyes. Sir John Stands up then also cuts his right hand with
his dagger. Then he offers a Knights blood oath. He too
places his Dagger as a symbol with a bloodstain in the
first stair at the foot of the throne next to his fathers.
“We have come to aid in defending the scepter your
majesty.” Sir John says in an honored voice. As pleased as
any father could be Lord Rathix Introduced his son. This is
my boy he is twenty-three grown into a man since last you
saw of him and eager to engage on any dangerous foe and
even out numbered he swings a mighty good blade. He has
been on many quests with me. Luck runs on his side. The
Knight grins. Both the King and Lord Rathix Chuckle to
themselves. The Knight wraps his hand with a cloth and
steps back behind his father. Just as the Knight steps back
to his Fathers side a young and beautiful princess steps
out of the shadows into his view.

64

As she walks up to the Kings side, the King introduces
his Daughter to the new guests. “This is my Daughter,
“Princess Lorraine.” As he finish’s his sentence Sir John
steps over to his men. Grinning from ear to ear he says.
“And very beautiful I might add.” The Princess holds her
composure she smiles, with blush on her cheeks. Immediately
the young princess has fixed eyes on the young Knight. What
a beautiful daughter you have your majesty. It is truly an
honor to fight for you, your majesty once again. “Yes it is
a good sight for sore eyes Lord Rathix.” Said the King. It
is always a pleasure to see Great warriors up close for
these old bones; I don’t get on the battlefield much
anymore. The King stands up and motions for Lord Rathix and
his Son to step forward. As Lord Rathix and his son walk
closer you can hear commotion in the background and some
small rejoicing. Lord Rathix walks up and kneels before the
king and kisses the Kings Royal ring on his hand. This is
the Kings way of accepting the Knights Blood oath. With
this the King sat down and made a great declaration a small
speech. “I hereby make today a special feast day.”

65

The entire kingdom is to eat twice as much food to eat
and eat twice the drink for our greatest Lord, and His
white Knights are here and will be going to battle soon as
our greatest hero’s.

66

Late Afternoon Day 3
The Great Feast

67

Chapter 6

Dinner was served. Steam rose from the fresh Roast
Pig, Blackened chicken legs, and Salted fish. The three
meats where served this evening. Loafs of bread, small
rolls, and cornmeal biscuits sat in big piles in the middle
of the tables. Tall Shiny gold candles with white glossy
sticks set in between the foods giving them light to see.
Small cubes of cheese displayed them selves nicely on
wooden plates. Apples, grapes, bananas, pears, kiwi,
oranges and almost every fruit imaginable where stacked
nicely in silver bowls. On every table a large glass bowl
of red wine sits waiting to be emptied. Almost overflowing
over the ends this bowl is tipped to pour into small
pictures that where used to fill up the guest’s glasses.
Servants rush everywhere trying to keep the foods and wine
full as they could.

68

Somewhere taking dirty dishes, some-where bringing
more food out to be displayed. A small band of folks where
playing a slightly mamba mood. Somewhere playing violins,
cellos, and harpsichord to. There was a Funny man telling
jokes that made everyone laugh. Jugglers where passing all
sorts of flying objects. Including some chicken legs and
apples they where keeping the attentions of most of the
guests. Doing their stunts and acrobatics small people was
entertaining the king. During the mid course of the meal a
duel of two opponents fencing started and was a long one
that ended up in a tie. The kingdom was enjoying a great
feast. The White Knights with out their armor all the
swords and shields look like ordinary men. Clean-shaven and
well dressed they might have been mistaken for common folk.
But everyone knew who he or she was. They were the White
Knights. Lord Rathix is stuffed after two big meals of
Roast Pig, and Blackened chicken legs. Sir John sits
sharing stories of his great battles with the white knights
and his friends while having his fill of the bread and
wine.

69

The Princess was eating fruits and toying with her
wine. She is so intrigued with Sir John’s stories that she
started flirting with him. The Princess was showing signs
of a crush. Sir John takes notice and tosses a small glance
her way. After finishing his last story Sir John relaxes
and takes a drink of his wine. Watching his friends
drinking and carrying on he sits back and watches the
festivals. The night grew on and everyone enjoyed herself
or himself and that was the feast. Later that night as Sir
John stands in his balcony he notices the bright blue lake
sea across the way. “It’s very beautiful at night.”

A

voice from the Skies, calmly speaks. The Knight looks
around. Gasping he says. “Hello,” “Say again please?”
Repeating what she had just said the Princess started to
talk again. “It’s very beautiful at….” The Knight slips up
the stairs to the Balcony just above his to where standing
at the rail is a very Beautiful Princes. She looks with a
smile and says. “Your pretty sneaky there John.” Oh, Sir
John I mean,” As she elegantly walks past his way with a
grin.

70

The Knight Remembering his mother when she told him
stories of romance with a knight and a princess in a palace
that had a happy ending. He pauses and stares at the
Princess. As he admires the princess he notices her beauty
in the moonlight. Her Long Flowing Red hair flickers in the
moonlight glow. She was in a very exquisite white evening
gown. A small golden pendant of an oak tree rests slightly
on her shoulder. “Are you going to stare at me all night
long?” Say’s the Princes. Before he could say anything the
Princess throws a small black shinny stone at Johns left
arm. With a quick turn of the wrist and clasp of the hand
he catches the shinny stone. You could hear him playfully
growling. “What did you throw that for?” Noticing him
showing a small smile she grins and says. “Come stand next
to me and look at the stars.” Still lost and about half
dumb from the fact she threw a stone at him. “Oh” ok, I was
going to.
The princess sits down on a small wooden chair. A few
moments’ later John walks over and leans over the ledge of
the balcony next to her.

71

As he opens his hand he looks closely at the small
black oval shiny stone as it glistens in his palm. Here I
think you lost this. Are you going to throw it at me again?
The princess says. “NO,” If you’re not going to stare any
more. The Princess stands up next to Sir John and takes the
small stone out of his hand. The Princess Smiles and points
her finger at the stars. I have a favorite star, and it’s
called Junipers. What about you? Sir John Just nudges his
shoulders with uncertainty. The princess says she likes
them all, especially the ones that look like small spoons.
John says he knows of only the North Star as he points at
the brightest star that could be seen. She giggles and says
that’s everyone’s favorite. Why can’t you pick another one?
Like Toppan, Styles, Chan Dune, Parlaa, or even Icecandara
star? The knight thinks to himself. Isn’t there a star that
represents honor and family? She thinks for a moment. Yes
there is its called Tri-Kantara. Yes it’s a pretty star,
she says as she points just shortly west. A table nearby
houses a vase some glasses and fresh water. As the princess
offers the knight some water they look out at the moon.

72

It sure is a pretty site here looking over the water
and seeing the stars and the moon. Say’s the Knight. Some
laughter is heard from one of the other rooms where some of
the other knights are still drinking and carrying on. The
princess looks at the Knight and leans over to him and
reaches for his hand. As he extends his hand she places a
glass of water in it. She then moves a bit closer to him.
Sir John pulls her close to him. With her head in his arms
she feels comfort. I’m sorry dear princess. I was not
trying to be rude. You’re just so darn beautiful. The two
snuggle up on the Ledge and gaze fast under the stars.
This night could not have been a more clear night. You
could see the third moon over the risen.

73

Early Morning Day 4
In the Morning

74

Chapter 7

Early in the morning on the Fourth day the princess
opens her eyes lying there on her bed with her sheets
tucked nicely up under her shoulders. She turns just a
little to her side to see if her Knight was there. She is
alone in the room. She jumps up and goes to the balcony
where the sun was out and shinning brightly thru the door
way. She smiles as she turns around and walks back into the
room. She notices on the second pillow on her bed a small
white letter with a red rose on top of it. The princess
smiled and picks up the freshly picked rose and smells it.
She then unties the small piece of silk string that held
the Note closed then unravels the parchment. The words of
her beloved Knight showed thru like rays of sunlight in
thru the window at dawn. She quickly reads the letter.

75

“Dear Princess,
We have not much time to prepare the Evil Sorcery’s
attack is coming. So I must go away to battle. But I will
leave you with this Decree. I Sir John Mullan of Coralline
and Noble of the White Knights make a decree that I will
fight this evil until it has gone from our lands. Our lands
will be safe again I will come to thee and we shall watch
the stars in the sky again.”
Sir, Jonathan Mullan of Coralline

The bottom has a seal. This was no ordinary seal. It
was a Blood bond seal from a White Knight. Only that a
blood seal from a White Knight was never taken lightly for
it would never be broken as long as the Knight Lives. In
those days a signed seal from a Knight was as golden as a
prayer. She held the Letter close to her heart and sat down
on her bed. She lay there with Content and a smile could be
scene from a mile away.

76

Later that morning when the planet’s sun starts to
raise, the King, Lord Rathix, Sir John and the White
Knights are preparing there horses to travel. The King
offers one of his best horses to Sir John as a good Gesture
knowing that the Knight had an eye for his daughter.

At

least 18 hands tall this one stood. It was White with one
small dot of black on his snout. The Knight accepted the
Kings horse. Lord Rathix shook the Kings hand and said
until we meet again old friend. And the king repeated,
“Until we meet again Knight.”
The Knights saddled up their horses and said there
goodbyes then started out of the coral with Lord Rathix in
the lead. The Knights made no haste for they knew their
journey would be long and hard time was slipping away every
so fast. Sir John Mounts his new horse and starts out of
the coral following the others. The Knight made it to the
main alley way, and many yellow flower pedals line the
road. As the last knight appeared in the main courtyard
thousands of white flower pedals fell from above.

77

The Nobles empty there palms offering their prayer’s
to God above to watch over the White Knights. People where
cheering and shouting there praises to the White Knights as
they passed by. The Knights made it to the Traders
Marketplace where they were greeted by the rest of the
Kingdom. Sir trotted his horse up to meet Lord Rathix at
the head of the great multitude. It was a happy
celebration. Staring up Sir John could see his Princess
standing at her balcony. Quickly the Knight raises his
Helm, smiles and waves at the Princess. The princess waves
back then tosses her Golden pendant that was wrapped around
the red rose with a small note attached to it. Into the Air
it soared downwards passing all the falling pedals like a
falling star making its way to the ground. The pendant
plunges into the bed of yellow and white pedals leaving
only the bright red rose atop. John grabbed the reins of
his Stead and gallop’s back into the Courtyard. He
unsheathes his long sword and catches up the red rose with
the pendant still attached to it.

He then sheaths his

sword as he turns his horse around.

78

Removing the note he places the pendant around his
neck. The pendant was showed proudly on his armor next to
his heart. He starts his horse to gallop to catch up with
the other knights while he reads the note.
Sir John,
Take this pendant wear it to remember me on the
battlefield till you get back. In your battle keep it close
and I will be there to keep you company. Do not be afraid!
Sir John Do not be afraid. Princess
Sir John returns to the head of the group and he
shouts to the Princess I will return victorious. With a
deep breath he calls out a Great War yell the Knight join
in shouting. Lord Rathix follows Sir John as he leads the
White knights out of the castle. Outside the City the Army
of the White Knights already broke camp and was awaiting
their leaders to take them on their journey. The Knights
Join the rest of the army and Sir John are in the lead of
the massive army bound for The Castle Keep of Psylion. The
Army can be seen slowly moving away while the Sun slowly
rises to full sunset.

79

Afternoon Day 4
The Orcs move closer to the Castle Keep

80

Chapter 8

In another part of that very same Realm in the late
evening on you can hear the rumbling of the Evil army of
Orcs as the constant drone of their marching continues. The
Evil army is only Two thousand plus Orcs and goblins, but
their purpose is simple, to the focus of the attention of
the Keeps soldiers on the ground. The main assault will
come from the air by dragons. The Black Knight can hear the
footsteps of his horde of Orcs slowing behind him. “What,”
with the wrath of ten thousand snakes, are you all slowing
down for?” He shows his teeth to the gasping creatures
behind him, and swiftly draws his sword from his belt and
slices off the first ear the blade meets.
out the orders of the Dark Lord!
feet!

“We are carrying

How dare you drag your

The dark lord is not someone to ignore, and neither

am I Now move out and move faster!” The Army Starts
marching again at a faster pace.

81

A tall shadow of a man appears behind the Black Knight
appearing to float. The shadow mumbles, “Hear me now, great
flyers. You are the ones who will help me with my task.
These creatures alone are not enough strength that I need;
you are the out stretched hand that I need.

Your power

must run through me, I need the power!” A lightning bolt
cracks through the sky as The Black shadow raises his arms
to the sky.

It catches his hands and runs through him and

his eyes turn white, his lips crack and the few strands of
hair on his exposed scalp turn blue.

Several dragons fill

the sky and the Orcs crouch in fear. “Now you shall obey me
Dark Winged Creatures!” “Dragons,” A Goblin Yelled. Then
all at once all the goblin scream then run for there lives
hiding in the woods.
The Orcs come to Halt. With the entire army at a halt
and very scared the black knight Turned and looked at his
army. Now what he exclaims. The Black Knight stops and asks
one of his followers why the troops are not moving. “Well?”
As soon as the goblin called GE-Gob could get out from
underneath the nearest big oak tree he spoke to the black
knight with a scared tongue.

82

Well your evil one… We goblins are very much afraid of
the Dragons. They Eats us. We not want eats. The Black
Knight looked up and saw the dragons then turned around
seeing the Dark lord hovering behind him. Oh. That explains
it. With a very powerful entranced look by the eyes of The
Dark Lord, he turned and waited. The Dark Lord Shouted some
words of arcane and then the eyes of the Dragons turn black
and the Dark Lord spoke. He is possessed by the Darkness;
The Dark Lord Yelled out a command that the Dragons not eat
the Goblins. And that here enemy was only the humans. With
this the First Dragon landed and the dark lord mounted it.
Seeing this all the Goblins looked at each in
acknowledgment that the dragons were no longer a threat and
came out of hiding. The other dragons all landed and many
of the goblins rode on there backs. The dragons took
flight. This Dark Lord is pure evil that can only be
described as if you took all of the evil bad things and
evil with no names in the world and put them into a box,
this would not equal half the bad of this creature. Death
is the spirit of this Creature. The Black Knight Let out a
loud bark as he told the evil army to continue on.

83

The Dark Lord’s Dragon flew up into the sky. The Orcs
marched on; dredge on to the castle keep, minions of
darkness, and servants of evil all. A great dark wind
follows them, created by the flapping of the dragon’s
wings.

The Orcs are so entranced by the Black Knight they

hardly notice their feared comrades flying overhead. They
do not control their hands, the Dark Lord does. The Dark
lord was there to take the Scepter of Psylion, the fate of
the Kantara Realm is upon them. The Black Knight will not
leave the castle without the Scepter, and the Dark Lord
with the Dragons will make sure of that.

Both Armies are marching thru the entire fifth day.

84

Day 6 - Early Morning
The Arrival at Castle Keep of Psylion

85

Chapter 9

Almost dawn three days later and in the early morning
they arrive at the foothills of the valley neck where the
Castle Keep Psylion lies. The Knights dismounts there
horses and look down at the valley. Way back deep in the
Valley you could see a small silhouette of a castle. So far
back in under the cliffs a side or rear attack would be
impossible. The only way in is thru the front said Sir
John. “The moons are getting really close, they will attack
tomorrow of it will be the 7th day and the moons will be
fully aligned,” Said Lord Rathix. Sir John and the captains
were standing there with him. These men twice and three
times his son’s age, who have all sworn to do his bidding,
to give their lives for the White Knights and for the
protection of the scepter. Here at dawn a great battle will
unfold. “Let us move on, men,” Lord Rathix yells to the
troops behind him as he mounts his horse.

86

The captains and Sir John mount their horses also. The
great army starts again. There are twelve hundred in all.
Eight hundred swordsman. One-hundred and fifty longbow
archers.

Two hundred veterans Full-Plate Armor Knights on

war-horses, and fifty long-swordsman man-at-arms. Warriors
from all corners of the realm who have pledged to the Great
White Knights and will protect the Scepter of Psylion.
Slowly they came down the valleys winding path till they
could see it, the great castle Keep of Psylion. Very well
fortified with a twenty-foot wall surrounding the castle.
It has two huge towers one on each of its sides and a main
sanctuary in the center courtyard. There is a small moat
with a large stationary bridge that leads right up to the
castle. Inside the castle are placed a few hundred archers
and foot soldiers. Their faces were grim not much movement
could be seen coming from the Castle.

In the keep one of

the Soldiers was peeking out of his tower down at the
valley and was happy to see the flag that was waving in the
air bearing the cross of the Great White Knights. He shouts
down to his fellow solders. There here, the White Knights
are here.

87

Soldiers in the castle start to rustle and come alive.
You could hear loud cheering and laughter coming from the
Keep as the soldiers feel relief. The soldiers in the Keep
find new life and energy as the White Knights ride up to
the front of the Keep. As the White Knights march forward
onto the large bridge a forged black-iron gate was raised
then two giant oak doors standing twenty feet tall creak
open to let them in. Inside the Keep the great army comes
to a halt.
Then Sir John and Lord Rathix dismount their horses
and so do the Captains. Well, what do you think? Lord
Rathix says in a natural tone to Sir John. Well I am a
little worried about the two wooden doors. As long as the
Iron Gate stays down we should be ok.

Well, it looks

strong. I think we could hold them back from in front of
the gates as long as possible with swords while we hail
down lots of arrows from those towers.” Says Sir John as he
points to the two large towers. “How are we going to form
up, my Lord?” Ractor, the man with the military training,
asks Lord Rathix.

88

“I want Serek and his archers inside those Towers and
on the front walls for the frontal assault to try to take
out as many Orcs and goblins before they reach the Keep.
The Brothers Garci and Joci with the swordsman, out in
front on the bridge case they get to close to the gate. Sir
John and the White Knights up front on the other side of
the bridge to take on the main assault. “Ractor the men-atarms and I will be in the main sanctuary,” We will be the
last stand where all can retreat to if it we get overrun.”
There not getting in this castle Except through the windows
above in the ceiling. Said Garci. “Last time I seen an Orc,
they couldn’t fly.” Said Sir John. They are way much to
fat. Said Joci. Smiling. They all laugh. “Father.” Says Sir
John as he is greeted with a puzzled look from his father.
“I will lead the White Knights into battle.” I will kill
all evil that opposes and I will not allow the White
Knights to retreat.” The Lord Stares into his Son eyes who
with words that only a White knight could say agrees. “My
Son You will lead the White Knights in battle, and you will
bear the great sword of the White Knights.” Says the Lord.
Then he sheathes his sword too his side.

89

Then he pulls out a large leather battle sheath for
back hung sword and hands it to Sir John. Then he removes a
massive wrapped object from the satchel on his horse. It
was wrapped in a white tunic with a red cross on it. He unwraps the tunic and reveals a great sword. Sir John
unbuckles his sword and sheath then hands it to Felix. Lord
Rathix hands the White Tunic to Squire Felix. ‘Here help
Sir John put this tunic on.” He says. Hands already full
with Sir John’s sword and sheath Felix looks around for
somewhere to set it down. He notices a small set of bushes
then turns and chucks the small set into the bushes. Then
he reaches out and takes the white tunic from the lord. Sir
John, Take this Tunic of White bearing the Red Cross on it.
Know that it is the sign of leadership and the White
Knights will follow you into battle. And Sir John accepted
the tunic and put it over his own with the help of his
squire. Sir John was admiring the Great sword in the lord’s
hands. It sparkled with three red ruby crosses inlaid in
its hilt. Zero to none imperfections. This was undoubtedly
the most magnificent sword Sir John had ever scene. The
knight overwhelmed with pride took the sword and put it in
the air.

90

The Silver two-hand great sword with the family cress
of the White Knights engraved on the hilt shined bright in
the sunlight. A fine sharp edge glistened, as he raised the
sword in the air. You could hear a loud whistling sound
coming from the sword. “I will live for honor, father, I
will fight for honor, and I will die for honor,” Shouted
Sir John. The soldiers depart and take their places. Lord
Rathix leads his men in to the main sanctuary. The Men-atarms take their positions in front of the main gate close
to the drawbridge. Horsemen prepare their horses and armor
inside the main gate and prepare for battle. Archers make
there way up the stairs to the large towering towers and in
the front castle walls. “Our arrows will cut down the enemy
in a harsh way and make the numbers that the foot soldiers
encounter a much easier win,” says Serek. “There will be
plenty to fight but the less the better,” Says Sir John.
Yes agreed we will take down many as we can Sir John, as
Serek looks up to the towers from the courtyard. He then
orders his men to the top of the towers. Serek is the best
marksman in the kingdom of Pathonas and quite possibly in
the whole realm.

91

He has trained most of the men to aim quite well, but
only he is blessed with the vision of a Hawk. Up in the
tower the archers prepare small fires to which they could
light their arrows. “They are almost here, I can feel Em,”
one of Serek’s men tells him. “Be Patient,” is all that
Serek could respond?

He is mature for his age, and

realizes the commitment of these men and that the value of
there shots where critical. They too are sacrificing.

All

of this weighs even heavier on them, as each Orc that is
alive is another one that the swordsmen will have to bring
down. Lord Rathix prays that his army will prevail. For in
the morning there will be a great battle.

92

Day 7 - Early morning
The Siege of Castle Keep of Psylion

93

Chapter 10

Lord Rathix and two of his men enter the Great Room in
the tower where the scepter lies to view the scepter before
the great battle. The Elders surround the Scepter of
Psylion.

The Knights stop, amazed by the brightness of the

room, the Scepter is surrounded by the most amazing glow.
It is the aura of the world, colorful and colorless at the
same time. The Elders are also glowing, their eyes a bright
light shining out each Elder’s window to gaze upon the
world.

The men come to full understanding that the world

is resting on their shoulders and they must defend this
scepter with their lives. They leave the tower and head
back to the main sanctuary. There they wait at the ready.
The Archers are edgy but their eyes are focused.
Sir John tightens the last piece of body armor across
his leg. He taps it with his hand, as another knight looks
at him he says, tight huh. Yep, says sir john just enough
to keep the blood circulating.

94

Why said the other knight? So that the blow is taken
full and I don’t have any ringing to my armor, which will
make it, come loose. Oh, said the other Knight. Right, I
will too. So the rest of the Knights follow the idea and
start tightening their armor. They mount their horses and
are ready for battle. Inside the main gate Garci and Joci
along with Felix get their troops focused for battle. In
the towers, on the ground and in the main sanctuary all are
ready for battle. Loud noise of marching echoed through the
valley in front of the Keep. It was almost dust. A small
rumbling could be heard coming closer. The rumbling grew
closer. The time has come!” said Lord Rathix, “At the
ready, men!

Shouted Sir Johan and all the Captains echoed

in. Through the windows above, the moons are converging,
lining up in a conjunction of the sky.

The Elders’ eyes

began to close. Weapons appear in their hands and the men
know that the hour is at hand. The Fog is thick in the
morning so Lord Rathix gives the Command to Serek to take
the first shot with lit arrow so that the rest of the
archers would know where to aim at.

95

The first wave of Orcs came marching down the valley to the
sound of an orc war drum. A wave is less then five-hundred
but more then three-hundred. Bong, Bong, Bong-Bong-Bong,
Bong was the sound of feet marching with the beating of the
drum. Then it stopped and the shout of Black Knight echoed
thru the valley. Charge Great Horde, Take no prisoners,
Kill all who oppose the Me. Serek Shoots his first flaming
arrow into the air and lands several feet from the horde
making them visible for all to see. With many more flaming
arrows flying overhead the Knights could see plain as day.
Sir John Leads the White Knights two hundred in all and
they stampede out the gates of the castle into the night to
the battle. They met the horde and shred the orc ranks to
pieces. Hundreds of Orc’s had fallen, but not a single
knight.
The White Knights had crushed the first advancement.
The knights returned to the keep to regroup at the sound of
the Orcs retreat. After several minutes had gone by the Orc
war drums were beating again. The Knights ready the ranks.
Sir John yells out charge.

96

They rush out to battle and once again they come out
victorious and with at least twice the last Orc advancement
of ten waves. This went on and on for a few hours until the
light had started to come up. Then the drums started again
and this time the Orc’s with torches could be seen marching
forward with large wooden poles with cut ends. Sir John
shouted to the Knights to retreat and let the Foot soldiers
advance. Then a single wave of Orcs arrived this time and
with large wooden poles with sharp ends expecting the
horsemen again. The shout for foot soldiers to come and
break the Orc’s down was barked while the Knights and
horses take a break. Joci and Garci with their one hundredfifty Swordsman advance outside the main gates to the
battle ready. Garci then shouts,” lets get them men”. The
swordsman advance in and take out the horse killing Orc’s
loosing only two men. Before the group could returns to the
Keep making it only to the front gates the Orc drums beat
again. Yet another wave of the horde advance down the
valley. The Swordsman trailing advance back out to the
valley again. A magical storm approaches them as they enter
the valley and the sky is dark and it starts to rain.

97

The flaming arrows no longer show the way and the fog
was getting thicker and thicker the soldiers could not see.
There were loud screams and noises of shrieking creatures
coming from the woods. And then those in the battle were
met with a sight they never expected.

A rain of Fire came.

Black Shadowed winged creatures flew in from above and
started breathing their hot singing breathe down to the
ground as they swooped in over Garci’s troops. The
swordsmen scattered like ants into the woods chasing the
Orcs and running for their lives. Garci yells out loud,
“Dragons!” Men were incinerated and disappeared before each
other’s eyes.
Sir John’s Steed tears through the air with the White
Knights following out of the Main gates of the Keep. His
Steed jumped over the fire lit ground and passed in front
of Garcia’s troops. “Do not let them get past us,” Sir John
yelled.

“We must fight; we must not retreat for we all

pledged to fight!” The Orcs rushed the army and swords
began to clang together. Serek peering through an eyepiece
yelled to his men.

98

“Ready! Those Arrows.” Shouted Serek. Fire on the dragons
concentrate on them, Ready? Aim!

Fire!” and hundreds of

arrows came Sparkling into the sky over the Knights some
hitting there marks and taking one or two dragons down but
the rest just whistled thru the air passing the swordsmen
and into the second horde of Orcs that where approaching.
Some killing others hit the ground around the Orcs. “Do not
fall back men!” shouted Garcia As a soldier became engulfed
in flames standing next to him.

Garcia gasped, and bore

down on the Orcs he was fighting.

He ran his blade through

the armor of the faceless thug and it fell to the ground.
Felix, Joci and his swordsman join into the fight to help
Garcia and his men. Lord Rathix peered through the glass in
the tower and saw the Black Knight approaching. The dragons
were too much for his army. Lord Rathix had not expected
these Dragons to be allies of the dark realm. Lord Rathix
sent one of his trusted soldiers out of the keep to tell
Sir John that he needed to bring the army back to the keep
and that it was a trap to lure the army away from the keep.

99

Sir John looked up and saw The Black Knight on a horse with
another horde of Orcs passing him heading for the Keep, and
knew why he was there. The Sir John and the Knights after
killing all that was close to them galloped back onto the
bridge at the moat where few of the soldiers where left
fighting hundreds of Orcs. Arrows coming down from the sky
where hitting Orcs and some swordsmen too. They slashed and
killed everything that was coming at them but the Dark
Lords horde of Orcs still kept coming. Although the Orcs
seemed to have them surrounded, it looked as though Sir
John, and his Knights were finally making some headway, and
where slowly fighting there way back up to the keep.
Then A soldier out of nowhere rode up to Sir John and
said his father needs him. The White Knights were fighting
hard but with the dragons swooping down and tearing them
off the horses and eating the horses it was no match for
the white knights. Some of the soldiers went running into
the woods while others were be slaughtered by the Orc
horde.

100

In the main sanctuary out of the shadows The Black
Knight appeared Lord Rathix immortal enemy. The one that he
knew he would have to defeat to gain the scepter. The rest
of the army almost didn’t even matter; this was the man who
was sent to do the job. The Black Knight could take on ten
ordinary men single handedly. The Orcs were just to keep
The Army busy. Lord Rathix thought to himself. As the
dragons take out a third of the massive army, With One Look
Sir John made the Shout for a Retreat. “Retreat men!
Retreat!” Joci yelled too, and the diminished army ran back
into keep, The Orc horde right behind them. As they turned,
the dark silhouettes of the dragons cast shadow over the
great keep, each burning up as they try fly over the keep.
They are forbidden to enter the area fore they are evil and
their area is protected from flying evil creatures. Their
burnt, crisp carcasses disappear and the riders fall
through the windows, the sound of breaking glass
surrounding the soldiers. As the Falling goblins are
dropping through the broken glass, the fighting continues.
Lord Rathix Ran up a long set of stairs up to where the
Scepter rested.

101

The Black Knight followed both with swords drawn.

As

the swords clashed together, the earth began to rumble, and
the Elders eyes crept closer to being shut. “My destiny,”
Sir Lord Rathix rumbled. “Silly human, this is not your
destiny, this is your death!” The Black Knight thrust his
sword into Sir Lord Rathix armor, barely missing his chest
knocking him down. “No human could do this task; the King
was foolish putting their faith in a human!” “Their faith
will be your undoing!” Sir Lord Rathix sprang from his
position and sliced through The Black Knights left arm like
a knife through butter. The Black Knight didn’t even
flinch. “You have no idea the forces that you are dealing
with, old man. You will not win this fight, and you will
pray for a fast death and it will not come.”
Their swords clashed again as the eyes of the Elders
shut.

The moons were in line, shining brightly upon the

Scepter of Psylion. “Now is the time!” The Dark Sorcerer
screamed and lightning came. A black shadow appeared.
Murmured voices echoed through the hall/tower, and an
earthquake violent. The sky turned gray and the air got
thick.

102

The movement caught some of the soldiers off guard,
and they began to stumble, Orcs too. The voices grew
louder, and the chanting became recog-nizable. “Koola,
macouna, cravel tru lavis…koola, macouna, cravel tru
lavis…” Evil Dark Lord was weaving a spell.

The room began

to get brighter, and the scepter began to shake.

The Dark

Lord reached into the pit that the Scepter was suspended
over. He tried to grasp it, but just as he touched it, a
light exploded out of the Scepter. All of the solders and
evil things in the room were blinded and knocked over by
the blast, including the Black Knight. The Evil Dark Lord
fell to the ground. Sir John and some of the White Knights
had made into the tower but they too where knocked over by
the blast. The Dark Lord stood up after the blast and said
in a firm voice. It is done I have separated the pieces.
Now I can retrieve them. Then he disappeared into
nothingness. The Scepter flew up into the sky; the soldiers
slumped down to the ground. The Black Knight, White Knight,
Serek, Garci, Joci, knocked over from the blast watch the
Scepter burst into three pieces and flew up through the
windows, each piece going its separate way.

103

The Black Knight jumps into the air sword pointing
down at The Great White Knight Lord Rathix and pierces his
armor straight through to the bone. The Black Knight twists
the blade a little watching Sir Lord Rathix scramble in
pain. As Sir Lord Rathix gasp’s for breath he drops his
sword and slumps over. The Black Knight stood, looking down
upon his defeated enemy, he grinned. Sir Lord Rathix was
born of the faith of the Elders, and now that that faith
was gone, the glow has left him.

He fell down to his

knees. Black Knight said, defiantly you die here White
Knight and all the hopes of the Kantara Realm are lost. He
looked upon his fallen brethren with disgust. “None of you
were warriors; I am the only true warrior.” The rest of the
Knights and solders make a mad dash towards The Black
Knight but not before goblins and Orc’s met them. In anger
Sir John is trying to fight his way through to get to the
Black Knight. He slashes and hacks at the Orcs but they
keep coming.

Killing many Orcs and goblins he is still

held back and is fighting. The Black Knight reaches over
the dying Knight and pulls from his neck the sacred white
cross medallion.

104

The Lord Rathix Mullan of Coralline Family Crest was
engraved on it. He Turns it upside down and puts it around
his neck. “White Knight indeed.” He says. More like Dead
Knight, with horrible laughter he dashes for the nearest
door and leaves the castle keep. You can see many hundreds
of dead soldiers Orcs corpses on the ground. The Black
Knight Walks out of the Tower and Mounts his Horse and
remaining forces follow him out of the keep. The one or two
Dragons that were left disappeared into the sky above. Sir
John hacks his last Orc and makes it to his father. He
kneels down and takes his father in his arms. With his last
breath the great Lord requests his son to make a White
Knight Blood oath to avenge his death get the family
medallion back and to save the Realm with the Scepter. His
father passes and John sheds a small tear for his father
and then takes the family sword and runs off in pursuit of
the Black Knight.
Shortly after, the Keep started to rumble. Twisting
and Shaking the Keep started to crumble. Glass was breaking
and the large shards started falling down upon them.

105

Wood beams start to crack and pieces of the ceiling
start falling in. Some of the soldiers where standing up
and starting to make sense of things. A man shouts out
orders for the men to run their lives. Orcs and goblins
where crushed by falling rocks and wood pieces falling from
the walls caving in as they where trying to escape the
chaos. Most of the Soldiers managed to make it safely
outside the Keep. Sir John stumbled out of the Keep main
doors barely escaping the collapsing archway. A soldier
covered with mud in the moat in front of him yells out for
help. Then all of a sudden a large piece of the tower wall
comes crashing down into the bridge in front of him
collapsing it sending pieces everywhere. Sir John manages
to dodge the gate from cutting him into two.
As He misses the thrown wooden contraption hurled at
him he reaches for a dangling rope that was still attached
to what was left of the bridge and he starts to swing
across the moat. Before he reaches the other side he
stretches out his hand to the soldier below him in the moat
and pulls him loose.

106

Sir John swings him to the other side of the moat
while still holding on to the rope he swings a little
further. A goblin is standing their axe drawn as the
soldier drops down to one knee. The goblin raises his axe
and is yells out a war cry. Then the soldier goes for his
sword but its not there. There was a doubt across his face.
But then Sir John lets go of the rope and comes crashing
down on top of the Goblin and crushes him, then makes a
tumble to the ground. The soldier clears the mud off his
face revealing himself then opens his eyes and he is lying
on the other side of the moat next to Sir John. Sir John
turns head towards the blaze. “The Scepter has to be found
and restored before it was too late.” “Thanks Sir John.”
Felix said. “What?” Sir John Exclaimed. “Thank you.” Felix
said. Felix starts to get up. “Oh, I wondered where you
went; Your Welcome.” Sir John Questioned. “What are we
going to do about the Scepter?” Said Felix. Sir John turns
over and starts to get up. As he gets to his feet an army
of ORCS surrounds them with clubs and Axes pointed at the
two. The Black Knight on Horseback ordered they be taken as
prisoners. One of the Orcs Shouted.

107

Before Sir John could put up a fight a big Orc hits
him hard with a blow to his head with the handle of his
axe. Then another Orc hits Felix with the butt end of his
Axe causing him to go unconscious too. The two disappear
with the Orcs.
Somewhere in the clouds the Elder’s eyes began to
open, to see the world again and tears fell from their
eyes. The tears of the world fell from the Elder’s eyes, as
they whispered a prayer for realm, they start to disappear.
Already, devastation was beginning to take over the land.
In that instant the balance was gone. Now in three pieces,
the Scepter could not protect the humanity any longer.

The

Realm was unprotected and evil would take over realm. Lord
Rathix and all The White Knights were slain Sir John and
Felix the last of the white knights were captured and there
was no hope or was there. Could someone free the Knight and
his companion?

108

The Princess Accepts her Journey

109

Chapter 11

“AHHHAAAA!” a war cry is yelled, as a thin tall masked
figure charges at a wooden statue of a swordsman. Then
almost out of nowhere a small but stout man, appears in
front of the masked figure. The Figure did not stop its
charge and its sword was blocked by an axe that was quickly
pulled by the small man.

The sword was aimed at his

heart.“ Whoa! The masked figure exclaims, as the small man
blocks the tip of the sword with his Axe a second time. The
small man shouts. Princess, princess, it’s me, Joanna The
Champion!” The masked figure stopped in her tracks and
pulled her mask, revealing a beautiful princess. Her fire
red hair fell to her shoulders, and Joanna was glad to see
the face of his friend. The two have sparred so many times
before for it was the dwarf who trained the princess.

110

“You should know better than to startle me while I am in
practice, Joanna. Hasn’t anyone ever taught you any
manners?” “Me? What about you!

You’re the one charging me

with your sword. Little old me, all small and help-l-e….“
He exclaims. “I know that you weren’t just going to say
helpless. The Champion is not small, and he is definitely
NOT helpless.” “Well…” said by the princess. Joanna was
proud of the fact that the Princess knew who he was and
that he was known as the strongest of the entire dwarves
kingdom.

Humans don’t socialize with dwarves very much in

this society, especially the royal families. Her shinny
skin and the long hair that ended in the most magnificent
point in the center of her back enchanted Joanna. She
looked amazing in her leather tunic she wore when fighting,
her bosom slightly grazing the edge of the low neckline,
showing a bit. The long fire red hair was tied back in a
braid, her bangs framing her eyes perfectly. They were the
most beautiful violet eyes Joanna had ever seen. Even the
most beautiful dwarf, Giselle could not compare to this
Princess.

For Dwarfs were short people.

111

The male dwarfs usually had long flowing beards and side
burns. The females had long hair usually hung to there
feet. This Dwarf, Joanna has a royal blue long sleeve shirt
with little wooden toggles. A heavy brown leather vest with
brown leather pants and a thin red sash to cover his waist
line make the rest of his apparel. Many Cow, Deer, and
Rabbit furs are sewed together to make his cape that drapes
over his shoulders. Joanna found he was staring. The
Princess looked at Joanna and spoke, “I would appreciate if
you kept the stares and the mouth dropping to a minimum.”
Grinning she winked her eye as she turned and pulled her
bow and an arrow from her back.

“You know that I’ve made

lunch of less man than you.” “Sure princess, if you would
pardon my saying, there is no way that you could beat me, I
am the Dwarf Champion.” “Don’t let that silly title make
you think that you are better than you are, Joanna,”
Exclaimed the Princess.” If females were allowed into that
tournament, you know that I would be Champion.” “Want to
bet?”

Joanna lunges at the Princess as he had a number of

times before and she lets the arrow go.

112

She dodges his swing with his axe and tumbles to the ground
picking up a sword and parries his axe. The two clang
blades for at least twenty minutes. Then the two called it
a truce. Blocking each other’s every move and parrying when
needed. Then Joanna looked at his leg and there was an
arrow in his leg armor. “Ouch!” that looks like that hurts,
the princess said. That’s why I would win. “You don’t even
pay attention to the situation you are heading into.

How

did you not see the arrow in your leg? Says the princess.
“I did not feel it.” Said the Dwarf as he pulls out the
arrow and drops it to the floor. “Always Axe first then
brain. Amateur…” Said the Princess. Joanna’s pride was
hurt, but he smiled anyway. Princess was an amazing
fighter, but Joanna was sure that he could beat her if he
were challenged. After all she was a girl. He grinned. A
strange wind howled through the training hall where they
were standing.

The weapons hanging on the wall moved a

bit. The Princess and Joanna both stopped and smelled the
air.

The two walked over to the window and looked out at

the beautiful rolling hills of the Kingdom.
beautiful.

113

The day was

A light breeze swayed the trees and the clouds slowly
danced across the sky.

The Princess closed both her eyes

and took a long sip of the fresh air. She finished drawing
in her breath. She opened her eyes and walked into a long
hallway with Joanna by her side. This hallway runs along
side the training court and ends at a set of stairs.
Halfway down the hallway, the Princess notices at the top
of the steps her father, and the Oracle High Elf standing
they’re talking. “The oracle,” the Princess whispered to
Joanna. “He must come with news,” Joanna replied as he
stepped to her side.

“He only comes when there is bad

news.” Princess and Joanna raced up the castle steps, with
the Princess beating Joanna by four whole steps. “It’s not
fair when your legs are as long as I am tall!” Joanna
growled. Still marching up the stairs the Joanna whispers.
“Quiet, old man, you are just a sore loser, especially when
you lose to…a girl! A princess no less, why I don’t think
that there is any worse humiliation in the world, a strong
fighter like your self, and one who, rumor has it, took on
ten Orcs at once and killed them all. Woo Ehh Ohh What a
warrior. Bla Bla Bla.

114

Whatever it is they say you did.” I mean, how can you stand
the humiliation?

A Human, a human girl beating the

strongest, supposedly the fiercest Dwarf in the land?

I

think it’s because I’m just plain Old better than you!” The
Princess burst into laughter as Joanna stomped ahead to the
top of the stairs. “Stupid girl, why I put up with you…”
Joanna mumbled as he trailed. Princess nudged him, “Come
on, you know I’m your favorite, just fooling ya.” As she
turned away she smiled. “Besides, the story is up to eleven
of them orcs,” the Princess said.” Joanna stopped short and
quickly turned his head in the direction that Princess was
staring. In the middle of the grand hallway, a glowing orb
of mist and smoke was suspended in front of the Oracle and
the king. They were talking then stopped when the two
approached. “She is here,” the Oracle says in a low tone.
Both the King and the Oracle cast a fast glance at the
Princess and the Dwarf walking their way.
The Oracle stood next to the king, showing the King
his visions in the mist. Inside the mist a great battle
with the White Knights, Orcs, Goblins, and Dragons was
raging.

115

Then the battle was over and there was the Evil Dark
Lord, the ruler of the Keepers and he had a claw in his
hand. Most of the White Knights had been burned or
slaughtered. There was a massive fight and hundreds of Orcs
where lying dead on the ground. The Leader of the White
Knights Lord Rathix was slain by the Black Knight. Sir John
and the last of the knights where taken Captive. The
Princess rushed over to the two with Joanna right behind
her and the two stops to gaze into the mist. “That’s not,”
she said as she trailed. “I am afraid it is my darling,”
Said the King. “The Scepter has been broken and one of the
pieces the claw is now in the hands of The Evil Dark Lord.”
The king says. “I am afraid the White Knights have failed,”
Said the Elf with a low unhappy tone. “Someone must go,”
Said the King. “We must act now,” Said the Dwarf and the
Princess. The Elf and the King turned to look at the
Princess and Joanna. “We have little time, someone has to
restore the balance again,” Said the King. The Princess
looked at the Oracle very seriously then stepped forward.
In a sharp but clear medium tone said. “I will go, Father.”

116

Then the dwarf moved forward adjusting his belt and sash.
The Oracle looked puzzled past the princess towards Joanna.
“And you?” said Oracle. The King and his Princess look in
the direction of the Dwarf for his response. Joanna as sure
of him self as he was a Dwarf said, “I will protect My
Princess no harm shall come to her.” “Ok then, you cannot
do this alone,” Says the King. “You must gather some
warriors and rescue Sir Jonathan, for he alone has the
might to defeat The Black Knight,” Says the King. “I will
send a small army with you princess to help you with your
task,” Said the King. The Oracle then explains that a large
group would slow them down, attracts attention and would
certainly be discovered faster by the Evil Lord. He said
that a smaller group would be faster less apt to be unseen.
The Oracle suggested that the King send ten of his finest
warriors with the Princess and Joanna.
They would need to find the other two parts before the
Evil Dark Lord does. If the Evil Dark Lord obtains control
of all three parts and puts them together he will rule both
realms. Joanna looked towards Princess whose eyes were
wide.

117

“I feel like we have a lot on our shoulders,” Says
Joanna. The Princess looked towards her father. “What about
the third part to the scepter, and where is Sir John being
held?” Says the Princess,” The King looked down. Sir John
and the white knights are held in the Dead Valley Dungeon
Prisons in the Dead Valley Mountain. “You and Joanna will
have to free Sir John first and he can go after the third
missing piece to the scepter and face the black knight.
Then you have to find the other two parts.” Joanna was
getting annoyed. “What are you all talking about?

We don’t

need the Knight; I can defeat the Black Knight.” Princess
looked to Joanna. “Well, aren’t you my little hero,“ says
the Princess. The Oracle cut her off.

“Dwarf you must save

your fight for the Dark Lord you will need to protect the
Princess against him while she puts the scepter back
together. The Dark Lord is your destiny. For you alone
cannot defeat the Black Knight, It is your destiny to
protect the Princess.”

“Your youth Princess and your

strength Dwarf will help you defeat the Dark Evil Lord,”
Said the Oracle. You must get the sphere from the half
lings most likely that is where it has headed for.

118

The parts have magic in them and have gone back to
there creators. You can find the golden scepter in the
mines Of Ladamer the underground Dwarven City. Well that
one will be easy said the Dwarf. That’s my home. “What
about the Claw?” the Princess asked. “That is Sir John’s
charge.” “The White Knights slain the Dragon the claws came
from, and now he must fight the Black Knight to get it
back.”

“You must meet here when the three moons are full

and restore the balance once again,” Says the oracle.
“Joanna can you lead me to the half lings?” says the
Princess. Joanna smiled. His gaze was icy. Then the Oracle
spoke. “Joanna, You have the key to the gate of Half Lings,
don’t you Joanna?” says the Oracle. The King looks at the
Dwarf. The Princess was puzzled. “Joanna?” says the
princess. She laughs and looks towards the King and the
Oracle. “Joanna doesn’t have any special key!” says the
princess. Now Joanna was puzzled. Joanna remembers his
prize for being Champion. The key around his neck, it all
of a sudden felt warm. He pulled it from under his vest as
it glowed of jasper and gold.

119

The Princess sighs as she notices she was wrong and is
feeling quite silly. “Well, that is certainly a key
alright,” Says the King. “This will get us into the gates
of the half lings?” says the Princess. Rejoicing the Dwarf
Bellows, “Yes it will.” “You must convince them to give you
the sphere Princess. Whoever has it will not give it up
easily. Half lings are partial to shinny things. They most
likely will not have any clue to what it is. So you must be
cunning and out smart them. That is the Key Joanna,” Says
the Oracle. Joanna held the key tightly. “You can count on
me your majesty,” Says the Dwarf. The Dwarf bowed to the
King and nodded his head in acceptance to the Oracle.
The Princess rushed up to her father and hugged him.
“Succeed and Come back to me, my Princess,” Says the King.
“I will father.” The Princess exclaimed. “You are strong
and good of heart my daughter, you shall restore the
balance and save our world,” Says the King. “Thank you
father, your faith will guide us,” Says the Princess. The
Princess nodded towards the Oracle and turned to Joanna.
“Are you ready for a journey?” says the princess.

120

Joanna half smiled and replied. “I’m ready if you
are.” He bowed to the King and the Oracle. “I thank you for
this honor, My King,” Says the Dwarf. “The honor is ours,
Champion,” the King replied. The two Hero’s walk away and
the sounds of there footsteps fade away. The Princess
nudges the Dwarf in the back of his helm, “When where you
going to tell me about the key?”
In her room, the Princess was collecting weapons and
clothes for her journey.

She was packing her usual

wardrobe into the small backpack.

An extra Leather tunic,

green pants, leather boots and a few extra pairs of woolen
socks line the inside of the backpack. The Princess held up
a dagger and pointed it at Joanna who was standing in the
doorway to her room. “What?” “What?” What did I Do? Well
you haven’t done anything that’s the problem. But I never
knew you had a special key to the Gate of Half Lings. “What
is it, the Dwarf Don’t tells the Princess because she can’t
keep a secret? To whatever it is that the key goes to? The
Princess says in a sassy voice. “Would you just stop? The
Dwarf almost yells.

121

“Maybe I didn’t tell you because I forgot about it
myself!” It just hangs there with no noise or glow no use
at all. Princess threw her packed backpack on the bed and
turned to Joanna.

She looked at the ground.

“All I know

is that the Oracle said Sir John had a destiny to the
Scepter. That means that you and I need to free Sir John so
he can confront this Black Knight.”

Princess had her hands

on her hips and an icy gaze. “We can do this, you can do
this, and we will conquer our foe.’ Joanna Says. The Dwarf
didn’t want to make Princess anymore stressed than she
already was.

Her pretty face was twisted in fear and

anger. “Sorry, it’s a lot, the balance is Sir John’s
destiny and I can’t turn away from helping him,” Said the
Princess.

“It’s yours too, we have to do this together,”

Said Joanna.

“No problem, we should get going soon

Princess. What do you say?” The Princess thinks for a
moment then she has a thought. “Let me just say goodbye to
my brother.” “Lawson” The two walks down the long hallway
toward the east wing of the castle. They stopped half way
at a set of stairs on the right. Then the Dwarf started
down the stairs to the courtyard.

122

Outside its mid morning and the Suns are starting to
show daylight. The trees whistle with the leaves falling
like little bombs from the sky. The Princess continued on
until she reached a room at the end of the long hallway.
The Princess walked into the room where an older man was
busy polishing his sword handle. “Lawson!” He sits the
sword down on the table next to him and he turns around to
notice his younger sister. He stands up and puts a crutch
under one of his arms for he only had one leg. He lost his
leg in a wagon accident saving a small girl from a runaway
wagon. The Princess walked towards him stopping in front of
him. The two embraced, and then pulled back, arms still
around each other. “I’m glad you came to see me before you
left,” Lawson pulled a dagger from his belt. It glowed with
a blue shine. It was silver with green runes engraved on
the blade. There was blue jasper stone in the hilt. “This
is a gift to you, sister. Fight well, and this will help
you stay safe. It’s magical; it will deactivate any kind of
a spell.”

The Princess took the dagger from her older

brother, who helped her learn so much about fighting, along
with Joanna.

123

“Thank you, brother.

Guard the palace, and please

take care of Father,” Says the princess. A tear welled in
one of the Princess’s eyes. “What is that? No tears!

A

warrior does not cry, and you, my sister, are one of the
fiercest warriors that I’ve ever trained,” Says her
brother.

“Thank you for your confidence,” Says the

princess. “I feel that I will need it.” “Blessings are with
you, my sister.

Let the Elders grace you with their

faith,” Says her brother. She then left the room. The
Princess walked out of the room, down the grand staircase,
and into the courtyard. Waiting with two horses one short
and the other tall Joanna held the reins waiting for his
princess. Smiling the Princess grabs the reins and takes a
step then leaps up into her saddle. She takes in a deep
breath of fresh air and sighs. Her horse bobbles his head a
little as to wondering where it was they where going then
he starts to move forward ready for a chance to gallop. The
Dwarf being so ample in size lacked in height, had to use a
small foot stole to mount his steed. One leap of faith was
all it took and Joanna was on his horse. With a growl of
disgust, he gives his horse a kick with his feet.

124

Dwarfs don’t like Horses, especially short ones. The
Princess Giggled. “Having Problems old Mighty Champion?”
Then she trots off out of the Castle. “Grrrr.” Joanna
growls. Then he takes his reins and follows in a fast
gallop after the Princess. The Princess Laughing all the
way out of the castle Dwarf trailing behind. The two go to
meet their destiny.

125

Two Join the Quest

126

Chapter 12

They made there way through alleys and past the small
homes to the marketplace outside the Castle. As they slowed
down so not to trample anyone over with the horses a little
elf boy approaches them and stepped in front of their
horses, blocking them from moving on. “You two are on a
magical journey, I can smell it. The boy pulls out a small
dagger and jousts it into the sky. My grandfather tells me
it’s important he says you need warriors. Where are you
going? Are you going to save the Realm? I want to go! Can
you take me with you? I can help. I am a thief I can get
anything. Let me come with you,” Says the elf. The Dwarf
stares at him with amazement that a little elf boy would
want to journey into such danger.

The Boy did not have a

clue where he was going or fighting. Joanna looks over at
the Princess. “Well…” says Joanna.

127

“Please,” says the elf “The Princess with no
expression just sits there and is thinking.” “Why in the
world should we let you come with us?” The Dwarf huffed in
the boy’s face. Joanna rolled his eyes. So many children
had asked to accompany him on dangerous journeys; he just
was tired of saying no. “A thief could be good to have
around, since they’re always trying to steal something
anyways, “Said the Princess. “What is your name?” She
asked. “Tooc, I am Tooc,” the boy replied. Joanna looked at
the boy, trying not to laugh, “That is your name?” “Tooc, I
am Tooc,” the boy replied. “Tooc”, hmm Tooc what rimes with
Tooc? Said the Dwarf “More Like Took, I think he meant
took.” as Joanna Smiles with laughter, The Princess Smiles
and chuckles at the boy. “Don’t mind him he’s fickle.” She
says. “HaHa.” Such a funny little man said the Elf boy.
“Alright you can come,” says the Princess. “He can?”
Questioned the Dwarf.” The Dwarf with ease and quickness
reaches down and snatches a flask out of the thief’s hands,
as he was about to take a drink. Where did you get this
flask? That is mine, Exclaimed the Boy.

128

I don’t think this flask belongs to you for he
revealed a White Cross on a Red shield. The Dwarf turned it
around for all to see and Under the Cross-was the Initials
S.J.C. That stood for Sir John of Caroline. Ah, I was going
to give that back Honest. The Boy Said. The Princess took
the Flask from the Joanna and handed back to the Boy. We
are on a quest to rescue Sir John and to save the realm. I
think you should give this back to him your self after you
help us rescue him. Tooc then said in a loud happy voice.
“Ah… ok Great!”

Let me get my horse!” The boy goes to the

nearest horse and looks it up and down. It was a small
brown sugar horse, just a little skinny but with a nice
evenly straight body. The horse was tied to a post, saddled
and had a small pack on the side. Tooc thought to himself,
a little shorter then my normal catch but this will do.
Then he hops on. The horse is a little startled for a
moment but then reacts to the slight nudge in the ribs from
the elf’s boot to start trotting. The elf trots over to
where the old magician was sitting. The Old Magician slowly
opens his eyes and looks up to the Elf boy. “On another
adventure are we! Say’s the Old Magician.”

129

The Elf says with a smile and hurries. “Yes Grandpa,’
we must hurry or a White Knight wills surely die.” says the
Elf boy. “Very Well,” Says the Old Magician. The Old
Magician then slowly stands up and takes his cane and
plants it firmly on the ground to gain a straight posture.
He then reaches out his hand to the Elf Boy to help him up
on the horse. The elf Boy proceeds to help old magician up
onto the horse. “Woo, we didn’t say anything about grandpa
too, just you.” In an unclad tone said The Dwarf? “Come on,
please,” Says elf boy.” “He knows magic, really and he said
I couldn’t go without him,” the elf boy pleaded. The elf
turned to his Grandpa and winked an eye. The little
magician just smiled. “Well alright, let’s go,” the
Princess said.” The Boy just smiled. “I think your getting
soft,” Says the Princess as she pulls the reins on her
horse to a gallop. “Bah… Bah I am a Warrior we never get
soft, screeched the Dwarf.

‘I just think four swords are

better then two,” Says the Princess. Once again, The
Princess kicked her horse, and Joanna did so as well.
were off.

The thief and magician were close behind.

130

They

As they rode away, a drunken patron stumbled out of
the pub, scratching his head, standing where he thought his
horse had been tied. “I thought I brought my horse…?” says
the drunken patron. “Hmmm. Guess Not.” Say’s the drunken
patron as he starts walking home.
At a fast gallop three horses carrying a Princess, Dwarf,
thief and a Magician left the marketplace and were fast in
Gaining to the countryside. The four rode until the trees
had no leaves, the rivers ran dry and the sky was dark
Gray.

131

The Dungeons of Dead Valley Mountains

132

Chapter 13

“This must be the land of the Black Knight,” Tooc
said, his voice wavering. “You’re right, said the princess.
The party dismount there horses and ties them up to a
nearby tree. The Dwarf Pulls out a map and researches there
exact location. As the Moons come out from behind the
clouds the moons light gave shadow to a nearby castle on a
side of a mountain. To make the rest of the trip would
require going up the side of the mountain thru the woods,
or straight up the winding trail to the front gate. Trying
to take on all the guards at the front gate would be
impossible so they choose the going up the mountain side.
“We must watch our step and keep our voices low,” The
Princess whispered back. “My grandfather can cast a spell
to make us invisible!” Tooc exclaimed. “Hush!
Princess just say?” Joanna said harshly.
head, and whispered sorry.

133

What did the

Tooc lowered his

“Invisible, huh, well that will certainly make it easier to
slip past the guards.” Magician can you do this?” The
Princess said. Grandfather’s face lit up and he pulled a
wand from his sleeve and began to wave it frantically.
“Sight unseen, sound unheard, make us invisible, by my
word!” a puff of smoke came from his wand then a bright
flash. They were invisible. Joanna looks around and said
where did everyone go? Princesses are you there?
Then it is quiet for a moment then a pleasant but firm
voice broke the silence. “Wow, I’m impressed.

Glad we

brought you, Magician.” The Princess said in amazement. “It
worked. In an exciting amazement said Tooc.” “You’re
surprised,” muttered the Dwarf. “”Ah, No, I new he could do
it,” Said Took in Disbelief. Then all those who were
invisible begin to have a light blue glow around them for
each other to see their locations something the magician
added to his spell. Tooc Poked the Dwarf in the back and
Joanna turned around seeing just an outline of Tooc’s body.
Then he turned and could see the Princess as she walked up
close to him. “Are you doing ok my Champion,” Said the
Princess.”

134

“Ah… um… you’re invisible too… Sure I am… I am ready
to fight,” Exclaimed Joanna. Joanna and the Princess look
towards the Magician as he is sitting down on a small tree
stump. “Spells take a lot out of him; he will be ok in a
moment,” Said Tooc. The Dwarf turned around. “Well, he’s
your responsibility, you best watch him, and don’t let him
get behind! The quiet thing still stands, even though we’re
invisible.” They where invisible and without horses there
was almost zero noise now they had the element of surprise.
They press forward thru the wilderness. Stopping every now
and then to get there bearings the Dwarf looks at his
trusty map. “Well it looks like it’s just thru this thicket
to the East,” Said the Dwarf.”
As the band of warriors walk out of the woods as a
castle loomed above them on a hill. It was most hideous.
Black towers shot straight up into the sky. High Stone
Walls surround the castle. Green moss and vegetation is
scattered about on the walls revealing small cracks in the
blocks from old age. Many Orcs patrolled the turrets and
walls around the castle.

135

The moat water surrounding the castle was almost red
in color as the moonlight shined down from the moon.
Dangerous creatures are stirring about underwater. In front
of the Castle in camp is a massive army awaiting orders.
Light flickered in one the windows of the castle between
the towers.

A dark figure walked out of the doorway next

to the window and stood on the balcony just above the main
gate. The Dwarf quickly ducks back into the woods. Psssst!
Princess… Princess… the Dwarf frantically called for her.
She turned around. Joanna did you forget that about the
invisible spell. Hum. I mean ya. Maybe it wore off… Oh ya
Princess. The Dwarf darts out of the woods axe drawn and
back up to the side of the Princess. “The Shadow splits
into two dark silhouettes above the main castle gate. The
Princess and her party can make out the silhouettes, one
the Black Knight and another is one of his soldiers. The
time is coming again, My Lord,” an Orcs captain bowed to
the Black Knight. The great leader did not turn. “Don’t you
think I know this?” as he hissed.

“I know that you are

stupid, but I don’t understand what makes you think that I
am.

136

I am not an Orc, I am a Knight, and we are not dumb
like you.”

“I’m sorry, sir.

I do not know what I say.

I

am stupid,” the captain stared at the ground as he spoke.
“What shall we do to prepare?” The Black Knight turned to
the Orc, his face that of a human, a human that gave up on
human way of life a long time ago and said. I have the
claw! Interrupted by a raspy voice out of the shadows a
third silhouette appears. We have the claw, Knight!” As the
Dark Lord walks up behind him as if he were drifting across
the floor like a leave in the wind.

“If it weren’t for me,

we’d be nowhere, The elves would restore the balance and my
chance to vanquish their realm would be shattered. All
those lives we have taken, their voices would ring in our
ears, Shouted the Black Knight.” All of the evil we have
spread in the world would turn to,” he paused, and shut his
eyes. “Good,” with an air of disgust, said the Dark Lord.”
“That would be terrible, My Lord as the Black Knight
responded. I want to see that look on the face of their
King as we kill all his people leaving him to last to
watch. They both turned to the other side of the balcony
and walked into the door where there was a fire lit in the
center of the room.

137

The Dark Lord walked to the fire.

Suspended in the

fire was the dragon claw. “Ice Candara, you were such a
great beast.

It’s a shame they had taken your life you had

served me well. He spoke to the claw.

“You will protect

us; you will keep my army strong,” How about the other
parts of the scepter?” The Black Knight spoke. “You will go
and retrieve the other two parts to the scepter and I will
take the Dark army to the Kingdom of Pathonas Said the Dark
Lord. I will make sure that the castle and all those who
fight against me will be destroyed, just like the White
Knights, “And what of the last White Knight Sir John,” Said
the Black Knight. The Dark Lord opens up his hand and a
small mist forms in his palm. A quick glance to the Dungeon
in a small dark cell with a man chained to the wall with
little hope and half starved. “Let him rot in the Dungeon,”
Rasped the Dark Lord. He closes his palm into a fist and
the image disappears. You will go and retrieve the other
two parts of the scepter and bring them to me. Tomorrow I
will Start the siege and break their defenses down. And
when you arrive in two days with the final two parts to the
scepter I will merge the pieces into the most powerful
scepter.

138

Then I will crush there puny castle and destroy them
once and for all. The Dark Lord gives the locations of the
missing pieces to the Black Knight, and then the Black
knight departs his Castle with hundred of his best Orcs
heading towards Palace in the Valley of the Half lings.
Then shortly after the Dark Lord flew out of the castle
with his Dragon as the Dark Army followed behind. This
leaves only a handful of Orcs to protect the castle. But
that was too many for the group of four to face alone. So
they had to be stealthy and sneak inside with out alarming
the guards.

139

The Back Way in

140

Chapter 14

Joanna looks at the Princess. Then he asks for best
strategic Plan to get inside the castle and free Sir John.
“Hmm, The Princess thinks a loud.”
-Stone path road leads right up to the front door of the
castle? Says the Princess with question.
“Nope, There are many guards in front of the main gate we
will be overrun, Says the Dwarf.”
-Main gate is a large stone door with iron braces to hold
in on the wall? Says the Princess with questions.
Natta, Unbreakable.
-Castle walls?, Says the Princess with questions.
Not a chance. Not even remotely scalable even by rope,
barks the Dwarf.

141

-The Two tall towers in the front of the castle? Says the
Princess with question.
Not an option. That Way is Too Visible. No cover many
casualties will come from the arrows showering from the
towers above, the dwarf barks yet again at the princess.
“Ok now I am fresh out of Ideas Dwarf? Now what? Says the
Princess.” The Dwarf sitting on a Log bounces his axe from
hand to the other. I don’t know. He Claims. The Princess
Looks at her Champion and the magician they all look at
each other clueless and shrug their shoulders.
“Water!!!” blurts out the Thief.
“Water how can you think about water at a time like this
the Dwarf sighs.” The Princess takes heed and Looks at
Tooc. Water? What are you talking about Tooc? “I heard from
a friend of a friend of a friends Father that he had
escaped once from the Black Knights castle, He escaped out
a waterfall.” “Ok. I’m listening, Says the Princess.” On
the backside of the Castle is a waterfall.

142

Behind the waterfall is a drainpipe that leads to one
of the lower dungeons in the castle, There are no guards
there his father said.” The Dwarf stands up. “Yes now
that’s a good Idea, How do we get there? Says the Princess
as she grins.” Yes. How do we get their Tooc? The Magician
Smiles. “I dun no,” says Tooc.
“Listen, The Dwarf whispers.” They all stop and listend The
Dwarfs ears perk up then he started walking, then stopped
and turned around. I’m a Dwarf if anything I can find
water, I smell it. Then he started walking again East about
two hundred feet thru the woods. They followed. They came
to a small clearing in the middle of the woods and could
see nothing either way up or down but trees.
“Well there is a cliff to the East of the Castle. Follow
the cliff down to the base of the waterfall and there we
should find some way behind the waterfall to get into the
pipe, said the thief.” This way the Dwarf said as he headed
south towards the end of the clearing. At the end of the
clearing there was a huge oak tree laying on its side and
covered with moss.

143

There was a narrow path leading out from it into the
woods. The Dwarf follows the small path till he reaches a
dead end. Thin small blades of grass were doused with water
just below there feet. There were patches of water all
around. Large stones line the end of the path with only one
way to go. They stop as the Dwarf Kneels down stooped over
with an ear to the ground while his axe lays flat under his
hand keeping him from falling over. “Aye!” “This way,” “I
hear running water coming from the South East.” Says the
Dwarf. Up, they went and over to the other side were many
dead pine trees stood. They continue on as they pass all
the dead trees. A Large wall surrounds the castle
boundaries and they have just reached this stone wall when
suddenly there was a drop in the earth. The Cliff was
found. Look as the thief shouts. There it is. About two
hundred yards away and about a hundred foot down there was
a waterfall. They started to follow the cliff until it
stopped to what appeared to be a ramp heading down towards
the waterfall and the river. A small river ran down the
backside of the castle for miles. The only way to cross was
behind the waterfall.

144

Tooc was the first down the ramp, then The Princess,
the Dwarf, The Magician, and then the Guards. As they reach
the bottom of the Ramp they where right in front of the
Waterfall. On one side of the river was a wall of stone and
they other was tree roots and some long lost fallen great
oak trees. Tooc finds a way behind the waterfall and tells
the others to follow. It is Dark, Damp, wet, and filled
with a nasty smell. They lit their torches and continue in.
At the far end of the Waterfall there was a doorway blocked
by iron bars. At the bottom left side there was a break in
the bars and two were missing. Tooc said I will go but I am
not going first its dark in there. The Dwarf grabbed a
torch from his backpack and catches blaze from one of the
other torches. Along with Tooc they fit thru the break in
the iron bars and disappear into the darkness.
Some times passes by and they return. Princess there
is a large drain shaft that leads up towards the castle the
Thief blurts out. The Iron Grate that was on it has fallen
broken says the dwarf. It is dry and does not appear to
have been used in a long time.

145

It is possible to climb up through the shaft. Everyone
follows the Dwarf into the Tunnel and he leads the group up
through the winding cavern. After an hour of climbing they
arrive at the other end of the tunnel and Come up through a
broken metal grate that lay in the stone floor.
As the Dwarf removed the metal grate covering from its
place a small gust of wind comes through the tunnel blowing
out all the torches. The Dwarf quickly jumps out of the
tunnel and lights another three torches and throws them
down on the ground. The room starts to fill with light and
the rest of the group ascends out of the tunnel into the
room. Several Black chains with cuffs hang on the wall up
high off the floor. Straw covers a dirt floor, with a few
Small rocks and stones placed mysteriously about. Decaying
Bones and skulls of captive victims lay silently on floor.
Old metal armor with dents and scratches sit about with no
body to cover. This seemed to be a center point in a lower
dungeon surround by twelve small cells and one corridor
heading upwards. Small round holes or windows are in each
of the outer walls of twelve cells covered with black iron
bars.

146

A single cell with no window had scratch marks in the
wall under were the window had been filled in with stone.
Long black iron chains drape down from the ceiling fitting
tightly into a hanging hook in side of the wall. This must
be a torture chamber said Tooc. “Yes, indeed,” Says the
Princess.” ‘They will probably keep the Knight up higher in
the dungeon so as to check on him daily to see how much
suffering he is doing, Said the Dwarf.”
”Yes, says the Princess.”
We must continue up to the upper dungeons. The group relights their torches and they start up the corridor. After
a few corridors they come to the main Dungeon. Blocked by a
big wooden door there were five Orc guards and a goblin
jailer on the other side. There is a single white candle
half burnt in the center of the jailers table along with a
half eaten piece of bread and a small empty wooden bowl and
spoon. Torches on the walls outside the cells give just
enough light each cell. There is movement in most of the
cells. Joanna sizes up the door. He Pulls his axe too his
side and then to his shoulder.

147

The Princess looked at Joanna. “And just how much
noise do you plan on making their Dwarf?” the princess
asks.

“Well I was going to just make a little noise, Says

the Dwarf.’ The Princess interrupts in a childish charm.
“Hmm. Now I wonder how hard that door could be to unlock,
Just look at that old rusty lock on the door.” “Wow it must
be at least two tumblers in there.” She says, to the thief.
The thief after doing a quick browse into his belongings
for a quick inventory clears his throat and says. Ahmmmm…
Princess I can do it.” “What might those little fingers do
with this lock?” the princess says as she turns around. The
Thief pulls his hand out of his backpack sets it down on
the ground then pulls out a small bag from his waist belt.
Then pulls out his lock pick set and grins. “Well it should
not take at least three cockcrows and no more,” says the
thief. Then he quickly zips over to the door and starts
twirling and twisting his lock picks in the old lock. The
Princess turns to the Dwarf and gives his arm just a nudge
for a hint for him to lower his axe to his side. And so he
did. The thief was whistling and muttering to him self.

148

And Just moments later a small click could be heard
then the big wooden door became a jar. “Done, Said the
Thief.” The Axe came up quickly into both hands as the
Dwarf slowly pushes open the wooden door with his shoulder.
It creeks some then opens. The rest of the group arm
themselves.
Outside Wolves are creeping through the thick bramble
that surrounds the cliffs of the waterfall. An Owl hoots as
other night flight creatures fly about through the trees.
The wind is picking up and Light is being extinguished by
darkness as Night arrives. Still invisible, the Princess
and her heroes are about to surprise the Orc Jailers. “Did
you hear something?” One of the Orcs stops the conversation
about the White Cross Necklace the Goblin was holding.
“Yeah, I heard GE-Ob over there was not going to share in
the goods.” an Orc responds. GE-Ob is a little upset by
this comment and attacks the Orc who said this.

Soon all

ten Orcs and the one goblin are fighting each other,
hitting each other in the face, clawing, scratching, and
chewing.

149

The Goblin is biting one Orc on the arm. “I have a
feeling they won’t notice us,” The Princess whispered. “I
think you’re right, Said the Dwarf,” The Princess whispers
back.

“Let’s go.” They stayed close to the wall of the

inner main Jailers room until they reached the furthest
corridor on the other side of the room. They reached the
corridor and then followed it to a large door at the end.
This door had a sword and a suit of White Knight armor all
piled up on a table sitting next to it. The three crept by
sleeping Orc door guard to reach the destination of yet
another locked door. This door appears to be locked from
the other side. The Dwarf suddenly became visible, then the
Thief, then the Princess. “Wow that didn’t last long, Said
the Dwarf.” “Yes indeed,” the Princess said.” “But we did
get inside, said the Thief.” “So How, how, how are we going
to get in that room? Tooc asked nervously.”
climbing skills The Princess asked?”

“How are your

Already noticing the

small ledge above the door where there was a small window
Joanna throws up a rope with a grappling hook. Joanna gives
a light tug on the rope to make sure it was secure.

150

As Tooc began to scale the short rope up and over the
door he went finding footholds in offset stones. There was
a loud crashing coming from the other side of the door then
three smaller thuds. The Princess and the Dwarf hide in the
shadows. The Orc door guard opens his one eye half way and
takes a quick look around. Seeing nothing he then turns
over to his other side and goes back to sleep.
Not even a minute went by then the door unlocked and
crept open with a small shadow on the other side motioning
to come this way. The Princess and Dwarf walk through. The
Dwarf asked what the loud noise was. The Princess was in
silence until they reached the doorway. A table was smashed
to unrecognizable wood pieces scattered all about. There
was food and wine splattered on the walls and wooden plates
and Goblets where in the mix. Chairs where broken flipped
over and three Orc guards where lying unconsciously on the
floor. There where three surprised Orcs when I came over
the door so I jumped and made a dive bomb for the table and
the Orcs broke my fall. Beat from the climb up and the jump
down Tooc catches his breathe as he smiles.

151

The only thing not smashed was a single candle lying
on its side dripping wax onto the floor as its flame
flickered on in the densely lit room.

There were two cells

one on each side of the room. Both Cell’s had black iron
bar doors on them. The one cell’s door was open and it was
very dark inside the other was dimly lit by the moonlight
coming in thru its window. The Cell’s door was shut and
locked. Coming from the cell on the left side you could
here the faint sounds of two people talking. It startled
the Dwarf. “Who’s here with us?” Felix whispered loudly.
Sir John says “I’m not sure.” Maybe the Orcs came back to
torturer you some more? Ha very funny John. The last time
they it took them two hours to argue over who was going to
take you to the torture chamber and they forgot all about
it when they were done fighting. “Yes, that was pretty
lame. They are probably fighting over the gold cross that
you always wear, said Felix.” “Yes I’ll get that back sir
John grunted as he tried to loosen himself from the wall.
“Sooner then you thinks.” Someone speaks up from the other
side of the cell door.

152

Then Out of the shadows a single flickering candle was
help up to the cell door a small Dwarf and a little elf boy
are standing there. The thief starts working on the cell
lock. Have this open in a jiffy. Then the Dwarf lowers the
candle to spread light over the lock so the thief could do
his work. Click, Scrap, Scratch, and Click, Click, for two
minutes then a loud POP and then the door sprang open. The
Princess takes the candle as she enters the cell. Are you
ok Sir John she asks? Yes we are fine, Thought you would
never come, says Felix as he rejoices. Hello my Brave
Knight I have come to free you says the Princess as she
smiles. How did? Where Was? What the Devil? Felix Squirms
in his chains as he notices the Princess, Elf Boy, The
Dwarf, And the Magician. Just as Felix was complaining a
weird clicking sound was heard from over his head and chain
came loose and he was released. As he fell down to his feet
Tooc started unlocking the iron cuffs around his hands
feet. Felix was checking his wrists for they where hurting
from the shackles. Who all came with you Princess? The
Knight asked. “Tooc,” Whispered the Princess.”

153

Another clicking sound and the Knights Shackles fell
to the floor. Then Tooc appeared out of the shadows while
putting his lock picks away. Yes princess, I am here Says
the Thief. “Our little Locksmith thief, says the Princess.
“Joanna?” A loud wind comes hurling by the faces of The
Princess and The Thief as an axe comes gracefully flowing
in an arch down to the ground below them with a loud thud.
Perfect and precise the Axe Cuts a large black iron shackle
into two. “This here shackle with a three foot chain
attached to a five

hundred pound ball has no lock and can

not be picked so I deprived our Knight here of it, gasping
for breath, the Dwarf said.” ‘So Yes I am here Princess,
Says the Dwarf.” The huge shackle falls to the floor and
the Knight steps out of it. “Are you all right? The
Princess asks.” The Knight is on one knee and is standing
up. He starts to slip a little but regains his balance.
“Don’t worry about me, I will be fine,” Sir John Expressed.
The Princess turns to the knight and the two walk out
of the Cell. The Knight starts putting his armor back on
and Felix his Squire helps.

154

Tooc disappears for a few moments but reappears with
Sir John’s Cross. The Knight puts on his last piece of
armor and tightens the straps to it. He then puts his sword
in its sheath. Sir John bows his head as Tooc puts the
cross back to its rightful place. The Knight notices his
favorite wine flask tucked in the Thief’s sash then
remembers the boy at the marketplace. Then stands up and
flexing his muscles turning his head side to side
stretching all the muscles. The Knight heads to towards the
main door and takes a torch off the wall and lights it. The
Thief runs up to the Knight and starts to pull the Wine
Flask out of his sash. “Sir John I want to return this
to….. Sir John turned his head sideways with torch in hand
and smiled. Its ok you keep it, thanks for getting my cross
back. And Sir John pulled his sword out of its sheath and
continued thru the door way. Will he be ok, asks the Dwarf.
He will be fine he is White Knight, The Princess shushes
him. ‘Do you know where the Claw is being kept, Says the
Princess.” The Knight thinks for a moment. “Yes I know how
to there from here, follow me…”

155

The Knight carries the torch and Leads followed by the
Squire, the Princess, the Dwarf, the thief, and trailing is
the magician. Felix stops at the wooden table just outside
the room picks up his leather armor and puts it on. Looks
around and finds his sword among others lying on a weapons
rack. Upside down on the ground being used to hold old rags
and used garments he finds his Sir John’s shield.
After dumping out the old rags he puts the Shield on
his back. There I am ready now. He catches up with the rest
and the hero’s start down the corridor as the Knight leads
the way. They reach the end of the corridor the Knight
comes to a stop. About two feet from him was a single
goblin standing their mouth wide open and ajar. He was
holding a shinny brass fork in his hands in front of him.
The Goblins eyes where glossy and big as boulders and he
was shaking lizard skin boots. The goblin was weapon-less
other then the gold fork. The Goblin was starring at the
cross around the Knights neck. Hey that is mine, give it
back. I demand it the Goblin shouted. The Knight Leaned
over the goblin ruffled his armor and flexed.

156

The Goblin was sweating bullets and just sinking in
his stance. The Knight Grinned and shouted Boo!!! The Voice
echoed through the corridor. The Goblin was so scared he
fled the opposite direction with his feet barely touching
the ground. He left the gold fork almost suspended in mid
air. The Knight quickly caught the golden fork before it
fell to the ground. On the side of the fork was an
engraving of Tooc’s name. Wonder where he got that. The
Knight Smiles and everyone are staring at the Thief. Tooc
Walks up and snatches the fork out of the Knights hand.
“Don’t even ask, he muttered.” the White Cross Necklace
around the Knights neck glistens as the thief stares at it
for a moment. “Ahh, says the Knight. “There,” Says Tooc.
The Dwarf speaks up. “Can we go now?” The Knight and the
Princess Chuckle and giggle at the Dwarfs comment. He is
eager for battle the Knight says. Yes I think he is says
the Princess. The group arrives at the main jail just
shortly after the Goblin does. Ten Orcs surround the goblin
trying to make out weather he is lying about humans and
dwarf being in the corridor past there group.

157

The goblin stops for a moment in mid sentence. He
starts to shake in his place then the Orcs turn to see the
White Knight Grinning from ear to ear with sword in hand.
Two of the smallest Orcs armed with clubs lunge forward
towards the Knight, only to be met by the Thief and the
Dwarf. The two Orcs are surprised by the thief and the
dwarf and crash into each other trying to stop. Another Orc
bigger then the other two dashes around them and makes his
way to Sir John. The big Orc comes barreling through with
an unstoppable speed swinging his axe high aiming for the
White Knights head. The Knight half grins as the Princess
steps out from behind and she dives forward in a sweeping
motion like a battering ram aimed at the Big Orcs feet. The
princess crashes into his feet and the big Orc is knocked
off his feet striking the ground in a loud and hard crash.
The Princess stands up and unsheathes her sword. Sir John
steps over the Large Orc and charges the remaining two
Orcs. “Common big fella,” The Princess eggs on the Orc.
Show me what ya got. The big Orc shakes his head and clears
his brain and gets very angry. He tries to regain his feet
while the Princess stands there waiting sword in hand.

158

Then three more Orcs come out of know where flood the
tiny room and charge at the knight along with the two
remaining Orcs.

One by one they try to tackle bite or

grapple the knight. And one by one he sends them flying in
all directions not even taking any hits. One the Orcs goes
flying through the air and lands head first into a cell
causing it to open. The inmates start beating on him with
water cups and wooden buckets. The Orc screams as he is
stuck in between bars. Another Orc crashes into a table
breaking it into many pieces and is knocked out cold. Three
of the Orcs grab there weapons off the ground and scan for
the Knight. The Knight is standing right in front of them
Sword point into the ground and he is leaning on it
checking his nails for a broken one.
The Princess sees this and yells at the Knight. Hey
Mr. Perfect! We don’t have time for this. Remember save the
world, chivalry, and honor so fight now, gloat later? Ah
yes Chivalry, Says the Knight. He charges at the three Orcs
and swings methodically and there is a cloud of dust
surrounding them.

159

The Dwarf defends himself gracefully for the no-match
Orc. He disarms his Orc of his club and gives him a chance
to run away and he does. Bumping into the Felix the Thief
is running for his life for he struggling to get his sword
unsheathed as an Orc is chasing him swinging an axe
vigorously nearly hits Felix? Felix, who has been trying to
find a weapon annoyed at the Orc finally picks up a table
chair and smashes it over the Orcs head disarming him. Then
Felix picks up a large branding iron that was suddenly
revealed to him by the table. The Orc is looking for his
Axe and Felix comes crashing in with his branding iron
bending it into half and knocks the Orc down on top of a
table to the ground next to his weapon. The Orc stares at
his Axe. Then Felix says, DON’T really loud. The Orc laughs
then reaches for his Axe, and Felix picks up nearby over
turned table closes his eyes starts swinging it crazily
whacking and smashing at the Orc. Blood squirted
everywhere. Wood splinters and parts where flying all over.
When all was said and done the Orcs remains was
unrecognizable and lying on the floor. Tooc stops, His
sheath falls to the floor revealing a very sharp sword.

160

Finally puts his sword into the air turns around. He
Yells come on I’ve got ya now as he looks at the mess Felix
made. Smash, crash, and bang as Felix lets the Orc have it
a few more times until there is only one leg left of the
table. The Thief stands there in disbelief and is
motionless. The Dwarf catches his arm before he goes to
swing again and tells Felix to open his eyes. Felix does,
and stops his swing, and looks down to the eyeballs popped
out, tongue hanging lifeless outside of the mouth Broken
Orc lying there. “Boy I gave him a beaten didn’t I,” Said
Felix. Ill say said the Dwarf. Oh Yes, Yes Stutters Tooc.
Startled by a shriek the dwarf is looking over his shoulder
as his undefeated foe comes at him with a dagger. Tooc saw
this as a golden opportunity to try out his new boomerang
and loops it at the Orc. You can hear a whistling sound, a
crack, and then a smash to the ground as the Orc falls
lifeless from the blow to the head.
The boomerang fell to the ground after impact. Tooc
came over picked it up mumbled something about two gold
pieces and it didn’t even come back.

161

He quickly and selfishly throws the boomerang behind
his head and hits another Orc sending out a nearby window
and then the boomerang comes returning back as the Dwarf
catches it. Well I guess you will keep it now. Tooc Just
looked in disgust. Ya you I’ll guess I will keep it now.
The Dwarf Grins, here you go. Tooc tucks the boomerang in
his belt and turns around to stare at Felix again. Felix
and picks up a piece of cloth from the ground and wipes off
the blood of his new weapon. The big Orc finally gets up
and is standing over the princess. I will crush you he
yells. She stands there’s and waits. The Orc picks his Axe
up above his head and comes down with all his might. At the
last moment she side steps the swing of the Axe and swings
her sword into the arms of the Orc taking them off at the
elbows.
At disbelief the Orc tries to pick up his axe but his
hands are not working. He gets very, very mad and starts
screaming out of control and runs at the princess. She
ducks as he passes by swinging his arms sporadically all
over and catches him in the back of the head with her sword
taking it off at the neck.

162

His body stops and falls over as his head rolls around
on the floor for a moment. As she puts back her sword in
its sheath she looks for the Knight. The Dust has settled
and the knight is camped sitting upon a hill of six dead
Orc corpses. Limbs, legs, and torsos are stacked upon each
other. The group stops as they breathe heavily. Then all of
a sudden you could hear it plain as day a screeching of a
horn. A sound so hideous it could only mean one thing. The
goblin had mad it to the outer guards and has sounded the
castle alarm. We better hurry before they figure out where
we are and come for us the Knight shouted. The Princess
agreed.

163

The Escape

164

Chapter 15

The Dwarf, Thief and Felix trailed behind as The White
Knight and the Princess led the way. They were all running
and with quick speed ascended up through the levels of the
Dungeon. The group reaches a large corridor on the inside
of the castles main floor. Standing there awaiting the
group was a large mass of troops, Orcs and goblins with
weapons of all sorts. Rusty old swords, clubs, wooden
boards with nails, and the biggest ugly old Orc you had
ever seen. Armed with chain and a iron ball attacked to the
end of it he stands there waiting.
Fifty Sixty, Said the Dwarf as he pulls his battleaxe
from his shoulder harness. More like Forty Fifty once you
reach them after me. “Says, the Princess as she pulls out
her sword with one hand and a dagger with the other and a
large grin across her face.”

165

The Dwarf eager for battle paces waiting for the
command from the Princess. Sir John, Felix, and Tooc will
go and retrieve the Claw, while we finish these Orcs off. I
believe what the Princess is saying is let us be getting A
move on, says the Sir John. Right you are says Tooc. Sir
John and Felix start running the opposite way of the Orc
Horde. Tooc walks up to the Dwarf and whispers into his ear
something then runs off giggling following the Sir John and
Felix. “More like too many he says.” The dwarf repeats what
the thief says in a whiney voice. Bah… Dreaded thieves the
dwarf thinks. More like a scared goat ling if you ask me
thinking out loud as the Dwarf chuckles to him self.
Joanna…. Long pause.
Joanna…. Short pause.
In a real frantic tone the Princess loses her composure and
calls out his name. JOANNA! She speaks practical screams.
Ah, Hmm, Yes my lady As the Dwarf Replies. Are you ready?
Says the Princess. I am. The Dwarf replies in a more
confident tone.

166

The Princes and the Dwarf’s eyes fixed on the Orc
Horde pause for a moment. The Orc horde was indeed fifty in
all Thirty Orcs plus a giant Ugly Orc and nineteen or so
goblins. Standing there waiting for the two to move the
Orcs start chanting a war cry. Ku TA pa, Ku TA pa, Ku TA
pa, Ku TA a… (Which means time to die) Then they start to
march towards them. The Princess yells out a large war cry
and advances towards the Horde at a medium jog.
The Dwarf lets out a loud war cry and advances towards
the horde at t a faster jog trying keeping up with the
princess. After reaching half the distance to the Orc Horde
the two let out another very loud war cry and speed there
jog to a fast run. Orcs on the left, goblins and the Big
Orc on the right says the Dwarf. You take the goblins and
the big one Joanna she screams.

The Dwarf yells out. I am

already on it my lady. Then the Dwarf hops once, twice,
then three times into the air he went diving into the crowd
of goblins. The Dwarf was heading in the direction of the
Largest Orc in the Horde, slashing and hacking his way past
the Goblins.

167

The Princess runs right up the middle ducking,
turning, sliding, and jumping over blades of the Orcs. She
reached what seemed to be the middle of the Horde and there
was opening about twenty feet. She stopped there and stood
starring at the Orcs from behind.

She was unharmed and had

not even a single scratch on her. Surprised that she was
still standing the Orcs looked dumb-founded and confused.
The Dwarf had a small group of goblins following him along
with some Orc stragglers until he reached the Big Orc. Then
they stopped way behind him as they saw the Big Orc. The
Big Orc was sitting down on a stool finishing up some kind
of food meat on a bone. He throws the bone down on the
ground and picks up his ball and chain. That ball alone
must weight at least four hundred pounds the Dwarf thought
to himself. The Big Orc then stands up and grins. The Dwarf
comes to a sliding stop about ten feet away from the Big
Orc. Oh you’re a big one. Aye, bet ya fall down just as
fast as you stood up there. The Big Orc Leans over and
grins at the little dwarf. Ha, Ha, the Big Orc starts too
laugh. “Such a puny dwarf wants to fight me”, as he scans
the crowd of goblins cheering him on.

168

I will crush you Dwarf like I have done all the
others. Then the Orc picks the ball in one hand and threw
it up in the air and starts to whirl in around his head.
Not only are you the biggest Orc I have ever seen, you
are the Ugliest goat smelling, not bath taking, front teeth
missing creature I have ever set eyes on. And frankly don’t
ever want to do it again. This makes the Big Orc extremely
upset and his eyes squint looking for his target. He tosses
his Ball and chain while still holding on to the end at the
chain at the Dwarf. The Dwarf stands still waiting for the
ball then at the last moment he dives and rolls out of the
way of the ball. The ball crashes into the ground and is
about half covered in dirt. The Orc through the ball so
hard that it had lodged it’s self in the ground. As The Big
Orc frantically tries to pull the ball free from the
ground, he struggles and leans back putting all his
strength into pulling. The Dwarf just smiles and hops up
onto the Ball and starts to scale up the chain. The Big Orc
pulls harder and harder and is frantically trying to free
his weapon.

169

The Princess yells at the Orcs, come and fight me
unless you’re scared? She smiles. They do not. The Orcs
grew very angry and they all rushed at her at the same
time. As they approached she used her training and killed
them all fast and quickly. First one came in with axe
gloating overhead lost his hands then his head. The next
few were textbook parries with the dagger, blocks with the
sword and then straight cuts to the vital organs and
dropped like falling leaves from a fall tree. The Orcs
changed their tactics and started in on her one at a time
trying to outsmart the Princess. The Orcs pick up a nearby
table and run at the princess trying to knock her down. She
jumps up and flips over the table coming down with a swing
with the sword cutting it into two. “You’re going to have
to do better then that she shouts.” The two Orcs fall and
hit hard to the wall as they are knocked half conscious.
One after another the Orcs try to get a good swing on the
Princess. One by one they go falling, fleeing or tumbling
in the other direction. There was a quiet moment where all
the remaining Orcs stood still trying to regain their
strength.

170

The Princess smiles as she scans the Orc crowd. “Next,
as she taunts them.” The Dwarf Continues up the Chain. The
chain is made of black metal iron and is attached with a
metal shackle around the Big Orcs neck. The big Orc sees
the Dwarf walking up the chain and he starts to go crazy
and screaming and yelling trying to pull the ball free from
the ground. All the Goblins run up to the where the iron
ball lay in the dirt and start digging around it trying to
help free the Big Orc. When the Dwarf gets about half way
he flips his axe a few times in his hand and he shouts at
the Big Orc. What was that you were saying about us
crushing us Dwarfs?
The Orc Crowd was getting smaller by the attack.
Broken arms, large gashes in torsos and even some missing
limbs. This was what half the Orc Horde had taken from the
Princess. Not even a single scratch on the Princess.
Breathing heavily the Orc Horde looked at each other. Then
all at once they ran, leaped and even crawled at the
princess. The first two had no weapon and no chance.
“Dead,” The princess said.

171

Then She Turns while Ducking and provides a sweeping
fatal blow cutting deep into the stomach of two passing by
Orcs. “Going to be dead,” the princess says. Four more Orcs
with Axes come running up from behind her and she jumps
into the air doing a summersault over the heads blocking
all the axes. As she comes down behind them she stabs the
first with her dagger in the neck and he goes down. She
side cuts the next Orc and pulls free the first Orc by
pushing him down with her foot freeing the dagger. The
other two Orcs turn sideways and stop. The Princess tucks
her dagger into the midsection of the first Orc and runs
him through to the next Orc. She lets go as the fall over.
Throwing there arms and feet all over the place try to get
up she walks over top of them and sends her blade down deep
into the center of there bodies. They lay there lifeless
and dead. She leans down to pull her dagger free. Then with
a quick thrust and back move she thrusts her sword into the
midsection of the last Orc standing behind her. With a
growling noise of disappointment he falls forward dead with
his axe falling down towards her. She tries to get her
Dagger free but it was too late.

172

The Big Orc rants and raves while still trying to get
his iron ball free. When he sees that this is doing no good
and the Dwarf is almost at him he begins to pull at his
neck trying to get the shackle a loose. The goblins give up
on digging and climb up the chain in pursuit of the Dwarf.
The Dwarf turns around and sees the group of goblins
closing in. He starts running up the chain and jumps up
into the air and pulls his axe back ready to strike. The
Big Orc falls down to one knee and leans forward putting
his hands in the air trying to catch the Dwarf. At his last
grasp of air he finally manages to catch the Dwarf.
The Knight stood there quietly looking through a
window at the Claw. The only thing between him and the claw
was a small wall. Sir John moved to a crack in the wall
where light was filtering through.

He saw a shadow of a

man standing in front of a fire it was the Evil Sorcerer,
an evil with the face of a human. “There he is! Then the
thief and squire pop out of small vent shaft just on the
other side of the room. Felix and Tooc crammed next to him
to try to get a peek.

173

“Where’s the claw of Icecandara, is that it?

That is

what we came for,” Felix told Tooc as he pointed at the
claw suspended over the fire. The Evil sorcerer paced about
the room, looking at the claw and looking at the wall.

He

focused on the crack that John was looking through, and
smelled the air. “You are here, aren’t you?
you think belongs to you.

Here for what

Well, come and try to take it

puny human!” And With that, the wall came crumbling down to
the ground, and the White Knight was standing behind the
rubble, the invisibility cover of the wall was broken. Sir
John rushed at the Evil Sorcerer, and Tooc and Felix ran to
get the claw.

Sir John drew his sword and swung his blade

and the evil sorcerer blocked it with a large candle stick
holder and pushes the knight back a few feet. “I come for
the Claw evil sorcerer” Shouted the Knight. “You Challenge
me?

Evil Sorcerer screeched.”

sense that you were near?”

Did you think I could not

I will crush you like a bug

Knight. “I will rid this realm of you and your white
knights. The Evil Sorcerer exclaimed. John snarled through
clenched teeth and swung his sword again. “We’ll see about
that!” The Evil Sorcerer drew his sword.

174

The swords clashed and lighting crashed out the
window. Tooc and Felix were creeping towards the fire when
Evil Sorcerer turned and cast a magical knife and through
it at Felix’s head. The Thief put up his hands and closed
his eyes and whispered some words. Then the magical knife
stopped in mid air and flew back at Evil Sorcerer. Felix’s
eyes widened as the blade pierced the Evil Sorcerer cloak
disappearing into thin air. “So you have a little of your
own magic, do you?

Well, it will do you no good, the claw

is mine, and the Mystics have willed it. No small boy’s
magic is a challenge to mine.” With that a few words
mumbled out of the mouth of the Evil Sorcerer and Felix sat
on the ground, stunned. Tooc had disappeared. “Fight me you
babbling fool, for I am taking the claw with me,” John said
as the two struggled. Sir John was blocking all the swords
play that the Evil Sorcerer threw with his sword. Sir John
lowered his sword and bear hugged the Evil sorcerer. At
that moment, the Evil Sorcerer looked at the fire while
pulling out a dagger and ran it through John’s armor barely
missing the flesh. Sir John looked at Tooc and nodded the
go ahead.

175

The Evil Sorcerer saw too but it was too late the
thief had already lifted the claw and was halfway out the
door.

The Evil Sorcerer’s Magic is no match for the

cunning of a thief. He was too distracted by his would be
triumph over the White Knight Sir John, for he did not see
Thief sneak up into the room. Sir John picked up The Evil
Sorcerer and threw him over the fire onto the other side of
the room. He quickly tipped over some tables and threw down
some wooden statues and the room caught fire. The Evil
Sorcerer dropping in mid air reached the wall at a fast
speed and slowed himself down to a feather drop by magic.
He was standing up while casting another magic spell. A
fireball of flame came out of his fingers heading straight
for the door that the White knight just shut and escaped.
The Fireball exploded into the door and the door shattered
into flaming pieces all around. Another magic spell was
cast and the flames in the room turned into snow putting
out the flames. Felix had regained his strength back and
had already left the room and was heading down the corridor
following the Thief.

176

The Evil Sorcerer quickly turned his head towards the
fire to see that the claw was gone. The Evil Sorcerer went
to the balcony and yelled. “Guards, Guards.” At that
moment, the Orc guards came into the hall As Tooc and Felix
past them up followed by Sir John came smashing past
knocking the Orcs out of the way. “Get the boy!
boy he has the claw!”

Get the

The Evil Sorcerer shouted and the

Orcs ran down the hall after them.
The three heroes followed by the Orcs head back down
to the main floor to meet up with the Princess and the
Dwarf. The Dwarf is captured in the air. The goblins jump
into the after the dwarf and crash into the Big Orc. The
big Orc takes a beating of goblins crashing into his face.
The goblins slide down and catch his collar and hang there
for there dear lives. Then he looks back at the Dwarf who
was waiting for the big Orc to turn around so the Dwarf
could let him have it right between the eyes. So he did and
the Orc tries to pull back and receiving a large axe right
square in the middle of his head.

177

This send the Orc falling backwards releasing the
dwarf and freeing the iron ball from the ground, he
stumbles back and falls down sliding against the wall. The
Axe had caught him in his Helm and split it into two. The
goblins go flying up into the air into the walls as there
crushed by the force. This large blow from the Dwarf was
enough to knock him off his feet.
The Big Orc pulls the Axe free and throws it down to
the ground. The Big Orc smiles and starts to get up then
has a frown. He then stops as he is met with the Iron ball
smashing his head into the wall along with his upper body.
The Big Ugly Orc and the goblins all gone say the Dwarf as
he picks up his battle-axe.
The Dwarf looks around and sees no life at all. Then
he walks over to where he last saw the Princess. My lady,
my princess where are you,Exclaims the Dwarf. The Dwarf
looks around moving dead bodies and searches for survivors
and in his amazement all the Orcs where dead, But no sign
of the Princess. But one of the Orcs was moving and
groaning.

178

Hmm the dwarf sighs as he approaches the dead body.
Then notices the Orc had a sword sticking out of his back.
A little more groaning, pushing, pulling and tugging as the
Princess frees her self. She then turns sideways to pull
her sword free and stands up. Covered in blood and dirt the
princess manages to wipe her eyes clear. She tries to focus
and pulls her sword back to swing at the Dwarf Orc object
in front of her. Don’t swing my princess it is I Joanna.
The Princess smiles and says what a relief that they’re all
dead. Shall we get going says Sir John as he walks up
behind handing the Princess a cloth covered object. She
uncovered the Claw and marveled over the markings of ruins
carved on it. Then she quickly covered it up and put in her
backpack. They the Knight, the Dwarf, the Thief and the
Squire await her commands. Ok let’s go. The princess says.
The fastest way out would be through one of the windows
over in the front by the main gate. We will never make it
back down for all of the Orc guards, Says the Knight. They
head towards the front of the castle and find an open
window by the main gate. The Dwarf looks out and down and
says there’s nobody there.

179

The guards are gone. Barely missing the dwarf’s head,
two grappling hooks lodge just below him on the ledge. As
he looks down he can see the Princess’s soldiers and horses
just below. Ok then as the princess stands up on the ledge.
Down we go, says the dwarf as he jumps up on the ledge
also. The two slide down. What? Says the Knight still left
with no clue what was going on. The Knight looks over and
sees the ropes and that the group has already started down.
Felix starts down leavening only Tooc and the Knight. Tooc
was about to get into the window when Sir John grabbed him
as he jumped to the side of the window. Then a fireball hit
the window taking out about ten feet of wall with it.
Ropes, Rocks, Wood and the escape route went down in fire.
The fire vanished leaving a great gapping whole in the
wall. Tooc struggled to his feet, and Sir John rushed to
his side. They crept to where the window was. “Not so fast!
I am not finished with you!” the evil sorcerer shouted.
John looked at Tooc, “Let’s hope Grandfather didn’t forget
about us.”

The two jumped out the window into the night

air below, and low and behold, Grandfather’s flying spell
had worked as the magician said a spell.

180

They floated to the ground safely and landed on their
feet.

Tooc had slumped and held his side. Sir John had

taken the recognizable water flask from Tooc’s side bag and
offered him a drink; Tooc frowned then took a swig then
passed out in John’s arms. The Knight did not put the flask
back in his own belongings, for the knight knew that the
thief had more need of it.

The Orcs could be heard in the

distance. “Let’s go, Sir John,” the Princess yelled as he
was running down the hill from the castle and Tooc over his
shoulder with Orcs not far behind. “The Orcs will be here
soon,” Shouted the Dwarf. The Magician chanted a spell when
Sir John reached the group and they all vanished. Moments
just after the Orcs arrived at the same spot looking for
the group. They had a puzzled look on their faces. The
Princess and the White Knight had disappeared. The
companions traveled for the Sphere located to the East of
the Black castle. Along the way they found a place for
shelter. Hidden high up in the forest treetops was a small
Elf Village called Winlowsouf. The group stopped here for
the night. It was far enough away that they did not have to
worry about the Evil sorcerer and his Orcs.

181

Tooc had been hit by some of the flying debris after
the fireball from the Evil sorcerer took out the wall in
the black castle. The evil magic was soaked into his body
causing him to get sick. Tooc would need some time with the
healer to regain his health and would be able to travel on
the second day to come. The second scepter piece the golden
rod was in the Dwarves City a few days ride away. The
Princess knowing that the Dwarves city would take two days
travel and the Halflings City only one day to travel
decided to part ways with the Dwarf leaving the group
behind so they could leave after a days rest. They head out
for the under ground Dwarves City Called Ladamer. The Dwarf
gave his Golden City Key to Sir John to gain entrance to
the Half Lings Gate.

182

The Palace in the Valley of the Halflings

183

Chapter 16

After a day of resting Tooc lying in a bed wakes up
all alone. Sir John had been up for an hour at least and
was out on the landing of the first hut next to the
healer’s talking to the Healer elf. Tooc heads out onto the
wooden deck. Outside on down below the hut Felix looks up
at a large figure leaning over the railing. “Sir John the
Horses are geared and ready to when you are.” Felix yells
up to Sir John. While stretching Sir John Mumbles and
groans as he pounds on his chest a few times, yes I will be
right down. Hey Tooc how are you feeling? The knight says
as he walks over to where Tooc was standing. It was on a
nearby railing staring up through the trees. These trees
are beautiful, and yes I am feeling much better thank you
and Thank you for bringing me hear to the elf healer. The
Thief Smiles and pulls out something from his pocket.

184

He then hands back the wine flask he borrowed from the
Knight. The Knight nods then he grin as he tucks the full
wine flask back into his armor. After Two days of
traveling, Sir John, Felix and Tooc arrived at the gates of
the half lings.

Sir John looked down at his chest.

“I

guess that this is where this comes in,” he pulled the key
from under his breastplate. Sir John looked at Felix.

Both

were confident, this was the easy part. “Well, let’s go, we
need to get the sphere so we can save our Realm. What are
we waiting for?” Tooc Smiled. Hmm I like the “we part,”
Makes me feel like you care. Your not getting soft on us
are you big guy as Felix nudged him. Sir John Grumbled with
a half smirk then he put the key in the lock and turned it,
the gates opened with ease. Once inside, the three rode
their horses through a forest where the trees seemed to
look at them.

“Do you feel like someone is watching us?”

Tooc asked Felix. “Don’t be silly, we’re alone.” As he said
this, a small creature went running past. Half lings are
strange little creatures.

Good natured, they are a mutt

bread of humans, dwarfs, and elves said Felix.

185

They keep to themselves and are guarded by the Nomad,
who watches over them from the Great Palace, where the
sphere is kept. “What was that?” Tooc said. “That was a
pixie, Said Felix.

You’ve never seen one before?” Felix

asked. “No, I haven’t.” Tooc had never actually seen a half
ling before but Sir John and Felix have seen a few on their
travels. “Well there are Pixies and there are Fairies.
Because they look so alike it’s hard to tell with out
asking, “Interesting.” “They won’t hurt us, this should be
pretty easy.” Sir John says.
Out of the woods, three more pixies flew up to the
Knight.

They stopped and stared at him with awe. “He’s so

shinny,” one pixie girl said.

“Why are you so shinny,” she

asked the Knight in wonder. “Well, I am a White Knight.
But being a White Knight isn’t the only thing that I am.

I

am a warrior, and I am on a quest with my friends,” Sir
John told the pixie. “Do you know where I can find the
Great Palace?” “Of course we do, we can take you there, if
you would like,” the pixie answered. One of the boy pixies
spoke up, “For a price that is.”

186

He gave the girl pixie grin. The Girl Pixie gave a
dirty look to the other Boy Pixies. “Well, Tooc looked in
his bag, I do have this pretty little trinket,” he said,
pulling out a Shinny bottle cap. The three Pixie’s eyes got
even wider, “Oooohhh…” they gasped. “That’s pretty.

It

must be magical.” “Yes, very magical,” Tooc said. “What
does it do?” the Boy Pixie asked.

“Well, if you show us to

the palace, I will tell you,” he answered. The three Pixies
looked at each other once again, and seemed to make strange
signals by wiggling ears and noses. “Ok, we’ll take you,”
the girl Pixie announced. “It will take no time at all.”
Let’s go,” Sir John took charge.

“We need to get there as

fast as possible.” The Pixies started down the path as fast
as they could fly with the three horses galloping behind.
Around the winding path of twisted oak trees sometimes on
the trail sometimes off and up a small valley and over a
low flowing river they came to the end of the trail. They
reached the palace in less then an hour. The wind rushes
through the hair of the White Knight as he takes off his
helm to get a breath of fresh air and to inspect the
Palace.

187

The Pixies were practically falling over each other
waiting for their reward. The palace was beautiful, white,
with a pearl sheen to it.

The moonlight reflected off the

shallow river surrounding the palace. “This is where the
great one lives,” the girl pixies said. “We brought you;
now give us the magical cap impatiently the boy pixies
requested.” Tooc handed them the bottle cap, and gave the
female pixie a piece of shinny string.

Now Pixies this is

what you do. “If you punch a hole in the shiny cap thing,
and thread this shinny string through, it will make a great
flyer,” Tooc told the Girl Pixie with the string. The
Pixies smiled and yelled “Thank you!” and disappeared in a
hurry with their treasures. Sir John turned to Tooc, “Let’s
go.” All three kicked their horses and they galloped up a
long winding road that circled around the Palace. They
reached the front door of the palace in about ten minutes.
The Palace stood elegant and tall and was very narrow in
width. They slid off their horses and turned to great
doors. They were about twenty feet tall, made with white
oak and had shinny gold hinges. A single Half moon shaped
handle made of gold was attached to the each of the doors.

188

Do you think we should knock?” Felix asked the Knight?
At that moment a quiet gust of wind came about as the doors
swung open slowly. Coming out of the Palace a very small
old man greeted them. This man in blue robes has a warm
aura about him that with his friendly eyes made you feel
safe around him. He had Silver hair and his face was
wrinkled, but with dawned with a youthful smile. His eyes
were as blue as the sea, and his smile as wide as the waves
that ride it. “Welcome,” He shouted out in a loud voice.
“Come in,” the man said. “I knew my children would bring
you to me. As they Follow him into the palace Tooc Blurts
out. What children the Pixies? The pixies are your
children? Tooc asked. Yes they are, all the creatures in
the forest here are my children and they call me the Nomad,
I am their protector. The Nomad starts to float across the
floor and the group can barely keep him in site as they are
almost running to keep up. As the group walks through the
palace they see that palace is bigger then it appears. Up
and down stairs through a long hallway lined with stone
columns.

189

Across a shinny stone bridge that cross a small stream
that flows through the middle of the palace and into a
small garden they went. There were flowers planted along
the path. Purple and Yellow Flowers align the walkway and
are backed by small shrubs with green and yellow leaves
covering them. It makes it very easy to see the stone path
ahead. When the flowers ended there was a small shrine with
a flight of stone stairs leading up to it. A small cluster
of large marble stones surrounds the shrine in a half
circle. Nomad stopped at the stairs and bowed his head and
then glided up the stairs like he was flying. The group
followed him. Up and About twenty feet off the ground they
were up inside the shrine. It was empty except the large
portal windows that surrounded room with small pedestal
that sat empty. I am the holder of something that you are
looking for The Sphere.” As the group stand there out of
breathe. “Yes.” The Knight said.

The sphere is one of the

three parts we need to complete the scepter of balance.”
Yes I know, The Oracle told me,” the Nomad replied. The
Knight was puzzled.

190

“She came to me in my dreams, telling me that this
great White Knight and his friends would come to get the
sphere to save our realm. Your Kingdom has been a great
ally and friend to us, and I wish that we could be of more
help. We are a peaceful people here.” The Nomad put his
hands together and chanted some words and the sphere
appeared sitting on the pedestal. “This is what you are
looking for, and I must say, the Oracles description of you
hardly does you any justice, you are a Marvelous Knight.”
The Knight Grinned and a glistening sparkle appeared on his
teeth. The Thief began to get aggravated and said “Hey
mister Marvelous yadda, yadda camblama, we need to get a
going-a.” We have a realm to save. “Thank you, dear friend.
I hope the rest of our journey will be this easy proclaimed
the Knight. The Oracle appeared in front of them. Then in a
calm voice says. “Once you get all the pieces, you must
travels back to your kingdom; there you must put the pieces
together.” “How will I do that?” The Knight asked. “The
Princess has the power to put the pieces back together. You
must hurry.

191

Time is running out, the moons are almost aligned and
full. That is when the scepter must be completed, if you
want to defeat the Orcs and save your kingdom.” The Oracle
conjured an orb and in it they saw the King and armies
defending the Castle of Pathonas.

The Knight gasped, and

his eyes got wide. “They will be ok for now the Oracle
Said.” “You need to complete the scepter to defeat this
army; the Orcs are powerful and out number your Kings army
three to one.” The Princess will get the golden rod and
meet you at the castle of Pylons. The Knight turned to
Felix and Tooc, “We must go, now.” He turned to the Oracle,
“Thank you for all that you have showed us.” Then turns to
the Nomad and says bids farewell.” The Knight hands the
Sphere to the thief and asks him to hold on to it. The
thief placed the sphere in his leather satchels. The three
ran back down the path of the flowers and down the long
hallways until they reached the front doors to the palace.
They reached their horses and the White Knight mounted his
horse.

Felix was right behind him. The Thief was nowhere

in site. Sir John yelled for Tooc.

192

Tooc where are you? As he said this he could see Tooc
hanging from the outside of the two doors on the brass half
moon golden ring. He was pulling with all his weight. His
feet propped on the door hanging upside down trying to free
loose the door of its brass handle. I will be right there
as he pants loudly out of breath. Sir John yells out in a
loud voice. “Come on Tooc leave that, you don’t need that
gold handle. Hurry we don’t have time for that. “The thief
shouts back, “But he has two of them he won’t miss the
other.” The Knight kicks his horse and the horse gallops
off down the path away from the Palace. Thief’s, I will
never understand them. Sir John thinks to himself. Felix
jumps off his horse and runs over to Tooc. Come on Tooc. He
pulls on Tooc but he is not letting go. Tooc you won’t be
able to sell the brass if we don’t have a realm to go back
too. Felix pulls very hard and Tooc lets go. Felix is
dragging Tooc by the back of his color and Tooc drags his
feet with his arms crossed with a sad look on his face.
Once the Thief reached the horses Tooc Spoke, “Well I guess
your right. But right after we save the Realm I am coming
back here to get my gold.”

193

“Felix chuckles, then he replies ah Ok then mounts his
kicks his feet into the sides of the Horse sending the
horse galloping in the same direction of the White Knight.
The two catch up with the Knight. Around the windings of
the thin narrow cobble stone road they ride hard and fast.
They descend thru the mountains down to the Great Plains.
They need to cross the Great Plains to catch up with the
Princess and the Dwarf. They will meet at the castle to
complete the scepter.

194

The City Of Ladamer

195

Chapter 17

The Princess and Joanna had reached the Mountain of
Ladamer in less then a day.

The City was buried very deep

in the mountain and the main entrance was on the other
side. It’s been a while since I have laid eyes on this
mountain Joanna says. The Princess looks and smiles. That
is a big mountain. How do we get around it? We don’t. The
Dwarf said. We don’t. Then how do we get there, Exclaims
the Princess. We go under it, as the Dwarf hits the side of
the Mountain with his axe triggering a mechanical device
that starts a large rock to move and reveals a passage
leading down into the mountain. Oh Says the Princess. As
the two lead their horses into the opening the princess
inspects the place where Joanna struck his axe. It was a
stone rod of some sort disguised as a tree root growing out
of the side of the mountain that was placed inside the rock
to be used as a key.

196

When they reached the inside of the opening the Dwarf
pulled a lever located on the wall inside and two giant
doors just inside the opening crawl open. After walking
inside the door way the two doors come together closing the
opening and then the rock slides back inside of the
mountain. The light slowly vanished as the opening closed.
The princess looked in the direction of the dwarf as all
the light was gone.
“Ok now what.” The princess exclaims.
Five, Four, Three, Two, one and Walla. The Dwarf said. A
small spark could be seen down the corridor and then all of
a sudden you could hear a mechanical noise. Then one by one
small oil burning torches came to life on the walls
lighting up the corridor far as the eye could see. “Hmm
that was impressive dwarves think of everything said the
princess.” She leads her horse down the corridor. “Yep,”
Says the dwarf as he follows.” An hour has gone by and they
come to the end of the torches and where the path ends.
“The Dwarf squeezes by, let me see.”

197

The Dwarf reaches out along the dark wall and feels
around then he sighs. “I found it exclaims.” He finds a
lever then pulls it down. For a moment it seems like
nothing happens. Then a loud noise whistled through the air
as a horn blew very loud. Then a loud clicking of metal
against metal started clanging in a repeatedly sound.
“Joanna?’ The princess said in an upset voice as she pulls
out her sword. “Oh Aye, Sorry he says then he pull’s
another lever. All of a sudden torches came on all around
them and the path was no longer a path it was a huge
abandoned mine leading down. Looking down the princess sees
long steel cables with mining carts on them traveling up
down and into different caves. This must be an abandoned
mine said the Princess.

Yes this mine has been emptied for

many years of all its precious materials. There are several
hundred working mines in this mountain so they don’t even
bother with the little materials left in this mine once
they reach a certain depth. The Dwarf points down and about
a thousand feet you can see a large doorway light up. “We
need to go there.”

198

The princess looks down and turns her head as she asks
how. The dwarf steps back a step or two and as the princess
looks up a large elevator closes in on them and stopped in
front of them. Brakes on the cables made a loud screeching
noise as the elevator stopped. The Elevator swayed a little
then it came to a complete stop. The Dwarf opened the two
metal iron gates and led his horse into the elevator
followed by the princess. The dwarf closed the two gates
then pulled three levers. Then the small elevator tilted
down a little. Are you ready? The dwarf said. The princess
looked at him and grinned and said ah ok. Then he pulled a
big lever that was twice his size. A loud click and then a
spark came on the cables above as the breaks released. Then
down the elevator went. Very fast it was traveling down as
the two held on to the railings. The horses where moving
about and making noise of being startled.
Down and down they went for a few minutes, and then
the lights at the bottom of the mine seemed to come very
close. “Hey Dwarf are you going to slow this thing down the
princess said.”

199

The Dwarf looked at her and smiled don’t worry It will
slow itself down. “I hope,’ as he let out a small gulp. The
both of them grabbed onto the safety straps on the mine car
and held on. The mine car came down and started to level
out then passed some type of mechanical device with a bar
sticking out. It hit so hard that the bar that was
protruding from it broke in half. There was a loud clanging
noise as the bar flew back nearly hitting the Princess.
Whoosh… As the Princess brings her head back up. What was
that Joanna, Sounding a little concerned? That. That. The
Dwarf stutters while trying to speak. “That was nothing.”
The Dwarf sinks down a little into the cart. The Princess
looks ahead at the opening in the wall closing in very
fast. “Nothing I bet.” She thought to herself. The Princess
closes her eyes. “Princess, Princess, My lady,” the Dwarf
shouts at the princess. Then he pokes her in her side with
a small stick. The Princess opens her eyes a little
disoriented. Then she stares up at the Dwarf smiling. She
smiles, am I dead? The Dwarf looks down at her with a hand
stretched out, not yet. The Princess takes his hand and
stands up.

200

She looks around and notices she is not in the cart
anymore. Where are the horses she asks? The Dwarf Black
smith has taken them to feed them and get their horse Shoes
refitted. The Dwarf explains that the cart came to a quick
stop like it was supposed to but one of the bolts holding
the rail that Princess was holding onto came apart sending
her and the rail flying through the air to crash in a bail
of hay. As the Princess turns around she sees the huge bail
of hay behind her and the rail lying next to where the
Dwarf was standing. “The noise was so loud that several
Dwarfs came a running to make sure everything was ok, the
Dwarf explained.” There was a Doctor here too and he said
you would be fine. You must have knocked your head on the
rail when you landed because you have been out about twenty
minutes. The Princess followed the Dwarf and they exited
out of the Mineshaft into the back of a horse ranch where
there were several horses grazing about. As they made there
way to the front of the ranch a small town came to view.
There many shops and small houses.
where is this brother of yours?

“Let’s go, Joanna,

The princess exclaimed.”

We need to find him fast,” she demanded.

201

Joanna looked a little hurt, but he knew that Princess
was worried about her kingdom and time was short. “Over
here, this is the pub that everyone hangs out in,” Joanna
pointed to a ragged door with a small grate window. Just
over the door way was a small wooden sign that read “Dwarfs
Lair.” The Princess was walking towards the door already.
She turned to Joanna, “What are you waiting for, and
invitation?

I hear you’re good in these kinds of places,

Joanna the “Hammer.” Joanna hurried up and joined the
Princess. “They call me that for a reason, you know.

I can

hammer down a mug of ale like nobody’s business,” he smiled
at the Princess. Joanna was reading the sign up above the
door and tried to stop the Princess but she was already
walking in the door before he could stop her. She missed
the “Dwarfs only” carved in small letters under the words
Dwarfs Lair. The Princess walked into the bar, it was very
quiet and everyone in the bar was looking at her.

Joanna

walked in behind her, shaking his head. “Who here can tell
me where I can find Joanna Hammer’s brother?”
yelled with authority.

202

The Princess

A husky dwarf walked up behind her, arms crossed.
“What do you think you’re doing in here, girly?” The
Princess whirled around and landed a left hook across the
dwarf’s face. A right knee to his groin doubled him over in
pain; a foot in the chest knocked him to the ground.

She

spun around, and the bar was stunned. “And don’t call me
Girly. Now where is Joanna the Hammer’s brother?” she
yelled once again and the entire bar pointed towards a
booth that was poorly lit and two figures sat there in the
darkness.

She walked through, and Joanna followed her,

grinning and somewhat embarrassed. “Hey Joanna, who’s the
elf?” one patron yelled. “Does the Hammer have a body guard
now?” another shouted. That was the last straw.

“All

right, Joanna shouted.” “I have had enough. Joanna turned
to the dwarf and said, “I’ve been itching to kick some
butt,” as he grabbed the dwarf with the back of his belt
removing him from his stool, and threw him against the
wall. While he was lying on the ground, dazed, Joanna took
his full mug of ale and gulped it down then he slammed it
down on the bar like a hammer. “Now the little lady asked a
question.

203

So I want an answer and I want it now, the Dwarf
Barked” The Princess picked up a lit lantern from the end
of the bar and sat it down on the table. She plopped down
in a chair in front of the booth where a very big Dwarf
passed out and a smaller dwarf sat. On the table at the
booth an empty mug sits on its side and a strange wooden
object on the other. “I need to speak with you,” as the
Princess lifts up the Dwarfs head. “How did you get in
here?” the little dwarf demands.

“Never mind that, now

scram or else I’ll show you,” the Princess said as she slid
into the booth. The smaller dwarf gets up while Joanna
walks up.

“You heard what she said,” Joanna told the

little dwarf and he scurried out of the booth. Smiling and
trying to keep composure Joanna sits down beside the large
dwarf. . “Hello, Luca, how have you been?” Joanna asks as
he picks up the mug and sits up straight. The big dwarf
starts to pick his head up. “Brother!” he says. He sits up
and the looks at the princess then turns his head towards
Joanna. His eyes where bloodshot and he was definitely hung
over. “I’ve been great, things are great said Luca.

204

Wow, it’s been forever, huh?” Luca said cheerily. The
Princess wasn’t happy, having her question not answered.
“Hey, over here, are you the Brother of the Mighty Hammer.
Both Joanna and Luca Look at The Princess Puzzled. Then
Joanna steps in. Oh ya. Hey Brother we need some help.
There is something that we’re looking for, a certain gold
platinum scepter, Kind of weird looking. I was hopping you
might know where it is or someone that does,” the Princess
got closer to Luca. Yes that is my question too. “You’re
awful pretty, you know Said Luca. Such a pretty girl
shouldn’t be in a place like this.” The princess motions
for the bartender to come to the table. He turned to
Joanna, “What are you doing bringing such a helpless and
pretty girl here?” he asked him. “You better answer her
questions, brother, or else she will show you how not so
helpless she can be.” Joanna Grinned. “Shish.

The

bartender comes over with a pot of coffee and pours into
the mug. Everyone has to be so touchy about this golden
scepter thing,” he says as he sips on his coffee. “What do
you mean everyone?” Princess asked. “I mean the guy I sold
it to being all secretive about it when he bought it.”

205

“You sold it, who did you sell it to?” at this point,
Princess had Luca’s collar in her hand, and her grip was
getting tighter. “Whoa, down girl, if aye let me breathe,
Nearly Spilling his coffee all over himself, I will tell
you.” She let go of his collar and backed off. “I’m sorry,
you just don’t understand, my kingdom is in trouble.” “The
man who I sold it to lives in the last house on fourthstreet in the under-town. He said he needed it for some
spell or something, was going to conjure something with
it,” The Princess was already on the way to the door.
Joanna started to turn and then thought. Hmm there are many
last houses on the end of Fourth Street because when it
ends there is a row of ten houses at the end. So Joanna
quickly grabbed his big brother by the arm and gave him a
good yank nearly spilling half the cup of coffee. Come on
brother we need you to show us the last house. Then Luca
barely grabs a hold of his coat and slides out of the booth
following Joanna. “Good seeing you, hammer…” A patron from
the bar whispered. The Bartender yelled who is going to pay
for this ale? Then Joanna flipped a gold coin up on to the
bar as he Lucas walked out.

206

The Princess asks how far this fourth street is. Well
about an hours walk or if you have horses then about
fifteen minutes. Joanna turned towards the princess. Yes we
have horses, and they headed to the blacksmiths. After
putting saddles on the horses they mount and then head out
towards Fourth-Street. They arrived at Fourth-Street and
follow it to the end and just like Joanna remembered there
were ten houses of various colors in a single row at the
end.

So Luca do you remember what color the house was said

the Princess. “No.” But I remember he said there was a
white picket fence in his yard. They looked and each yard
had a white fence surrounding it. Ah he said there was a
mailbox on a wooden pole in front of his house. They looked
around and all the yards had a mailbox in the front yard
and they where on little poles. The Princess looks at Luca
do you remember anything else. No, not that I can recall,
let me think about. Joanna sets his axe down and leans it
against white fence. He then pulls an apple from the only
tree growing in the yard of one of the houses. Joanna then
prepares to eat it.

207

Luca interrupts him in the middle of his first bite.
APPLES! Luca exclaims with a smile. Apples the Princess
says with a puzzled look as she starred at him. A-p-p-le?
Said Joanna as he started chewing with a mouth full. Yes.
Apples, the guy loved apples. Every time I see him he is
eating an apple. Both the Princess and Joanna were staring
at the only apple tree in the yard of the third house from
the right. All the other yards where bare except some dirt
or straw spread about. The house was yellow with a pale
blue door. Wow how did he get an apple tree to grow in a
mountain? Its magic Luca said. Just then Joanna stopped
eating and spat out the apple pieces from his mouth and
then dropped his half-eaten apple. Magic Huh. Don’t want
any part in that as Joanna picked up his axe and proceeded
through gate in the middle of the white picked fence. The
Princess was already at the door and the Princess started
knocking on the door.
A tired dwarf opened the door, and she pushed past him
into the house. I need the scepter.

He looked at her,

confused. “Scepter?” he said groggily. “Yes, made of gold
platinum looks like a scepter.

208

Do you have it?” He started tooling around, looking
under papers.

Joanna caught a gleam of gold under a

newspaper on the table and pointed. The little Dwarf picked
it up. “Is this it?” he asked the Princess. “Yes! That’s
it!” as she quickly grabs it out of his hands. They turn
and ran out of the house, the man still half asleep
wondering where they went. “Dang thing never worked
anyway,” the man muttered under his breath. They ran right
past Joanna’s brother. Joanna yelled goodbye as they ran to
the horses. Luca smiles and says goodbye then looks at his
empty mug. Well back the pub to something better tasting
then this day old coffee, he thought to himself. He watched
them leave.
Silhouetted in the moonlight the two mounted their
horses and started to gallop out of the town. As they rode,
the trees seem to push them along, the wind lifts their
horse’s steps higher, and a whisper came about them. You
must hurry back to the castle, you must hurry.”
Oracle’s voice.

It was the

“We need you.” At that same time, Sir

Jonathan and his group were making their way to the castle
of pylons.

209

From the nothing a whisper spoke into their ears. “The
Princess and Joanna are on their way to the castle. You
must hurry; the Orcs will begin there siege soon.” These
whispers made them ride faster and both groups arrived at
the same place at the castle borders just hours afterwards.
Out of breath, the Princess yelled out to them. “Sir
Jonathan! We must hurry!” Jonathan turned to Tooc and his
Grandfather, “You stay here, for you have done enough.”
Grandfather spoke for the first time, “Nonsense, boy.
are coming.

We

This is our world too and we will save it.”

Jonathan shrugged.

“But we will be careful.” The Knight

agreed. “Don’t worry, we’ll protect you.” Tooc said to the
Princess, “Ok Let’s go!” the Princess yelled.

210

Saving the Realm

211

Chapter 18

The group came to a sudden stop when they reached the
outer farmlands near the castle. Another Two miles and they
would reach the other stonewall. This wall separates the
farmland from the castles. It is four feet tall in some
places but mostly ten foot tall in the rest. This walls
purpose was for marking the area of the farmlands and had
no strategic use. The Princess and The Knight ride up ahead
of the group to the one section of the wall. “Look you can
see the siege has begun, said the Princess. “The Castle is
under siege! Tooc blurts out as the rest of the group
arrives.
The Castle walls had large cracks where the Orc
catapults had launched barrages of stones into it. There
where burn marks on the sides as well from fire ballistae.

212

These machines launch tree size arrows on fire into
the walls. Some thatched roofs have broken out into flames
and are beginning to smolder. The Castle is billowing smoke
out from its insides. Some buildings had structural damage
where the roofs caved in. Grumm, Grumm, Grumm, Grumm, this
was the deep sound of Orc War Drums echoing over the
castles walls as they march forward. Thousands of Orc’s
were advancing forward unto the castle. Castle archers
ready there longbows, and the pike man, the swordsman and
the crossbowmen prepare for battle. Then when the Orc’s
where within range hundreds of fire lit arrows where
released into the oncoming army. Many arrows hit the Orc’s
killing many and catching others on fire. This was not
enough to stop them for there where thousands of Orc’s and
they were approaching fast.
A stream of dark red water surrounded the castle. In
its moat bodies of goblin and Orc’s where floating
lifelessly. Archers move about on the wall shooting flaming
arrows into the goblins and Orc’s killing many. Soldiers
and pike men fight ladder climbers and try to keep the
walls as clear as they can.

213

Many Orcs and goblins are dying but keep on coming.
Princess, Sir John! A voice shouts from along side the wall
where they were standing. The look about and see nothing.
“You must come now, Princess. Come, save your kingdom!” the
King’s voice came again, but this time it was close and
very clear. Just some feet away from them a hidden passage
was opening and The King along with twenty palace-guards
appear out of a the wall. Just as this was said Joanna,
Felix, Tooc and the Old magician dismount there horses and
walk up to the Princess and Sir John.
The King approached the Princess he was shouting you
must follow me through the escape passage to the inside of
the castle. The castle main gates are blocked by the Orc’s.
The Orc’s will soon breech the first set of gates into main
court yard and try to take control of the second gate. If
they gain control of the main courtyard gates then the
castle will be lost. The Captain of the Guard along with
the Swordsmen and a few pike men are in the main courtyard
and they will try to hold the Orc’s back as long as they
can.

214

Sir John we need you to help keep those front gates
closed and take back control of the main court yard shouts
the King. “Now is the time to fight my King, Said Sir John
then he looked at Joanna. You Felix, Tooc, The magician and
the Princess go ahead and follow the king and get to the
tower and I will go with the palace guards and try to
regain control of the court yard. Ok said the Princess. The
king tells his guard to follow the White knight and to help
him close the main gate. The King leads the e princess and
her group into the passage closing it behind them. How are
we going to regain the main court yard Sir John, Felix
asked? I have an idea just follow me and do as I do. Sir
John and Felix followed the wall with the palace guards
trailing to the front of the castle. Before they reached
the Orcs they gathered disguises from the dead bodies of
the Orcs. They where dressed in Orcish clothes and just
filtered in with the Orc’s massing in front of the castle.
The next wave of Orcs along with the disguised group
stormed through the two wide-open front gates to the inside
main courtyard. The second gates had not been breached yet.
Sir John’s group went unnoticed.

215

Sir John could see a handful of Palace guards and the
Captain of the guard frantically holding back more then
three hundred Orcs. The Orc’s were at the main courtyard
gates and they where starting to gain ground. Sir John
charged in sword drawn still disguised as an Orc. With a
loud war cry he slashed his way to the middle of the Orcs
taking out about twenty of them along the way. The
slaughter went unnoticed until one of the Orc’s turned
around and stared at the knight. He started screaming. “AA-A White Knight, “Look a white knight let’s get him, kill
him as another yelled. They yell war cries. Another Orc
turned and stared at Felix then started screaming here is
another one, kill them. Sir John shed his disguise and
started into the group again towards Felix. Felix unveiled
himself and pulled out his sword. The Captain of the Guard
saw the Knight and proceeded to push his soldiers towards
the Knight closing the gap. Forward men push your way
towards that Knight said the Captain. The Sergeant standing
next to the kings twenty palace guards looked at the
outnumber group of soldiers in the middle. Then he turned
towards his men.

216

“What are we waiting for, Charge.” Joining Felix the
group charged from the rear of the Orcs slashing and
hacking their way towards the White Knight. The King opens
the entrance to the passage and the Princess, Joanna, Tooc
and the Magician follow out. This is the south side castle
wall. As the passage closes back up they walk up a small
flight of stairs to the main level of the castle. Thru a
few corridors and down a small hallway they come to a
courtyard. This courtyard is filling up with Orcs. A small
hole had been made through the side of the castle by means
of a battering ram. They’re hundreds of Orc’s coming
through a sergeant said as he stopped in front of the king
and took a knee. Well go and try to stop them the king
demanded. The sergeant jumped to his feet and barked orders
to about thirty swordsman and they charge the on coming
Orc’s. Dwarf you stay close to the Princess Lorraine and
get her to the top of that tower. Tooc and Magician can you
clear a path for them? The King said. Yes Tooc said as they
trotted off in the same direction as the soldiers. The
Magician climbed upon a piece fallen castle rock and
chanted magic words.

217

The ground shook and the earth rumbled. Immediately
out of the ground arose five stone guardians. They turned
to the magician and waited for orders. Clear the way the
Magician commanded the creatures. And clear the path they
did. The King looked at the five Guardians. These stone
creatures were very tall and had stone hammers in hand.
“That should do as the King Smiles at the Magician.” Just
as he was turning away the Princess Turns him around and
gives him a welcome back hug. The Dwarf turned to The
Princess, who was looking at the castle, stunned. “My home,
what have they done to my home?” She had one small tear in
her eye. “What did I tell you about the tears?

A warrior

never cries spoken Calmly by The Dwarf. You are stronger
than this, my Princess. You are stronger than anyone I have
ever known.

Now get up there and kill some Orcs. Just like

the old days. The King would not have put his faith in you
if you were not the one to help save our world.

Now go!”

The Princess looked at the Dwarf and smiled, wiped the
tears from her face. She then said what are we waiting for
then.”

218

While the stone guardian’s where smashing Orc’s and
tossing around there body’s clearing space the princess and
the dwarf try to get thru. Tooc used stealthy skills and
managed to take out a few of the Orcs. And the Magician
Used magic missiles to kill the rest of the fleeing Orcs.
The Princess and the Dwarf made their way through the stone
guardians crushing the Orcs to an open clearing.

A group

of Orcs ten in all where blocking their way to the great
hall with the only way into the tower. Protecting the three
pieces of the scepter that would save her world the
Princess drew her sword and charged in. The Dwarf followed
shortly after with Axe in hand shouting a battle cry.
Finally, The Princess and Dwarf reached the Great Hall.
This would be the new resting-place for the scepter. The
thief looked back before entering the great hall and the
guardians had crushed the last of the Orcs in the yard. The
Magician made a command and two of the stone guardians
close up the whole in the wall with there bodies and to
return back to the earth. The wall is repaired now let’s
hope Sir John can take care of the gates said the magician
as he followed Tooc into the great hall.

219

A chamber filled with hundreds of candles and pictures
of the ancestors on the walls and the seal of the Eldens
where painted on the floor.
to do next.

The Princess had no idea what

She turned to Joanna. “Do you know what to

do?” she asked him. He looked at her, and shrugged.

No

“Don’t you?” he asked. The Princess began to panic. No one
had ever told her what to do with the pieces of the scepter
once she got them together.
anything about this.

Her father never told her

There were no instructions on the

side like every other thing any other being has ever had to
put together. How was she going to figure this out! As she
asked again! A man stepped out of the shadows. An Older man
the head advisor to the king and was smiling. “Why is there
a sad look on your face princess All is not lost. What are
you smiling about?” The Dwarf groaned. “Princess, you are
not only just a warrior. But you are the future of our
world.

Love lies in you. Your strength is not just

physical. Your strength is your love for your people, your
great mind and your ability to see what others can’t.”

220

The advisor removed the helm from the Dwarf and
revealed ears that had points, Ears that only elves have.
The Princess was stunned. “I thought you were a Dwarf,” she
gasped. “You knew I was not just a Dwarf. You knew that I
was something more.

More, what do you mean more? What. Who

are you she said. I am the spirit of the Eldens they live
inside me the dwarfs says warmly.

Sure, the world sees me

as a Dwarf when I hide my ears; the world sees me as an elf
when I don’t. If I want, I can even shrink my body to look
like a Pixie. I am made me to be part of all that is good
in the world.

I am the key Princess; I am the answer to

your question.

I am what the key that holds the scepter

together. The Keeper of the Eldens stood before the
Princess.

“You and I are the ones to restore the balance.

Now let us finish this combining of the scepter. He was
calm.

The Princess could not believe that this was the

Dwarf who she had known all her life. Not knowing he was
protecting her, his whole life. Then Joanna held his arms
out and his hands began to glow and he closed his eyes and
began to chant.

221

The princess closed her eyes and listened to the chant
and was feeling comforted by Joanna. The Head advisor just
looked in awe. The White Knight, Felix and the captain of
the guard are finishing up the Orcs trapped in side the
gates. The outer gates start to move and Sir John looks up.
A giant Stone Guardian closes one gate as another Giant
Stone Guardian closes the other. The Giant stone Guardians
then proceed out of the castle crushing all the Orcs along
the way as they head towards the siege engines. One by one
the Giant Stone Guardians smash and bash the catapults and
trebuchets until they were all gone. As thousands of Orcs
take on the Giant Stone Guardians they where met by either
stone hammers or were being tossed. One Guardian removed a
tree from the ground and cleared hundreds of Orcs with a
Yankees home run motion. Tooc had chased down two fleeing
Orcs trying to escape his mad yelling and wild swords play
and they met their doom. Then the thief caught up with the
Magician and they met in the Great Hall. Sir John, Felix,
and the Captain trying to catch there breathe.

222

The guards and swords men where regrouping and forming
up. They watch the Black Knight followed by fifty plus
Orc’s enter the main courtyard thru the gates. Sir John
took in a deep breath. We need to go and help the princess.
They turn and charge at the group of Orcs.

223

The Last Moment

224

Chapter 19

A smile comes across the Princess’s face. Then she
turned towards Joanna picked up the helm from which he had
always worn and returned it to him. As she did, something
slammed against the door.

It did not distract her though;

The Wizard was standing in front of her.
the golden rod.

She handed him

The walls started to rumble.

As he held

the golden rod in his hand, energy started to radiate from
the first part. Next, she placed the claw on top of the
rod, which seemed to come to life as it came in contact
with the rod.
sphere.

The claw flexed and opened, waiting for the

The door began to break, and fear was starting to

take over the Princess’ heart. “Don’t be afraid, princess,”
Joanna told her.

“If you are afraid, you cannot heal the

scepter!” The Princess looked at her friend, and then
looked at the door.

She thought about all that had become

of her beautiful world, and it overcame her.

She began to

cry, the tears streaming down her cheeks and landing on the
sphere.

225

As each tear landed, the sphere in her hands began to
glow more and more. Then it levitated out of her hands and
stopped right above the claw then merged into the claws as
the gripped it tightly. The princess takes up the scepter
into her hands as a Queen holding her scepter. “It is time
now, for the balance to be restored!” the Princess yelled.
She pointed it into the Sky Yelled out the words; Almighty
Eldens grant me the power of the Scepter so that my people
and I shall be rid of the Dark Evil Orc forever. She then
commanded that the spirits come back together for love and
peace of her realm to save her kingdom. The Sphere orb
started glowing then it was full of sparkling white
snowflakes the Sphere cam to life. With Red fireworks,
yellow lightning bolts, and blue swirls of wind danced on
top of the sphere then dropped into the sphere. The Room
lit up like a thousand bright candles and the light
engulfed the room. The scepter grew as bright as the sun
and there was an explosion. Then with the force of a
hurricane the Princess and Joanna were thrown back, against
the wall.

226

The scepter spun in the middle of the room with its
point towards the sky. Then a great beam of light shoots of
it thru the roof at the moons, which were aligned above
them.

This happened, and then the face of the moons

changed into three colors, red, yellow and blue. The men
and creatures fighting in the hallways were distracted by
the great light and looked up. When the soldiers looked
down, the Orcs were running away screaming in agony. The
walls that had started to crumble came together again.

The

floor, which had cracked, mended itself, the doors, which
had begun to fall down, went back on their hinges and swung
closed. All that was undone in the kingdom was repaired.
The room was silent and the princess lies there silent
unconsciously. The door on the other side of the hall
bursts open and the Dark Lord hovers in. Another door just
to the left of the Princess bursts open and the Magician
and King appear. The King runs over to the Princess and he
looked stunned.

The magician walks over to where the Dark

Lord was. The scepter, still spinning, came to a halt and
floated down to hover between the Magician and the Dark
Lord.

227

The Dark Lord laughs and makes fun of the magician.
You want to fight me old man. You can’t even stand up
straight. You’re too frail to face me. You will certainly
die against me. The magician drops his wooden cane and
stands up straight fixing his posture. He then takes down
his hood and removes disguise revealing a very powerful
wizard thought to have vanished a long time ago. The dark
lord screams out, You. It can’t be. He looks at his hands
and shouts at the powerful magician this is what you did to
me. The magician folds his arms over and stares into the
mind of the dark lord. The dark lord closes his eyes for an
instant. Then flash back memories of the dark lord as a
young mage apprentice magician along with the powerful
magician as an a young apprentice in a lab. The young dark
lord was mixing different lab chemicals together in a large
glass. The young dark lord poured the contents into a
mixing glass and stirred it with a wooden spoon and it
began to fizz. His goal was poor the contents on the young
magician’s cat turning it into an evil grey-white troll.

228

He then pours the contents of the mixing glass into a
small vial then sits the mixing glass down. The young dark
lord goes to poor it over the small white cat sleeping on
the counter when the young magician walks in the room. The
young magician screams NO and charges at the young dark
lord knocking him off his stool down onto the ground while
dropping the vial on the counter. The cat wakes up startled
and runs across the counter knocking the vial over causing
it to spill over the side of the lab table onto the young
dark lord lying there on the ground. The young dark lord
trying to cover his head with his hands but the chemical
poured all down his hands and then on his entire head. The
young magician leans over the lab table asking if his
friend is ok. The young dark lord jumps to his feet and is
screaming look what you did. The young magician looks at
the young dark lord and his hands and arms are grey white
and all the hair has fallen off leaving it bare. His face
started to take on a shape of another creature but not
completely. He begins to claw at him self and tearing holes
into his clothes then he ran out of the lab screaming
insanely.

229

The Dark Lord opens his eyes screams out some
meaningless words and casts a large fireball at the wizard.
The wizard puts up one of his hands and says r-i-reflecta
and the fireballs blasts into the side of the wall leaving
a huge burn mark. The wizard grins then puts his hands
together as he enchants. Ice-of-storm-wind-o-releaseia then
with palms facing out an instant sparkling white shard
sphere releases from his hands at the dark. The dark lord
frantically shouts r-di-shield-a and a small invisible
shield surround his arm blocking the shard sphere knocking
him back to the wall. The shards hit the ground and the
wall surrounding him leaving black burn marks of there
existence. The wizard goes to reach for the scepter but is
met by the dark lord leaping in the air hands first at his
throat. The two fall into the path of the scepter knocking
it down on to the ground and rolls into a corner where they
land. The two roll around fighting for the scepter. The
dark lord rustles to the top of the wizard pinning his arms
down with his body. He then reaches for the scepter before
the wizard could get his hands free.

230

The dark lord picks up the scepter and whirls into the
air. I will rid your existence from this world wizard. He
pulls back to strike. It was to late the Dark Lord had
already taken control of the Scepter into his hands. The
Castle stopped repairing itself and the grounds started to
shake. The Dark Lord starts to make enchantments while
weaving the scepter around in his hand. Combust-r-end-ofolly- as the wizard frees one his hands. Then Out of the
shadows Tooc charges in pulling a magical dagger out of his
leather satchel. He throws the magical dagger past the king
towards the dark lord then dives over the princess into a
ball and rolls to a stop at her feet. The dark lord ducks
and the dagger hits the wall bounces back and falls beside
him and the wizard. The dark lord continues his enchant and
rears back to hit the wizard with the scepter but is met
with piercing force to his side. The Dark Lords yells out
in screaming agony then turns around with the dagger
sticking out of his chest. He releases the scepter over his
head and the wizard finishes the enchanting. – death he
shouts loud then rolls out of the way.

231

As the scepter lands on the dark lords head he bursts into
a blue flame and combusts into nothing leaving the Scepter
floating in the center of the room once again. Then
suddenly from behind a door you could hear a blood-curling
cry of an Orc meeting his death. Then door bursts into
pieces and shards of wood fill the room. Two large Orc’s
follow the pieces and are hurled into the air past the
wizard. First Sir John came gallantly charging in yelling a
war cry and having his sword held high and bearing his
shield on his left arm. Then Felix the captain of the guard
and a few of the king’s guards followed thru. They all came
to a halt as they see the King kneeling down next to the
princess. The Knight lies down his sword and shield and
picks up his princess who laid there quietly a sleep. She
can’t be dead. My princess is strong he screams. He holds
her close to him and rocks back forth. The wizard walks
over to them with the scepter in his hand. He is glowing
and so is the scepter. He mumbles a few words, arcania-tolife-princess and then taps the princess on the forehead
with the scepter. The princess opens her eyes then she
began to move.

232

Her eyes get big as wall nuts and she lifts her arm
and points behind the wizard. As a wisp of wind came from
behind the wizard the black knight whirls his sword into
the King. The white knight grabs the princess and rolls her
to the side and rambles to get up. The black knight then
twists back and lunges his shoulder into the surprised
wizard knocking him off his feet. As he falls to the floor
he looses his grip on the scepter and it falls to the floor
then begins to roll. The black knight puts his foot on the
scepter stopping its roll. He then picks it up and walks
over to the open doorway. Felix and the captain of the
guard chase after the black knight. Then four Orc’s burst
into the room. The black knight orders them to attack. They
leap forward at Felix and the Captain of the guard. The
king’s guards surround him. Taking his last breath the King
falls over and says gaspingly don’t let Evil prevail my
daughter. As The King falls to control his balance a great
shriek comes from the Princess. “No” Oh NO Father No. The
white knight jumps to his feet shield and sword in hand. He
lunges after the black knight.

233

The black knight points the scepter at the white
knight and a burst of energy is released hitting the knight
sending him into the air crashing down on a table
obliterating it to pieces. The Dwarf runs at the black
knight in full charge reaches around his back to pull his
weapon. The black knight points the scepter towards the
dwarf and shouts STOP and then Dwarf freezes like a block
of ice before he has a chance to pull his axe out. Then the
Black Knight points the scepter at the palace guards. He
shouts the words SLEEP, and they instantly collapsed fall
down fatigued with sleep. The Black Knight walks up to the
princess who stands up with tears in her eyes and she
doesn’t move. He Picks up the white knight by the throat
and lifts him into the air. Your time has come knight. You
will die by my hands just as your king has. As Tooc and his
the wizard run up hurriedly to say words of magic or help
they are hit with a big ghastly storm breeze coming from
the scepter as the Black Knight points the scepter at them
and shouts BACK. Swiftly they are hurled through the room
in to the ceiling where they are trapped as they are pinned
to it.

234

Felix and the Captain of the guard finish killing the
last of the four Orcs. They run over to where the black
knight was holding the white knight by the throat. The
captain of the guard runs to the king’s guard to help them.
Felix rushes over to the dwarf. He shakes the dwarf and the
freeze wears off. Dwarfs help the princess while I help the
white knight. Then Felix runs over to the Black knight and
lunges forward with his sword. The black knight turns side
ways with the scepter and blocks Felix’s sword then uses
the scepter to throw Felix against the wall. He hits the
wall and passes out as he slides down the wall. The dwarf
runs to the princess and is trying to talk to her. He yells
at her. Snap out of it princess. Your white knight is in
danger. Help me he says. He then raises his hand removes
his glove and smacks her in the face with his glove. She
opens her eyes the crying stops and looks down at the
little long red haired long bearded dwarf holding her
sword. He has a huge smile from ear to ear.

235

He says, “Hi ya princess you lost this as he hands her
a sword.” The Princess drags the sword behind her and walks
over to the Black Knight. The White knight is suspended in
midair by the strength of the black knight. The white
knight is unconscious hanging there lifeless. “The Princess
comes to the white knights Rescue, How Daring; I shall take
pleasure of killing you after I Take care of him.” The
black knight scours in a hateful manner. The princess
shouts at the black knight. I have had enough of your evil
black knight. This realm only has room for one knight.” She
then swings her sword with both hands as hard as she could.
The back knight blocked the blow with the scepter with both
his hands while releasing the white knight to the ground.
The Black Knight falls backwards tripping over the
unconscious white knight loses control of the Scepter
dropping it. The scepter falls to the floor and it rolls a
few feet then stops.

Felix quickly tries to catch both

Tooc and the wizard while they are falling from the
ceiling. He softens there landing nearly almost killing
himself.

236

The Dwarf runs up behind the princess and stands next
to her with his axe pulled. The black knight stands up and
pulls his sword out. The black knight growls in disgust and
beats his chest. Then shouts, I will kill you girl, then
starts towards her. Ah. Ha and quickly in a flash the white
knight jumps in and steps in between the black knight and
the scepter. This is my fight princess get the scepter. The
Princess and the dwarf run over to the scepter then picks
up the Scepter jumps out of the way and runs to where
Felix, Tooc and the wizard where standing. Sir Jonathan
lays down a few good slashes from his sword and gives quick
thrust. The Black Knight to which is no fool for swordplay
quickly puts in his own slicing and dicing of Swordplay. As
the Black Knight steps back he knocks over some nearby
candles to block the Knight. Then cuts down some Draperies
and pulls them down in front of the white knight. The White
Knight gets tangled up but quickly gets free. The draperies
catch fire from the candles and force the two out the
doorway to the balcony. Sir John then lunges at the Black
knight Swords clashing the two fights out onto the balcony.

237

Sir John charges into the black knight knocking him
down and then Sir John dives onto the black knight and
there swords get tangled up. The black knight knocks the
sword out of sir johns hand and sends it sliding down the
stairs to a small landing where it stopped. Sir John slides
down the side of the stairs trying to stand up with the
black knight trailing. He picks up his sword and quickly
blocks a wide sweep from the black knight’s sword. The two
grapple and fight for position and then the black knight
punches Sir John with his sword hilt. Sir John then bear
hug the black knight and head buts him twice. The Two fall
down the second flight of the stairs to the next balcony.
They rustle on the ground then start rolling around. The
black knight picks up large plant bowl and tries to crush
Sir Johns head with it. He misses then the two roll over
side to side and Sir John on the bottom grabs both the
black knights arms and puts his leg up and catapults the
black knight down the next flight of stairs

the black

knight grabs sir johns armor while falling and drags him
down the stairs with him. The both of them loose left their
swords up top.

238

Tossing and turning trying to regain there balance and
the two jab at each other with closed fists. The black
knight mist Sir John by a good foot but Sir John got a
counter punches one just under the chin. The Black knight
bent over and charged at Sir John like a NFL player and
picks him and slams him into the wall. Sir John balls fists
and pounds on the neck line of the black knight till he let
loose his grip a little. Then he grabbed the black knight
by his ears and head butted him three times. The black
knight let of sir john and held his forehead while bending
over in pain. Sir John Rears up his knee into the black
night chest sending falling backwards to the ground. Sir
John runs up the flight of stair to the upper balcony. He
passes the black knights sword at the edge of the stairs
and about five feet way from there stuck in the stone
banister was his own sword. He leans over to pick it up. He
gives it a good pull but it does not release. He turns
around to see the black knight running up the stairs. The
black knight with blood dripping down from his fore head
yells as he picks his sword. He swings his sword above his
head and charges at Sir John.

239

Sir John still tries to free his sword from the stone
banister. The black knight two feet away jumps in the air
and brings down his sword as Sir John ducks side ways
pulling his sword out. The black knight’s sword hits the
stone banister breaking it into two and he drops it over
the side. As he is doubled over the banister he then stands
straight back up and turns around and is met with a
haymaker from Sir John. Sir John steps up to the black
knight plants his feet and swings his sword blade sideways
at the black knights torso. This connects sends the Black
Knight up and over the railing backwards falling over the
balcony side down to the nothing. Sir John waits for a
moment to regain his breath. Then As Sir John Looks over to
see if his foe fallen and died to his surprise the Black
Knight reaches up from under the balcony and pulls the
White Knight over the railing and the two fall down two
balconies to the last one. This balcony was all but big. It
was very narrow with no Rail at all. They’re where some
flower pots and statues of creatures and such.

240

As Sir John fell over the balcony he was able to catch
the end of the Black knights shoulder armor and place the
black knight between him and the stone floor the lies a
head. This slows down his momentum while crashing down upon
the black knight on the smaller balcony. The Black Knight
pulls out a dagger from his armor and lunges at Sir John.
Sir Johns reaches for his sword sheath and his sword was
gone. It was on the upper balcony and no way to get to it.
Sir John sidesteps and sends the Black knight into a
flowerpot. The black knight staggering head first into the
pot totally obliterates it to pieces. Sir John turned
around leaned over to pick up the black knights broken
sword. Then the Black Knight quickly jumped onto his feet
with dagger in hand charged at Sir John. With Eyes of
confidence and mild grin Sir John slowly picked up his
opponents broken sword then turned it around and thrust it
backwards behind him with all his might meeting the Black
knight in air. As the Sword Pierced the great Black Knights
armor you could hear a thud as it hit bone on the backside.
Sir John stood up and pushed it in further.

241

Then he walked with the sword pushing the black knight
in agony he drops his arms to the side and stands there
lifeless. Then Sir John pushes the Black Knight over the
end of the balcony. The victorious Knight Sir John walks up
the stairs to the second balcony then bends down to one
knee exhausted from the battle picks up his sword and
slowly rises to his feet. After putting his sword back into
his sheath he walks back up to the top balcony and leans on
the railing. The princess had been standing and watching on
the balcony. She smiles at him. He smiles back. She looks
him over. He has dents and scraps on his armor. His left
Spaulding was missing and one of his bracers was gone too.
There he stood with blood dripping down his arms and
forehead. The princess’s face turned a pale shade of white
then her Shouts Sir John look out. Just as Sir John turns
his head the Black knight slowly rises up behind him
climbing onto the railing. With his dagger in hand he
lunges up to strike most certainly into Sir John’s heart
through his back. Then out of nowhere a small blur runs
past the Princess the Dwarf pulls his axe from his back and
throws it over his head as hard as he could.

242

All Sir John could hear was a loud Whoosh in the air
as a huge battle axe flies past his head. Barely grazing
his shoulder missing him the battle axe landed its mark
right in the Center torso of the black knight. From the
force of the heavy weapon hitting the black knight so hard
he is lifted into the air dropping his dagger on the rail
and is thrown backward. The black knight’s foot is caught
on the railing and he turns side ways slips and falls down
to the next balcony standing on the rail. Sir John turns
around and looks over the railing next to the magical
dagger. Then the princess and the dwarf walk up and look
over the railing. The three watch as the black silhouette
waves his arms and hands back and forth trying to counter
balance the weight of his armor from falling off the
railing. Then sir john felt a tug on his armor as Tooc
Climbed up the side of Sir John and jumps to the railing.
Tooc looks down to the next Balcony below and shouts
downwards. “Won’t you just die already BLACK KNIGHT?” Then
Tooc looks just to the left of Sir John. “AH there’s my
dagger he picks it up and puts I tin his teeth.”

243

A loud thud could be heard and a sharp push on Sir
johns head as Joanna Lunges off Sir Johns shoulder and
dives forward into a forward summersault about ten feet
down landing just square of the axe on the Black Knights
shoulders sending the Black Knight flipping into the air
and off the balcony and into the nothing that lies below.
The Princes runs down the stair and rushes up to the Dwarf
on the railing. As you see the black knight disappear
gasping for air a sign of relief came over the princess
Face as she grabs the Dwarf by the collar to keep him from
falling off the balcony as well. Along with the Sir John
the rest of the party gathered around the top of the
Balcony including the King and what was left of his army.
“You did not let us down, Princess.

Nor you, Sir John,”

the King spoke and both bowed back at him. “This scepter
holds the balance because it is a balance. The sphere
possesses the powers of wizards; the claw is that of IceCandara, the dragon, and the scepter the enchantment of the
dwarfs.

It is the balance of our world, these things.

Now

that it is restored, it will ward off evil and all that is
bad in this world.

244

For that, I thank you, the realm thanks you all.” And
the King bows to the knight, the princess, the dwarf, the
thief, the squire and the wizard. The princess took the
scepter and went to the great room. There was a small fire
built in the center of the room’s wall. And above it was a
cradle hanging from the wall. The princess went to set the
scepter in the cradle but it flew up in the air and
suspended it self. The scepter was not done yet.

The Great

Room was soon washed in white, the floors turned to pearl
white marble. Then one by one the Eldens materialized into
the center of the room.

Princess and Joanna were dressed

in robes now, and the scepter fell to Princess’ feet.

She

picked it up and kissed it, the tears that she had cried
for her people still dried on her face, in trails of
glitter. “I believe this belongs to you,” she started to
say as she was handing the scepter to the Joanna. He held
it for a moment smiled then turned around and put it on the
wall. “NA, it will be just fine sitting right here. He
walks over to the princess. Besides I wont have no reason
to come see you if I hang onto it princess. “Ok, says the
princess as the start walking out the chambers door.”

245

The Princess elbows the dwarf in his side as the pass
thru the door.” Don’t start with me princes as he says
grumbling under his voice while walking.”
“Joanna the hammer, he who has defeated many Orcs, and
many of goblins. How about we also add that you lost your
axe in the last battle. The princess pulls out her sword
slashes at Joanna and runs down the hall. Now what will you
fight with?” Sir Joanna looks around and picks up a single
candlestick. Then he waves it at her. She stops keels over
and starts laugh. “Did I tell you about the time that I had
once defeated five Orcs with a single broom stick?” Say’s
the dwarf as he runs after the princess yelling and
shouting with laughter. Joanna the hammer will get you. The
Princess smiles and burst out with laughter as she sheaths
her sword and runs from the dwarf.

The End

246

247

248

249

Meet the Characters
Sir John

The Thief

250

Felix the Squire

The Goblins

251

The Evil Sorcer

The Black Knight

252

The Princess

The Dwarf

253

The Orc

The King

254

Brothers Garci and Joci with the swordsman

Misc Photos

255

More photos to come.
The Stone Warriors, The Magic Old Man,
The Little Girl, Kristian, White Knights Serek the archer
Ractor the man with the military training
kingdom of Pathonas, the whole realm
The Elders surround, Eldens
Scepter of Psylion, Kantara Realm
The Lord Rathix Mullan
The White knights Coralline Family Crest
the Old Magician, the dragons

256

