DON WEBB
THE EVIL MIRACLE
Martha Wills made the down payment on the Starlight Motel in 1966 in memory of
her only love. Now in 1992 she is sixty-seven and wondering if there is a
chance
of selling it in a terrible real estate market. And there are the spiders.
The tarantulas-- big furry black ones-- had always been a problem. Just one of
them padding across the asphalt would bring a Yankee tourist screaming for
his)or more likely his family's) life. Across the highway the old prairie dog
town was full of 'em, and they became quite frisky in the warm weather. Martha
knew them as harmless. You damn near had to step on one to get him to bite
you.
As a child she and her brother Billy used to fish 'em out of holes with bubble
gum. You'd get your well-chewed bubble-gum -long, dangly, and pink -- and
you'd
lower the string into a prairie dog hole. You'd pull up a tarantula and swing
'em round--sort of a living hairy yo-yo. Tourists didn't relate well to this
story. Next were the garden spiders. Black-and-white wonders of the spider
world, they could've been designed by Picasso. They spun huge webs to glisten
rose window-like with the morning dew. Usually she'd have one on the roses out
front and one in the bear grass out back. But this year they were everywhere
-linking guests' cars with their sticky floss; obscuring doorways, filling the
aluminum steps which led to the diving board of her pool. Martha had taken to
getting up at dawn and dewebbing the place.
Finally there were the brown recluses. A different matter. They were one of
the
truly poisonous species. The bite could be fatal. Martha's cousin was once
bitten. The tissues of his leg turned black and smelled of rot. When months
later-- Robert had healed, he was missing a handful of leg. The tiny brown
recluse likes to sleep in shoes and other tight places. Martha had found six
in
the twenty-seven years she owned the Starlight. Three of the six she had found
last month. She figured that the spider increase was somehow due to pesticide
use. She'd half-slept through a TV movie with that theme. She didn't tell
anyone
about the spiders. She didn't want rumors to start. Brown recluses could kill.
In the days when the Starlight catered to an interstate tourist trade, a death
would have meant nothing. Somebody from New York/ Ontario/Alabama had died. So
what.? Who cares? But the small patronage the Starlight now enjoyed was
connected to the hospital. Her clients were the families of the patients. They
came in from nearby little towns and left after cures, deaths, or loss of
hope.
But they recommended the Starlight to their plagued neighbors. Cheap and
clean,
they said, in walking distance of the hospital and the McDonald's. One death
from spiders -- or even the notion that such a death was likely -- would close
the Starlight by the same word of mouth that kept it open.
Martha hadn't told her niece or her nephews that she was going to sell the
Starlight. If she told them-- she'd have to do it. 'Cause she's that way.
Women
don't make it in the business world if they appear indecisive. It was like Mr.
Rheims said, you have to have fire in your heart and ice in your veins. Mr.

Rheims represented the appearance of love to her. Perhaps she even loved him.
His name was John.
It was early in the morning and the maids hadn't arrived. Martha turned on the
lawn sprinklers. Just so. Any more and people's cars would get wet, any less
and
the grass wouldn't. She said good morning to Mrs. Abrams, who was already on
her
way to sit in the ICU waiting room. Promised her that she'd pray for Mr.
Abrams.
She removed the web across the office door and went inside to make her first
pot
of decal
Across the quiet highway she noticed one of her guests doing something very
strange.
The fellow had checked in over a week ago. Martha had been preparing for bed
-the Starlight hadn't had a night clerk in three years -- when someone hit the
buzzer in front. Wearing her peach-colored fuzzy bathrobe, she had checked him
in. He wore this khaki outfit; if he had a pith helmet, she would've sworn he
was on safari. He had known her name.
"You're Martha Wills, right? That's what I was told, Martha Wills."
It was late and she hadn't asked who or why, but she wondered. Folks always
talk
about the Starlight, never about Martha. She didn't think anyone had mentioned
her by name since she won $100 by being the ten thousandth customer at a Food
King.
But the strange man in khaki -- what was his name? -- was picking up bits of
spider web with tweezers. He was putting the webs in some kind of tiny glass
test tube. One strand per tube. He capped each tube with a black rubber
stopper,
then carefully put the tubes into a case specially fitted to hold them.
Her secret was out. This was some kind of scientist here to study the spiders.
Her heart sped up. Her doctor had told her to avoid excitement and coffee. Her
heart sped up and this scared her. It was almost a pain to feel this feeling
in
her chest.
She gripped the smooth wooden counter with the thumb and index finger of her
left hand. She could feel her pulse through her fingertip. She would have to
relax -- have to use the method she learned at Amarillo Community College.
Relax, now, relax. Relax between each beat. When she felt calm, she looked at
the tar-brown nail of her thumb and wished for the millionth time she could
give
up smoking.
She couldn't see the strange man from the window of the motel office.
His name was Olin Fletcher, and immediately it became Dr. Fletcher in her
mind.
She decided to call a realtor that afternoon. The realtor came along with a
photographer. He shot the Starlight from several angles while his boss drank
iced tea with Martha. They agreed on the truths and lies that could be used to

sell the motel. The realtor cautioned her against any kind of For Sale sign.
That almost always scared away guests. In fact, Martha might want to run some
undetectable promotion to fill up the units. The realtor couldn't promise a
sale--it was a slow market--but if Martha could wait six to twelve months, the
realtor was willing to work with her. Then the realtor mentioned a figure. It
was twenty thousand more than Martha was even hoping for. She should've come
to
this decision long ago. The realtor also told Martha that the housing market
was
worse, and when the time came to move from the Starlight she was sure she
could
find Martha an affordable house in town.
Move from the Starlight. She hadn't quite figured that part yet. Damn Dr.
Fletcher.
She served the realtor some carrot cake. She bought it from a shop in town and
carefully put it on her grandmother's green platter. Everyone thought it was
her
own. She pushed her gold-rimmed spectacles up the slope of her sweat-shiny
nose.
She looked outside and saw that Dr. Fletcher was pestering the photographer.
Fletcher had finally donned a pith helmet. What did he think he was -- on
safari.? Trying to talk the photographer into shooting some footage of the
quaint aboriginal motel.? Please, God, don't let him say anything.
She'd lost track of what the realtor was saying; and now the realtor was
leaving, and she hoped she didn't look like a senile fool. Dammit she wasn't
old. She was just distracted. She'd always been distracted by the Starlight.
The realtor and the photographer left. Martha heard the doors slamming shut on
their white station wagon -- the sound of gravel as they sped off in the dry
Texas heat. She wondered if she had agreed to anything. This was the worst it
had ever been. She was letting words make solid life decisions for her and she
didn't even know what the words were. She'd let her life drift into this state
of disconnectedness. She was worse off than the Starlight. Both were real only
in the past, sharing the fate of ruins -- sagging shapes and spiders.
She would put a few things right, though, and one of them would be Dr.
Fletcher.
Her chance came two days later. Fletcher stood in front of the Starlight on
the
tiny strip of Bermuda grass that separated the asphalt of the parking lot from
the asphalt of the highway. He admired the burnt orange sunset broken by the
Spanish tile roof of the Veterans Hospital. He must have heard her walk up
behind him for at the perfect moment he waved his right arm to the sky and
said,
"It looks like an opened paradise."
She almost fell backwards, because the same words had been said to her
twenty-seven years before. Her blood must're collected in her feet, which
suddenly seemed made of lead, and her voice must've gone there too for when
she
spoke she had to lift each word against the gravity of the whole earth. "How
poetic," she said, and thought it was the most stupid and flat thing she had
ever said in her life -- save for when she had said those same words
twenty-seven years before. And then it had been worse because she had said
them
to a man whom she had just fallen in love with. A Miata whizzed by with its

bass
so loud she could feel it in her hollow chest. She looked hard at this strange
man in the safari suit. It couldn't be the same man. He had his height, but it
couldn't be the same man. It couldn't be the same man, because this man
brought
fear and disappointment and the other had brought love and hope. It was a
terrible thing to be an innkeeper because your guests were always bringing you
emotions from their strange, far-off lands.
"You think so?" he said. "I'm a lonely man and lonely men are given to
poetry."
She would break the pattern. She would say something different. She had to
remember. Ah! she knew -- comment on something new.
"I like the way the orange light shines on the metal of the new water tower,"
she said. It was awkward as hell, but at least it was original.
He looked at her with his little green eyes filled with hate. She knew she had
stopped him at some game he was playing, but she wasn't sure that she had done
a
good thing.
"The man taking pictures told me that you were going to sell this place."
"Are you interested in buying it?" I wouldn't sell it to you/or a kazillion
dollars, she thought.
"Me. No. Even as interesting a site as it is." He shook his head. "It would
tie
me down too much."
He turned to face the Starlight, and she automatically turned as well.
Together
they began walking toward the office.
"Could I get you something? A Coke? I like to do special things for my
customers
who stay for weeks." She would find out his game.
"Not yet," he said. "Not yet."
And before she could say anything else, she saw Mrs. Abrams walking like a
wooden zombie. Her cheeks were shiny with tears. Martha remembered that she
hadn't prayed for Mr. Abrams. She went toward the grieving woman, immersed in
her real life's work. It was only much later after she had literally tucked
Mrs.
Abrams into bed that she thought of the meaning of "Not yet, not yet."
Martha's relatives came the next day and it was like a funeral.
She had called them at eleven o'clock in the morning -- her nephews Bill, at
his
dry cleaning shop, and Ralph, at the Frame-It-Yourself in the mall; and her
niece Sarah, at the Credit Bureau. Apparently the three of them had decided
among themselves that if Aunt Martha ever sold the Starlight, she must be in
bad
health and soon to die. Or at least soon to be a burden. Sarah, along with the
two nephews, drove up in her slate-blue Ford Escort. They stayed inside the
car

for a few minutes talking among themselves. Martha watched them through the
office's bay window.
When they came in they talked too loud as though she was deaf. They were
overly
solicitous. They kept telling her to sit down and not to fuss. Sarah's mouth
said that Aunt Martha could come live with her; although Sarah's eyes said she
Would rather go to the dentist seven thousand times instead. Bill and Ralph
were
full of information on the wonderful retirement communities the city had to
offer. It seemed that there was the place that began as a sort of apartment-"Just like being a guest at the Starlight"-- and then as she deteriorated she
could be eased into nursing home-type care. A simple gentle process perfectly
tied with the dimming of the light.
She told them that she was getting her own house. A house away from them. They
could just leave. And she cried and they left.
This had never happened before.
She had just called them out of courtesy; they had no place in her life. If
John
hadn't left. No.
She had been with him a month in 1966. He had brought her love and mystery and
magic. She'd been a maid then and the Starlight a more prosperous
establishment
living on the lifeblood of Route 66. He had changed her life so much that she
knew she would have to hold onto this place.
He had told her that a certain kind of man meets a certain kind of woman and
both are changed by the experience. This can happen at the most unlikely
places,
but at likely times. There is a time when a man has reached a certain stage of
his personal development -- that only a certain woman could excite love,
imagination, and will.
And for that woman, of course, there was only that certain man.
After they had known each other for a week (and had only made love once), he
took her to a used book store and bought her a copy of Goethe's Faust. He read
to her about Gretchen-- not at the beginning of the play, but at the end. When
Faust's damnation is near -- when he has pushed his powers and knowledge to
the
max and only Hell awaits. Yet Gretchen's prayers open Heaven's gate for him.
Her
love and constant devotion translate him to a state of glory and knowledge of
God.
But Faust abandoned Gretchen, she had said.
"He did what he had to do," he said. "He stuck to his quest."
"But he was evil," she said.
"He sought knowledge and power. Is that evil? Perhaps it's just breaking the
human horizons. Galileo was evil when he moved the center of the universe from
the earth to the sun. From that understanding we have the space program.
Someday
we'll even have a man on the moon. Is it evil to want knowledge and power? We

send our kids to college so they can get an education and a good job. Our
nation
is full of tiny Fausts, but we have forgotten the importance of love in the
equation."
He had said many strange and wonderful things and she knew how Eve felt
listening to the Serpent in the Garden. Early on she realized that he would
someday abandon her. She didn't think it would matter. Although she had never
known love before -- she had known sex and she had known friendship -- she
thought that knowing how to love is enough. She would take that knowing and
use
it on an appropriate man. None of these mystery men stopping in for love and
magic. She had tried. After that morning when she woke up alone, and realized
that it was really so-- she tried. She tried finding other men -- men whose
place was inside the city. She tried with men she met through singles bars,
churches, adult educational programs. There were wild times, fast times, hard
times but no love.
She tried to forget about John Rheims. But everything that called to love, the
love songs on the radio, a dingy Valentine card found in the street, the sun
in
the sky, put John's face in her mind.
Had it really been love? Could there have been love in such a short time? And
if
he really felt the way she did, could he have left her? These questions were
with her always.
Three months after John's departure, she won a magazine distributor's
sweepstakes. She bought the Starlight from her boss, who was able to fulfill
his
lifelong dream of retiring to the Hamptons. While he contemplated the cold
North
Atlantic, she read detective novels and tried their methods at the scene of
the
crime.
For the first three years she was too busy to do anything except hope for his
imminent return. The address in the register proved to be false, but she hoped
that he would prove true. For the next three years she took to asking
traveling
salesmen and professional vagabonds if they'd ever met anyone like John. Then
she bought the property next door-- put in sixteen more units and a
restaurant,
and for six years she made money hand over fist. She worked all the time and
didn't think much. She invested her money wisely. When her brother drank
himself
to death, she was able to send her nephews and niece to college. Good
colleges,
too. A few months before her establishment was totally bypassed by the new
business loop, she sold the restaurant and the sixteen units to her competitor
next door.
The kids came back from college and six quiet years passed. She developed
herself. She learned to paint. She took night classes at the community
college.
She hired herself three assistant managers and she permitted herself a couple
of
vacations. She woke up one morning and was surprised to see her mother in the
mirror-- so she stopped looking for love. It just wasn't dignified somehow.

These were the years of the secret. She told no one of John, and if anyone
remembered the name she advised them she was well over that. She thought that
if
she spoke not--the memory would lessen. Yet by hiding the secret in silence-it
grew ever stronger until it became the driver of her life.
During the eight years that followed, as the Starlight began its decline,
Martha
pulled her money out. She never let the place get run down or shabby after
all,
she lived there and one should take care of one's own environment. But she let
some of the staff go, she put more of her own salary into T-bills, she created
the economic means to live out her life.
She had been thirty-nine when she met John. Now she was sixty-six.
She was still surprised when she qualified for a senior discount. Someone
would
die in a dramatic fashion, and on the news they would say, "an elderly woman."
And Martha would find out that the woman was her age. Several friends from her
high school class had shown up in the obituaries.
She should have had the answers by now. Instead, terrifying events were
threatening the order she took for granted.
She didn't sleep.
Her arthritis was bad.
She felt somewhat better after a long hot shower. She wanted to confront Dr.
Fletcher at dawn -- or as soon thereafter as she could.
She knocked on his door at 6:50. She knew she was waking up other guests, but
she plain didn't care. She knocked, waited, knocked, waited, and put her pass
key in the lock. Just as she turned the key a chittering noise came from
within.
Her nerve failed. Dr. Fletcher said, "Later, Ms. Wills, later." She went back
to
her room and threw up.
There was someone in the office wanting to check out -- pissed off by the
early
morning knocking. Martha Wills' reflection was pale and sweaty in the office
window.
The day was long and she didn't eat anything. At sunset she ventured outside.
He
was standing on the strip of grass between the parking lot and the old highway
again. She was weak and kept falling in and out of visions from her past.
Whatever unknown lodestone drew her to this meeting, it had overcome her will.
Fletcher raised his arm to the magnificent sunset. "It looks like an opened
paradise."
"How poetic," she said.
"I'm a lonely man and lonely men are given to poetry," he said.
"It seems that poetry should attract the perfect audience."

Fletcher turned to her and said, "Now, Martha Wills, now. We have said the
words
and you know and believe that these words are not said here and now by
accident."
"I know and believe," she said, and suddenly everything had that slow-moving
clarity of a dream.
They walked back to his room. She sat on the green vinyl chair and he took a
small brass jar from his suitcase on the dresser. The jar was simple and
unadorned. It looked like an old-fashioned jelly jar save for its material. It
seemed very old. He unscrewed the jar; it made a noise like a scratchy
seventy-eight on her grandmother's Victrola. The noise was John Rheim's voice.
He said, "You know, Martha, I only want one thing."
"I know," she said.
"The jar," said Dr. Fletcher, "always makes those sounds. I found it ten years
ago in a market in Marrakesh. I've spent ten years trying to find out what it
means. I can't tell you the number of nights I've spent turning the lid again
and again. To find why the jar said these things, I studied phonics,
statistics
-- at first it was a hobby. Then an obsession. Eventually I had to learn the
hidden lore of mankind, and I can tell you that it is a good thing that many
things are hidden."
"So you found out about John and me," she said. "Let me ask you something. Do
you love your little jar?
"It tortures, it tantalizes. For a while I thought I loved it, but what it
woke
up in me is curiosity. All of the strange and beautiful things in my life came
from my quest. Even now I don't know what's in the jar. It won't open. The
recording principle is simple -- the technology is mysterious because of
reasons
of metallurgy. I've had offers of thousands of dollars from material
scientists
for my jar. So do you know what the words mean?"
"I know," she said. "But you haven't told me about the spiders."
"They always show up," he said. "They're always waiting when I get to a place.
I
don't know how the spiders fit in. They're another piece of the puzzle; so
what
do the words mean?"
For the first time she saw another human being in Fletcher. His green eyes
were
alive with want. This was someone who was like herself.
"I know," she said. "But you must tell me where John is. I think I even
understand the spiders."
"I don't know. A magician of Marrakesh, who lived in an artificial cave
beneath
the city, recognized the voice. He said that it belonged to someone who stood
outside the circles of time-- a voice sometimes heard in the wind at the
sacred
sites of the most ancient cities. What does he want?"

"He wants my forgiveness."
"Will you give it to him?"
"He is a devil, an evil man. He revolted against God, having to know
everything.
But I learned love from him and not from God."
"I learned curiosity from him. I had to track down hundreds of people to
reconstruct your first meeting."
"Play the message again," she said.
He spun the lid on the small brass jar. "You know, Martha, I only want one
thing."
"And the lid never comes off?"
"Just round and round. I'd thought of removing it by force, but I might
destroy
the very mystery I'm seeking to answer."
Martha pulled herself up in her chair. She sat in a very dignified manner with
her hands on her lap. "Play the message again."
"You know, Martha, I only want one thing."
"I forgive you for leaving me, John, and I hope you have found what you
sought."
There was a slight metallic ping! from the jar. Fletcher started to twist at
the
lid, but stopped himself. He had been so long apart from his mystery, his
beloved, and he had to force himself to stay separate. He managed to ask, "You
said you knew about the spiders."
"I had forgotten. I don't know how I had forgotten this with months of spiders
showing up to change my life. John has reached out to change my life again. I
guess I'm ready for retirement. I guess I'd been waiting to say the words,
too.
He used spiders as a metaphor for his Work. He said that spiders were perfect
Faustian creatures. They make their own worlds out of the material in their
black hearts. Each is its own god; I objected to the metaphor. I told him that
God had foreordained each spider to weave its web. Those perfect patterns of
symmetry that catch the morning sun are examples of God's will. He said, 'I'll
show you some real magic sometime. I'll get spiders to make something other
than
a preordained web.'"
Fletcher gave the lid another turn. It came off. The jar was empty, but the
room
was suddenly filled with the fragrance of roses.
Then from beneath the bed, from behind the curtains, from underneath the crack
of the door-- they came. Spiders. Thousands, maybe millions of them. Fletcher
dropped the jar and they scurried over to it. The jar was soon covered.
The swarming mass was organizing. Tarantulas at the bottom, garden spiders in
the middle, brown recluses at the top. The mass split into three almost

perfect
balls, one atop the other.
Fletcher looked at Martha and Martha looked at Fletcher.
There weren't any more spiders coming in.
Martha rose. The spider snowman stood a foot taller than she. She walked to
it,
and after a moment of dreadful deliberation -- stuck her left hand into the
center of the garden spider ball. It felt lacy and dry inside -- like sticking
her hand into a pile of feathers. She felt around -- seeking the jar, which
she
presumed to be in the center. Her fingers found something long and smooth. At
first she thought it was a pencil. As she grabbed it her index finger was
pricked by something sharp -- or maybe a spider had bitten her. She pulled it
out carefully.
In her left hand she held a single perfect black roses.

