The
Essential

J.R.R. Tolkien
Sourcebook

A FAN’S GUIDE
TO

MIDDLE-EARTH
AND

BEYOND

George Beahm
Illustrated by Colleen Doran

New Page Books
A division of The Career Press, Inc.
Franklin Lakes, NJ

001 Tolkien front - ackno.pmd

1

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

Copyright © 2004 by George Beahm
All rights reserved under the Pan-American and International Copyright
Conventions. This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, in any form
or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system now known or hereafter invented,
without written permission from the publisher, The Career Press.
THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK
EDITED BY CLAYTON W. LEADBETTER
TYPESET BY EILEEN DOW MUNSON
Cover illustration and design: Jean William Naumann
Printed in the U.S.A. by Book-mart Press
Art by Colleen Doran © 2003 by Colleen Doran
Art by Donato Giancola © 2003 by Donato Giancola
Art by Steve Hickman © 2003 by Steve Hickman
Art by Tim Kirk © 2003 by Tim Kirk
Art by Michael Kaluta © 2003 by Michael Kaluta
Art by David Wenzel © 2003 by David Wenzel
Photographs of Sideshow-Weta collectibles © 2003 by Sideshow-Weta
Photographs of swords by United Cutlery © 2003 by United Cutlery

To order this title, please call toll-free 1-800-CAREER-1 (NJ and Canada: 201848-0310) to order using VISA or MasterCard, or for further information on
books from Career Press.

The Career Press, Inc., 3 Tice Road, PO Box 687,
Franklin Lakes, NJ 07417
www.careerpress.com
www.newpagebooks.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beahm, George W.
The essential J.R.R. Tolkien sourcebook : a fan’s guide to Middle-earth and beyond / by
George Beahm.
p. cm.
ISBN 1-56414-702-9 (pbk.)
1. Tolkien, J. R. R. (John Ronald Reuel), 1892-1973—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2.
Tolkien, J. R. R. (John Ronald Reuel), 1892-1973—Film and video
adaptations—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Tolkien, J. R. R. (John Ronald Reuel),
1892-1973—Collectibles—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 4. Middle Earth (Imaginary
place)—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 5. Fantasy fiction, English—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 6.
Fantasy films—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
PR6039.O32Z566 2004
828'.91209--dc22
2003044293

001 Tolkien front - ackno.pmd

2

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

Say “friend” and enter:
This book is for
Colleen Doran.

001 Tolkien front - ackno.pmd

3

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To Douglas A. Anderson, for bibliographic assistance and answering all my
e-mails about Tolkien; to Stephen Spignesi, who stopped working on his own
books to help me with mine; to Ned Brooks, who scanned images, answered
Tolkien-related questions, and provided contacts; to the artists who pushed away
their drawing boards to help out with interviews and art—Tim Kirk, Donato
Giancola, Steve Hickman, Michael Kaluta, and Dave Wenzel. Thanks, too, are
due to Michael Whelan, who gave time for an interview, despite his crushing
workload in finishing up his current assignment.
I owe a special thanks to the fellowship of publishing professionals at New
Page Books, who, despite an impossibly unforgiving deadline, rose to the challenge
and, as a team pulling in the same direction, took my raw manuscript and produced
a beautiful book. Handsomely typeset and elegantly designed, this book shows
their care and craft for book publishing: Ron Fry, publisher, who believed in this
book; Clayton Leadbetter, editor, who worked tirelessly to make this book as
good as it could possibly be; Eileen Munson, whose design work as formatter
showcases the words and art to their best effect; Gina Marie Cheselka, who ably
assisted in the preliminary editorial work; Stacey A. Farkas, editorial director,
who shepherded this book through production from start to finish; and finally,
Mike Pye, whose work and ideas also helped improved it. This book bears the
watermarks of their professionalism on every page.
And, finally, to Colleen Doran, who was an integral part of this book from its
beginning: Despite a professional workload that kept her at the drawing board
for seven days a week, she squeezed in time to produce nearly two dozen original
pieces of art done especially for this book. In addition, she provided an interview;
turned over her entire Tolkien collection for me to have on hand as I worked on
this book, which proved to be invaluable; assisted me in the photography of her
many Tolkien collectibles; promoted this book online and through her contacts
at TheOneRing.net; and was my sounding board on this project, as we discussed
Tolkien and all things in Middle-earth. Thank you, Colleen.

001 Tolkien front - ackno.pmd

5

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

“In that realm a man may, perhaps count himself fortunate to
have wandered, but its very richness and strangeness tie the tongue
of a traveller who would report them. And while he is there it is a
dangerous for him to ask too many questions, lest the gates should
be shut and the keys be lost.”
—J.R.R. Tolkien, On Fairy Stories

001 Tolkien front - ackno.pmd

6

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

CONTENTS

The Day of His Death Was a Dark, Cold Day ............................. 13
By Stephen Spignesi

Foreword

........................................................................................................... 17

Introduction

Chapter 1
Books by Tolkien ............................................................................ 21
The Hobbit, or There and Back Again
21
The Lord of the Rings
24
The Silmarillion
31
The History of Middle-earth
34
Other books by J.R.R. Tolkien
35
Books About Tolkien ..................................................................... 41

Chapter 2

Visual Adaptations of The Lord of the Rings: .............................. 59
The Film and Related Book Tie-In Products
DVDs
59
Books
66
The Official Lord of the Rings Fan Club
70

Chapter 3

Chapter 4
Sound Advice: Audio Adaptations ............................................... 71
Audio Adaptations
73
Musical Adaptations
75
Chapter 5
Printed Products ............................................................................. 81
Stationery Goods
81
Posters
84
Lithographs and Photographs
87
Art Prints, Giclée Prints, and Original Art
87
Calendars
90

003 Tolkien TOC.pmd

7

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

Chapter 6

The One Ring Replicas .................................................................. 93

Chapter 7
Licensed Movie-Related Collectibles .......................................... 99
Decorative Items
99
Clothing and Apparel
100
Jewelry
101
Standups
102
Action Figures and Dolls
103
Board Games and Puzzles
106
Computer Software
106
Sideshow/Weta
107
Swords by United Cutlery
120
Stamps
125
Coins
126
Miscellaneous Collectibles
127
Chapter 8

Gaming and Miniatures ................................................................ 131

Chapter 9

The Noble Collection ................................................................... 145

Chapter 10

Smaug’s Stash: Tolkien Treasures .............................................. 151

Chapter 11
Visions of Middle-earth: Tolkien Art ........................................ 167
Tolkien Artists: A Selective Overview
168

003 Tolkien TOC.pmd

8

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

Interviews and Art by Select J.R.R. Tolkien Artists
Tim Kirk’s Works
Colleen Doran: Drawn to Please
Steve Hickman: The Art of Imagination
Donato Giancola’s Classical Art
Michael Whelan: The Master
Michael Kaluta: Flights of the Fantastic

175
175
180
184
188
194
199

Chapter 12

The Literary Landscape of Tolkien’s World ............................ 203

Chapter 13

Tolkien Websites: The Road Goes Ever On............................. 213

Chapter 14

The Essential J.R.R. Tolkien: My Personal Picks ................... 225

Final Word

The Importance of Story .............................................................. 231

Appendix A

Glass Onion Graphics .................................................................. 235

Appendix B

The Lord of the Rings Motion Picture Trilogy: ......................... 237
The Exhibition

Appendix C

Tall Towers, Brave Kings, Wise Wizards, and ......................... 239
Precious Rings: A Celebration of Fantasy Art

Appendix D

Flights of Imagination ................................................................... 241

Appendix E

Ted Nasmith, His Tolkien Art, and the Chalk Farm Gallery . 243

Appendix F

Tolkien, Licensing, and Copyrights...and Wrongs ................... 247

About the Author and Illustrator .......................................................................... 257

003 Tolkien TOC.pmd

9

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

004 Tolkien illustra page.pmd

10

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

004 Tolkien illustra page.pmd

11

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

FOREWORD

THE DAY OF HIS DEATH
WAS A DARK,
COLD DAY
BY STEPHEN SPIGNESI

I love W.H. Auden’s poetry.
The title of this essay is a line from Auden’s poem, “In Memory of W.B.
Yeats,” one of my all-time favorites, although the line could easily be read to
describe that day, in September 1973, when the world lost J.R.R. Tolkien.
Auden’s ode to Yeats is powerful, sad, and compelling, and its opening line—
“He disappeared in the dead of winter”—I have long considered to be a truly
evocative rendering of someone’s death.
Likewise, I am an enormous J.R.R. Tolkien fan, and that admiration is something similarly felt by great W.H. Auden. In a 1954 New York Times book review
titled “The Hero Is a Hobbit,” Auden wrote, “No fiction I have read in the last
five years has given me more joy than The Fellowship of the Ring.”
Indeed.
During the days when I was thinking about Tolkien, this essay, and the tome
by my good friend George Beahm that you now hold in your hands, I received an
e-mail from an old friend. Nancy and I grew up together and she was my date for
my junior prom. She was writing to wish me a happy birthday and to order a copy
of the limited edition of my novel. In her note, she reminisced a little and told me
how much fun she had had at the prom. Coincidentally, while I was cleaning my
office a week earlier, I had come across my high school diploma. I opened the
leather binder and there was our prom picture. Nancy was radiant with blonde
hair and a blue gown—in fact, she looked like Arwen, or even Galadriel—and
because Catholic high schools of the time did not allow facial hair (perhaps they
still don’t?), I was clean-shaven. (I grew my beard the following summer and
have not looked back.)
u 13 U

007 Tolkien Foreword.pmd

13

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

14 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

“But Steve, what does that prom story have to do with Tolkien?” I hear you
asking.
Fair question, and I have a good (and relevant) answer: The theme for my
junior prom was Lothlórien.
The Lord of the Rings fans know of Lothlórien as the fabled golden woods,
“Lórien of the Blossom,” the land on the banks of the River Celebrant, to the east
of the Misty Mountains and southeast of Khazad-dûm. Lorien was probably
founded sometime long before the First Age, perhaps around the time of the Great
Journey, and it serves as a sanctuary of sorts (albeit briefly) for Frodo and company in the trilogy.
When I was in high school in the 1970s, The Lord of the Rings was huge. Everyone had read it, usually more than once, and everyone had a sense that we were
living witnesses to a seminal moment in the history of English literature. If I recall
correctly, the trilogy was actually assigned to my freshman English class. This was
extraordinary! A three-volume fantasy epic being taught in high school! Today,
the literary merit and importance of The Lord of the Rings is universally recognized; back then, science fiction and fantasy were not usually found in high school
curricula, especially Catholic high school curricula.
The Lord of the Rings tells the story of the great conflict at the end of the Third
Age between Sauron the Dark Lord and an alliance of men and elves. A humble
hobbit named Frodo Baggins was summoned by fate to return the One Ring
to the fire in which it was made and the
trilogy tells of his sacred quest.
The recent, glorious, three-part
movie version of the trilogy (and Peter
Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings is, without question, simply one long movie broken up into three parts) has renewed
interest in Professor Tolkien and his
works. The movies have also introduced
Frodo, Gandalf, Saruman, Elrond,
Gollum, Boromir, and all the other denizens of Middle-earth to a new, younger
audience, while rekindling the interest
in the story for those of us who read the
The Elvish inscription found on the One
books when they were first released.
Ring (“One Ring to rule them all...”), on
the base of the plastic ring enclosure
This book by George Beahm speaks
containing the One Ring.
to the worldwide interest in hobbits,
elves, dwarves, men, orcs, and all the
other people, places, and things of Middle-earth and its environs. Here you will
find a cornucopia of resources certain to provide you with any and all information
you may want or need about J.R.R. Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings.

007 Tolkien Foreword.pmd

14

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

THE DAY

OF

HIS DEATH WAS

A

DARK, COLD DAY

u 15

For instance, I will probably never forgive my friend George for regaling me
in his book with details about the Allen & Unwin “Bible paper” edition of the
complete The Lord of the Rings. This magnificent volume, which George correctly
describes as a work of art, retails for £100 ($161 American) and is a little rich for
me—especially considering that it would be the fifth or sixth copy of the trilogy I
would be adding to my library.
George’s book also includes details on everything from jewelry to letter openers, action figures to signed letters, and candy to Websites, while providing accurate and authoritative information on precisely what makes a collectible
“collectible,” how to value autographs and limited editions, and what to buy when
you are on a budget.
In a recent poll conducted by the Modern Library, The Lord of the Rings was
the Library’s readers’ fourth favorite novel of all time. Fantasy aficionados have
long rated the epic as the greatest fantasy novel ever written. In a wonderfully
synergistic development, The Lord of the Rings movies are receiving similar praise
and admiration.
George’s book will serve well all who cherish Professor Tolkien’s tale—all of
us who use “Gandalf” as their screen name and all who use “Gimli” or “Bombadil”
as their password.
George Beahm has applied the same care and attention to detail to this book
about Tolkien and his work as he did to his earlier works about Stephen King,
Michael Jordan, Tim Kirk, Anne Rice, and Vaughn Bode. George understands
that admirers of a writer, artist, or sports figure are enriched by learning more
about them and their work.
Thus, I say with certainty, as if I had seen this truth myself in one of the
seven Palantíri brought to Middle-earth by Elendil, we Hobbits are all enriched
by this fine book, and I am grateful to George for inviting me to be a part of it.

007 Tolkien Foreword.pmd

15

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

INTRODUCTION

The product of 13 years of part-time work, The Lord of the Rings was typed
using two fingers by J.R.R. Tolkien, not once, but twice. Originally published by
Allen & Unwin in 1954–55 in three volumes, The Lord of the Rings was deemed,
because of its length, such a risky proposition that Tolkien received no book advance; he was an equal partner in a profit-sharing plan...if the book made money,
which seemed doubtful to the publisher. Tolkien admitted his new book was rather
unlike his previous book, The Hobbit. This new book, written not for children but
for adults, would have to find a new audience.
“My work has escaped from my control,” Tolkien wrote in a letter (February
1950) to Allen & Unwin, “and I have produced a monster: an immensely long,
complex, rather bitter, and rather terrifying romance, quite unfit for children (if
fit for anybody); and it is not really a sequel to The Hobbit, but to The Silmarillion.”
Tolkien’s understandable fears proved unfounded: Not only was The Lord of
the Rings a best-selling classic, but in 2001 it was adapted as a live-action film by
New Line Cinema, directed by New Zealand film director Peter Jackson—a makeor-break risk for the studio, which invested approximately $300 million.
Executives at New Line Cinema were justifiably concerned, but when The
Fellowship of the Ring was released in December 2001, it became apparent to
all—critics, Tolkien fans, the Hollywood community, and most important, the
moviegoers—that this was exactly what the public had been waiting for: timely
and timeless, the battle for Middle-earth, symbolic of the eternal struggle between
the forces of darkness and the forces of light, struck a resonant chord with its tale
of Everyman in the guise of an uncommonly brave Hobbit, who assumed a terrible
burden and changed the fate of the world.
u 17 U

008 Tolkien Intro plus illustra.pmd

17

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

18 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

It was, simply, a tale for our troubled times.
Grossing more than $1 billion worldwide, the film adaptation of The Fellowship
of the Ring had a salutary effect in the bookstore. Their interest piqued by the film,
moviegoers rushed into bookstores
to find out more about the book and
its creator, only to discover that one
could spend a lifetime wandering
through Middle-earth, because finding one’s way would be no easy task.
With its half century of publishing
history, The Lord of the Rings is available in editions to suit every budget
and every taste—from inexpensive
mass market paperbacks to magnificently illustrated hardback editions.
No wonder newcomers to
Middle-earth feel overwhelmed: the
wealth of material by and about
From Sideshow/Weta, a sculpture
Tolkien, in every conceivable form,
of the dreaded Balrog.
staggers the imagination.
As to the genesis of this book: Soon after The Fellowship of the Ring debuted
in theaters nationwide, I was in a Barnes & Noble bookstore in Newport News,
Virginia, where I saw what had to be a commonplace scene. Faced with multiple
editions of The Lord of the Rings, a young girl and her parents tried in vain to determine what edition to buy. I overheard her say
that she wanted to write a school paper on Tolkien
and wanted a biography and a critical study.
Understandably confused by a wall of books
by and about Tolkien, she had no idea where to
begin looking—a problem facing millions of new
readers, who won’t know enough about Tolkien
to know what to buy.
I knew that no Tolkien sourcebook was
available, but one was urgently needed. Ideally,
such a book would be hundreds of pages long,
with hundreds of color photos, covering everything from 1954 to present day—a virtual encyclopedia of everything that had ever appeared
in print.
A life-size sculpture, from Sideshow/Weta, of
Gandalf the White on his steed, Shadowfax,
on display at the 2003 Book Expo in Los
Angeles. (Photo courtesy of Colleen Doran.)

008 Tolkien Intro plus illustra.pmd

18

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

u 19

INTRODUCTION

I, too, would welcome such a useful resource, but the immediate need is a
general book to orient the new reader and to update seasoned readers with current information.
On December 17, 2003, the third installment, The Return of the King, will premiere in theaters nationwide and bring to a satisfying conclusion the magnificent—
a word I do not use lightly—movie adaptation of The Lord of the Rings. The
subsequent year will see the release of its DVD (in a regular and extended version), and possibly the release of all three films in a final, extended DVD edition.
But the Tolkien celebration won’t end there, because 2005 will mark the 50th
anniversary of the publication of The Fellowship of the Ring, and Tolkien’s publishers will take full advantage of that fact to promote LotR in bookstores worldwide, as will The Tolkien Society in England, which will hold its biggest conference
ever, scheduled one week after the World Science Fiction convention to be held
in England that year—celebrations of special magnificence!
If you are a newcomer to Middle-earth, I say: Speak, friend, and enter! As you
will soon discover, there is much to explore and many wonders to see, but only if
you know where to look.
Not all who wander are lost, but it’s too easy to lose your way in Middle-earth
without a roadmap, so I hope this book will set you on what will surely be a long
and enjoyable journey through the enchanting realm imagined and chronicled by
J.R.R. Tolkien.
Note: To minimize repetition, where applicable, The Lord of the Rings is abbreviated to LotR.

008 Tolkien Intro plus illustra.pmd

19

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

008 Tolkien Intro plus illustra.pmd

20

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

CHAPTER 1

BOOKS
BY TOLKIEN

The Hobbit, or There and Back Again
The Hobbit, or There and Back Again, the prelude to The Lord of the Rings, was
originally published by Allen & Unwin on September 21, 1937. According to Tolkien
scholar Douglas A. Anderson, its first printing was small—only 1,500 copies. Published in hardback with 10 black-and-white illustrations and two maps furnished by the author himself,
The Hobbit garnered positive reviews and, as its publisher, Stanley Unwin, predicted, led to a public demand for more stories about hobbits.
As a novel, The Hobbit holds its own as an engaging story well worth reading, but when read before tackling The Lord of the Rings, The Hobbit
establishes a framework for the larger work to follow and whets the appetite for more information
about hobbits, Middle-earth, and those who dwell
therein: wizards, elves, dwarves, trolls, and the minions of evil.

The Hobbit Recommended Editions
From Houghton Mifflin, the U.S. publisher of
the Tolkien canon, there are several editions of The
Hobbit in print, depending on your literary taste
and budget:

A journal bearing the title
“There and Back Again,”
from the title of The
Hobbit.

u 21 U

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

21

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

22 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

u The Collector’s Edition ($35). For gift giving, the clear choice is the
hardback “Collector’s Edition” of The Hobbit. With its full-page color
illustrations, two-color typography, and green leatherette binding with
matching slipcase, this edition is eye-catching and very attractive. Any
Tolkien fan would be delighted to get a copy of this as a gift.
u The Most Informative Edition ($28). Especially useful for students or
readers who want to know more about the book, its history, and a
thorough explication of its text, the hardback of The Annotated Hobbit
(Revised and Expanded Edition, 2002) is the book of choice. With
annotations by Tolkien expert Douglas A. Anderson, who also provides

The Publishing Story Behind The Hobbit
“In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.”
And so begins the book that brought an
Oxford professor from the relative obscurity of academe to a larger world.
Early reviews were positive, heralding
great expectations from a new storyteller
who showed great promise.
From The New Statesman & Nation:
“His wholly original story of adventure among goblins, elves and
dragons...gives...the impression
of a well-informed glimpse into
the life of a wide other-world; a
world wholly real, and with a quite
matter-of-fact, supernatural natural history of its own.”
Echoing The New Statesman, The
Observer commented:
“Professor Tolkien’s finely written
saga of dwarves and elves, fearsome goblins and trolls, in a spacious country of far-off and long
ago...a full-length tale of traditional
magic being...an exciting epic of
travel, magical adventure... working up to a devastating climax.”
The Times (of London) called it “a
solidly delightful book” and “a fascinating excursion into the early English
scene.”

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

22

The best, and most accurate, assessment of The Hobbit came from Tolkien’s
friend C.S. Lewis, who rightly concluded,
in the Times Literary Supplement (Oct. 2,
1937), that “Its place is with Alice,
Flatland, Phantastes, The Wind in the Willows.... [The] prediction is dangerous: but
The Hobbit may well prove a classic.”
C.S. Lewis was right. The Hobbit not
only proved to be a classic, a book beloved by generations of readers, but a
bestseller as well—a book that continues to sell at a brisk pace, in more than
40 languages worldwide. As Douglas A.
Anderson affirmed in his introduction
to The Annotated Hobbit, “There is no
doubt that The Hobbit is a worldwide
classic, for all ages, and all times.”

The U.S. edition
of The Annotated
Hobbit, edited by
Douglas A.
Anderson.

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 23

TOLKIEN

a lengthy and informative introduction to the book, The Annotated
Hobbit offers the full text of the novel itself and also extensive
appendices, including “The Quest of Erebor,” which recounts how
Gandalf came to enlist Bilbo Baggins in the adventure with the dwarves;
“On Runes,” with a dictionary; a bibliography with extensive notes about
the various editions of The Hobbit; and a useful map of Wilderland.
u The Best Illustrated Editions ($17.95–$35). Intended for gift giving, two illustrated editions are
available: a $35 hardback with color plates by
British artist Alan Lee—renown for his Tolkien
art, and a set designer for Peter Jackson’s film
adaptation of The Lord of the Rings—and a
$29.95 hardback or $17.95 trade paperback, with
48 color paintings by an American artist best
known for his work on children’s books,
Michael Hague.

Other editions include:
u The Hobbit: Young Reader’s Edition ($10), which
has cover art of the great dragon Smaug by the
author, and includes a teaser chapter from The
Lord of the Rings.

The U.S. edition of
The Hobbit,
illustrated by British
artist Alan Lee.

u The Hobbit ($16 hardback), with cover art by the author.
u The Hobbit ($12 trade paperback), with cover art by Alan Lee.
u The Hobbit ($18 hardback, $10 paperback), with cover art by Peter Sis.
This edition sports black-and-white illustrations by the author and,
textually, is as close as possible to Tolkien’s original work, according to
Douglas A. Anderson, who wrote a note on the text.
Though The Hobbit is an entertaining story—a well-told tale, albeit with a juvenile flavor because of Tolkien’s habit of addressing the reader directly—its story
elements lay the groundwork for what would follow: The Lord of the Rings.
In The Hobbit we learn how the One Ring
came to Bilbo Baggins, who in turn would give it
to his nephew, Frodo. We also learn about
Gollum, who plays a pivotal role in the long tale
that follows, and we meet the wizard Gandalf,
who assumes an even more significant role as the
war for Middle-earth clouds the horizon.
A packaged edition of The Hobbit, published by
HarperCollins UK, containing the book, postcards, a
map, and a CD of J.R.R. Tolkien reading excerpts from
the book.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

23

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

24 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

New readers who want more information about how Bilbo Baggins came to
find himself in an adventure of a lifetime may be surprised to learn that Tolkien
wrote a narrative that was originally intended for publication in the appendices of
The Lord of the Rings. However, the piece in question, “The Quest of Erebor,” was
omitted from it but subsequently published in a posthumous collection, Unfinished
Tales. (It is also available as Appendix A of The Annotated Hobbit.) It is “Gandalf’s
account of how he came to arrange the expedition to Erebor and send Bilbo with
the Dwarves,” wrote Tolkien.

J.R.R. Tolkien on The Hobbit
In the book trade, catalogs are issued to
promote forthcoming releases. The catalog copy is usually written by the marketing department, but in Allen & Unwin’s
1937 Summer Announcements, Tolkien’s
own copy appeared:
“If you care for journeys there and
back, out of the comfortable Western world, over the edge of the
Wild, and home again, and can take
an interest in a humble hero
(blessed with a little wisdom
and a little courage and considerable good luck), here is
the record of such a journey
and such a traveler. The period is the ancient time between the age of Faerie and
the dominion of men, when the famous forest of Mirkwood was still
standing, and the mountains were
full of danger. In following the path
of this humble adventurer, you will

learn by the way (as he did)—if you do
not already know all about these
things—much about trolls, goblins,
dwarves, and elves, and get some
glimpses into the history and politics
of a neglected but important period.
“For Mr. Bilbo Baggins visited
notable persons; conversed with the
dragon, Smaug the Magnificent; and
was present, rather unwillingly, at the
Battle of Five Armies. This is all
the more remarkable, since he
was a hobbit. Hobbits have hitherto been passed over in history
and legend, perhaps because
they as a rule preferred comfort
to excitement. But this account,
based on his personal memoirs,
of the one exciting year in the otherwise quiet life of Mr. Baggins will give
you a fair idea of this estimable
people, now (it is said) becoming
rather rare. They do not like noise.”

The Lord of the Rings
Though the film adaptation of The Lord of the Rings is a laudable achievement—
indeed, the three films, taken as a whole, stand not only as a cinematic achievement par excellence but as a testament to the wizardry of special effects—the book
itself is even more impressive. An estimated half million words in length, the story
itself is buttressed by an appendix of 128 pages that provides the back story, which
is more appropriate to a work of nonfiction than fiction.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

24

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 25

TOLKIEN

The story behind its publication is a tale in itself. When The Hobbit was originally published, publisher Stanley Unwin wrote Tolkien, “A large public will be
clamouring next year to hear more from you about Hobbits!”
The problem, however, was that Tolkien wasn’t planning a sequel about hobbits.
He was planning to publish The Silmarillion, which predated The Hobbit.
Tolkien submitted The Silmarillion to his publisher, along with other works,
and, in due course, his publisher reiterated the obvious need for another hobbit
tale. As he explained to Tolkien in a letter:
What we badly need is another book with which to follow up our
success with The Hobbit and alas! neither of these manuscripts (the
poem and The Silmarillion itself) quite fits the bill. I still hope that
you will be inspired to write another book about the Hobbit.
Tolkien’s reply, in part, stated that he would “give this thought and attention...”
and, in fact, did so. Soon after the letter was written, Tolkien began the first chapter of The Lord of the Rings, “A Long-expected Party.”
Starting the novel was one thing, but finishing it, quite another. Begun in
December 1937, the book was completed in February 1950—13 years later. To
Tolkien, who recognized that he was more a starter than finisher in literary matters, the singular achievement of finishing it stood out in his mind.
In offering Allen & Unwin LotR, he, in fact, gave his publisher more than
what was expected—a deeper, richer, and, admittedly, darker work of fiction
that, unlike its predecessor, was clearly not intended for children.
Given the continued popularity of The Hobbit, one would think that the road
to publication for The Lord of the Rings would have been smooth, but it was not.
Stung by the rejection of The Silmarillion, and courted by another publisher who,
in fact, had his sight set on acquiring the profitable Hobbit, Tolkien actively
downplayed the book and its commercial possibilities to Allen & Unwin and issued
an ultimatum, as well.
Stanley Unwin, forced to make a decision about The Lord of the Rings based
on an incomplete manuscript, was put in an untenable position. Tolkien’s ultimatum to him—requiring either a prompt yes or no—was met with a polite but firm
rejection, which cleared the road for its publication by another publisher.
In what has to be, in retrospect, one of the worst book publishing decisions of all
time, Milton Waldman of Collins—after several inquiries from Tolkien—finally
declined to publish the book, citing its length and publication costs. Collins imprudently passed on what turned out to be one of the most enduring and profitable
fantasy franchises of all time.
Three years after Stanley Unwin rejected Tolkien’s ultimatum, the book remained unpublished. Tolkien, realizing his mistake, wrote to Unwin in June 1952
and began fence-mending, clearing the way for its publication.
By November of that year, Allen & Unwin accepted The Lord of the Rings,
which was subsequently published in three volumes—the first and second, The Fellowship of the Ring and The Two Towers, in 1954, and The Return of the King in 1955.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

25

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

26 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Because of its division—one book published in three separate volumes—The
Lord of the Rings is often mistakenly termed a trilogy, when, in fact, it is not. The
book is clearly one story, not three, and its division was merely a publishing convenience dictated by economic concerns.
The book-buying public that had clamored
for more stories about hobbits embraced The
Lord of the Rings with enthusiasm. The central
story is about a hobbit named Frodo Baggins (the
favorite nephew of Bilbo Baggins), who inherits
the ring and assumes the considerable burden
of taking the ring back to Mordor to destroy it—
an epic quest that defined the Third Age of
Middle-earth.
Predictably, The Lord of the Rings has
spawned numerous imitations, but even after
half a century, The Lord of the Rings stands
alone. The literary works it inspired are pale
imitations, lacking its historic, geographic, and,
perhaps most distinctive of all, linguistic underpinnings that give Middle-earth its solidity, its
The title page of The Lord of the
sense of reality.
Rings, signed by Tolkien, offered
for sale by Lucius Books, of
I am in general agreement with Tom
England. (Photo courtesy of
Shipley, who, in his excellent critical overview,
Lucius Books.)
J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century, concluded:
“No one, perhaps, is ever again going to emulate Tolkien in sheer quantity of effort, in building the maps and the languages
and the histories and the mythologies of one invented world, as no one is ever
again going to have his philological resources to draw on.”
As for Tolkien himself, his impetus in writing The Lord of the Rings wasn’t
fame or fortune, though both, in hindsight, were inevitable byproducts of having
written the most influential fantasy novel of the 20th century. As stated in the foreword to the second edition of The Lord of the Rings, he wrote it “for my own satisfaction.” He added that he had “...little hope that other people would be interested
in this work, especially since it was primarily linguistic in inspiration and was begun
in order to provide the necessary background of ‘history’ for Elvish tongues.”
Ironically, though Tolkien had submitted The Silmarillion for publication years
before he submitted The Lord of the Rings, the former work remained unpublished—
due, mostly, to his endless niggling of details—until 1977, when his son and literary
executor, Christopher Tolkien, took on the formidable task of editing the book
into publishable form.
Christopher Tolkien would go on to edit several more books of his father’s,
works of scholarship that involved carefully sifting through literally thousands of
pages of manuscript and typescript to make whole the complete history of Middleearth.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

26

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 27

TOLKIEN

Of Titles and The Lord of the Rings
The narrative bridge between The Hobbit
and The Lord of the Rings can be found in
the prologue to LotR, which is a detailed
explication of hobbits, pipe-weed, the
geography of the Shire, and “Of the
Finding of the Ring.”
Clearly, hobbits have a large and
important role to play in the War of the
Ring—especially Frodo Baggins, who is
appointed the Ring Bearer at the
Council of Elrond, where he chooses to
accept the burden of taking the ring to
its eventual destruction. The fellowship
consists of nine, representing all the
races in Middle-earth: one wizard, two
men, one elf, one dwarf, and four
hobbits—a number mirroring the forces
against them, symbolized by the nine
Ringwraiths, once powerful kings of
men, who, corrupted by the rings of
power, became shadows of themselves
and fell under the dominion of Sauron.
“The Lord of the Rings is a good
over-all title,” Tolkien concluded, in a
letter to Raywin Unwin (August 8,
1953), but the matter of individual titles
for each volume was a matter of
concern, because LotR is properly six
books plus lengthy appendices.
In a March 1953 letter, Tolkien
suggested:
• Volume #1: The Ring Sets
Out [book 1] and The Ring
Goes South [book 2].
• Volume #2: The Treason of
Isengard [book 3] and The
Ring Goes East [book 4].

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

27

• Volume #3: The War of the
Ring [book 5] and The End of
the Third Age [book 6].
In that same letter, he suggested
alternative, simplified titles:
• Volume #1: The Shadow
Grows.
• Volume #2: The Ring in the
Shadow.
• Volume #3: The War of the
Ring or The Return of the King.
In an August
1953 letter, Tolkien
suggested another set
of titles, with the
statement that “I am
not wedded to any of
the suggested sub-titles; and wish they
could be avoided. For it is really impossible to devise ones that correspond to
the contents; since the division into two
‘books’ per volume is purely a matter of
convenience with regard to length, and
has no relation to the rhythm or ordering of the narrative....”
In the end, Tolkien suggested—in a
subsequent letter in August to his publisher—the titles that were in fact used:
• Volume #1: The Fellowship of
the Ring.
• Volume #2: The Two Towers.
• Volume #3: The Return of the
King (alternate title, The War
of the Ring).

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

28 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

It can be rightly said that what J.R.R. Tolkien had begun—to construct a
fantasy world with such detail that it has the solidity of our own—his son had
finished. The history of Middle-earth is now thoroughly chronicled, properly recorded, and it’s a monumental testament to the imaginative genius of its creator,
J.R.R. Tolkien, and the dedication of his son Christopher.
The first volume was published in 1954. A trade hardback priced at 21 shillings (the equivalent of $4 U.S., not adjusted for inflation), it had a first printing
of 3,500 copies.
As with any book, The Fellowship of the Ring had its detractors, but in the
main the critics praised it. Predictably, the most favorable review came from
fellow Inkling C.S. Lewis, who wrote: “Such a book has of course its predestined
readers, even now more numerous and more critical than is always realised. To
them a reviewer need say little, except that here are beauties which pierce like
swords or burn like cold iron; here is a book that will break your heart.”
The Fellowship of the Ring was followed by The Two Towers, published later
that year, with The Return of the King following in 1955. Now that it could be
judged in its entirety, was it “juvenile trash” (the opinion of Edmund Wilson,
writing in The Nation) or was it a work of wonder as W.H. Auden suggested in
the New York Times: “...no fiction I have read in the last five years has given me
more joy”?
Tom Shippey, author of J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century, argues convincingly that Tolkien’s most famous and celebrated book is indisputably a literary
work of substance:
...The Lord of the Rings has established itself as a lasting classic,
without the help and against the active hostility of the professionals of taste; and has furthermore largely created the expectations
and established the conventions of a new and flourishing genre. It
and its author deserve more than the routine and reflexive dismissals (or denials) which they have received. The Lord of the Rings, and
The Hobbit, have said something important, and meant something
important, to a high proportion of their many millions of readers.
Critics notwithstanding, The Hobbit has sold more than 40 million copies
since its publication, and the various volumes of The Lord of the Rings have sold
50 million copies in more than 35 languages worldwide. Clearly, Tolkien achieved
his laudable goal of writing, as he explained in the foreword to the second edition
of LotR—a “really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse
them, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move them.”
Clay Harper, the caretaker of the Tolkien publishing program at Houghton
Mifflin, explained in an online interview on his publisher’s Website that:
More than 45 million copies of Tolkien’s work have been sold in
the United States since 1938. After each point in its long history
when the audience has expanded dramatically, the work has never

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

28

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 29

TOLKIEN

seemed to fade in popularity. Now Tolkien’s work has been passed
down through several generations, from parent to child as well as
from friend to friend, and each generation finds in his stories an
inspiring set of values and ideals that fits its own life and times.
A steady backlist seller, The Lord of the Rings was discovered by a new audience in December 2001, when New Line Cinema released the first of three liveaction movies directed back-to-back by New Zealand film director Peter Jackson.
According to Clay Harper of
Houghton Mifflin, in 2001, an astonishing 11 million copies of Tolkien’s books
sold in the United States alone, due to
the anticipation of the December 2001
release of The Fellowship of the Ring.
J.R.R. Tolkien, finally, had been discovered by moviegoers who, until then, had
probably never heard of him.
Though Tolkien detested allegory
and roundly denied that LotR was allegorical in intent, the fact remains that a Trade paperback movie tie-in editions of
The Fellowship of the Ring and The Two
strong case can be made for allegory and Towers, published in the United States.
its contemporary relevance. In Tolkien’s
fantasy tale, the free world bands together to fight the forces of darkness from its
strongholds, the two towers of Orthanc and Barad-dûr—a comparison eerily apt
in a world reshaped by the events of September 11, 2001, dominated by the collapse
of two prominent towers in downtown Manhattan.
Allegorical or not, LotR speaks to us at a time of moral ambiguity, a time of
confusion and indecision, and a time when, more than ever, we need heroes that
will rise to the occasion and do battle against the orcs, the Sarumans, and Saurons
of the world.

The Lord of the Rings Recommended
Editions
In print continuously since its original publication,
The Lord of the Rings is currently available in various
editions—as a single volume and as a trilogy—to suit
every budget and taste:

The front cover of the special edition of The Lord of the
Rings, with stamping in various colors. This was for the
early printings of the one-volume edition printed on India
paper (that is, Bible paper—so thin that this one-volume
trilogy is only 1 inch thick).

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

29

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

30 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

u The Most Elegant Edition (£100). Printed by Allen & Unwin in one volume
with a matching slipcase, the “India paper” edition—so named because of the
thin paper stock typically used to print bibles—is visually distinctive: the book
itself is approximately 1-inch thick, which surprises most people at first glance.
(Typically, the book, when printed on normal paper stock, is thick as a brick,
with a 2-inch spine.) This is not so much a book to read as one to treasure; the
book is simply a work of art.
u The Most Imaginatively Packaged ($75). A one-volume edition packaged in a
gift box, with an appropriately themed pair of bookends featuring Bilbo Baggins
inside his hobbit hole at Bag End and Gandalf rapping on its door with his
staff. Perfect for gift-giving.

One of two pieces comprising the set called
“No admittance except on party business,”
from the first chapter of The Fellowship of
the Ring. Gandalf raps on the door of
Bilbo’s hobbit hole with his wizard’s staff.
Manufactured by Sideshow/Weta, this is no
longer available from them. Both pieces are
now packaged with a one-volume edition of
The Lord of the Rings and sold by
Houghton Mifflin as a gift set.

The second piece of the “No
admittances except on party business”
bookend set by Sideshow/Weta. Bilbo
Baggins, in his hobbit hole, answers
Gandalf’s rapping at the door.

u The Best Illustrated Edition ($80). Printed on semi-glossy paper to enhance
the art by Alan Lee, this three-volume set with matching slipcase is available
separately at $27 per volume.
u The Best Single-Volume, Illustrated Edition ($70). The “commemorative
edition” to celebrate Tolkien’s centenary, this one-volume edition is illustrated
with 50 full-color illustrations by Alan Lee.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

30

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 31

TOLKIEN

u The Collector’s Edition ($75). A one-volume
edition bound in red leatherette with matching
slipcase, the text is printed in two colors. (This
complements the collector’s edition of The
Hobbit, bound in green leatherette.)
u The Standard Edition ($65). The three volumes
in this set come with a matching slipcase and
feature color jacket art by Alan Lee. They are
available separately at $22 apiece.
u The Cleverest Packaging ($70). The millenniumedition, boxed set of seven books, with laminated
hard covers in a matching slipcase. The six books
comprising The Lord of the Rings spell “T-O-LK-I-E-N” across its collective spine. My concern,
though, is with the glue binding, which will not
hold up after repeated readings.

The one-volume gift edition
of The Lord of the Rings
published in the United
States. It has red leatherette
binding with stamping on the
exterior boards and comes
with a matching slipcase.

The Silmarillion
Published posthumously in 1977, The Silmarillion was, as Tom Shipley (J.R.R.
Tolkien: Author of the Century) put it, “the work of his heart.” Originally submitted
at the request of Stanley Unwin, who had hoped for a book to follow The Hobbit,
The Silmarillion was not a narrative tale but, instead, a book of pseudo-history.
As such, it wasn’t what Unwin had hoped for, so he rejected it. In a letter dated
December 15, 1937, Unwin wrote: “The Silmarillion contains plenty of wonderful
material; in fact it is a mine to be explored in writing further books like The
Hobbit rather than a book in itself.”
Tolkien initially bristled at the constructive criticism but soon came to realize
that a sustained narrative was, in fact, what was needed and therefore requested
by Unwin, who spoke for Tolkien’s readership that preferred stories to pseudohistory. Soon thereafter, Tolkien began writing “A Long-expected Party,” which
would be the first chapter of The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring.
In the seemingly interminable wait between the original submission in 1937
(and subsequent rejection) and eventual publication of The Silmarillion in 1977,
Tolkien fans speculated as to the book and its contents.
Fans got a glimpse when Clyde S. Kilby published Tolkien and the Silmarillion
in 1976, but the following year fans got the full monty. Edited by Christopher
Tolkien, The Silmarillion was finally published, rendering Kilby’s speculations moot.
In his foreword to the book, Christopher Tolkien wrote:
The Silmarillion, now published four years after the death of its
author, is an account of the Elder Days, or the First Age of the World.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

31

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

32 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

In The Lord of the Rings were narrated the great events at the
end of the Third Age; but the tales of The Silmarillion are legends deriving from a much deeper past, when Morgoth, the first
Dark Lord, dwelt in Middle-earth, and the High Elves made war
upon him for the recovery of the Silmarils.

The Silmarillion Recommended Editions
f The Illustrated Edition ($35). A companion book to the illustrated editions of
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, this edition is illustrated by British
artist Ted Nasmith. (Note: In 2004, a new edition will be published, with 20
new paintings. Like the three-volume illustrated edition of The Lord of the
Rings, with art by Alan Lee, the new edition of The Silmarillion will be printed
using one paper stock instead of text stock and glossy stock for art, which
allows placement of art as appropriate.)
f The Second Edition ($28 hardback, $14
trade paperback). This includes a 1951
letter written by J.R.R. Tolkien.

The Delaying of
The Silmarillion
“The three jewels shining with the
light of the Two Trees, made by
Fëanor in the years following the
unchaining of Melkor. The
Silmarilli were the greatest
works of craft ever produced by
the Children of Ilúvatar, and,
like the Two Trees, their creation could not be duplicated.
The shell of the jewels were composed of silima, but at their heart
was the ever radiant light of the
Trees, and the Silmarilli shone
by themselves. They were hallowed by Varda so that any impure hand touching them would
be burned and withered.”

When The Silmarillion was rejected by
Tolkien’s publisher, he fired back a letter the
next day, bristling that “My chief joy comes
from learning that The Silmarillion is not rejected with scorn....But I shall certainly now
hope one day to be able, or be able to afford,
to publish The Silmarillion!”
The Silmarillion would not be completed
in his lifetime. A perfectionist and a literary
niggler, Tolkien’s biblical accounting of the
First Age of Middle-earth, with its obvious
Christian parallels, was clearly not a narrative
—Robert Foster,
on the order of The Hobbit or The Lord of the
The Complete Guide to
Rings; it was, in fact, for those devoted readMiddle-earth
ers who religiously read every word of the 128page appendices in LotR.
In 1976, Clyde S. Kilby published Tolkien
& The Silmarillion, an accounting of a summer
spent with Tolkien, with the hope that he could assist in editing The Silmarillion
for publishing as soon as possible. Wild rumors about the book had circulated for

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

32

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 33

TOLKIEN

years previous, but Kilby’s sympathetic portrait of Tolkien was the first reliable
accounting of the book that fans felt might never be published, for whatever
reasons.
As Kilby found out, Tolkien was distracted by matters both large and small,
matters compounded by his popularity and fame. A man who paid attention to the
smallest detail, no matter how trivial, Tolkien never grasped the big picture: that
the completion of The Silmarillion was, at that point in his life, more important
than any other literary effort.
Everything, it seemed, distracted Tolkien from this paramount task. As Kilby
recounts in his book, W.H. Auden had contracted to write a “brochure” on Tolkien,
who felt its mere publication was a distraction of the first order. An exasperated
Tolkien wrote, “I wish at any rate that any book could wait until I produce The
Silmarillion. I am constantly interrupted in this; but nothing interferes more than
the present pother about ‘me’ and my history.”
Another interruption—the publication of an unauthorized edition by Ace Books
of The Lord of the Rings—likewise commanded, and held, his attention to the point
that it, too, prevented him from focusing his long overdue attention on the completion of The Silmarillion. As Kilby pointed out, “I failed to understand why he could
not see instantly that the Ace edition need not usurp even one day of his time. It
was purely a legal matter and only needed to be handed over to his lawyer.”
Kilby’s visit was in 1966 and when he left to return home to the United States,
it became clear that the days were growing longer, but The Silmarillion was no
closer to completion, despite Tolkien’s best efforts.
On September 2, 1973, J.R.R. Tolkien passed away, leaving The Silmarillion
unfinished, to the great dismay of his fans. The story of the jewels of power, it
seemed, would be lost forever. “At Tolkien’s death his story of the First Age of
Middle-earth was incomplete—how incomplete nobody will ever know,” wrote
Kilby.
The only person who knew was Tolkien’s son Christopher, who assumed the
literary challenge of sifting through mountains of unpublished papers to bring The
Silmarillion together in a cohesive whole. Published in 1977 in trade hardback, a
staggering 1 million copies sold by year’s end.
In his foreword to The Silmarillion, Christopher Tolkien wrote that “...throughout my father’s long life he never abandoned it, nor ceased even in his last years to
work on it.... On my father’s death it fell to me to try to bring the work into publishable form.” He noted, too, that beyond The Silmarillion, “There is indeed a wealth
of unpublished writing by my father concerning the Three Ages, narrative, linguistic, historical, and philosophical, and I hope that it will prove possible to publish
some of this at a later date.”
That material would eventually see publication as the 12 volumes of The History
of Middle-earth, which Christopher Tolkien edited.
As for The Silmarillion, it was to be grander than its author had imagined. In it
are “Quenta Silmarillion” (The History of the Silmarils), “Ainulindalë” (The Music

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

33

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

34 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

of the Ainur), “Valaquenta” (Account of the Valar), Akallabêth (The Downfall
of Númenor), and a long piece titled “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age.”
Ideally, one would want to read The Silmarillion first, because it’s set in the
First Age of Middle-earth, then read The Hobbit, which sets the stage for the Third
Age and is then chronicled in The Lord of the Rings, an accounting of the War of
the Ring. (Optionally, Unfinished Tales and the 12-volume History of Middle-earth
would fall, chronologically, after The Silmarillion.)

The History of Middle-earth
Of J.R.R Tolkien’s children, only Christopher Tolkien followed in his father’s
academic and literary footsteps. Currently living in France, Christopher—the literary executor of the Tolkien estate—rarely travels to England, and then only on
critical business.
He has devoted most of his time in
bringing to light the pseudo-history of
Middle-earth with the posthumous publications of The Silmarillion, Unfinished
Tales, and most notably, the 12-volume
History of Middle-earth, a work of scholarship that could only have been undertaken by “an accredited student of
hobbit-lore” (as J.R.R. Tolkien termed
his son, in a letter drafted April 1956 to
Joanna de Bortadano).
Of the 12 volumes, the middle
Two U.S. hardback volumes from
The History of Middle-earth.
four—volumes 6 through 9—comprise
a subset of special significance: The
History of The Lord of the Rings.
Taken as a whole, the 12 books are a remarkable testimony to the creativity of
J.R.R. Tolkien and the industry and painstaking scholarship of his son Christopher.
To answer the most obvious question: For most readers, interested in narrative but not exposition, these books will likely be more than they’d want or need to
know; however, for readers who appreciate the philological and historical impetus
that created The Lord of the Rings, this series is a gold mine of information, spanning all the Ages of Middle-earth.
In the United States, the preferred editions are the hardbacks; in the United
Kingdom, two editions are especially noteworthy: the deluxe editions (fine paper,
gilt edges, slipcased), which collects all 12 volumes in three handsome hardbacks:
Volume 1–5, 6–9, and 10–12 (£100 each).
An attractive, affordable alternative is a trade hardback edition of three volumes in matching cloth, with slipcase (£150).

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

34

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 35

TOLKIEN

The History of Middle-earth consists of:
1. The Book of Lost Tales.
2. The Book of Lost Tales 2.
3. The Lays of Beleriand.
4. The Shaping of Middle-earth.
5. The Lost Road.
6. The Return of the Shadow.
7. The Treason of Isengard.
8. The War of the Ring.
9. Sauron Defeated: The End of the Third Age.
10. Morgoth’s Ring.
11. The War of the Jewels.
12. The Peoples of Middle-earth.
In addition, HarperCollins UK has issued an index to the 12 books, The History
of Middle-earth Index (£9.99), edited by Christopher Tolkien, with his introductory
notes for each volume. (There is no equivalent U.S. edition currently available, alas.)

Other Books by J.R.R. Tolkien
Most Tolkien fans will limit their exposure to Middle-earth to hobbit stories—
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings; however, if one has more than a casual
interest in his work, there are other books by him that are worth your attention.
(Note: Unless otherwise noted, the books listed are U.S. editions and in print.)
f Bilbo’s Last Song (Knopf, $12.95, hardback). The text is an original poem, written
by Bilbo Baggins, just before he takes a ship from Middle-earth to the Undying
Lands. An elegiac piece, it is illustrated by Pauline Baynes with charming
watercolors—Baynes is an English artist whose long association with Tolkien
goes back to Smith of Wootton Major (Ballantine Books).
It was written for and subsequently given as a gift to Joy Hill, an employee
at Allen & Unwin who, at Tolkien’s request, took on the daunting task of handling the crush of correspondence that his fame brought late in his life.
f Farmer Giles of Ham (Houghton Mifflin, $17, hardback). Edited by Christina
Scull and Wayne G. Hammond, illustrated by Pauline Baynes. According to
Tolkien biographer Humphrey Carpenter (J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography), this
book was originally published in 1949, with illustrations by Baynes, about whose
work Tolkien wrote: “They are more than illustrations, they are a collateral
theme.”

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

35

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

36 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

This is an expanded edition with the full text of the original book, a map,
the original story outline, the original illustrations by Baynes, and notes toward
an unpublished sequel, about which Carpenter wrote:
At one time Tolkien considered a sequel to it, and he sketched the
plot in some detail; it was to concern Giles’s son George Worming
and a page-boy named Suet, as well as re-introducing Chrysophylax
the dragon, and it was to be set in the same countryside as its
predecessor.

The U.S. hardback
expanded edition of
Farmer Giles of Ham.

Farmer Giles of Ham was initially not the success its
author and publisher had hoped: of its first printing of
5,000, an unimpressive 2,000 had sold, prompting Tolkien
to complain that insufficient advertising dollars was the
culprit—misplaced criticism, because Tolkien himself had
earlier noted that the book didn’t have commercial appeal.
In a letter to C.A. Firth at Allen & Unwin (August 31,
1938), he wrote: “I see that it is not long enough to stand
alone probably—at least not as a commercial proposition
(if indeed it [could] ever be such a thing).”
The story itself is novella length and is an appealing
tale of a farmer who fights off a giant and is rewarded by
the king with a sword, Tailbiter, which carries its own
score to settle—a sword that formerly belonged to a
dragonslayer. Not surprisingly, when a dragon shows up,
the king calls on Farmer Giles to deal with this new intruder, as well.

f Finn and Hengest, by J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Alan Bliss (HarperCollins
UK, £7.99, trade paperback). Two Old English poems about fifth-century
heroes Finn and Hengest, told in Beowulf and The Fights at Finnesburg. Obscure
poems with a history of controversial interpretation, they are the subject of
Tolkien’s clarifying lectures, published in this book.
f Letters from Father Christmas. Though purportedly written by Father
Christmas, these illustrated series of letters written to the Tolkien children—
John, Michael, Christopher, and Priscilla—were in fact from their father,
who wrote annual installments every Christmas beginning in 1920.
Of course, in time, the children grew up and realized that the real author
was their father, but until then his children enjoyed these humorous tales from
the North Pole, especially the antics of an accident-prone Polar Bear who always
managed to get in the way.
A revised gift edition (Houghton Mifflin, $20) is available as a traditionally
printed book; however, given the nature of this literary work, its spirit is best
captured in the gift book edition (Hougton Mifflin, $19.95), which has 10 envelopes with pullout letters and pictures. A mini-book edition (Houghton Mifflin,
$5.95), designed as a stocking stuffer, is also available.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

36

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 37

TOLKIEN

f The Hobbit: An Illustrated Edition of the Fantasy Classic (Ballantine Books,
$15, trade paperback). An abridged graphic novel adaptation with art by David
Wenzel (cover art by Donato Giancola). The only graphic adaptation (that
is, comic book art) of any of Tolkien’s fiction, Wenzel’s only regret was that
his deadlines didn’t permit the luxury of devoting the time he felt necessary to
render the art to the degree he desired.
f The Monster and the Critics (HarperCollins, $22.95, trade paperback). A
collection of seven nonfiction pieces spanning three decades: “On Fairy Stories”
(his well-known essay explicating his notion of subcreation), “English and
Welsh” (a critical essay), “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight” (a translation by
Tolkien), a valedictory address given at Oxford, and two essays on Beowulf—
“Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics” and “Translating Beowulf.”
f Mr. Bliss (Allen & Unwin, out of print hardback). After the success of The
Hobbit, Tolkien’s publishers, anxious to capitalize on its success, asked him
for more work for possible publication, and one of those submitted was this
charming children’s story, Mr. Bliss. His publisher read it and wanted to publish
it, but Tolkien had profusely illustrated it in color, so they asked him to redraw
and simplify the rendering, to keep costs down. Tolkien, distracted by other
matters—personal, professional, and academic—never followed through, with
the result that the work remained unpublished until 1983, 46 years after it was
submitted and accepted.
An amusing tale of Mr. Bliss and his comical car misadventures, the inspiration for the story was Tolkien’s purchase of his first car in 1932.
f Poems from The Hobbit (Houghton Mifflin, $5.95). In page count (56) and in
size (a miniature book), this small gem collects all eight poems from the book
and Gollum’s riddles, as well. The real bonus is the inclusion of Tolkien’s own
art, with 30 drawings and paintings.
f Roverandom, edited by Christina Scull and Wayne G. Hammond (Houghton
Mifflin, $12). A children’s story written to console J.R.R. Tolkien’s then 4year-old son Michael, after he lost his favorite toy dog at the beach, this short
novel (25,000 words) is illustrated by the author, as well.
f Sir Gawain and the Green Knight/Pearl/Sir Orfeo, translated by J.R.R. Tolkien
(Del Rey, $6.99, paperback). With an introduction by Christopher Tolkien,
this is a collection of three medieval poems: “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,”
“Pearl,” and “Sir Orfeo.”
f The Tolkien Reader (Ballantine Books, $6.99, paperback). An anthology
collecting some of his miscellany, this shows the many sides of Tolkien: the
scholar (a play titled The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth, Beorhtheml’s Son), the
intensely autobiographical and allegorical (“Leaf by Niggle”), the essayist (a
seminal piece on fairy tales), the humorist and children’s writer (Farmer Giles
of Ham), and poet (The Adventures of Tom Bombadil).

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

37

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

38 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

One wishes that it also included Smith of Wootton Major, but even as is,
it’s a good cross-section of Tolkien’s varied literary interests and his wideranging imagination.
f Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-earth, edited by Christopher Tolkien
(Houghton Mifflin, $26 hardback, $14 trade paperback). In his introduction
to the book, Christopher Tolkien made an important distinction between The
Silmarillion and this book: “That The Silmarillion should remain unknown
was for me out of the question, despite its disordered state, and despite my
father’s known if very largely unfulfilled intentions for its transformation....”
This book, observed Christopher Tolkien, was another matter entirely:
The narratives in this book are indeed on an altogether different
footing: taken together they constitute no whole, and the book is
no more than a collection of writings, disparate in form, intent,
finish, and date of composition (and in my own treatment of them),
concerned with Númenor and Middle-earth.
J.R.R. Tolkien acknowledged that
he considered the pseudo-history of
Middle-earth supplementary reading.
In the appendices to The Lord of the
Rings, he writes: “Those who enjoy the
book as a ‘heroic romance’ only, and find
‘unexplained vistas’ part of the literary
effect, will neglect the Appendices, very
properly.”
For those to whom the appendices
matter very much, Unfinished Tales is a
worthy addition, including narratives
from the First, Second, and Third Ages
of Middle-earth.
The book has a fold-out map of “The
West of Middle-earth at the End of the
Third Age,” drawn by Christopher
Tolkien.

Literary Piracy: Ace Books
Plunders Middle-earth!
“This paperback edition and
no other has been published
with my consent and cooperation. Those who approve of
courtesy (at least) to living authors will purchase it and no
other.”
—J.R.R. Tolkien, from
the back cover of the
Ballantine paperback
editions of The Lord
of the Rings.

The Lord of the Rings: The Illegitimate Edition
A war was fought not in but over Middle-earth in 1965. Under the legal pretext
that The Lord of the Rings was not protected by copyright in the United States, Ace
Books—after being rebuffed in its attempt to legitimately publish the book in mass
market paperback—made plans to publish an illegitimate edition. As Humphrey
Carpenter so devastatingly put it, in his biography of Tolkien, “Early in that year it

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

38

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS

BY

u 39

TOLKIEN

was learned than an American publisher who appeared not to suffer from an
excess of scruples was planning to issue an unauthorized paperback edition of
The Lord of the Rings, almost certainly without paying royalties to Tolkien.”
The legal consideration revolved around the matter of imported sheets of the
British edition, rebound for the U.S. edition: the number of sheets rebound exceeded the limitation for copyright protection. This consideration was for the benefit of U.S. printers—the idea being that by keeping the number low for importing
and rebinding sheets, it would force book publishers to use U.S. book printers,
thus keeping them in business; no one, however, imagined that the loophole would
be used as an excuse to publish a pirated edition!
Tolkien, hard at work on revisions for Smith of Wootton Major, now found
himself with a major, unforeseen distraction on his hands. To prevent Ace Books
from stealing sales, Ballantine Books was forced to issue a new edition with revisions to secure copyright protection.
Tolkien, understandably upset at Ace
Books, began writing notes to all his correspondents to pass the word on that
Ace Books, in Orc fashion, was ripping
him off.
Ballantine’s editions cost more, and
Ace Books benefited from the cost advantage. Readers who didn’t suffer from
an excess of scruples bought the
cheaper edition, with the result that Ace
Books sold 100,000 copies.
Middle-earth had been literarily
plundered, but what Ace couldn’t anticipate was the loyalist backlash from a
united Tolkien fandom, aided by the
vocal support of the Science Fiction An orc archer from the mines of Moria.
Writers of America (SFWA), many of This sculpture is from the Sideshow/
whose authors published at Ace Books. Weta collection.
Together, the collective strength of
Tolkien fans made it clear that Ace may have won a battle, but it would lose the
war. In the United States, Middle-earth was Ballantine’s territory, not Ace’s.
Booksellers, pressured from ardent Tolkien fans, stopped carrying the book, and
Ace Books could see the writing on the wall.
As the Ballantine editions’ sales rose and the Ace editions’ sales fell, as the
objections of Tolkien fans and professional writers in SFWA reached a fever pitch,
Ace wisely threw in the towel and agreed not to reprint once its existing stock had
been depleted. In a misguided gesture of good faith, Ace had hoped to salvage a
little goodwill out of fandom by stating that they would donate royalties to SFWA,
to help new writers. But when Tolkien got wind of that, he rightly asserted his
unassailable position: He—not a writer’s group—could use the money, and as the

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

39

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

40 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

author who had been violated, didn’t he deserve compensation? He did, and Ace
finally relented, with the result that royalties of 4 percent were paid to Tolkien.
It was not much, but the money was distinctively felt, as Tolkien explained in a
February 1966 letter to W.H. Auden: “The half of this which I shall retain after
taxation will be welcome, but not yet great riches.”
Tolkien, having retired on a modest pension from Oxford in 1959, was like
any other author—he could always use the money, even though it was half the
normal royalties paid.
The Ace edition, however, did have one salutary effect: Its low cover price of
75¢ made it affordable to college students, who couldn’t even afford the more
expensive Ballantine edition at 95¢, much less the $6 hardback editions.
With this distasteful and distracting matter behind him permanently, Tolkien
turned his attention back to Smith of Wootton Major, which was subsequently published in 1967.

01 Tolkien Chapter 1.pmd

40

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

CHAPTER 2

BOOKS ABOUT
J.R.R. TOLKIEN

Not surprisingly, there are more books about Tolkien and his work than there
are books by Tolkien. Though most of the books about Tolkien are academic in
nature—the kind of books the Tolkien Estate favors, because Tolkien himself was
a professor and firmly entrenched in the academic world—the most accessible
books, and the best-selling books of their kind about Tolkien and his works, appeal
to its popular culture.
Every year sees a new bumper crop of books about Tolkien, on every conceivable aspect of his life and work, and with more on the way. As Tolkien expert
Douglas A. Anderson correctly observed, “The real heyday [for books about
Tolkien], both popular and scholarly-wise, is coming.”
Reading a book about Tolkien is not necessary to appreciate the fiction. In my
opinion, considering that Tolkien straddled both universes—popular culture and
the critical community—specialized books addressing his varied interests may enhance the reading of the principal texts.
Clearly, this is one area in which the new reader will easily find himself hopelessly lost in a sea of books. To paraphrase Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s Rime of the
Ancient Mariner: water, water everywhere, but with what to slake one’s thirst?
To assist the new reader, I have provided capsule reviews of the books about
Tolkien, with an emphasis on “in print” titles. With few exceptions, out-of-print or
self-published books are not addressed.
When I began looking at the sheer volume of books about Tolkien, it was clear
that a secondary bibliography composed of books, magazine articles, and pieces in
critical journals would be very useful, but such a work would entail years of research,
approaching the complexity of the forthcoming Tolkien reference books, The J.R.R.
u 41 U

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

41

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

42 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Tolkien Companion and Guide (Houghton Mifflin), which is a two-book set totaling 1,600 pages! (There is, after all, over a half decade of criticism to chronicle—
critical extracts and photographs, as appropriate.)

The Atlas of Middle-earth, by Karen Wynn Fonstad (Houghton Mifflin, $24, trade
paperback, revised edition). In an October 1953 letter to Allen & Unwin regarding The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien worried about “The maps. I am stumped. Indeed in a panic. They are essential; and urgent; but I just
cannot get them done.... I feel that the maps ought to be
done properly.... Even at a little cost there should be picturesque maps, providing more than a mere index to what
is said in the text.”
The maps, of course, were eventually completed, with
the assistance of his son Christopher, but the geography
of Middle-earth still remained largely uncharted in map
form, until the publication of Karen Wynn Fonstad’s
The Atlas of Middle-earth in 1981, which was revised and
updated in 1991 to include the publications of his posthumously published books.
A cartographer by trade, Fonstad provides hundreds
The front cover of The
of two-color maps and diagrams that give us an appreAtlas of Middle-earth.
ciation for the richness and detail of the geography of
Middle-earth.
Fonstad comments on the book’s genesis, after reading The Hobbit and LotR:
...I immediately developed an explorer’s need to map and classify
this (to me) newfound world. The complexity of history, diversity
of landscapes, and proliferation of places were so overwhelming
that I longed to clarify them with pen and ink for my own satisfaction.
I wished for one gigantic indexed map, showing every place-name
and all the pathways.
One could not ask for anything more: maps of the First Age and the Third Age,
regional maps, maps from The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, thematic maps
(such as climate, vegetation, languages), and a complete index for cross-reference.
A Tolkien Bestiary: A Bestiary of the Beasts, Monsters, Races, Deities and Flora, by
David Day, edited by Nancy Davis (Grammercy, $24.99, trade paperback). In his

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

42

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 43

preface to the book, Day explains what a “bestiary” is: “A bestiary is a book about
beasts. In the Middle Ages, when the bestiary was most popular, it was the equivalent of an encyclopedia of natural history, revealing fabulous beasts and monsters
to the curious.” This book, as he explains, is a rather broad interpretation of that
word, because it discusses more than just the beasts of Middle-earth—Day provides individual listings of the people of Middle-earth, as well. The book is illustrated by 11 artists, whose work is of varying quality: color and black-and-white,
pencilwork and pen-and-ink, illustrative and very stylized. The artists are, curiously, not credited, though the art itself is referenced by subject matter and page
number. As for the text, it is written for the layman and does not have page references to the principal texts—an omission (to my mind) that mars an otherwise
accessible book.
Note: Though Day states that “It is a comprehensive encyclopedia that describes,
illustrates and historically delineates all his creations,” the reader is advised that Day
is referring to general creations by race, not specific individuals, therefore, you’ll
find no listing for Aragon, Bilbo Baggins, Frodo Baggins, and so on.
After the King: Stories in Honor of J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Martin Greenberg (Tor
Books, $16.95). Greenberg, who is the most prolific anthologist in the fantasy/
science fiction field, has done for Tolkien in this book what he’s done for the field’s
other best-known writers, such as Isaac Asimov, Ray Bradbury, and H.P. Lovecraft:
He’s assembled an original anthology of fiction to honor the writer. As expected,
the stories run the gamut, but overall, it’s a strong collection and a worthy addition
to any fantasy library. The contributors include: Poul and Karen Anderson, Peter
S. Beagle, Gregory Benford, John Brunner, Stephen R. Donaldson, Karen Haber,
Barry Malzberg, Dennis L.M. McKiernan, Andrew Nortong, Robert Silverberg,
Judith Tarr, Charles de Lint, Emma Bull, Elizabeth Ann Scarborough, Harry
Turtledove, Jane Yolen, Mike Resnick, and Terry Pratchett.
Bored of the Rings: A Parody of J.R.R. Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings, by Henry Beard,
Douglas Kenney, and the Harvard Lampoon Staff (New American Library, $12,
trade paperback). This book will separate Tolkien fans into two groups: those who
have a sense of humor...and those who desperately need one. Short in length (as
parodies ought to be), but long on laughs and irreverence, Bored of the Rings dates
itself with its many references to drugs—a dead giveaway that it was originally
published in the 1960s. The only book of its kind, this send-up bears a cautionary
note: “This paperback edition, and no other, has been published solely for the purpose of making a few fast bucks. Those who approve of courtesy to a certain author
will not touch this gobbler with a ten-foot battle lance.” At least the folks at the
Harvard Lampoon, unlike some other authors, are honest—it’s about the moolah.
Celebrating Middle-earth: The Lord of the Rings as a Defense of Western Civilization,
by John G. West, Jr. (Inkling Books, $10.95, trade paperback). An anthology of
papers given at a conference at Seattle Pacific University in November 2001. The
papers were written by John West, Peter Kreeft, Janet Leslie Blumberg, Joseph
Pearce, Kerry L. Dearborn, and Phillip Goggans.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

43

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

44 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: From The Hobbit to The Silmarillion, by Robert
Foster (Ballantine Books, $13.95, trade paperback). Originally published by Jack
Chalker’s Mirage Press in 1971 under the title A Guide to Middle-earth, this is the
text of the revised and expanded edition published in March 1978. I imagine Foster
is already hard at work to update it because of the posthumous publication of The
History of Middle-earth, but even as is, it’s the best concordance in print on the
people, places, and things to Tolkien’s fictional universe. What makes it especially
useful is that entries are indexed by book and page number, so you can consult the
original reference. It is an indispensable addition to any Tolkien collection and the
perfect book for new readers who want to understand the many references found in
the fiction. Wrote Foster in an introduction to the revised edition “This Guide is
intended to be supplementary to the works of Professor Tolkien and no more; its
value is that it can clarify deep-hidden historical facts and draw together scraps of
information whose relation is easily overlooked....”
Defending Middle-earth: Tolkien, Myth and Modernity, by Patrick Curry (HarperCollins UK, £7.99, trade paperback). Curry vigorously defends LotR from its detractors who dismiss it as fantasy, by exploring his thesis that it is significant
because of its contemporary relevance as a cautionary tale that addressed ecological concerns: the wanton destructiveness, needless intrusion, and presumptive arrogance of modern man.
Finding God in The Lord of the Rings, by Kurt D. Bruner and Jim Ware (Tyndale
House Pub, $12.99, hardback). Bruner, an executive with the conservative Christian
group Focus on the Family, and Ware, a graduate of Fuller Theological Seminary,
join forces to find God in The Lord of the Rings. The purpose of the book, they
state, is “to help fans of The Lord of the Rings discover how the rich fabric of
Tolkien’s fantasy world enhances a Christian understanding of our real world.”
The authors accomplish this by picking specific scenes and themes from LotR and
finding parallels in the Bible—linkages that any careful reader could discern for
himself. Written for the layman and lacking the depth that a scholar would bring to
this subject, this book doesn’t appear as much to be about The Lord of the Rings as
it is a means for the authors to proselytize.
Frodo’s Quest: Living the Myth in The Lord of the Rings, by Robert S. Ellwood (Quest
Books, $18.95, trade paperback). An Emeritus Professor of Religion (University of
Southern California), Ellwood is well qualified to discuss Frodo’s journey (and
burden) as a spiritual quest. Readers who enjoy Joseph Campbell’s extensive examination of the nature of myth will find much of interest in this thorough, wellwritten book.
The Hobbit: A Journey Into Maturity, by William H. Green (Twayne Publishers,
$31, hardback). A critical analysis intended for students and scholars.
The Hobbit, 3D: a Three-dimensional Picture Book, by J.R.R. Tolkien, illustrated
by John Howe (Picture Lions, £14, juvenile title). A color pop-up book with
scenes from the novel, including Mirkwood spiders, Smaug the Dragon (“the
Chiefest and Greatest of Calamities”) and the Battle of Five Armies.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

44

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 45

Hobbits, Elves, and Wizards: Exploring the Wonders and Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien’s
The Lord of the Rings, by Michael Stanton (Palgrave Macmillan, $12.95, trade
paperback). An English professor at the University of Vermont, Stanton has
taught LotR for over a quarter century. His book is targeted to the general reader
or for students at the high school or college level. A contextual book, it offers a
summary of the trilogy, background information about Middle-earth, and a thorough discussion—organized by race—of its varied inhabitants: the hobbits, elves,
wizards, orcs, and so on.
The Inklings Handbook: A Comprehensive Guide to the Lives, Thought and Writings
of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield and Their Friends
(Chalice Press, $32.99, hardback). For readers who have no inkling of the linkage
among these men—an Oxford group known as “The Inklings”—this book is a
good overview of this fraternal order of learned men who enjoyed camaraderie
and conversation and gave readings of works in progress. Tolkien read parts of
“Leaf by Niggle,” The Hobbit, and The Lord of the Rings to fellow members.
The Inklings: C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, and Their Friends, by
Humphrey Carpenter (HarperCollins UK, £8.99, trade paperback). The best look
at the Inklings by Carpenter, who edited Tolkien’s letters for publication and wrote
the only authorized biography. For this book, Carpenter had access to unpublished
diaries and letters that lend this book a depth the other books on the Inklings lack.
The J.R.R. Tolkien Handbook: A Concise Guide to His Life, Writings, and World of
Middle-earth, by Colin Duriez (Baker Book House, $12.99, trade paperback). A
reader-friendly, introductory overview to the man and his work on LotR. Especially
useful to new fans who might be intimidated by the more expansive overviews,
this is an accessible text for practically everyone.
J.R.R. Tolkien: Myth, Morality, and Religion, by Richard L. Purtill and Joseph Pearce
(Ignatius Press, $13.95). Originally published in 1984, this is a reprint edition, with
the addition of a new preface by Pearce, who has published several books on Tolkien.
A fascinating examination of morality and Roman Catholicism in Tolkien’s fiction.
J.R.R. Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings (Modern Critical Interpretations), edited by
Harold Bloom ($37.95, hardback, Chelsea House Pub). At first glance, it seems
odd that Bloom would be the editor for this book, because he admits that he
didn’t enjoy them; but at second glance, it does allow him a certain perspective
that, at a time when the bookshelves are groaning with adulatory tomes, is timely.
Especially useful for students looking to explore Tolkien’s trilogy, these pieces,
though dated, are worth your time.
J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings (Barrons Book Notes), by
Anne M. Pienciak (Barrons Educational Series, $3.95, paperback). Plot synopses,
discussions of the story elements (characters, setting, theme, style, point of view,
form, and structure), and supplementary material useful for students wanting to
write research papers on Tolkien’s two major works.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

45

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

46 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-earth, by George Clark
and Daniel Timmons (Greenwood Publishing Group, $62.95, hardback). An excellent book examining Tolkien in a very broad literary context, its contributors
are well-known scholars who discuss his literary sources and put his work in
juxtaposition to other writers. Though too expensive for individual purchase, it
properly belongs in schools and public libraries where students and scholars can
access it.
J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, by Leslie Ellen Jones (Greenwood Publishing Group,
$49.95, hardback). A well-written and researched biography, though its high cost
will keep it out of reach from the general reader—it’s priced for library collections.
Readers who want a more affordable edition may want to check out the authorized
Humphrey Carpenter’s J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, which is available in trade
paperback for $14 from Houghton Mifflin.
J.R.R. Tolkien: The Man Who Created THE LORD OF THE RINGS, by Michael
Coren (Scholastic, $4.99, trade paperback). A biography for young readers, written
by Coren, who covers Tolkien’s life in seven chapters. This is a straightforward
accounting; readers who want more detail are advised to seek out Humphrey
Carpenter’s biography.
J.R.R. Tolkien: Architect of Middle-earth, by Daniel Grotta (Running Press, $18.95,
trade hardback). A biography of Tolkien profusely illustrated by the Brothers
Hildebrandt.
J.R.R. Tolkien: Master of Fantasy, by David R. Collins (Bt Bound, $16.10, hardback). A biography for young readers, this book is unbalanced in approach. Its
readers will likely be more interested in the events of Tolkien’s life as storyteller,
thus, they will likely skip over the early years and go directly to the latter years.
Visually, the book has some interesting photos, but some seem like filler, and,
unfortunately, the art by William Heagy is—to my eye—crudely drawn and ugly.
J.R.R. Tolkien, by Charles Moseley (Northcote House Pub Ltd, $22.50, paperback). A well-written and illuminating overview of Tolkien’s life and work,
Moseley’s critical discussion explores his fiction as the product of a world-builder,
an imaginative sub-creation steeped not only in myth, but firmly grounded on a
critical base.
J.R.R. Tolkien, by Michael White (Alpha books, $14.95, trade paperback). A
straightforward biography that relies heavily on Carpenter’s previously published
biography and collection of Tolkien’s edited letters. Note: A useful list of Websites
is provided.
J.R.R. Tolkien, by Andrew Blake (Headway, $9.95, trade paperback). One in a series
providing a concise introduction to major cultural figures, this book discusses
Tolkien’s life and worth in a critical framework, with review material at the end of
each chapter to reinforce the principal text. A useful study for older students.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

46

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

u 47

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, by Humphrey Carpenter (Houghton Mifflin, $14, trade
paperback). Originally published in hardback in 1977, this revised edition is the
biography of choice. All other biographies on Tolkien owe much to Carpenter’s,
which is consulted as the leading secondary source of information. Unlike Carpenter,
however, the biographers that followed have not had the exclusive access that he
enjoyed, such as Tolkien’s family, friends, and papers—all possible because this is
an authorized biography. As a result, Carpenter’s book has a depth that no other
biography can match. Wisely, Carpenter has decided to leave the explication of
Tolkien’s text to scholars; Carpenter has, instead, written a straightforward biography that covers Tolkien’s life and work with thoroughness. And because Tolkien
himself never wrote—or intended to write—an autobiography, the task was left to
others. One might wish that his son Christopher Tolkien assay such a task. He is,
after all, in the ideal position to do so, but has shown no sign of doing so. For that
reason, I’m grateful that someone such as Carpenter took on the task, because his
biography is neither hagiography or interpretive biography, with an emphasis on
literary dissection. It is, instead, a very readable general biography for all of Tolkien’s
readers, complete with appendices that include the Tolkien family tree, a chronology of events (personal and professional) in his life, a chronological listing of
Tolkien’s publications, an acknowledgement of sources, and a very detailed index.
Indispensable reading and the gold standard against which all other biographies
will inevitably be compared, this is the best such book in print.
J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator, by Wayne G.
Hammond and Christina Scull (Houghton Mifflin, $25,
trade paperback). Because Pictures by Tolkien is long
out of print and commanding premium prices on the
secondary book market, the publication of this book,
with its illuminating text, is a welcome addition to any
Tolkien collection.
Tolkien considered himself a writer first and
downplayed his skills as a designer and artist, but as this
book amply shows, his artistic efforts were commendable. His illustrations, charming in their own right, show
that he clearly had an artistic vision of Middle-earth that
buttressed his narratives. Rare indeed is the writer who
can also illustrate his own fiction!
In 1937, when the subject of a U.S. edition of The
Hobbit had arisen, Tolkien downplayed his own artistic efforts on the book. As for the illustrations:

The front cover to J.R.R.
Tolkien: Artist and
Illustrator, by Wayne G.
Hammond and Christina
Scull.

I am divided between knowledge of my own inability and fear of
what American artists (doubtless of admirable skill) might produce.
In any case I agree that all the illustrations ought to be by the
same hand: four professional pictures would make my own
amateurish productions look rather silly.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

47

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

48 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Tolkien sold himself short—his illustrations for The Hobbit are simply delightful.
In fact, of the nine editions in print in the United States, only two feature the art
of others—Alan Lee and Michael Hague.
This art book, with more than 200 reproductions, most in color, shows the
artistic side of Tolkien: calligrapher, cartographer, book jacket designer, illustrator,
and inveterate doodler—proof positive that he could not only write about Middleearth, but capture it visually with delightful art that fans have loved over the years.
The text by Hammond and Scull is excellent and well-informed, as you’d expect.
The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide, by Christina Scull and Wayne G. Hammond
(Houghton Mifflin, $70, boxed set). At this writing these books have not yet been
published, but they promise to be invaluable and works of painstaking scholarship,
like Scull and Hammond’s other books about Tolkien. From the publisher’s catalog copy:
Designed to be the essential reference works for all readers and
students, these volumes present the most thorough analysis possible of Tolkien’s work within the important context of his life. The
Reader’s Guide includes brief but comprehensive alphabetical entries on a wide range of topics, including a who’s who of important
persons, a guide to places and institutions, details concerning
Tolkien’s source material, information about the political and social upheavals through which the author lived, the importance of
his social circle, his service as an infantryman in World War I—
even information on the critical reaction to his work and the “Tolkien
cult.” The Chronology details the parallel evolutions of Tolkien’s
work and his academic and personal life in minute detail. Spanning
the entirety of his long life including nearly 60 years of active labor
on his Middle-earth creations, and drawing on such contemporary
sources as school records, war service files, biographies, correspondence, the letters of his close friend C.S. Lewis, and the diaries of
W.H. Lewis, this book will be an invaluable resource for those who
wish to gain a complete understanding of Tolkien’s status as a giant
of 20th-century literature.

Trade paperbacks of two of Tom
Shippey’s books.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

48

J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century, by
Tom Shippey (Houghton Mifflin, $26
trade hardback, $14 trade paperback). An
accessible, critical text by a writer who is
sympathetic—in every sense of the word—
to Tolkien, Shippey is a former Oxford professor who taught from the same syllabus
used by Tolkien; furthermore, Shippey
held the same Chair that Tolkien held at
Leeds University—the Chair of English
Language and Medieval Literature.

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 49

Shippey’s thesis is that fantasy is the dominant literary mode of the 20th century;
furthermore, by popular and critical acclaim, Tolkien’s masterwork, The Lord of
the Rings, is the fantasy book of the century and, therefore, Tolkien is the “most
influential author of the century.”
J.R.R. Tolkien: A Descriptive Bibliography, by Wayne G. Hammond with the assistance of Douglas A. Anderson (St. Paul’s Bibliographies, hardback). Though out
of print and in need of updating (it was published in 1993), this book focuses only
on Tolkien’s work, and provides a wealth of information unavailable anywhere
else: books and periodicals are covered, with an emphasis on first appearances
(described physically), with an essay on each major edition—The Hobbit’s entry,
for instance, runs 15 pages. This is a detailed, exhaustive, and indispensable resource
for book collectors.
JRR Tolkien’s Sanctifying Myth: Understanding Middle-Earth, by Bradley J. Birzer
and Joseph Pearce (Intercollegiate Studies Institute, $24.95, hardback). A wellwritten, well-researched study of Tolkien’s spirituality; specifically, the influence
of Roman Catholicism on the man and his work.
The Languages of Middle-earth, by Ruth S. Noel (Houghton Mifflin, $16, paperback). Unlike other authors, whose names, places, and, especially, languages are
the products of sheer imagination with no linguistic underpinnings, Tolkien was a
philologist—he loved words and their meanings, and was fluent in several languages and dialects. For instance, when a reader at Allen & Unwin, after reading
The Silmarillion, criticized it for its “eye-splitting Celtic names,” Tolkien responded,
in a December 1937 letter, that “personally I believe (and here I believe I am a
good judge) they are good, and a large part of the effect.”
Tolkien knew whereof he spoke!
Noel’s book—the first book of its kind, published in 1974—provides a useful
introduction to Tolkien’s imagined languages, but the serious student interested in
linguistics might first want to examine the numerous language-related Websites
that benefit from more recent scholarship.
Note: I feel that this book is overpriced, at $16 for a small paperback of 207
pages. For that kind of money, one would expect a hardback, not a mass-market
paperback.
Lord of the Rings: The Mythology of Power, by Jane Chance (University Press of
Kentucky, $19.95). An examination of the book in light of its mythology of power
and its relevance to the 20th century.
Note: Tolkien had an active distaste of allegory, as he stated in the foreword to
the second edition of LotR: “But I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations,
and always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence.”
It is not likely, then, that he would have favored the allegorical approach to this
book.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

49

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

50 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Magical Worlds of The Lord of the Rings: The Amazing Myths, Legends, and
Facts Behind the Masterpiece, by David Colbert (Berkley Pub Group, $13, trade
paperback). This book is very reader-friendly. It’s a good introduction to the
story behind the story, as it were, of Middle-earth, intended for young readers,
new readers, and the general reader. Colbert is the author of a similar book, The
Magical Worlds of Harry Potter: A Treasury of Myths, Legends, and Fascinating
Facts (Broadway Books).
The Magical World of J.R.R. Tolkien, by Gareth Knight (Sun Chalice Books, £9.99,
trade paperback). Knight bills himself as “one of the world’s foremost authorities
on ritual magic, the Western Mystery Tradition, and Qabalistic symbolism. He
trained in Dion Fortune’s Society of the Inner Light, and has spent a lifetime
rediscovering and teaching the principles of magic as a spiritual discipline and
method of self-realization.” This is one of four books in a series called The Magical
Worlds in which he examines the lives of the Inklings to show a linkage between
their creative imaginations and the wisdom they glean thereby, and the power of
magic as a manifestation of the human soul.
The Maps of Tolkien’s Middle-earth, by Brian Sibley (Houghton Mifflin, $25, boxed
set). A slipcased collection of four full-color, large-format maps illustrated by John
Howe. Includes a 64-page hardback book “describing in detail the importance and
evolution of geography within Tolkien’s epic fiction.”
Meditations on Middle Earth: New Writing on the Worlds of J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by
Karen Haber (Griffin, $13.95, trade paperback). This is an original anthology of
essays about Tolkien’s fiction as seen (mostly) from the perspective of fantasy
writers. An eclectic collection with essays of varying quality, the high points include pieces by Terry Windling, Douglas A. Anderson, and Ursula K. LeGuin, who
has previously explicated Tolkien’s use of rhythm and language in a previously
published chapbook, From Elfland to Poughkeepsie (Pendragon Press). Other
contributors include all the usual suspects: Harry Turtledove, Raymond Feist,
Terry Pratchett, George R.R. Martin, and the late Poul Anderson.
Well-known Tolkien artist John Howe provides illustrations drawn in pencil,
but these are minor efforts—rough sketches at best—and hardly representative
of what, artwise, he is capable of.
Myth and Magic: The Art of John Howe (HarperCollins, $35, hardback). The conceptual artist for the Tolkien movies has assembled 250 of his sketches and paintings for this collection, drawing on The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, The
Silmarillion, and The History of Middle-earth.
Myth & Middle-earth: Exploring the Medieval Legends Behind J.R.R. Tolkien’s Lord
of the Rings, by Leslie Jones (Open Road Pub, $14.95, trade paperback). In a 1951
letter to Milton Waldman—a 10,000 word explication on The Lord of the Rings
and The Silmarillion—Tolkien wrote about the roots to LotR and said he desired
to write an English myth, because other great countries had their respective myths:

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

50

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 51

“There was Greek, and Celtic, and Roman, Germanic, Scandinavian and Finnish
(which greatly affected me); but nothing English....” Tolkien, of course, accomplished what he set out to do: to give England its own distinctive myth...This book
acknowledges the obvious historical influences—Norse and Germanic—and also
Celtic. A useful examination of myths from various countries that, in part, influenced or inspired Tolkien.
Myth Maker: J.R.R. Tolkien, by Anne E. Neimark, illustrated by Brad Weiman
(Harcourt, $17, hardback). A biography for young readers, a straightforward accounting of his life, times, and literary works.
Myth Maker: J.R.R. Tolkien, by Anne Neimark (Bt Bound, $12.65, hardback). A
biography for young readers, a straightforward accounting of Tolkien’s life and
work.
One Ring to Bind Them All: Tolkien’s Mythology, by Anne C. Petty (University of
Alabama Press, $18.95, trade paperback). This is an expanded edition, with a new
introduction and an updated bibliography. A well-regarded, classic book examining the mythology of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.
The People’s Guide to J.R.R. Tolkien: Essays and Reflection on Middle-earth from
TheOneRing.net, edited by Erica Challis (Cold Spring Press, $16.95, trade paperback, distributed by Simon & Schuster). In 1999, a Website (www.TheOneRing.net)
was set up to provide news on the highly anticipated movie trilogy. In short order,
it grew to encompass news, reviews, photo galleries, and so on, totaling more than
800 Web pages. It has become the premiere fan Website, and on it one can find
much talk about the goings on in Hobbiton and beyond.
This book is a print version of the Website, with articles about Tolkien in
general, with an emphasis on film coverage of the Jackson trilogy.
Its principal audience is the hard-core fan; new readers will likely be somewhat
disoriented. Written by, and for, Tolkien fans—and I emphasize the word “fans”
in its best sense: ardent admirers or devotees—this book is just as it is advertised.
It is an informal, spirited discussion of all things in Middle-earth from frequent
travelers who know and love the territory well.
A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Road to Faerie, by Verlyn Flieger (Kent State
University Press, $18, trade paperback). From the editor of The Tolkien
Legendarium: Essays on the History of Middle-earth and Splintered Light: Logos
and Language in Tolkien’s World, A Question of Time investigates the importance
of time and dream in his works. Granted access by the Tolkien estate and the
Bodeleian Library in Oxford to unpublished material, Flieger sheds new light on
Tolkien as a modern writer. “As a traveler between worlds, he was also a traveler
in time, shuttling restlessly between the grubby, smoke-stained present of his
own century and the faerian past of his imagination. It is this very oscillation that,
paradoxically, makes him a modern writer....”

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

51

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

52 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Readings on J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Katie de Koster (Greenhaven Press, $34.95,
hardback). An abridged collection of previously published essays, its audience is
the advanced reader with some familiarity with Tolkien’s principal works.
The Road to Middle-earth, by Tom Shippey (Houghton Mifflin, $13, trade paperback). In his preface to this third (revised and expanded edition) edition, Shippey
writes:
After Tolkien’s death I felt increasingly that he would not have
been happy with many of the things people said about his writings,
and that someone with a similar background to his own ought to try
to provide—as Tolkien and E.V. Gordon wrote in the “Preface”
to their 1925 edition of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight—”a sufficient apparatus for reading [these remarkable works] with an
appreciation as far as possible of the sort which its author may be
supposed to have desired.”
Shippey writes insightfully and authoritatively about Tolkien’s sources of
inspiration—literary and, especially, philological. Personally and professionally
sympathetic to Tolkien, Shippey, in his afterword, writes: “This book’s main purpose has been to provide the material for a more thorough and appreciative reading of Tolkien.”
In that purpose, Shippey has succeeded admirably. Readers and students who
want to read a critical study before venturing further will find this book accessible,
informative, and illuminating, shedding considerable light on Tolkien’s literary
inspirations.
Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World, by Verlyn Fieger (Kent
State University Press, $19, trade paperback). In his foreword to the second edition of LotR, Tolkien writes, “...[The Lord of the Rings] was primarily linguistic in
inspiration and was begun in order to provide the necessary background of ‘history’ for Elvish tongues.”
By the time Tolkien completed his history of Middle-earth, he emerged as a
world-builder, a storyteller whose work displaced the fictional requirement of
“the willing suspension of disbelief” (as Coleridge put it), by instilling a firm
belief in Middle-earth because of its own reality.
This book is an excellent explication of Tolkien’s languages as an outgrowth
of the myths of Middle-earth, and essential reading for anyone who wants to fully
appreciate Tolkien’s background as a philologist that informs all of his fiction.
Tales before Tolkien: The Roots of Modern Fantasy, edited by Douglas A. Anderson
(Del Rey, $27.95 hardback, $14.95 trade paperback). At this writing, this book has
not yet been published, but Anderson provided me with a table of contents and
his introduction, which allows this brief entry.
In his introduction, Anderson writes: “To better appreciate Tolkien’s achievement one needs to better understand Tolkien’s own roots, and the roots of modern

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

52

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 53

fantasy.” Anderson’s thesis is that Tolkien’s “greatness” was in his ability to synthesize diverse influences—literary and historical—to bring a new depth to fantasy
literature.
The stories selected for this anthology are arranged chronologically and show
the diversity of imaginative literature that inspired Tolkien.
Anderson rightly points out that the general reader with no familiarity of
fantasy erroneously assumes that the field began, and ended, with Tolkien. This
is not true, of course, because the beginnings of fantasy literature go back to the
Anglo-Saxon poem, Beowulf, about which Tolkien had written extensively and
authoritatively.
Among the contributors are George MacDonald, Andrew Lang, William Morris,
H. Rider Haggard, L. Frank Baum, Lord Dunsany, William Hope Hodgson,
Arthur Machen, and James Branch Cabell—a veritable “who’s who” of literary
practitioners who celebrated the literature of the fantastic.
The Journeys of Frodo, by Barbara Strachey (HarperCollins, $22.95, trade paperback). An atlas of 51 maps that shows the journey of Frodo from Hobbiton to
Mount Doom in Mordor. A very useful guide for readers who want a roadmap, as
it were, of his epic quest.
The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Humphrey Carpenter, with the assistance of
Christopher Tolkien (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95 trade hardback, $15 trade paperback). A supplementary book to Carpenter’s J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, this
collection of letters is required reading. A prolific letter-writer, Tolkien’s correspondence ranged from short one-page letters to a 10,000-word letter to a prospective publisher who asked for more information about The Lord of the Rings
and The Silmarillion. Collecting family correspondence—most of them to his son
Christopher—and business correspondence, this book gives us Tolkien in his
own words.
The first letter in the book is to his fiancée, Edith Bratt. It is presumed to
have been written in October 1914. The last letter was written to their daughter,
Priscilla Tolkien, in August 1973.
Tolkien came from a generation when he felt that gentlemen acknowledge
correspondence, and so he spent a disproportionate amount of time answering fan
mail, which often dealt with technical questions about LotR that he delighted in
answering. Certainly one wishes he would have spent the time in preparing promised books—The Silmarillion, regrettably, was published posthumously—and writing new fiction.
Given that Tolkien was a voluminous correspondent, there remains a score of
letters that have never surfaced, from 1918 to 1937. Carpenter is not alone in his
desire that these eventually come to light, because a revised edition, especially
with letters from those missing years, would be welcomed by all.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

53

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

54 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Read Carpenter’s biography to get an overall view of Tolkien’s life and work,
and then read this collection of letters to fully understand and appreciate Tolkien’s
many facets. Note: This edition has an expanded index.
Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings: A Guide to Middle-earth, by Colin Duriez (Hidden Spring, $17, trade paperback). A good overview, with a look at the man, his
life, and his work; a look at LotR; an A-to-Z listing of people, places, things, and
events; and a literary look at the principal fiction. New readers will find this to be
a good place to start when exploring Middle-earth.
Tolkien Magnet Postcards, by the Brothers Hildebrandt (Running Press, $12.95,
paperback). Though packaged as a book, it’s actually a collection of magnetic postcards (4 x 6.5 inches), with art by the Brothers Hildebrandt, who published three
consecutive Tolkien calendars for the U.S. market. These postcards are designed
to be pulled out of the book and mailed.
The Tolkien Companion: The Indispensable Guide to the Wondrous Legends, History,
Languages, and Peoples of Middle Earth [sic], by J.E.A. Tyler (Gramercy, trade hardback). Originally published in 1975, this reprint edition, published in 2000, obviously needs updating. It is a concordance to the people, places, and things in
Middle-earth. Unlike Robert Foster’s The Complete Guide to Middle-earth
(Ballantine Books), this book lacks what I consider to be essential to this kind of
book: page references to the source material. Also, this book is more interpretive
than Foster’s, whose matter-of-fact, objective approach may prove more useful,
especially for students, scholars, and researchers.
Tolkien: Man and Myth: A Literary Life, by Joseph Pearce (Ignatius Press, $14.95,
trade paperback). Readers looking for a biography will be mildly disappointed,
because although this appears at first glance to be a biography, it is not. It is, however,
a carefully written examination of the philosophies that informed Tolkien’s
worldview and the extent to which his religious views affected his fiction, notably
LotR.
Tolkien: A Celebration: Collected Writings on a Literary Legacy (Ignatius Press, $12.95,
trade paperback). A good collection of general essays on Tolkien’s work, including
George Sayer and Walter Hooper, both of whom knew him personally. As the
publisher put it, “The works are examined theologically, philosophically, culturally,
ecologically, mystically, and historically, as the various contributors seek to understand the profundity of Tolkien’s achievement.”
Tolkien and the Great War, by John Garth (Houghton Mifflin, $25, hardback). A
general biography that examines World War I and its impact on Tolkien’s fiction.
Garth’s thesis is that The Lord of the Rings is an outgrowth of his experiences during the war.
In a foreword to the second edition of LotR, Tolkien addressed the matter of
WWI and its significance and impact on his novel, because many people felt it
must have been allegorical:

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

54

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 55

It is neither allegorical nor topical.... The crucial chapter, ‘The
Shadow of the Past,’ is one of the oldest parts of the tale. It was
written long before the foreshadow of 1939 had yet become a threat
of inevitable disaster.... Its sources are things long before in mind,
or in some cases already written, and little or nothing in it was
modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.
Tolkien concluded this line of discussion by firmly stating that “The real war
does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its conclusion.”
Garth’s thesis is intriguing, but Tolkien himself, although admitting that “an
author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected by his experience,” concludes in
the end that it’s fruitless to try to determine where the real world ends and the
fantasy world begins in regard to fiction.
Tolkien’s Ordinary Virtues: Exploring the Spiritual Themes of The Lord of the Rings, by
Mark Eddy Smith (Intervarsity Press, $11, trade paperback). Smith is neither critic
nor theologian, and his book is neither fish nor fowl; that is to say, the book falls
short of the mark. A simplistic interpretation of LotR, this book lacks the depth
that others with more specialized training would bring to the task. Written in a
very conversational prose, this book is frothy fare.
Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on The History of Middle-earth, edited by Verlyn Flieger
and Carl F. Hostetter (Greenwood Publishing Group, $62.95, hardback). Though
priced for libraries, this volume of Tolkien criticism is worth adding to your book
collection. There are many familiar names in this collection, including Christina
Scull and Wayne G. Hammond (the team that wrote The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide and J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator); Verlyn Flieger (author of
A Question of Time and Splintered Light); Douglas A. Anderson, who contributed
a bibliography of Christopher Tolkien’s work; and others. There is also an essay of
special interest by the late Rayner Unwin, who contributed “Early Days of Elder
Days.”
A Tolkien Treasury: Stories, Poems and Illustrations Celebrating the Author and His
World, edited by Alida Becker (Courage Books, $14.98, trade hardback). A good
introduction to Tolkien, this companion-style book is divided into two sections.
The first, “Tolkien and Middle-earth,” is of more general interest, with a biography,
reviews of LotR (the early reviews by W.H. Auden and Edmund Wilson), a chronology of The Hobbit and LotR, and essays on Tolkien. An eight-page color insert
of The Lord of the Rings paintings by Tim Kirk follows, reprinting plates from his
calendar. The book’s second section, “Frodo Lives: A Look at Tolkien Fandom”
draws all its material from Tolkien fanzines, with poems, a parody, songs, haiku
portraits, recipes, articles, and fannish pieces (that is, personal essays).
A miniature edition is also available ($4.95, Running Press). It is designed as
a gift book and features poetry excerpts and art, notably Tim Kirk’s.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

55

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

56 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Book Publishing: A Gentleman’s Profession
Before his death on November 23,
2000, Rayner Unwin—son of Stanley
Unwin of the publishing firm Allen &
Unwin—reflected on how the book
publishing industry had changed: It
used to be a gentleman’s profession
when the editorial department had the
final say, but now the sales and marketing department share that duty.
After determining the costs to
publish The Lord of the Rings in three
volumes, Rayner cabled his father that
he believed it was a work of genius but
would lose £1,000. His father replied
that if he really felt it was a work of
genius, he was free to lose the £1,000.
In other words, the book was perceived not as a potential profit-maker,
but a prestige book, the kind that enhances the reputation of the firm but
not the bottom line.
Tolkien, who did not received an
advance for the book, agreed to a
profit-sharing plan in which he would
get nothing until the book made its
costs back; afterward, he and the publisher would share equally in the
profits...if any.
Those terms turned out to be more
profitable for Tolkien than the standard
royalty arrangement (usually 10 percent
of the retail cover price).
“In those happy days no second
opinion was needed. If I said it was
good enough to be published, it was
[published],” said Rayner Unwin, in
an interview that appeared on the extended DVD of The Fellowship of the
Ring—the last interview he ever gave.

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

56

Time and circumstances change,
though, and despite having the crown
jewels of The Hobbit and The Lord of
the Rings—the silmarilli of Tolkien’s
literary efforts—the firm’s unfocused
book line handicapped profitability.
In 1990, HarperCollins bought
Unwin Hyman, formed after Allen &
Undwin joined with Bell & Hyman in
1985. Taking draconian measures to
fatten profits by trimming the book line
and personnel, HarperCollins now was
responsible for marketing, selling, and
promoting Tolkien and his books.
It was the end of an era and a bittersweet end to Tolkien’s original publisher, a highly regarded book firm that
had weathered many previous storms.
Since then, HarperCollins has not
only published Tolkien’s books profitably, but has done so wisely and well.
Note: For those who want to know
more about Stanley Unwin and
Rayner Unwin, two books are worth
your attention: The Truth About Publishing, by Stanley Unwin, and George
Allen: a Remembrancer, by Rayner
Unwin, which has a lengthy section
detailing his decades-long involvement
with Tolkien.
When all is said and done, credit
must be given to Allen & Unwin for
taking the considerable risk in publishing what seemed to the firm and to the
author as a dubious proposition—a
long romance tale with questionable
financial prospects. To its credit, Allen
& Unwin took that risk when no other
publisher would and, by doing so, has
earned its place in publishing history.

10/28/2003, 8:56 AM

BOOKS ABOUT J.R.R. TOLKIEN

u 57

Tolkien’s Art: A Mythology for England, by Jane Chance (University Press of
Kentucky, $19.95, trade paperback). Chance is an English professor at Rice
University. Originally published in 1980, this updated edition examines the
sources and influences on Tolkien’s work.
Tolkien’s Middle-earth and Monsters Postcard Book, illustrated by John Howe, Ted
Nasmith, Roger Garland, and Alan Lee (HarperCollins UK, £7.99, paperbound).
Comprised of 40 postcards, which are designed to be extracted from the book, it
features art by the best-known Tolkien illustrators.
Treasures from the Misty Mountains: A Collector’s Guide to Tolkien, by James H. Gillam
(Collector’s Guide Pub, $30.95, trade paperback). The only book of its kind, with
500 color photos of Tolkien material (by and about him), the book is actually an
illustrated bibliography. Published in 2001, just before the first movie (The Fellowship of the Ring) was released, it covers as much movie tie-in product and memorabilia as possible, but necessarily falls short because the preponderance of tie-in
products that followed. Ideally, one would want more information—especially on
out-of-print material—and more text. The book would ideally be published as a
searchable CD-ROM, but this book is a very good place to start if you’re looking to
build a Tolkien collection and want to see what the actual items look like.
Visualizing Middle-earth, by Michael Martinez (XLibris Corporation, $21.99, selfpublished paperback). Technological advances have given self-published authors
a viable alternative to remaining unpublished: Books can be printed in small runs
or on demand—printing a single copy on demand (that is, when it sells). The upside is that it promises to bring to print some books that, otherwise, would never
see print. The downside is that the reader must do his own research, because
reviews from sources such as Publishers Weekly, Booklist, and Library Journal are
unlikely—they don’t review self-published books. That said, this book is a very
informal book that the general reader would find interesting, as can be seen by
the chapters: “Can Middle-earth survive the commercialization of Tolkien?” (My
answer: yes.) “Love, Middle-earth Style,” and “Would Sandra Bullock be a good
Mrs. Isildur?” Hardcore fans will probably not care for this book’s light touch or
tone, but most people will find it accessible and modest, as is its author.
Women Among the Inklings: Gender, C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams,
by Candice Fredrick and Sam McBride (Greenwood Publishing Group, $62.95,
hardback). Priced for libraries, this book has a very narrow focus—the male
camaraderie that was at the heart of the Inklings and their attitudes toward women.
For a broader look, consult The Inklings Handbook.
World of the Rings: The Unauthorized Guide to the Work of J.R.R. Tolkien, by Iain
Lowson, Peter MacKenzie, and Keith Marshall (Reynolds & Hearn, $12, trade paperback). This book is principally concerned with the movie adaptations to a degree
the average reader will find tediously excessive. Those seeking the story behind the
movie are best advised to read Brian Sibley’s authorized look at the visual adaptations, The Lord of the Rings: The Making of the Movie Trilogy (Houghton Mifflin).

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

57

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

02 Tolkien Chapter 2.pmd

58

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

CHAPTER 3

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS OF
THE LORD OF THE RINGS:
THE FILM AND RELATED
TIE-IN BOOK PRODUCTS

The film industry is currently in a technological transition. The videotape is on
its way to extinction, eventually to be replaced by the DVD format, with its vastly
superior sound and picture quality and its enhanced storage capacity for more data.
There will come a day when VHS tapes are no longer available—indeed, DVD
rentals now exceed VHS rentals—and for that we can be grateful; VHS tapes are
in every way inferior to the DVD format. For this reason, I do not recommend the
VHS editions and will not discuss them here, because interested readers with DVD
players will prefer compatible editions.

DVDs
The Fellowship of the Ring
Full-Screen ($29.95). This is the version released in the theaters, severely cropped
to fit the conventional television screen. Typically, the left and right edges are simply chopped off to ensure the movie “fits” the television screen.
The second disc gives you a glimpse of the making of the movie—a behind-thescenes look at the making of the film, numerous vignettes (short pieces, up to five
minutes) exploring the culture and geography of Middle-earth, a preview of The
Two Towers, the original TV and movie ads, the lovely Enya music video (“May It
Be”), a preview of the video game version (in other words, an advertisement), and
a preview of the Special Extended DVD Edition (another advertisement).
Director Peter Jackson states in an interview on the supplementary disc that he’s
not fond of the term “Director’s Cut” because it implies that what was released in
u 59 U

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

59

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

60 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

the theater was not what the director had intended. In his case, however, Jackson
states that the film, as released on the big screen, was exactly what he intended, but
he’s glad to have the opportunity to issue an extended DVD set, so he can incorporate additional footage and supplementary material.
I do not recommend the full-screen format, because it sacrifices footage for
format.
Wide-Screen ($29.95). This is the version released in the theaters with a picture
proportion that, on a conventional television set, will mirror that which is seen on
the movie screen. Termed letterboxing, this format will yield black bars on the top
and bottom of the picture, which some people find distracting. (Solution: Buy a
wide-screen television, if you’re a real movie buff).
This is the preferred edition. It is priced right, and it has the theatrical release
with additional footage (30 minutes) incorporated into the film itself and the aforementioned disc of supplementary material.
For fans who want the additional
scenes and some of the supplementary
bonus material on the second disc, this
is a recommended buy.

The expanded DVD set of The
Fellowship of the Ring.

Platinum Series Special Extended DVD
Edition ($39.99). This is the extended
wide-screen version with two additional
DVDs, “The Appendices,” which includes documentaries and art galleries,
for an in-depth, behind-the-scenes look
at how the movie was made.
This is the edition of choice—the
best buy: all the features you’d want at a
reasonable price.

Platinum Series Special Extended DVD Edition
Collector’s Gift Set ($79.92). This is for hard-core,
serious collectors only: a pair of small bookends, a
new version of the documentary on the film produced
by National Geographic, trading cards, a selection of
special editions of the fan club magazine—all encased
in a collector’s box designed by Tolkien illustrator
Alan Lee.
Don’t buy this for yourself—save your money and
get the $39.99 edition—but consider buying if you
want to give a Tolkien fan a gift to remember.
One of the two pieces sculpted by Weta
Workshop for inclusion in the Collector’s
Gift Set of The Fellowship of the Ring.

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

60

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS

OF

THE LORD

OF THE

RINGS

u 61

In an interview on the extended DVD, Peter Jackson said that he’s a big fan
of the extended DVD precisely because it does what can’t be done on the movie
screen—restore footage and provide back matter that greatly enhance one’s appreciation of the film. In the case of The Fellowship of the Ring, the “plain vanilla”
edition is anything but. The first disc is the theatrical release with integrated additional footage, and the second disc is jam-packed with the kind of features moviegoers love.
The attention to detail shown in the movie release is also evident in the DVD
release. Peter Jackson had the foresight to realize that documenting every facet
of the making of The Fellowship of the Ring
was critical for its DVD release. Therefore,
on the supplemental disc, there’s an extended behind-the-scenes look at how the
The Art of the DVD
movie was made (short features irritatingly
In their eagerness to capitalize on
termed “featurettes”), with segments on
sales, studios have rushed to reis“Finding Hobbiton,” “Hobbiton Comes
sue their movies in DVD format.
Alive,” “Believing the World of Bree,” and
Until recently, however, the reissues
more, all of which give the viewer a sense of
have largely been afterthoughts,
the geography and people of Middle-earth
with content reflecting their lack of
as well as the actors and their perceptions—
planning—neither adding nor subespecially to new fans who haven’t read the
tracting, the DVD is a facsimile of
book and are likely to be confused by the
the VHS edition from years ago.
And let’s face it, it’s a waste of the
large cast of characters.
medium, because a DVD can hold
I also enjoyed the Enya music video
so much more content than a VHS
“May It Be” and all the original theatrical
tape, with the added benefit that
trailers and television spots. I didn’t even
content on a DVD is more accesmind the not-so-blatant advertising for
sible, whereas a VHS tape must be
other products, such as the preview of The
fast-forwarded or rewound—a real
Two Towers, the preview of the Two Towers
aggravation when seeking a specific
video game, and Elijah Wood (who plays
scene.
Frodo Baggins) thumping the drum for the
Had Peter Jackson released The
extended DVD edition. There’s plenty of
Fellowship of the Ring on DVD as
shown exactly on the movie screen,
room for such supplemental material, so
few people could complain; the
what’s the harm? It’s there if you want to
movie was magnificent and a high
see it.
point in film history. Indeed, taken
Retailing for $29.95, the two-disc DVD
as a whole, the movies—buttressed
set of The Fellowship of the Ring sells as
by their excellent DVD releases and
low as $22 from online merchants.
(mostly) excellent tie-in products—
have raised the bar for future filmAs good as the full-screen and widemakers who want to give good value
screen editions are, the real winner, by a
to consumers.
wide margin, is the Platinum Series Special
Extended Edition. Retailing for $39.99, the
online price is approximately $27.99—a
bargain in anyone’s book, especially in this

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

61

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

62 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

case, because this edition offers better packaging, more supplemental printed
material, and—best of all—two additional DVDs of material not available on the
full-screen or wide-screen editions.
A lot of thinking and imagination went into developing these packages, which
show an astonishing attention to detail. Even before I read Sibley’s book on the
making of the movie trilogy, I could tell that Peter Jackson was a perfectionist, the
kind of person who goes to extraordinary lengths to get the tiniest details right. He
is most assuredly a precise and exacting man, and it certainly shows in how he
envisioned the extended DVD package.
First, the packaging: The box itself shows the Doors of Durin, the dwarf-doors
that can only be opened when the right words are spoken. Inside the box, five
panels unfold to reveal a printed booklet and four DVDs—the extended movie in
two DVDs and two DVDs comprising the appendices (“Part One: From Book to
Vision” and “Part Two: From Vision to Reality”).
The booklet’s case is illustrated, appropriately, with a watercolor by film
conceptualizer Alan Lee, who depicts a pivotal scene when the fellowship has
opened Durin’s Door and are dwarfed by the cavernous Mines of Moria, with steps,
columns, and archways receding in the background; a light from Gandalf’s staff
provides scant illumination of the vast hall, most of which is covered in shadow.
The case also has a map showing the route of the Fellowship, starting from
the Shire, winding its way through the mountains where the Mines of Moria are
located, and ending northwest of Mordor at Amon Hen, near the Falls of Rauros.
As for the contents, the booklet accompanying the DVD set tells us that
“with no constraints on the film’s running time, director Peter Jackson extended
the movie by more than 30 minutes—with more character development, more
humor, more story, more of J.R.R. Tolkien’s world.” It is, then, an expanded
version of the movie, with the new scenes seamlessly integrated into the whole,
and new music scored to ensure continuity.
It is, in short, the preferred version of the movie.
In the note explaining the two-disc appendices, we are told that:
Making the motion picture trilogy of The Lord of the Rings is
certainly a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and Peter Jackson
wanted to make sure he captured it all for posterity.... Everyone—
cast, crew, Weta Workshop and Digital—contributed their time,
resources, treasures, and memories to this DVD.
The booklet provides a guide to scenes, with notations on the extended
scenes—handy if you want to go directly to them, instead of viewing the movie
from start to finish. To visually explain the appendices, a four-panel “tree,” with
leaves branching out, explains the interrelationship of the additional material.
For instance, early storyboards branch out to “The Prologue,” “Orc Pursuit Into
Lothlórien,” and “Sarn Gebir Rapids Chase.”

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

62

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS

OF

THE LORD

OF THE

RINGS

u 63

Just as the movie flows, the tree-like flow chart shows how the contents of the
appendices have been grouped thematically, so areas of interest are colocated and
instantly accessible. Complete with still frames and video clips, the appendices—
mirroring Tolkien’s own appendices in The Lord of the Rings—comprise the back
story. It’s there if you want it, but it’s not necessary to enjoy the movie itself. Middleearth, after all, is fictional world-building on a grand scale, and the newcomer will
find a detailed road map to be most useful.
The only thing that these DVDs do not provide is the requisite screen with
which to properly view it. Clearly, some movies are made for the big screen—the
large canvas is needed to show it off to the best advantage—and, in my opinion,
nothing less than the best will do. (A flat plasma-screen television of at least 42 inches
will set you back $4,500, though a projection television is a reasonable alternative,
with a screen as large as 70 inches, currently available for $3,000 or less.)
For most of us, however, the best we can hope for—or afford—is a Sony
Trinitron or Sony Wega. Both are excellent choices, especially the sets in wide-screen
proportion.
Then sit back and let the movie take you away to Tolkien’s imaginative universe,
as envisioned by Peter Jackson, who has carefully and lovingly brought the book to
the screen—and, by doing so, has introduced millions of people to the wondrous
world of Middle-earth.

Easter Eggs in Middle-earth
Software programmers invented the
“Easter egg,” a hidden, special feature
in the software—usually a message,
picture, or credits—that can be seen
only when certain keys are pressed. In
other words, you have to know exactly
where to look and how to access it.
In the extended DVD of The
Fellowship of the Ring, there are two Easter
eggs, if you know where to look. Usually,
Easter eggs are well-kept secrets known
only to insiders, but the Internet has
changed that: an Internet search will turn
up numerous references to the
aforementioned Easter eggs, so my sharing
them with you is not a sin.
Easter egg #1: On disc one, click
down to the scene of the “Council of

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

63

Elrond” and then highlight it. Click
down and an image of the One Ring will
appear. Click on it and Peter Jackson
introduces a hilarious MTV spoof, of
which I shall say nothing—you will
understand why words fail me after you
view it—except to say that I wish
someone would do a short film parody,
because this small sampling had me in
tears.
Easter egg #2: On disc two, the
trailer to The Two Towers. To access it,
go to the menu selection and click down
to the far right hand side of the screen
where scene 48 is located. Then click
down on the remote control and a hidden
symbol, two towers, will pop up. Click
on it to play the trailer.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

64 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Two Towers
Full-Screen ($29.95). Visually edited to fit a conventional television screen, this
two-disc set includes the theatrical trailers, two documentaries on the making of
the film, short vignettes on the culture and creatures of Middle-earth, the music
video of “Gollum’s Song” by Emiliana Torrini, a short film by Sean Astin, a short
behind-the-scenes preview of The Return of the King, a preview of the video game
based on the movie, and—if you have a compatible computer—links to an online
Website with exclusive content.
Again, my recommendation is to forgo the full-screen version in favor of the
widescreen (letterboxed) edition.
Wide-Screen ($29.95). This is a good value. The letterbox format allows you to see
the movie exactly as it was shown at the theater, with the bonus disc of supplementary material.
The Platinum Series Extended Edition: Wide-Screen ($39.99). This is the best
value. It is not only in wide-screen format, with additional footage (40 additional
minutes incorporated in the original film), but includes two discs that comprise the
appendices with a wealth of material that is available nowhere else.
The Platinum Series Extended Edition: Collector’s Gift Set ($79.92). This edition
adds the collectibles that are available nowhere else: a polystone statue of Gollum,
with a printed companion piece from concept sketch to digital character, and a
DVD highlighting the Weta Workshop.
This is a good buy, my precious! We wants it!

From Book to the Silver Screen
As early as 1958, Tolkien and his publisher were approached by Hollywood
with an offer to bring The Lord of the Rings to the big screen. Seeking—as he and
his publisher put it—a large amount of cash or kudos, they were open to any
overtures.
The first came from Morton
Grady Zimmerman, who proposed
an animated feature and presented
a story line to Tolkien, who found it
incomprehensible. In an April 1958
letter to Rayner Unwin, Tolkien
wrote: “I should say Zimmerman,
the constructor of this [storyline], is
quite incapable of excerpting or
adapting the ‘spoken words’ of the
book. He is hasty, insensitive, and
impertinent.... He does not read
books.”

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

64

Peter Jackson’s
Quest for the Ring
“The Lord of the Rings remains one of
the greatest books ever written. All I
am offering is an interpretation, but
hopefully one that will take the fantasy film to an entirely new level of
adventurousness and believability.”
—Peter Jackson

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS

OF

THE LORD

OF THE

RINGS

u 65

It was Tolkien’s first encounter with the Hollywood film industry, and not
unlike the experience of most writers who discover, often too late, that the movie
and book industry sometimes make strange bedfellows.
Thankfully, the proposed animated feature was never made, which, in retrospect, is probably a good thing. From Hollywood’s point of view, The Lord of the
Rings presents several problems in terms of adaptation, which is why no reasonably
faithful version could be made until recently. Here are the principal reasons why:
1. Length and Cost: The average screenplay is approximately 120 pages
of script—one page per screen minute. The half-million words that
comprise The Lord of the Rings, however, is a complex novel that cannot
be compressed to 120 pages without sacrificing its story.
In order to adequately translate the book to film, it would require
an unprecedented commitment on the part of a studio, because it would
mean taking a considerable risk. Such a costly endeavor, in time and
money, is enough to scare most studios away.
In this instance, the risk extended to three films made simultaneously, to keep costs down and maintain continuity, which translated
to almost $300 million, making The Lord of the Rings the most expensive movie ever made.
Playing high-stakes poker on this scale is enough to make any studio executive blanch. On the upside is the prospect that the film could
potentially be a billion-dollar franchise (or more), but the prospect of
its downside was daunting—the studio could not only lose a fortune on
the first movie, but go on to compound it with two more possible financial flops, which would almost certainly force the sale of the studio itself to another company.
2. Director Commitment: The average film takes one year out of a
director’s life, but this project would require a three-year commitment,
which is more than most directors can afford. In addition, it would take
a director who could—to quote from The Hobbit—“smell elves”:
someone who not only loved the book but wanted to do it justice and
ensure fidelity, to capture the essence of Middle-earth on film.
3. Special Effects: From a technical point of view, this presented the
largest challenge. Since Star Wars debuted in 1975, special effects have
become increasingly sophisticated. In fact, as filmmakers are fond of
saying, anything that can be imagined can be brought to life on the big
screen through special effects.
For a fantasy film, The Lord of the Rings presents formidable challenges. It is an imaginative work translating to hundreds of potential
scenes that would have to be brought to life—painstaking, difficult work,
at best.
In short, the special effects wizards would have to perform their
best magic to convince people that Middle-earth does indeed exist.

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

65

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

66 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Although the opening weekend is critical, the second weekend is more telling;
if attendance drops significantly, the movie will likely be a financial bust. Marketing
initially brings the movie to the public’s attention, but good reviews and, especially,
strong word of mouth combine to pack the theaters with not only new customers
but repeat viewers, as well, for (hopefully) a long engagement.
As director Peter Jackson put it (Time magazine, December 2, 2002), “The
pressures on us before the first film came out were, obviously, fairly extreme. We
never talked about that much. Nonetheless, it was there with you every single day.”
Thankfully, “The gamble paid off,” wrote Time magazine’s Jess Cagle. “Fellowship turned out to be the second highest grossing film of 2001 and firmly established Jackson as the next George Lucas. The movie went on to gross $860 million
worldwide and was honored with 13 Oscar nominations, including Best Picture.”

Books
Movie Tie-In Editions
The official line of movie tie-in books is worth your
attention. Published by Houghton Mifflin—the U.S. book
publishing company that has in print nearly 100 different
editions of books by and about Tolkien—the tie-in books
are oversized, in full color, and available both in hardback and trade paperback.
As with the DVDs, the movie tie-in books were
planned as an integral part of the movie package: When
moviegoers went into bookstores, they’d find these familiar books on the shelves.
A warmly inscribed copy of The Two Towers, from the collection of Colleen Doran, bearing
the signatures of Sala Baker (the actor who played Sauron) and Richard Taylor (Weta
workshop creative director).

Overview
The Lord of the Rings Official Movie Guide (Houghton
Mifflin, $24.95 hardback, $14.95 trade paperback). This is
the first book in this series, which accurately bills itself as:
...a celebration of the films...a lavishly illustrated behind-the-scenes guide which includes
full-color photos of the cast, locations, sets,
monsters and costumes, together with exclusive interviews with Peter Jackson and all the
principal cast. It also features an entertaining overview of the conception, design and
filming of the trilogy over the last five years....”

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

66

The movie tie-in edition of
The Lord of the Rings
Official Movie Guide.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS

OF

THE LORD

OF THE

RINGS

u 67

The Lord of the Rings: The Making of the Movie Trilogy,
by Brian Sibley (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95, trade paperback). To be read after The Official Movie Guide,
this is a close-up, in-depth look at the making of all the
movies, with more than 300 color photos, extensive interviews with the cast and crew, and a behind-the-scenes
look at every aspect of the production of these movies.

The Fellowship of the Ring
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Photo
Guide, edited by Alison Sage (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95,
trade paperback). Intended for children (ages 8 and
up), this chronological, photo-illustrated overview of
the movie emphasizes images over text: designed to be
an introduction to the movie.

The movie tie-in edition
of The Lord of the Rings:
The Making of the Movie
Trilogy.

The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Insider’s
Guide, by Brian Sibley (Houghton Mifflin, $6.95, trade
paperback). Intended for children (ages 8 and up), this
is an overview.
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Visual
Companion (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95, trade hardback).
Especially useful to new readers, this oversized encyclopedia provides a photo-illustrated guide to the characters, places, landscapes, events, and key artifacts of
the movie, with explanatory text. This 72-page book
includes historical information (an overview of the
Rings of Power and of the Last Alliance of Elves and
Men), and the characters and places: Hobbits, Bag End,
Bilbo Baggins, Frodo Baggins, Samwise Gamgee,
Meriadoc Brandybuck, Peregrin Took, Men, Bree,
Aragorn, Boromir, Elves, Elrond, Arwen, Legolas,
Lothlórien, the Lady Galadriel, Dwarves, Gimli, Moria,
the Istari, Gandalf the Grey, Saruman the White, the
Dark Powers, Orcs, Uruk-Hai, and the Nazgûl.
The Lord of the Rings: The Art of The Fellowship of the Ring,
by Gary Russell (Houghton Mifflin, $35, trade hardback).
This is a “must have” book. With more than 500 blackand-white and color images, from rough conceptual
pencil sketches to finished paintings, this is an in-depth
look at the concepts, storyboards, and images rendered by
Alan Lee, John Howe, and others who conceptualized the
look of the movie. The art is supplemented with interviews

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

67

The movie tie-in edition
of The Fellowship of the
Ring Photo Guide, for
children.

The movie tie-in edition
of The Fellowship of the
Ring Visual Companion.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

68 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

conducted with Peter Jackson, Richard Taylor (head of
Weta), and many of the 200 artists at Weta.
In the introduction to the book, Russell writes:

The movie tie-in edition
of The Lord of the
Rings: The Art of The
Fellowship of the Ring.

Although this is a celebration of the
frequently unseen, often ignored aspects
of film-making (from concept to
execution) rather than a traditional
behind-the-scenes publication—there
are other books designed to do that—it
is worth spending some time on
introductions before “looking at the
pictures.

The result is a fascinating book for anyone who wants
to know how a movie is conceived—how it is originally
envisioned by conceptual artists, who then work with other artists to give shape and
form to the final product.

The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Photo Guide (Houghton Mifflin, $8.95,
trade paperback). For children ages 8 and up, this emphasizes photos with simplified, explanatory text. (A page of stickers of the main characters is bound into
the back of the book.)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers—Creatures (Houghton Mifflin, $8.95, trade
paperback). For children (ages 8 and up), a pictorial overview of creatures—fair
and foul—seen in The Two Towers. Attached to the inside back cover is a fold-out
poster of Gandalf confronting the Balrog on the Bridge at Khazad-dûm.
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Visual Companion, by Jude Fisher (Houghton
Mifflin, $18.95, hardback). Like her previous book, this is a photo-illustrated

The movie tie-in edition
of The Two Towers
Photo Guide, for children.

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

68

The movie tie-in edition
of The Two Towers:
Creatures.

The movie tie-in edition
of The Two Towers
Visual Companion.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

VISUAL ADAPTATIONS

OF

THE LORD

OF THE

RINGS

u 69

guide (more than 100) to the characters, places, and
landscapes of this movie. Included is a four-page, foldout battle plan of the attack on Helm’s Deep.
The Lord of the Rings: The Art of the Two Towers, by
Gary Russel (Houghton Mifflin, $35, hardback). Like
his previous art book on The Fellowship of the Ring,
this book is a “must buy.” With more than 600 conceptual sketches—pencils, watercolors, photographs of
models, and finished pieces—this book shows how the
text of Tolkien’s novel was visually developed into designs that were finalized for the movie itself.

The Return of the King

The movie tie-in edition of
The Lord of the Rings:
The Art of the Two

The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King Photo Guide, edited by David Brawn
(Houghton Mifflin, $8.95, trade paperback). Written for children (ages 8 and
up), with a “Family Tree” pullout, this is understandably heavy on photos and
light on text.
The Lord of the Rings: Gollum, edited by Brian Sibley, with Andy Serkis (Houghton
Mifflin, $9.95, trade paperback). Written for children (ages 8 and up), this book
thoroughly looks at the CGI-created character Gollum, as interpreted by Andy
Serkis.
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King Visual Companion, by Jude Fisher
(Houghton Mifflin, $18.95, trade hardback). Like its predecessors, this principally showcases the people and geography of Middle-earth.
The Lord of the Rings: The Art of The Return of the King, by Gary Russell ($35,
hardback, Houghton Mifflin). Like its two sister books, this is a “must buy.” Jampacked with hundreds of conceptual designs—pencil renderings, watercolors, and
finished paintings—it shows how the book was visually interpreted from its basic
text to finished film.
The Lord of the Rings: Weapons and Warfare, by Chris Smith, with John Howe
(Houghton Mifflin, $29.95, trade hardback; $18.95, trade paperback). One of the
most challenging and time-consuming aspects of making this movie trilogy was
manufacturing the diverse weapons used in combat, from close-in fighting to forceon-force engagements. This book catalogs and discusses the various weapons wielded
by friend and foe alike.
According to Weta director Richard Taylor, “We designed and made 48,000
pieces of armor and had four people working 10 hours a day just producing chain
mail. We also produced 2,000 weapons, including swords, spears, pikes and maces,
longbows, crossbows, daggers, knives and axes.”

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

69

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

70 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Official Lord of the Rings Fan Club
Fan clubs are obviously for the hard-core fans. In this case, it’s for the diehard Tolkien fans who also happen to love the movie and simply can’t get enough,
despite the mountain of merchandised products available—the LotR geeks, in
other words.
The annual membership is $29.95,
which buys you a subscription (six issues,
bi-monthly) of The Lord of the Rings
Official Fan Club Magazine, a 10-percent
discount on merchandise, 10-day advance notification on new products, and
access to its online community.
The key benefit is the magazine,
which is professionally produced. It is a
letter-size publication of approximately
Two issues of The Lord of the Rings Fan
80 pages, with the usual material you’d
Club Magazine, published by Decipher.
expect to find in a fan club-oriented
magazine: a mail column (too cutely
titled “Mailbaggins”), a news column, profiles on those involved in the making of
the film, interviews with actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the craftsmen and artists who produced goods for the movies, and so on.
For those who are newcomers, back issues are also available, though at
collector’s prices—$45 for the first issue and $30 for all other issues thereafter.

03 Tolkien Chapter 3.pmd

70

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

CHAPTER 4

SOUND ADVICE:
AUDIO ADAPTATIONS

In a letter to Rayner Unwin (The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, August 29, 1952),
Tolkien wrote:
I have recently made some tape-recordings of parts of the Hobbit
and The Lord (notably the Gollum-passages and some pieces of
“Elvish”) and was much surprised to discover their effectiveness
as recitations, and (if I may say so) my own effectiveness as a
narrator, I do a very pretty Gollum and Treebeard.
According to Humphrey Carpenter, in J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, Tolkien
was staying with a friend of C.S. Lewis, George Sayer, who owned a tape recorder.
Initially suspicious of the newfangled device, Tolkien “pretended to regard Sayer’s
machine with great suspicion, pronouncing the Lord’s Prayer in Gothic into the
microphone to cast out any devils that might be lurking within.” Tolkien, however,
warmed up to the machine and later bought one himself, “and began to amuse
himself by making further tapes of his work.”
The Sayer recording was eventually issued by Caedmon Records on an LP,
then reissued on cassette and CD, under the title The J.R.R. Tolkien Audio
Collection.
Though not all of Tolkien’s works have been adapted for audio, the principal
works are available as straight readings and dramatizations, on cassette and CD.
Purists will undoubtedly prefer an unabridged reading to an abridged dramatization, but give the latter a try, preferably before you buy. The dramatizations are
not necessarily better or worse than an unabridged reading, but clearly different. It’s
an audio adaptation as contrasted to a movie, which is an audiovisual adaptation.
u 71 U

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

71

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

72 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

An encyclopedic listing of every edition, U.S. and U.K., of every audio adaptation ever produced is beyond the scope of this book; I’ve limited my list to U.S.
editions that are still in production, unless there’s a notable U.K. edition for which
there is no U.S. equivalent.
ISBN numbers are provided for each edition, to distinguish it from all others.
When ordering these products from your bookseller, the title and ISBN are especially useful in identifying the specific edition.

J.R.R. Tolkien and the
Art of the Spoken Word
The act of storytelling is steeped in the
oral tradition—a tradition Tolkien celebrated. Not surprisingly, Tolkien,
though not a professional reader, was an
effective reader of his own work. An exacting writer, he reads carefully, precisely,
relishing the sounds of the individual
words.
The CD paper jacket
for an insert of The
Hobbit from the
British gift pack
edition. On this CD,
Tolkien reads excerpts
from the book.

To hear Tolkien’s own voice, especially his delightful and spirited interpretation of Gollum, is to hear the
character come alive in a unique way—
well worth the price of admission by
itself. It makes one wish that Tolkien
had recorded more of his work, and in
a professional studio, instead of these
informal recordings made on monophonic equipment.
Publishers Weekly, reviewing The
J.R.R. Tolkien Audio Collection, said

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

72

that “The charming voice of Tolkien,
bringing Middle English accenting to
the craggy characters of the Middleearth, is irresistible.” I concur. The
master’s voice reads selections from The
Hobbit, The Fellowship of the Ring, The
Two Towers, The Return of the King, and
The Adventures of Tom Bombadil.
In addition, Christopher Tolkien
reads from The Silmarillion: “Of Beren
and Lúthien,” “Of the Darkening of
Valinor,” and “Of the Flight of the
Noldar.”
Though Christopher Tolkien, with
his precise British accent, gives a good
reading, my preference is for his father’s,
whose readings are more spirited and
passionate, and in which fictional characters take on their own, distinctive
voices, lending a depth that a “straight”
reading cannot match. J.R.R. Tolkien,
it seems, had a touch of dramatic actor
in him, which his son lacks.
Whether one prefers the father or
the son, or the material from The Lord
of the Rings or The Silmarillion, one fact
remains clear: The sole recording of its
kind, this audio collection is most
definitely a “must hear.”

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

SOUND ADVICE: AUDIO ADAPTIONS

u 73

Audio Adaptations
Farmer Giles of Ham and Other Stories (Houghton Mifflin, $15, ISBN 0618114807).
An abridged reading by Derek Jacobi on two cassettes.
The Fellowship of the Ring (Recorded Books, $49.99, ISBN 0788789813). An
unabridged recording by Rob Inglis on 16 CDs, running time is 20 hours.
The Hobbit (Recorded Books, $39, ISBN 0788789821). An unabridged recording
by Rob Inglis on 10 CDs, running time is 11.25 hours.
The Hobbit (Bantam Books-Audio, $25.95, ISBN 0553471074). A dramatization
by the BBC.
The Hobbit (Houghton Mifflin, $25, ISBN 0618087850). An abridged recording by
Martin Shaw on four cassettes.
The Hobbit (Bantam Books-Audio, $39.95, ISBN 0553455621). A dramatization by
the BBC. Five CDs.
The Hobbit (Bantam Books-Audio, $25.95, ISBN 0807288837). A dramatization by
the BBC. Cassettes.
The Hobbit (Bantam Books-Audio, $39.95, ISBN 0807288845). BBC Radio dramatization. Four CDs.
J.R.R. Tolkien Audio Collection (Harper Audio, $25, ISBN 155994675X). An abridged
recording of selections read by J.R.R. Tolkien from The Hobbit, The Lord of the
Rings, and The Adventures of Tom Bombadil. Portions of The Silmarillion are
read by his son, Christopher Tolkien. Running time: 4.5 hours. (This was originally
issued by Caedmon as an LP record.)
J.R.R. Tolkien Audio Collection (HarperAudio, $25, ISBN 0694525707). CD.
J.R.R. Tolkien reads an excerpt from The Hobbit. One CD, a component of The Hobbit
Gift Pack (HarperCollins UK, £19.99, ISBN 0007105096). The pack consists of a
hardback edition (regrettably printed on pulp paper), eight color postcards, a
foldout map by John Howe, and a CD recording of Tolkien reading the encounter
between Bilbo Baggins and Gollum.
J.R.R. Tolkien Reads The Hobbit and The Fellowship of the Ring (Caedmon
Audio, $12, ISBN 0694522236). Excerpted readings by J.R.R. Tolkien on two
cassettes.
Letters From Father Christmas (Houghton Mifflin, $15, ISBN 0618087842).
Unabridged reading by Derek Jacobi. Two cassettes.
The Lord of the Rings performed by J.R.R. Tolkien (Caedmon Audio, $24, ISBN
0898452236). Excerpted readings by J.R.R. Tolkien on cassette.

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

73

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

74 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Lord of the Rings (Bantam Books-Audio, $69.95, ISBN 0553456539). A dramatization by the BBC on 13 CDs. Boxed set.
The Lord of the Rings (Bantam Books-Audio, $59.95, ISBN 0553472283). A boxed
set. A dramatization by the BBC.
The Lord of the Rings (Soundelux Audio Publications, $49.95, ISBN 0881422703).
A dramatization by Mind’s Eye on 12 cassettes, running time is 12 hours.
The Lord of the Rings (Soundelux Audio Publications, $59.95, ISBN 1559351209).
A dramatization by Mind’s Eye on nine CDs.
The Lord of the Rings (Recorded Books, $129.99, ISBN 1402516274). An unabridged
reading by Rob Inglis on 30 CDs, running time approximately 48 hours.
Pearl and Sir Orfeo (HarperCollins Audiobooks, $14.95, ISBN 0001053744). Two
poems as translated by J.R.R. Tolkien, read by Terry Jones, on two cassettes.
The Return of the King (Recorded Books, $49.99, ISBN 0788789848). An unabridged
recording read by Rob Inglis on 16 CDs, running time is 15 hours.
Roverandom (HarperCollins AudioBooks, $15, ISBN 0001055356). An abridged
reading by Derek Jacobi. Two cassettes.
The Silmarillion (Bantam Books-Audio, $64.95, ISBN 0553456067). An unabridged
reading by Martin Shaw on 13 CDs.
The Silmarillion (Bantam Books-Audio, $59.95, ISBN 0553525409). An unabridged
reading by Martin Shaw on 12 audio cassettes.
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight (Trafalgar Square, $14.95, ISBN 0001053736).
Read by Terry Jones. Two cassettes, unabridged.
Tales from the Perilous Realm (BBC Radio Collection, $16.95, ISBN 0563401427).
A dramatization by Brian Sibley. Two cassettes.
Tales from Tolkien (BBC Radio Collection, £15.99, ISBN 0563401427). Performed
by Michael Hordern, Brian Blessed, and Nigel Planer. Dramatizations of four
Tolkien works: Farmer Giles of Ham, Smith of Wootton Major, The Adventures of
Tom Bombadil, and “Leaf by Niggle.”
The Two Towers (Recorded Books, $49.99, ISBN 078878983X). An unabridged
recording read by Rob Inglis on 14 CDs, running time is 16.75 hours.

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

74

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

SOUND ADVICE: AUDIO ADAPTIONS

u 75

Musical Adaptations
I would draw some of the great tales in fullness, and leave many
only placed in the scheme, and sketched. The cycles should be
linked to a majestic whole, and yet leave scope for other minds
and hands, wielding paint and music and drama....
—J.R.R. Tolkien, in a letter to Milton Waldman in late 1951.
More than any other fantasy work, The Lord of the Rings—filled with romantic
imagery, poetry, songs, and verse—has inspired musicians to interpret the book.
Though most of these are by fans who share music files online or self-publish in
minuscule printings, the commercially produced CDs, licensed through Tolkien
Enterprises or approved by the Tolkien Estate, add a new, aural dimension to the
enjoyment of Tolkien’s works.
With those thoughts in mind, here’s some sound advice: If you are seriously
interested in sampling some of the music, begin your search at www.tolkienmusic.com, which has an alphabetical listing and links to 872 artists who have set
Tolkien’s fiction to music. In addition, the site has a page of links that provide
further information and discussions about Tolkien-inspired music.
Given the sheer numbers of recordings, most home-brewed, I’ll restrict my
discussion to commercially produced recordings available directly from the publisher or from www.amazon.com.

For most Tolkien fans who have seen and enjoyed the movies, the logical
place to begin is the official soundtracks, which are, in a word, breathtaking.
Composed and conducted by Howard Shore, and performed by the New Zealand
Symphony Orchestra, the music—as it must—complements but does not overwhelm the on-screen visuals.
“Opera. That’s how I’m thinking of it—as if I were composing an opera,”
Howard Shore told Brian Sibley in The Lord of the Rings: The Making of the Movie
Trilogy. Shore’s musical interpretation is a seamless fit to the film itself. For
instance, for The Fellowship of the Ring, “Concerning Hobbits” is lighthearted
and playful, which contrasts sharply with the darker tones that inevitably follow
as Sam Gamgee and Frodo Baggins leave all that’s familiar and comfortable behind, to set out on a perilous journey. Another cut, “The Bridge of Khazaddûm,” is dark and ominous, and uses drumbeats as a musical motif to underscore
the war-drums as the Fellowship is pursued through the Mines of Moria, where
Gandalf the Grey falls in battle with the dreaded Balrog.

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

75

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

76 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Peter Jackson told Howard Shore, in The Lord of the Rings: The Making of the
Movie Trilogy, that he was largely on his own with only the most general directions.
“I really don’t have any director-type notes. It’s up to you to wrestle with the performance of it.” He then turns to Brian Sibley and says, “I’m tone deaf and really
don’t know a thing about the creation of music. So I limit my input to saying things
like ‘Could that be a little bit quieter?’ or ‘Maybe that could be a bit more exciting,’
and, amazingly, Howard always seems to find a way to make it happen.’”
Though the selections are mostly symphonic, there are vocals—haunting,
evocative, memorable. For The Fellowship of the Ring, Enya contributes “Aniron:
Theme for Aragon and Arwen” and, even more elegiac, “May It Be,” which is one
of the finest pieces she’s ever recorded.
“May It Be” was nominated in the category of “Best Achievement in Music in
Connection with Motion Pictures (Original Song)” for the 74th Annual Academy
Awards, at which Enya performed the song. Unfortunately, she did not win. On
the other hand, Howard Shore was justifiably recognized for his fine work in
scoring The Fellowship of the Ring, and won an Oscar for “Best Original Score.”
The soundtracks include:
u The Fellowship of the Ring (regular edition, $19.98).
u The Fellowship of the Ring (limited edition; no longer in production).
The extra money buys better packaging, but you can’t judge this “book”
by its cover: There are no bonus tracks on this CD, though there are
enhanced features that promote Enya’s musical presence. In short, save
your money—buy the regular edition.
u The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Song Book ($14.95).
Sheet music for the film score with piano, vocals, and chords. Includes
photographs from the film.
u The Two Towers (regular edition, $19.98).
u The Two Towers (limited edition, no longer in production). Better
packaging, but this time there is a bonus track: “Farewell to Lórien” by
Hilary Summers, an orchestral piece with vocal backups—very ethereal.
u The Two Towers (Internet limited edition, $29.98). The limited edition
of The Two Towers, with additional material: five character cards (used
as cover illustrations for the regular edition); printable maps of Middleearth, Rohan, and Gondor; a Two Towers “print and color set”; the
Two Towers movie trailer; a Two Towers image gallery; lyrics and
poems; score music video and “Making of the Score” video; and
screensavers and buddy icons.
u The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Song Book ($14.95). Sheet
music for the film score with piano, vocals, and chords. Includes
photographs from the film.

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

76

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

SOUND ADVICE: AUDIO ADAPTIONS

u 77

The Tolkien Ensemble
www.tolkienemsemble.com
Formed in 1995, this group of six Danish performers has set an ambitious goal
of creating the musical interpretation of all the poems and songs found in The
Lord of the Rings.
To date, three CDs have been published, issued in four editions: An Evening in
Rivendell (1997), A Night in Rivendell (2000), 24 Songs from The Lord of the Rings
(2001), and At Dawn in Rivendell (2002).
1. An Evening in Rivendell with The Tolkien Emsemble: Selected Songs from
The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien, by Caspar Reiff and Peter Hall
(Classico, $15.98, one CD).
2. A Night in Rivendell with the Tolkien Emsemble: Selected Songs from
The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien, by Caspar Reiff and Peter Hall
(Classico, $15.98, one CD).
3. J.R.R. Tolkien: 24 Songs from The Lord of the Rings, by The Tolkien
Ensemble. This is a gift set comprised of An Evening in Rivendell and
A Night in Rivendell (Classico, $24.98, two CDs).
4. At Dawn in Rivendell: The Lord of the Rings, Songs and Poems by
J.R.R. Tolkien, by The Tolkien Ensemble and Christopher Lee, music
by Caspar Reiff and Peter Hall (Universal, $16.98, one CD). Note: To
hear Lee read “One ring to rule them all...” in his deep, impressive
baritone voice is worth the purchase price.

Metrognome Studios
www.metrognomestudios.com
Metrognome Studios was formed by Kevin Pearce and James Prior. Inspired
by the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, these composers, in addition to managing their
studio, spent six years creating One Ring.
One Ring (Metrognome Studios, $12.99, one CD). This small press recording,
licensed from Tolkien Enterprises and published in a limited edition run of only
1,000 copies, is a labor of love. As the musicians who recorded this CD explained
(quoted from http://www.metrognome.demon.co.uk/compose.htm):
The Lord of the Rings. What a magnificent story. Probably the
single most influential fantasy story of all time. Tolkien knew how
to infuse the magic of imagination, to create a rich and emotive
tale that would last for years because of its simple depth and beauty.
As musicians, we wanted to be able to express some of that wonder,
and be able to recreate the world of Tolkien in sound and melodies.
Available only by Web order directly from the musicians, James Prior and
Kevin Pearce, this hour-long CD provides two bonus tracks, accessible only by a
linked Website (that information is provided when you purchase the CD).

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

77

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

78 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Brocelïande
www.broceliande.org
As quoted from the group’s Website (www.broceliande.org):
Brocelïande plays Celtic music from the British Isles and the Medieval and Renaissance music of the European courts, castles, and
countryside. Featuring stellar vocal and instrumental harmonies,
their entrancing sound is built on the interweaving of up to 4-part
vocals with the lyrical music of the Celtic harp, octave mandolin,
cello, guitar, flutes, whistles, percussion, harmonica, and melodian.
Their repertoire includes original arrangements of traditional
and Early music and ranges in feel from driving, danceable Celtic
beats to haunting, atmospherically lovely harp-based ballads. Their
lyrics, including some in Medieval French and Portuguese, speak
of love and longing, quests and revels, magic and transformation,
in an evocative style in the same vein as Loreena McKennitt,
Clannad, and Alan Stivell.
Brocelïande’s limited edition The Starlit Jewel is currently out of print, but according to its publisher, a second printing may be forthcoming in 2004. Licensed
from the Tolkien Estate, this is an unusual offering; rather than simply interpreting
the text musically, it sets poetry to music, some of which is by the late Marion
Zimmer Bradley, a well-known fantasy writer in her own right.
As expected from a musical group that plays principally at Renaissance fairs,
the music has a minstrel-like quality that seems appropriate to the book.
In a review by The Mythopoeic Society (a nonprofit organization devoted to
promoting fantasy and mythic literature), The Starlit Jewel is a gem of an album—
Paula DiSante writes:
There are bracing thrills and breath-catching beauties to be found
here, thanks to the multifarious miracles of Davis’s ardent
interpretation. In its new incarnation, The Starlit Jewel continues to
delight and astound. This dazzling re-release was well worth the
wait. It should find an honored place in many a Tolkien-lover’s
CD collection.

Madacy 2 Label Group #3193
Composed by Johan De Meij and performed by the London Symphony
Orchestra, The Lord of the Rings: Symphony No. 1 ($18.98) is comprised of six
tracks: “Gandalf,” “Lothlórien,” “Gollum,” “Journey in the Dark,” “Hobbits,”
and “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice.”

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

78

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

SOUND ADVICE: AUDIO ADAPTIONS

u 79

David Arkenstone
store.yahoo.com/neopacifica
Music Inspired by Middle-earth (New Pacifica, $19.98), by David Arkenstone.
Tracks include: “Hobbits from the Shire,” “Road to Rivendell,” “Quest,” “Moria,”
“Lothlórien,” “Galadriel’s Mirror,” “Riders of Rohan,” “Palantir,” “Arwen and
Aragorn,” “To Isengard,” “In the Land of Shadow,” “Field of Cormallen,” and
“Grey Havens.”
The publisher states:
Perhaps it is natural for composers to exhibit the desire to musically
illustrate other artistic works that have moved them in a powerful,
lasting manner. Yet, it can be tricky to present an interpretation of
a major artistic work that is beloved by so many, and has been
intimately personalized by their own imagination. That being said,
it was quite simply a joy for us to musically portray our impressions
of the incredible world created by Master Tolkien. The inspirations
for this recording have been developing for many years, and this
wonderful book has been a major source of joy in our lives.
As expected, there are other musical interpretations that strike me as being
out of sync with the work itself: pop rock, rock, and New Age are wildly interpretive.
My recommendation: sample some of the orchestrally inspired and folk-song
inspired works, because both are consistent with the “feel” of Middle-earth.

04 Tolkien Chapter 4.pmd

79

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

CHAPTER 5

PRINTED
PRODUCTS

Stationery Goods
Address Book
Dark green cover with “The Lord of the Rings address book” on the front, with an
image of a tree (Cedco Publishing, $7.95). Measures 3.5 x 4.5 inches, 96 pages.

Bookmark Set
The Fellowship of the Ring Bookmark Set
(Antioch, $19.95). Seven bookmarks,
each with a tassel; the Frodo bookmark
has a replica of the One Ring attached
to its tassel. The seven include: Frodo,
Legolas, Gimli, Gandalf the Grey,
Strider, Lurtz, and Saruman.
The Two Towers Bookmark Set (Antioch,
$20.95). Seven bookmarks, each with a
small character-related metal symbol
attached to its tassel. Included are Frodo
and Sam, Merry and Pippin, Legolas
and Gimli, Gandalf the White, King
Théoden, Éowyn, and Aragorn.

A selection of bookmarkers: Frodo
Baggins, Legolas Greenleaf, Strider
(Aragorn), and Boromir.

u 81 U

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

81

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

82 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Journals
Deluxe Journal (Cedco Publishing, $15.95). Brown fauxleather cover, foil stamping, and loop enclosure. The
cover bears the words, “The Lord of the Rings” on the
front, and an image of a tree. Measures approximately
6 x 8 inches.
Arwen Journal (Cedco Publishing, $7.95). Blue cover
with a die-cut window displaying a scene from the movie:
Arwen wielding her sword as she takes a stand against
the Nine Riders. Measures approximately 4 x 6 inches.
Bookmarker of Aragorn
with emblem tassel.

Frodo Journal (Cedco Publishing, $7.95). Green cover
with a cut-out window displaying a scene from the movie:
Frodo holding Sting. Measures approximately 4 x 6
inches, 240 pages.

The Lord of the Rings Crow of Saruman Icon Journal (Cedco Pubishing, $12.95).
Blank-page journal measuring approximately 6 x 8 inches, 240 pages. Faux-leather
cover with foil stamping on the cover: a crown design and the legend, “The Lord of
the Rings.”
The Lord of the Rings Icon Journal Set (Cedco Publishing, $33.95). A set of three
blank journals (each 240 pages), with faux-leather covers: the Tree of Gondor, the
symbol (crow) of Saruman, and the One Ring. The journals are also available separately for $12.95 each.
The One Ring Icon Journal (Cedco Publishing, $12.95). Blank journal with 240
pages, bound in red faux-leather. The front cover shows the One Ring inscription
and the legend, “The Lord of the Rings.”
The One Ring Tree of Gondor Icon Journal (Cedco Publishing, $12.95). Blank
journal with 240 pages, bound in black faux-leather. The front cover shows the
Tree of Gondor and the legend, “The Lord of the Rings.”
The Fellowship of the Ring Brown Journal (Cedco Publishing, $15.95). Bound in
brown faux-leather, this 240-page journal bears the legend “The Lord of the Rings:
The Fellowship of the Ring,” with a tree symbol.
There and Back Again: A Journal (Cedco Publishing, $15.95). Bearing the same
name as the subtitle of The Hobbit, this deluxe journal features a red faux-leather
cover, foil stamping, and a loop enclosure. Measures approximately 6 x 8 inches.
The Lord of the Rings Small Journal (Cedco Publishing, $12.95). The black cover
displays silver stamping of the crow of Saruman icon and the words, “The Lord of
the Rings.”

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

82

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 83

PRINTED PRODUCTS

Letter Openers
Miniature Collectible Sting Sword Letter Opener (The Noble Collection, $44.95).
A replica of Sting (Frodo’s sword) measuring 4.75 inches, set in a base made of
cold-cast porcelain.
Miniature Collectible Witch-king Sword Letter Opener (The Noble Collection,
$44.95). A replica of the sword wielded by the Lord of the Nazgûl, the sword
measures 8 inches, set in a base made of cold-cast porcelain.

Mousepads
The Fellowship of the Ring Mousepads (New Line Cinema, $16.95). A set of two:
One shows the One Ring surrounded by a cast of characters; the second shows
Gandalf, surrounded by the other members of the Fellowship, with a backdrop of
Middle-earth.
The Two Towers Mousepads ($16.95). A set of two: One shows Gollum/Sméagol;
the second shows Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli.

Postcard Books
Hobbit Postcards book (HarperCollins, $10.95). A set of 20 oversized postcards,
with art by Alan Lee, Roger Garland, and John Howe.
LotR Postcards Book (HarperCollins, $10.95). A set of 20 oversized postcards,
with art by John Howe and Alan Lee.

School
Datebook (Cedco Publishing, $12.95). Personal organizer. Brown cover with “The Lord of the Rings” on
the front, and a map of Middle-earth.
Locker Calendar (Cedco Publishing, $9.99). Published
annually, the locker calendars measure 7 x 10 inches
(when hung up, 7 x 20 inches), and are designed to
hang inside a student’s wall locker at school. The calendar starts with August and ends with December of
the subsequent year.
Student Planner (Cedco Publishing, $10.99). Published
annually, the student planner features month-at-aglance and weekly planners, as well. The calendar
starts in August and ends in August of the subsequent
year.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

83

Lord of the Rings: The
Fellowship of the Ring
datebook.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

84 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Posters
Note: Full-size posters measure 27 x 40 inches, mini-posters measure 16 x 20,
and door posters are approximately 5 feet tall.
The Two Towers: Frodo and Sam ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40 inches. Sam in the
foreground; Frodo in the background. The poster records a pivotal scene from the
movie, in which they discuss their motivation to continue in the face of insurmountable odds and increasing danger. Sam says, “Those were the stories that meant
something, even if you were too small to understand why, but I think, Mr. Frodo, I
do understand. Folks in those stories had lots of chances of turning back, only they
didn’t. They kept going, because they were holding onto something.”
Return of the King: Teaser Poster featuring Aragorn ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40
inches. A portrait close-up of Aragorn holding his sword, Anduril, in front of him.
The Fellowship of the Ring: Gandalf and Frodo in the Mines of Moria ($19.95).
Measures 27 x 40 inches. Printed on Elite Gloss paper stock—a higher quality than
conventional glossy stock used for movie posters—this poster had its origins as a
newspaper print ad; however, after Ian McKellen posted this on his Website, fans
asked for a copy. The result is a slightly revised version, emphasizing the text—a
dialogue between Gandalf and Frodo, who talk about fate, personal responsibility,
and decisions made—and those yet to be made.
The Two Towers: Final Movie Poster ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40 inches. A doublesided poster showing the two towers—Isengard and Orthanc, flanking the heroic
main characters.
The Two Towers: Saruman ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40 inches. A double-sided poster
showing Saruman overlooking his newly formed army set to march off to battle
against men and elves. On the top, the words, “A NEW POWER IS RISING.”
The Fellowship of the Ring: Pillars of Argonath ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40 inches.
Shows three small watercraft plying the misty waters, headed through the Pillars of
Argonath—statues of Isildur and Anarion.
The Fellowship of the Ring: Final Movie Poster ($15.95). Measures 27 x 40 inches.
Shows Frodo as the nucleus, surrounded by other main characters; beneath them,
the Ringwraiths.
The Hobbit Poster Collection (HarperCollins UK, $22.95). This poster book is an
oversized trade paperback, 11.5 x 18 inches. The art is by Alan Lee and features six
paintings illustrating The Hobbit.
The Lord of the Rings Poster Collection (HarperCollins UK, $22.95). This poster
book is an oversized trade paperback, 11.5 x 18 inches. The art is by Alan Lee and
features six paintings illustrating The Lord of the Rings.
The Two Towers: Gollum Poster ($8.99). Measures 25 x 35 inches. Close-up of
Gollum saying, “It came to me. My own. My precious.”

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

84

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 85

PRINTED PRODUCTS

The Two Towers: Legolas, with bow and arrow ($4.99). Measures 16 x 20 inches.
Legolas with drawn bow, taking aim.
The Two Towers: Aragorn Teaser Poster ($8.99). Measures 25 x 35 inches. Shows
Aragorn with drawn sword held upright in front of him, flanked by Arwen and Éowyn.
The One Ring Door Poster ($12.99). Measures 23 x 62 inches. Features the text of
the complete poem, “One ring to rule them all....” A simple, striking design depicts
the gold ring with the inscribed Elvish text, and its English translation above.
Heroes of The Two Towers Poster ($8.99). Measures 25 x 35 inches. Shows Faramir,
Éowyn, Éomer, Théoden, and the companions from the movie.
The Two Towers: Eye of Sauron Poster ($8.99). Measures 25 x 35 inches. The lidless
Eye against the backdrop of Orthanc, with the One Ring inscription on its periphery.
The Two Towers: Door Poster ($12.99). Shows the two towers: Orthanc and
Barad-dûr.
The Two Towers: Legolas Door Poster ($12.99). Shows Legolas, with bow drawn,
taking aim.
The Rohirrim and the Three Hunters Door Poster ($12.99). Shows Aragorn, Gimli,
and Legolas, with the lidless Eye of Sauron in the background and the Riders of
the Rohirrim in the foreground.

My Personal Picks
1. The Fellowship of the Ring Teaser “A” Poster (25 x 25 inches, $8.99). This is a
classic image: Frodo Baggins, played by Elijah Wood, holds the One Ring in
his hand. The expression on his face—a mixture of disbelief at its significance
and wonder at its power, so great that it throws an entire world into war—sums
up the trilogy perfectly. The One Ring is a burden, and destiny chose him to
carry it to Mordor for its destruction. (The variant poster, ‘B,’ shows the same
scene, but Frodo is looking down at the ring.)
2. The One Ring in two editions: a door poster (21 x 62 inches, $12.99) and a
smaller poster (25 x 36 inches, $9.99). Pictured is a bold, simple, and elegant
design, featuring the One Ring juxtaposed against a black background.
3. Classic Map of Middle-earth Foiled Dufex Poster (25 x 35 inches, $24.99).
Printed on silver foil-lined board using UV transparent inks, this poster is then
enhanced by hand with engravings to give it a unique visual effect.
4. Bodeleian Library Hobbit Exhibition Posters. Using Tolkien’s own art for
The Hobbit, these three utterly charming and delightful illustrations were reprinted as library exhibition posters, including the wraparound cover to The
Hobbit. Available from The Tolkien Society (www.tolkiensociety.com) and
from the Bodeleian Library at Oxford University.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

85

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

86 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

5. Gandalf and Frodo Mines of Moria Poster (27 x 40 inches, $19.95). From The
Fellowship of the Ring, this poster shows a contemplative moment that is shared
between Gandalf and Frodo as they sit in the Mines of Moria: Frodo laments
that he has been given the Ring and wishes none of this had ever happened,
and with his wizard’s wisdom Gandalf replies, “So do all who live to see such
times, but that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do
with the time that is given to us.”

Poster Sources
Literally hundreds of posters—unofficial and official, non-film related and
film-related, and book-related—have been published. As expected, the bulk of
what’s currently available are film tie-ins, ranging in size from mini-posters (16 x
20 inches) to door-size (5 feet tall!), in full color and printed on glossy stock, with
retail prices of $20–$30.
A detailed, encyclopedic listing of every poster is beyond the scope of this
book; however, the Websites listed have online catalogs, in color, with supplementary information on size and, where applicable, source material.
There is no single source that provides all the posters, but here’s where to
check out the current selection:
u The official Lord of the Rings Web store (www.lordoftherings.net/
index_flat_shop.html), located on the official Website for the movie.
u The Official Lord of the Rings Fan Club (www.lotrfanclub.com). Members pay an annual fee and get, among other benefits, a 10-percent
discount on merchandise; everyone else can register and pay full retail.
Although the fan club Web store does duplicate the inventory of the
movie Web store, it also offers some posters that are not available anywhere else.
u Lordoftheringshop.com (www.lordoftheringsshop.com). Not affiliated
with the film. There are numerous Web stores that offer Tolkien
merchandise, but this one is fairly comprehensive in its selection of
inventory, which is listed alphabetically and thematically for quick
reference. Its poster selection is extensive and organized by movie
for easy access.
u AllPosters.com (www.allposters.com). Not affiliated with the film. A
Web store with a wide selection of Tolkien posters. (Type in “lord of
the rings” in the search engine).
u The Tolkien Society (www.tolkiensociety.org). A nonprofit organization
in England, its poster selection includes four color images from The
Hobbit with Tolkien’s own illustrations, published to promote Tolkien
exhibits at the Bodeleian Library in England.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

86

10/28/2003, 10:00 AM

u 87

PRINTED PRODUCTS

u TolkienTown.Com (www.tolkientown.com). Billing itself “The
World’s Largest Tolkien Store,” it has an impressive line of posters,
including some that are out of print.
u The Tolkien Shop (www.tolkienshop.com) offers an excellent selection
of out-of-print posters. This retail store, located in the Netherlands, is
run by a longtime fantasy fan, Rene van Rossenberg, who is a learned
lore-master and a Tolkien expert of the first rank.

Lithographs and Photographs
Lurtz (actor Lawrence Makoare) Photograph (Decipher, $35). An edition of 140
produced for the LotR Fan Club, this 8 x 10-inch glossy photo was signed by Makoare
at the San Diego Comicon 2002, and comes with a certificate of authenticity.
Witch-king Lithograph (Decipher, $20). A limited edition lithograph of 3,000
copies, this is a scene from The Fellowship of the Ring, when the Witch-king
confronts Frodo at Weathertop. Measures 12 x 16 inches, printed on archival
paper. (Available only through the LotR Fan Club.)
Sauron Lithograph (Decipher, $20). A limited edition of 3,000 copies, this is a
scene from The Fellowship of the Ring in which the One Ring glows on the finger of
Sauron as he prepares for battle. Measures 12 x 16 inches, printed on archival
paper. (Available only through the LotR Fan Club.)
Cave Troll Lithograph (Decipher, $20). A limited edition of 1,500 copies, this is a
scene from The Fellowship of the Ring, when the Fellowship is attacked in the Mines
of Moria by a company of orcs and a cave troll. Measures 12 x 16 inches, printed on
archival paper. (Available only through the LotR Fan Club.)
The Fellowship of the Ring Lithograph (Decipher, $18). No limitation number
stated. A scene of the forming of the Fellowship at the Council of Elrond.
Balrog Lithograph (Decipher, $20). A limited edition of 1,500 copies, this is a scene
from The Fellowship of the Ring, when the Balrog and Gandalf face off at Khazad-dûm.
Gimli (actor John Rhys-Davies) Photograph (Decipher, $35). A numbered edition
of 200 produced for the LotR Fan Club, this 8 x 10-inch glossy photo is signed by
Davies and comes with a certificate of authenticity bearing the number of the photo.

Art Prints, Giclée Prints, and Original Art
Though there has been a wealth of Tolkien art published in every conceivable
format, art prints—typically sold through galleries or directly from the artists—are
the exception, not the rule, because these are normally published by the artists,
who retain copyright to the original art and, thus, reproduction rights.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

87

10/28/2003, 10:00 AM

88 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The economics of printing museum-quality prints has traditionally been out
of reach to all but the most successful artists, because the economy of scale
doesn’t favor small runs—a 30 x 40 print, in full color, in a run of 1,000, could cost
$5,000 or more, depending on where the artist goes to get the printing done.
Typically, an artist will sell 5–10 percent of the print run to recover printing
costs, but it means carrying the majority of the prints in inventory until they sell,
which could be many years.
An increasingly popular alternative is the Giclée (that is, inkjet) print, which
offers several advantages: First, it is possible to achieve a fidelity to the art that
cannot be achieved by conventional printing methods such as offset lithography;
second, it allows the image, after color corrections or whatever other manipulations
the artist makes, to be stored indefinitely and printed on an “as needed” basis, or
printed on demand, in other words; and, third, it allows prints to be made on a
variety of papers, including canvas, to suit the buyer.
The quality of Giclée printing has risen and the costs for the high-end machines (notably the Epson printers) has dropped dramatically, with the result that
Tolkien artists may well start printing their art themselves, instead of being forced
to rely on commercial printers.
Because there is no requirement to carry an inventory with this printing method,
orders will likely be printed as they are received, which eliminates the requirement
of long-term inventory storage.
In terms of papers, the print-buying public has responded enthusiastically to
Giclée prints produced on canvas stock, because these look more like originals,
do not require matting, and do not require glass; in fact, they look like oil paintings, which allows the artist to make minor touch-ups or highlights as needed to
lend a personal touch that lithographic prints lack.
To give you an idea as to size and pricing, the Brothers Hildebrandt offer
most of their Tolkien paintings as signed and numbered Giclée prints. The cover
for their 1977 Tolkien calendar featuring Gandalf is available as a 16 x 20 inch
Giclée print, in an edition of 50 copies, for $200; larger sizes are correspondingly
more expensive: 20 x 32 inches, $325, and 32 x 44 inches, $650.
Traditionally, museum-quality prints are produced in a numbered and signed
edition, and, once that edition has sold out, no further reproductions in any size
are available—good for investors, but not good for collectors who want the image
but don’t want to pay collector’s prices. For these collectors, the “open edition”
(no limitation as to how many are printed) offers a cost-effective alternative.
Because most artists prefer to spend time painting as opposed to handling print
orders, most are represented by galleries that act as middlemen, which is the case
with the Brothers Hildebrandt (www.spiderwebart.com) and Ted Nasmith
(www.chalkfarmgallery.com).
Giclée technology ideally lends itself to self-publishing, so artists’ Websites
are the place to go to see if any prints are available.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

88

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 89

PRINTED PRODUCTS

As more Tolkien-related museum-quality art prints appear on the market,
here’s a quick overview of what you need to know when buying prints.
u Open edition: This term means that the print run is open-ended—
there is no limitation to the number of prints being made. In terms of
collectibility, this means that the print will not rise rapidly in value,
because the artist can, and will, always print more.
u Limited edition: Usually hand-numbered and signed by the artist, the
Certificate of Authenticity specifies the exact number of prints sold.
Because of the limitation, once the print is sold out, prices will rise as
per market demand.
u A remarque: an original sketch, usually in pencil, in the border of a
print. (The remarques for Michael Whelan’s “Gunslinger” print added
$100 to the cost of the print itself.)
u Artist Proof: Usually marked “AP” or “A/P” and sometimes numbered,
these are traditionally the first few copies run off for evaluation purposes
only, to fine-tune the press for the regular print run.
u Most limited edition prints are accompanied by a limitation notice to
show the specifics of the print itself. If buying a print on the secondary
market, ask if a COA (certificate of authenticity) is available.

A Few Words on Original Art
Original art is, and will always be, unique. One-of-a-kind, original art is literally
irreplaceable. For fans wanting to buy original Tolkien art, there are several options:
u Go to major conventions such as the World Science Fiction Convention
or the San Diego Comicon. That is where you will likely see fan and
pro artists selling art directly, at a dealer’s table or in an art show.
u Contact galleries that deal with fantasy artwork. Galleries are in the
business of representing artists and, if they don’t work with the artist of
your choice, can usually locate him and negotiate a price based on fair
market value for an existing work of art. In addition, the gallery can act
as a broker for a commissioned piece. (This is usually, though not always,
more expensive than buying directly from the artist, because galleries
traditionally charge a 50-percent sales commission.)
u Bid at an auction house; all the big-name auction houses now sell on
eBay, offering a range of originals priced from the low to high end.
u The direct approach: Contact the artist directly, through his publisher
or through his Website. The advantage is that this method allows the
buyer to establish a relationship with the artist, which can lead to
early notification of new originals or prints for sale, or notification
when time is available for new commissions.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

89

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

90 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A Few Words on Art Commissions
Want a specific scene from your favorite book? Some artists accept commissions, which they do between their regular assignments.
The ground rules for commissions:
u Down payment: Artists usually want a deposit after accepting the job.
Typically, the deposit is 50 percent, with the balance due before delivery
of the artwork.
u Time: Pro artists juggle several assignments, so commissions are done
in their spare time. For this reason, most commissions take from six to
12 months to complete. Don’t commission an artist unless you are
patient and willing to wait.
u Copyright: The artist retains copyright (the right to make copies). All
you have bought is the physical ownership of the art itself. You own no
reproduction rights.
u Direction: If an artist takes a commission, he’s usually willing to illustrate
a specific scene, with the caveat that he usually doesn’t need to know
every tiny detail—he’s an artist and can visually imagine a scene and
put it on paper. For instance, telling an artist that you want a scene of
the Fellowship walking through the woods during the day is sufficient
art direction—he doesn’t need you to tell him what color clothes Legolas
should be wearing! (Even Tolkien left the details to the reader’s
imagination.)
u Medium: Costs go up as the medium dictates. From inexpensive to
expensive: a pencil sketch, a detailed pencil sketch, a toned pencil sketch
(two colors or more on colored paper), a full color pencil sketch, an
ink sketch, a detailed ink drawing, a detailed ink drawing colored in
watercolor, a watercolor painting, an acrylic or oil painting.
u Size: The bigger the size, the higher the cost.

Calendars
Since 1973, Tolkien’s publishers have had an active calendar publishing program, drawing from the abundance of artwork that adorned the book covers and
interior illustrations. Most of them have been the traditional wall calendar, with
desk and locker calendars supplementing the main line.
Rather appropriately, the first calendar, published by Allen & Unwin in 1973,
reprinted artwork by Tolkien. That same year, Ballantine Books published its first
Tolkien calendar, which featured art by Tolkien, Pauline Baynes, and John Wyatt.
The 1974 calendars from Allen & Unwin and Ballantine Books both featured art by
Tolkien and Pauline Baynes, but in 1975, Ballantine Books broke new ground by
publishing a calendar of all new material produced by a single artist—Tim Kirk,

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

90

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 91

PRINTED PRODUCTS

who had chosen The Lord of the Rings as the subject for his master’s thesis in art.
Up until then, all the calendars were simply titled “The J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”
In the years that followed, thematic Tolkien calendars were published—The
Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and The Silmarillion—but, over the years, the mainstay has been “The J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”
Though U.S. artists have been represented in the calendar publishing program—
notably Tim Kirk, the Brothers Hildebrandt, Michael Hague, Michael Kaluta,
and Stephen Hickman—the art has predominantly been British, drawing on the
work of Ted Nasmith, Roger Garland, and Alan Lee. John Howe is a notable
Canadian artist.
“The J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar” for 2004 (Harper Entertainment), featuring
artwork by Ted Nasmith, is appropriately themed around The Return of the King,
to celebrate the final film in the Peter Jackson trilogy.
Supplementing the pictorial line of calendars from HarperCollins, Cedco publishes a weekly calendar and a student planner with images from the movies. In
addition, New Line Cinema publishes the movie tie-in calendars with stills from
its three films.
The other alternative is the first of four calendars by the Brothers Hildebrandt,
who previously published the 1976–78 Tolkien calendars in the United States,
from Ballantine. A 16-month calendar, “The Tolkien Art of the Brothers
Hildebrandt” (Ronnie Sellers, $13) includes 14 paintings from those previously
published calendars.
For obvious reasons, calendars—unlike books—have a limited shelf life. They
are put up for sale in retail stores by early fall, usually starting in August, and
typically sell best during the Christmas season. After the New Year, existing stock
is marked down by half (or more) to clear the inventory.
Because of their smaller print runs, the early calendars are difficult to find and
have become collectibles in their own right, costing $100–$125. The best place to
find these is eBay, but be sure to read the descriptions carefully—some of them
may be marked from original use.

The cover of the 2002 Fellowship of the Ring movie tie-in
calendar.

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

91

The cover of the 2003 Two
Towers movie tie-in calendar.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

05 Tolkien Chapter 5.pmd

92

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

CHAPTER 6

THE ONE RING REPLICAS

It appears to be a plain, gold band, a simple piece of jewelry, but looks can be
deceiving. A Ring of Power, it is the Master Ring that, if wielded by its creator,
Sauron, will give him dominion over all of Middle-earth. As any of the long history
of ring-bearers might tell you, one does not so much possess the ring as be possessed by it.
For Tolkien fans who have wanted a faithful reproduction of the One Ring
that holds dominion over the other, lesser rings of power—three for the elf kings,
seven for the dwarf lords, and nine for men—the ring was simply not available
legally because no authorized reproduction had been licensed by Tolkien Enterprises.
In 2001, when the movie version of The Fellowship of the Ring predictably
created a resurgence of interest in rings and all things Tolkien, the timing was
right to release ring replicas, and lo, they were forged.
So rare—and so sought after—was the One Ring that the cheaply made $18.95
ring from Applause commanded over $100 on eBay when initially released, because demand was high, but stock was low. Not surprisingly, when an even more
expensive ring appeared—a handsome $299.95 replica from the Noble Collection—
unscrupulous sellers, who offered to sell their rings on eBay, deliberately avoided
mentioning the manufacturer, because the rings were open editions, available directly from the source for hundreds of dollars less than what the rings would get on
eBay from customers ignorant of its general availability.
Even the official movie Website’s store at www.lordoftherings.net did not carry
the Noble Collection replica until months afterward. (I speak with authority on
u 93 U

06 Tolkien Chapter 6.pmd

93

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

94 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

this because I talked to the people running the Website store and learned that they
did not even know of the existence of the One Ring manufactured by the Noble
Collection. Soon afterward, the official Website began stocking it, by which time
the speculators had left, having made their ill-gotten gains on eBay and slunk away.)
The supply has now caught up with the demand, and rings in all sizes with various
metals are plentiful, with prices ranging from $16.95 to $1,500 (in platinum).

The One Ring From Applause LLC
From Applause, for $16.95, is a metal ring plated with gold coloring. With
chain, this ring features the Tengwar inscription.
The first edition, released in time for The Fellowship of the Ring, featured the
ring with chain set in a black cylindrical box, with Tengwar around its perimeter.
The second edition, released in time for The Two Towers, features the ring
with chain set in a resin base resembling lava and lava rock from Mount Doom,
from whence it came.
The size-seven ring is not intended for finger placement; it is intended to be
worn around the neck on its 21-inch chain. More a souvenir than a collectible because of its toy origins and cheap metal, it is $14.99 and can be ordered from New
Line Cinema’s store at www.lordoftherings.net.

The One Ring From Schmuck-Uhren-Noll
From Schmuck-Uhren-Noll, with a price ranging from $199 to $639, depending on the precious metal used, this model uses laser technology to etch the Tengwar
inscription on the inside and outside of the ring itself. Designed to be finger worn,
the ring comes with a leather pouch. It is available in a variety of sizes.
u The sterling silver ring is the least expensive. It comes stored in an
unmarked, dark green pouch, for $199.
u The 8-karat gold ring, stored in a black velvet pouch with gold
overprinting, costs $399.
u The 14-karat gold ring, stored in a black velvet pouch with gold
overprinting, is priced at $499.
u The 18-karat gold ring, stored in a black velvet pouch with gold
overprinting, retails at $639.
Order from www.theonering-shop.com.

The One Ring From Badali Jewelry
An independent jeweler, Paul Badali began manufacturing his replica ring for
sale in 1998. Wrote Badali on his Website (www.baladijewelry.com): “I had no

06 Tolkien Chapter 6.pmd

94

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 95

THE ONE RING

idea that anyone owned the trademarks to J.R.R. Tolkien’s works when I started
selling the rings. A customer asked if I was licensed with Tolkien Enterprises
soon after I started, and I responded ‘Who is Tolkien Enterprises?’”
Badali wisely secured a license and began selling two versions of the One
Ring, as well as some the lesser Rings of Power.
u The Gollum Gold Ring with Necklace. A bronze ring plated with 24karat gold, size 9 3/4, with a 24-inch, gold-plated chain. Comes packaged
in a burgundy drawstring pouch. In plain script ($39.95), black script
($49.95), and red script ($49.95).
u The One Ring is available in 10-karat ($480), 14-karat ($590), 18-karat
($739), and 22-karat ($896), with plain lettering, black antiqued
lettering, and red enamel lettering. (A plain gold ring with no script is
available from $305 and up.) The ring comes in a decorative ring box.
Order from www.badalijewelry.com.

The One Ring From the Noble Collection
This company principally markets its wares through its direct-mail catalog,
though New Line Cinema’s Website carries most of its Tolkien-related items.
u The sterling edition is cast in sterling silver, with laser etching of the
Tengwar inscription. This size-10 ring comes in a small wooden box
with a 20-inch chain and a certificate of authenticity, for $129.
u The solid gold edition features laser etching of the Tengwar
inscription. This size-10 ring comes in an ornate wood box—a
handsome, if gaudy, presentation, for $295.
Order from www.noblecollection.com or from www.theonering.net.

The Jens Hansen Gold & Silversmith
In the window of a jewelry store in New Zealand, a small sign states, simply,
that Jens Hansen made the One Ring—a singular distinction, because Peter Jackson
had hand-picked him to manufacture what is unarguably the most important prop
for the movie.
The late Jens Hansen designed several versions, from which one was selected;
from that, several sizes were made, as required by Jackson. The result was a plain
gold ring, stunning in its simplicity, its elegance—the hallmarks of a Hansen piece
of jewelry.
Sadly, Jens Hansen never lived to see his ring replicas on the big screen.
Jens Hansen’s son, Thorkild, continues the fine work of his father and now offers
replica rings in various precious metals, with prices ranging from $80 to $1,500:

06 Tolkien Chapter 6.pmd

95

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

96 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

u In sterling silver, $80.
u In 9-karat white gold, $260.
u In 14-karat white gold, $475.
u In 18-karat white gold, $725.
u In platinum, $1,500.
u In 8-karat gold, $240.
u In 14-karat gold, $385.
u In 18-karat gold, $530.
Order from www.jenshansen.com.

The Hansen Ring
Among the replicas, if there is one ring
that rules them all, it is the Hansen
ring. As Hansen’s son, Thorkild, points
out on the company’s Website, their
ring—among all the rings currently
available—is closest to what Tolkien
had envisioned:
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be
made of pure and solid gold.
“Can you see any markings on it?”
he asked.
“No,” said Frodo. “There are
none. It is quite plain, and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear.”

And so, too, is the Hansen ring.
Unlike the other rings with the Elvish
script—in the movie, the Hansen ring
was visually enhanced by special
effects—this one is quite plain, and as
manufactured and presented in its
wooden box, it shows neither a scratch
or sign of wear.
A reproduction of the
One Ring, manufactured
by Jens Hansen (New
Zealand), the firm that
designed the One Ring in
various sizes for the movie
trilogy.

Though some will undoubtedly prefer the more gaudy replica rings with the
inscription emblazoned around their bands, I think most Tolkien purists would
appreciate the beauty of the Hansen ring, which is a lovely piece of jewelry, its
literary significance notwithstanding.
From the Jens Hansen Website (www.jenshansen.com):
The movie’s Art Direction team (later nominated for an Academy
Award for their work on the set) first approached Jens Hansen in
March 1999. From here, 15 prototypes were submitted. They all
boasted the same elegant simplicity but came in a variety of weights
and finishes. From this extensive collection, a decision was made
and the final design for the One Ring was selected.

06 Tolkien Chapter 6.pmd

96

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

u 97

THE ONE RING

Jens and his son Thorkild then had to make the One Ring scaled
for different scenes and sized to suit the various owners of the Ring.
We all know that there is only One Ring, but for the film more than
40 variations were needed, from smaller, solid gold versions that
perfectly fit Hobbit’s fingers, to the one seen in the prologue,
spinning and turning through the air. With a diameter of a massive
8 inches, this ring obviously couldn’t be made of solid gold, so steel
was used, it was cut on a lathe and then plated.
We are not an authorized or official licensee for any of The
Lord of the Rings movie jewelry or merchandise, and we would hate
to add to any confusion regarding the marketing or ownership rights
of the One Ring. However, since the high profile launch of The
Fellowship of the Ring, and the impending premier of The Two
Towers movie release, interest and requests from discerning
individuals has been so high, that we have decided to make faithful
replicas for those who wish to own the genuine article.

06 Tolkien Chapter 6.pmd

97

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

CHAPTER 7

LICENSED MOVIERELATED COLLECTIBLES

Decorative Items
Candle Holders
LotR: Witch-king Candle Holder (The Noble Collection, $21.95). A votive holder,
with four sword-shaped pieces attached to the crown, extending it to 11 inches tall.
LotR: Balrog Candle Holder (The Noble Collection, $39.95). Made of resin, this
8.5-inch high holder glows when a candle is lit and placed in its holder.

Ornaments
LotR: Frodo and Bilbo Ornament (Department 56, $9.95). Measures 2.5 inches
high, this shows Frodo and Bilbo together, with a large One Ring at its base.
LotR: Saruman Ornament (Department 56, $9.95). Measuring 3.5 inches, this resin
ornament shows Saruman holding his staff, with the One Ring at the base.
LotR: Arwen Ornament (Department 56, $9.95). Measuring 3.5 inches high, this
ornament shows Arwen astride her horse.

Globes
LotR: Galadriel Waterglobe (Department 56, $24.95). Made of resin and glass,
measuring 6.25 inches tall, this figurine of Galadriel is mounted atop a sculpted
base.
u 99 U

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

99

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

100 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

LotR: Hobbits in Hiding Waterglobe (Department 56, $39.95). Made of resin and
glass, measuring 7.5 inches tall, this shows the hobbits hiding from a Ringwraith.
The design is ingenious—the hobbits are in a protective ledge, encircled by a globe,
which is seemingly held in place from above, by the large, ominous hand of a
Ringwraith.
LotR: Gollum Encounter Snow Globe (Department 56, $44.95). Measuring 6 inches
tall, this resin and glass snow globe is the best this company offers: Gollum is reaching
down to Frodo and Sam; the globe itself rests on a rocky base. Very imaginative,
very attractive.

Clothing and Apparel
All of the shirts and hats mentioned in the following sections are official movie
tie-in merchandise, distributed solely by New Line Cinemas (shop.newline.com).
The costumes listed are manufactured and distributed by Rubie’s Costume Company (www.rubies.com).

Shirts
LotR Arwen babydoll shirt ($16.95). Blue design of Arwen’s pendant against a
black background. Babydoll t-shirt.
Frodo Lives T-shirt ($16.95). Tan T-shirt with “Frodo Lives” and the first film’s
release date on the front, the “One Ring to rule them all...” poem on the back, and
the movie on the left sleeve. A limited edition (though no limitation notice stated).
LotR Crow Symbol T-shirt ($15.95). Black T-shirt with a gray silhouette of a crow
on the front, with the words “The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers” in silver.
The back has the poem, “One Ring to rule them all....”
LotR Orc Trio youth T-shirt ($14.95). Sized for youngsters only, three orcs on the
front against a black background.
LotR Eye of Sauron T-shirt ($15.95). On the front, the symbol of Sauron, with the
legend, “The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers.” On the back, a large image of
the flaming, unblinking red eye of Sauron.
LotR: The Two Towers adult sweatshirt ($29.95). On the front, an image of the One
Ring, with the legend, “The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers.” A cotton/
polyester blend (90 percent/10percent).
LotR: The Two Towers movie montage T-shirt ($15.95). On the front is printed
“The Two Towers” and an image of the One Ring. On the back, the One Ring is
surrounded by a montage of heroes from the film. Note: A kid’s version is available as well ($13.95).

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

100

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 101

Baseball Caps
Frodo Lives baseball cap ($15.95). White lettering on black, adjustable cloth
closure in back.
LotR logo baseball cap ($14.95). Gold stitching on black, adjustable cloth closure
in back.
Faramir logo baseball cap ($14.95). The most visually attractive baseball cap
offered. Features the logo of Faramir of Gondor, embroidered in light gray with
gold stitching against a dark background, adjustable cloth closure in back.
The Two Towers logo baseball cap ($15.95). Yellow-orange logo on the front, adjustable cloth closure in back.
Hobbit tree baseball cap ($15.00). Green cap with tree logo on the front, LotR
movie logo on back, adjustable cloth strap with metal clasp.
Orc Flag baseball cap ($15). Black cap with gray Orc logo on front, LotR movie
logo on back, adjustable cloth strap with metal clasp.

Costumes
Gandalf Kids’ Costume (Rubie’s Costume, $31.95). Costume includes hat, robe,
satchel, and belt. (Wig, beard, and staff not included.)
Gandalf Kids’ Costume Set (Rubie’s Costume, $44.95). Costume includes hat, robe,
satchel, belt, wig, and beard. (Staff not included.)
Hobbit Kids’ Costume (Rubie’s Costume, $29.95). Costume includes hooded cloak,
vest, and satchel. (Pants and shirt not included.)
Moria Orc Mask (Rubie’s Costume, $49.95). For teens or adults, this latex mask
has a very authentic paint job—detailed, very convincing. The perfect thing for
Halloween.
Ringwraith Kings Costume Set (Rubie’s Costume, $32.95). Costume includes shredded black robe with matching hood and “see-out-only” mesh drape for the face.

Jewelry
The watches listed here have been manufactured for exclusive distribution
through New Line Cinema’s official Web store or through its official fan club
Web store.
LotR: Middle-earth Adult Watch (Fossil, $95). Limited to 2,000 pieces, this watch
comes in a wooden keepsake box, within which is a map of Middle-earth; a limitation notice is attached to the inside lid. The watch, run by a quartz movement, has
three hands and a leather band.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

101

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

102 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

LotR: The Two Towers Eye of Sauron Fossil Watch (Fossil, $125). Limited to
3,000 pieces. Comes in a molded silver case, packaged in a polyresin replica of the
tower at Barad-dûr. Its certificate of authenticity is etched in its base.
LotR watch: Frodo ($49.95). A unisex design with a black leather band and three
hands. Shows Frodo holding the One Ring. Comes in a decorative tin.
LotR watch ($49.95). A unisex design with a black leather band and three hands.
Shows a map of Middle-earth. Comes in a decorative tin.
LotR watch ($49.95). A unisex design with a black leather band and three hands. A
black face with gold lettering, the inscription, in Elvish, is the “One Ring to rule
them all...” poem.
LotR: Argonath Adult Watch ($49.95). The face of the watch has an image of the
Argonath. The gold-colored watch, with the “One Ring” inscription on its perimeter,
has a black leather band and comes in a gift tin.

Standups
These are life-size cardboard cut-outs of favorite characters from the movies. (If you want to impress your friends, tell them you hobnob with wizards and
hobbits. Take your picture standing next to a Gandalf or Frodo standup, but use
a flash to flatten the lighting to make it look more convincing, though only fools
of a Took will be taken in by this ruse!)
Life-size Frodo Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Frodo (actor Elijah Wood)
dressed in his walking garb (green cloak, brown jacket/shirt and pants), he is holding Sting. Height: 4 feet, 2 inches.
Life-size Gandalf Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Gandalf the Grey (actor
Ian McKellen) holding his wizard’s staff. Height: 5 feet, 11 inches.
Life-size Hobbit Standup (Advanced Graphics, $39.95). This standup is one single
piece depicting the four hobits: Frodo Baggins (actor Elijah Wood), Sam Gamgee
(Sean Austin), Peregrin “Pippin” Took (Billy Boyd), and Meriadoc “Merry”
Brandybuck (Dominic Monaghan). Height: 4 feet, 5 inches.
Life-size Saruman Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Saruman (actor
Christopher Lee) holding his wizard’s staff. Height: 6 feet, 3 inches.
Life-size Talking Gollum Standup (Advanced Graphics, $39.95). Height: approximately 3 feet. This standup has a motion-detecting voicebox that emits three phrases:
“My Precious!”, “You filthy little thieves!”, and “You stole it, My Precious, and we
wants it!” (This one’s perfect for the porch on Halloween.)
Gollum and Sméagol Talking Life-size Standups (Advanced Graphics, $59.95).
Gollum is approximately 3 feet tall, Sméagol 3 feet, 4 inches, both pictured together
on this standup. Nasty Gollum utters three phrases (same as the talking Gollum
standup), but nice Sméagol says, “Rock and pool, is nice and cool, so juicy sweet!”

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

102

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 103

Life-size Aragorn Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Aragorn, a.k.a. Strider,
(actor Viggo Mortensen) holding his sword. Height: 5 feet, 9 inches.
Life-size Gandalf the White Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). No longer
Gandalf the Grey, Gandalf (actor Ian McKellen) is now dressed in white and is the
head of the council. Height: 5 feet, 11 inches.
Life-size Gimli and Legolas Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). This single
standup pictures both Gimli the Dwarf (actor John Rhys-Davies) and Legolas the
Elf (actor Orlando Bloom). Height: 5 feet, 10 inches.
Life-size Legolas Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Legolas Greenleaf (actor
Orlando Bloom) stands peering into the distance. Height: 5 feet, 10 inches.
Life-size Talking Sméagol Standup (Advanced Graphics, $29.95). Stands 3 feet,
4 inches. Uses a motion-detecting voicebox that utters, “Rock and pool, is nice
and cool, so juicy sweet! My only wish, to catch a fish, so juicy sweet!”

Action Figures and Dolls
Toy Biz
Manufactured by a division of Marvel Comics, Toy
Biz offers the collector an affordable set of articulated,
poseable figures (that is, “dolls”) in collector’s boxes.
Unlike the Sideshow/Weta line with limited runs, the
Toy Biz line is geared toward the mass market, with distribution through major toy-store chains and other highvolume retail outlets.
These action figures are poseable and are designed
for action play; the Elrond figure, for instance, has a
sword attack action.
From Toy Biz, a Black
Rider and his steed.

The Fellowship of the Ring

6-inch Action Figure Assortment #1
1. Frodo, with sword attack action and Ringwraith base.
2. Strider, with sword-drawing and slashing actions.
3. Newborn Lurtz, with realistic battle attack action.
4. Legolas, with dagger-slashing and arrow-launching action.
5. Witch-king Ringwraith, with sword-lunging action.

6-inch Action Figure Assortment #2
1. Samwise Gamgee, with Moria Mines goblin battle base.
2. Gandalf, with light-up staff action.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

103

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

104 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

3. Saruman, with magic-floating Palantir on base.
4. Gimli, with battling axe-swinging action.
5.

Orc Overseer, with dungeons of Isengard newborn Uruk-Hai.

6-inch Action Figure Assortment #3
1. Traveling Bilbo, with Bag End diorama and traveling gear.
2. Strider, with arrow-launching action.
3. Elrond, with Elven sword-attack action.
4. Orc Warrior, with axe-hacking and arrow-launching actions.

6-inch Twin Packs Assortment #1
Two action figures from a pivotal movie scene.
1. Lurtz, with bow-attack action vs. Boromir, with battle-attack action.
2. Merry and Pippin, vs. Moria Orc, with Moria Mines battle attack
action.

6-inch Twin Packs Assortment #2
1. Samwise Gamgee and Frodo, with Elven boat accessory.
2. Uruk-Hai Warrior, with sword & shield battling action vs. Gimli
with axe-throwing action.

Collector Series Assortment #1
1. Gandalf.
2. Frodo.
3. Arwen.

Collector Series Assortment #2
1. Aragorn.
2. Galadriel.
3. Gimli.

Other
1. Deluxe Horse and Rider Assortment.
2. Electronic 10-inch Cave Troll.
3. Bow ’n Arrow.
4. Electronic Middle-earth Sword.
5. Light ’n Sound Sting Sword.
From Toy Biz, Arwen Evenstar and
Frodo “Deluxe Horse and Rider Set.”

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

104

6. Lord of the Rings Deluxe Gift Pack.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 105

The Two Towers: Gandalf the White (Toy Biz, $11.95). Fully articulated, poseable
character replica, 6 inches high.
The Two Towers: Gondorian Ranger (Toy Biz, $11.95). Fully articulated, poseable
character replica, 6 inches high.
The Two Towers: Aragorn and Brego (Toy Biz, $24.95). A set of two pieces, each
articulated and poseable. Aragorn and his horse, Brego, each 6 inches high.
The Two Towers: Bilbo Figure (Toy Biz, $28.95). An articulated piece, Bilbo is drawing Sting from its sheath, 12 inches high.
The Two Towers: Legolas Figure (Toy Biz, $28.95). An articulated piece, Legolas
prepares for battle, arrow and bow in hand, 12 inches high.
The Two Towers: Talking Treebeard (Toy Biz, $35.95). An articulated, poseable
action figure. It requires three AA batteries and, with its voice chip, speaks several
digitized phrases: “Treebeard, some call me!”, “I told Gandalf I would keep you
safe, and safe is where I’ll keep you!”, “I am not a tree, I am an Ent!”, “Little
orcs, burarum,” and “Burarum, don’t be hasty!”
The Two Towers: Witch-king Ringwraith (Toy Biz, $28.95). An articulated, poseable
action figure, 12 inches high.

Plush Replicas and “Bobbing Head” Dolls
Note: Regarding “bobbing head” dolls—what would J.R.R. Tolkien have
thought?
Frodo Plush Character Replica ($24.95). Distributed by New Line Cinema, this
plush doll, with molded plastic arms, legs, and head, measures 12 inches high.
Aragorn (Strider) Bobbing Head Doll (Upper Deck, $14.95). Packaged in a
character-specific window box, 7 inches tall.
Boromir Bobbing Head Doll (Upper Deck, $14.95). Packaged in a characterspecific window box, 7 inches tall.
Frodo Bobbing Head Doll (Upper Deck, $14.95). Packaged in a character-specific
window box, 6 inches tall.
Gandalf Bobbing Head Doll (Upper Deck, $14.95). Packaged in a character-specific
window box, 8 inches tall.
Gimli Bobbing Head Doll ($14.95). Packaged in a character-specific window box,
7 inches tall.
Merry [Merriadoc Brandybuck] Bobbing Head Doll ($14.95). Packaged in a
character-specific window box, 6 inches tall.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

105

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

106 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Pippin [Peregrin Took] Bobbing Head Doll ($14.95). Packaged in a characterspecific window box, 6 inches tall.
Sam [Samwise Gamgee] Bobbing Head Doll ($14.95). Packaged in a characterspecific window box, 6 inches tall.

Board Games and Puzzles
The Fellowship of the Ring Board Game (Reveal Entertainment, $23.95). Game
contains a playing die, 14 game tiles, 74 ring cards, 12 character cards, and 6 metalized rings.
The Lord of the Rings Chess Set (Hasbro Games, $39.95). The cardboard chess
board measures 15 x 19 inches; the pieces, made of plastic, are tinted pewter
(heroes) or bronze (villains), and stand approximately 3 inches high. For the heroes,
the pieces include: Sam Gamgee as the pawn pieces, Boromir as the rooks, Aragorn
as the knights, Frodo as the bishops, Galadriel as the Queen, and Gandalf as the
King. For the villains, the pieces include: an orc warrior as the pawns, an orc overseer as the rooks, Lurtz as the knights, the Cave Troll as the bishops, a Ringwraith
as the Queen, and Saruman as the King.
Risk, The Lord of the Rings Edition (Hasbro Games, $34.95). Modeled after the
classic board game Risk, this is the battle not for Earth, but Middle-earth.
Frodo & Sam Poster Puzzle (Wrebbit, $14.95). A collage of images featuring
Frodo and Sam. When completed, this 500-piece puzzle measures 25 x 36 inches.
Gandalf the White Poster Puzzle (Wrebbit, $14.95). A collage of images featuring Gandalf the White. When completed, this 500 piece puzzle measures 24 x 36
inches.
The Lord of the Rings Golden Hall, Edoras 3-D Puzzle (Wrebbit, $24.95). This is
a 3-D jigsaw puzzle of the home of King Théoden. When assembled, this 700piece puzzle measures 9 inches high x 18 inches wide x 20.5 inches long.
The Lord of the Rings Orthanc Tower, Isengard 3-D Puzzle (Wrebbit, $19.95).
This is a 3-D jigsaw puzzle of 409 pieces that, when assembled, measures 6 inches
wide x 6 inches long x 27 inches high.

Computer Software
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring CD-ROM Activity Studio (IMSI,
$24.95). For Windows PC only, this CD-ROM includes: a print room, in which you
can print out color images from the movie as various printed product, such as bookmarks and posters; a Character Profile section, with info on all the major characters
and printable scroll posters of each; screensavers and wallpaper for your computer;
video extracts from the film; Web links; and the Paint and Create studio, where
character line drawings can be printed as greeting cards, posters, and so on.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

106

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 107

The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers CD ROM, Mousepads, and Bookmark
Souvenir Set ($24.95). Available exclusively through New Line Cinema, this CDROM (for Windows PC only) includes a desktop calendar and personal organizer, three screensavers, and a selection of desktop wallpapers. Also included
are a fan folder and two mouse pads.
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Activity Studio (IMSI, $24.95). For Windows PC only, this Activity Studio is similar to The Fellowship of the Ring edition,
featuring a print room (to print out images as various products), character profiles, an interactive map of Middle-earth, screen savers, wallpaper, puzzles, a quiz, a paint-and-create
studio, and a video trailer of The Two Towers movie.
CD Cardz Set 1: Frodo, Gandalf, Aragorn, and Ringwraiths (SeriousUSA, $19.95). Designed for insertion
in a computer, these CD-ROMs shaped like trading
cards include “highlights, screensavers, film trailers, and
sound effects.” Because of the unconventional shape,
these will not play in a slot-loading computer tray.
CD Cardz Set 2: The Two Towers (SeriousUSA, $14.95).
Another set of four, with images of Frodo, Gandalf,
Aragorn, and the Rightwraiths. These CD-ROM “cards”
feature “character bios, photo gallery, behind the scenes,
postcards, screensavers, wallpaper, and more.”

A CD-ROM card for The
Lord of the Rings: The
Two Towers.

Sideshow/Weta
The Weta Workshop has been immersed for the last five years in
the conceptualizing, creation and on-set operation of the creatures,
miniatures, armor, weapons and special make-up effects for the
three epic films. Weta’s focus has been to create a unified look
throughout the three films while capturing the essence of the
books.... It is the same Weta designers and technicians that have
created the different armies and creatures within Middle-earth that
have chosen to create the high quality collectibles under the
Sideshow/Weta brand. The integrated experience that these
designers and technicians have resulted in the most authentic figure
and miniature collectibles possible.
—From the series 4 brochure
The film has spawned numerous tie-in products, running the gamut of the
silly (bobbing head dolls) to the predictable (One Ring replicas), but this line of
hand-painted collectible busts and figures, produced in limited runs, are collectibles
of the highest possible quality. Ranging in size from miniatures to 17-inch figures,
Sideshow/Weta is now offering high-end collectibles, including a hand-painted
bronze sculpture of Gandalf ($4,995), limited to 36 pieces.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

107

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

108 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A display of Sideshow/Weta collectibles at the 2002 San Diego Comicon. (Photo courtesy of
Colleen Doran.)

For fans who want a truly memorable collectible with which to remember the
films, a selection of busts and figures from this collection are certifiably collectibles. They have intrinsic value and will rise in price over time after their
retirement.

The Fellowship of the Ring Series 1
Gandalf the Grey Figure ($125). Constructed of polystone, 12.5 inches high, weighs
10 pounds.
Gandalf the Grey Bust ($60). Constructed of polystone, 9.25 inches high, weighs
5 pounds.
Orc Crowfaced Helm ($25). Metal helm, approximately 4 inches high, weighs 3
pounds.
Orc Squinter Helm ($25). Metal helm, approximately 5 inches high, weighs 3
pounds.
Orc Trapjaw Helm ($25). Metal helm, approximately 5.5 inches high, weighs 3
pounds.
Orc Hide Helm ($25). Metal helm, approximately 5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Aragorn, Son of Arathorn Bust ($60). Polystone, 8.5 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
Frodo Baggins Bust ($50). Polystone, 6.75 inches high, weighs 2 pounds.
Frodo Baggins Figure ($100). Polystone, 9 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Lurtz Figure ($125). Polystone, 14.5 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

108

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 109

Moria Orc Swordsman Bust ($60). Polystone, 7.5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Orc Overseer Bust ($60). Polystone, 6.5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Orc Overseer Figure ($125). Polystone, 10.5 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
Peregrin Bust ($50). Polystone, 6.75 inches high, weighs 2 pounds.

Series 2
Legolas Greenleaf Figure ($125). Polystone, 12.5 inches
high, weighs 6 pounds.
Gimli’s Helm ($25). Metal helm, 5 inches high, weighs 3
pounds.
High Elven Infantry Helm ($25). Metal helm, 6 inches
high, weighs 3 pounds.
Númenorian Infantry Helm ($25). Metal helm, 6 inches
high, weighs 3 pounds.
Orc Iron Cap Helm ($25). Metal helm, 5 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
Boromir, Son of Denethor Bust ($60). Polystone, 8 From Sideshow/Weta, a
close-up of the Legolas
inches high, weighs 4 pounds.
Greenleaf sculpture.

Gimli, Son of Glóin Bust ($60). Polystone, 7.5 inches
high, weighs 5 pounds.
Lurtz, Uruk-Hai Captain Bust ($60). Polystone, 6.5 inches high, weighs 6 pounds.
Moria Orc Swordsman Figure ($125). Polystone, 9.5 inches high, weighs 6 pounds.
Númenorian Infantryman Bust ($60).
Polystone, 9.25 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
Orc Pitmaster Figure ($125). Polystone, 10.25
inches high, weighs 4 pounds.
Orc Warrior Figure ($125). Polystone, 8.38
inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
Samwise Gamgee Bust ($50). Polystone, 6.5
inches high, weighs 2 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of an orc swordsman.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

109

Uruk-Hai Scout Bust ($60). Polystone, 9.25
inches high, weighs 6 pounds.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

110 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Series 3
Elendil’s Helm ($25). Metal helm, 5.5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Gandalf’s Hat ($25). Polystone, 6.5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Isildur’s Helm ($25). Metal helm, 5.75 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.
Moria Orc’s Helm ($25). Metal helm, 5 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
Bilbo Baggins Bust ($50). Polystone, 6.25 inches high,
weighs 2 pounds.
Cleaved Orc Bust ($60). Polystone, 6.5 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
High Elven Infantry Bust ($60). Polystone, 9.75 inches
high, weighs 4 pounds.
From Sideshow/Weta, a
close-up view of the head
of a Black Rider steed.

Meriadoc Figure ($100). Polystone, 9.5 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
Merry Brandybuck Bust ($50). Polystone, 6.25 inches
high, weighs 2 pounds.

Nazgûl Steed Bust ($75). Polystone, 12 inches high,
weighs 7 pounds.
Orc Brute Figure ($125). Polystone, 11.5 inches high,
weighs 8 pounds.
Orc Soldier Bust ($60). Polystone, 7.25 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
Samwise Gamgee and Bill the Pony Figure ($150).
Polystone, 9.5 inches high, weighs 14 pounds.
Saruman the White Figure ($150). Polystone, 12.75
inches high, weighs 14 pounds.

Series 4

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of Saruman the
White, as he communicates
with the Dark Lord,
Sauron, using a Palantir.

Aragorn, Son of Arathorn Figure ($125). Polystone, 11.5 inches high, weighs 5
pounds.
Arwen Evenstar Bust ($60). Polystone, 11.5 inches, weighs 5 pounds.
Arwen Evenstar Figure ($125). Polystone, 11.5 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

110

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 111

Dwarven Lord Bust ($60). Polystone, weighs 3 pounds,
size not available.
Moria Orc Archer Bust ($60). Polystone, weighs 3
pounds, size not available.
Moria Orc Archer Figure ($125). Polystone, 9.5 inches
high x 9 inches deep x 5 inches wide, weight not available.
Ringwraith Bust ($65). Polystone, 9 inches high, weighs
5 pounds.
Uruk-Hai Scout Swordsman Figure ($125). Polystone,
11.75 inches high, weighs 6 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of an orc archer
in the Mines of Moria.

Series 5
(Announced but no details.)

The Two Towers Series 1 Busts
Gríma Wormtongue Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000
hand-numbered pieces. Polystone, 7.75 inches high,
weighs 4 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of an Uruk-Hai
swordsman.

Lady Galadriel Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000 handnumbered pieces. Polystone, 8 inches high, weighs 3
pounds.
Legolas Greenleaf Bust ($60). Limited edition of 3,000
hand-numbered pieces. Polystone, 8.25 inches, weighs
6 pounds.

Saruman the White Bust ($60). Limited edition of 3,000
hand-numbered pieces. Polystone, 8.5 inches, weighs 6
pounds.

The Two Towers Series 1 Figures
Easterling Soldier Figure ($125). Limited edition of
2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Gary Hunt.
Polystone, weighs 10 pounds, size not available.
Gimli, Son of Glóin Figure ($125). Limited edition of
2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Jamie
Beswarick. Polystone, 9 inches high x 6.5 inches wide x
12 inches deep, weighs 6 pounds.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

111

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of an Easterling
Soldier.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

112 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Gandalf the White Figure ($125). Limited edition of
3,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Gary Hunt.
Polystone, weighs 10 pounds, size not available.

The Two Towers Series 2 Busts
Galadhrim Soldier Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000
hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Heather Kilgour.
Polystone, 9.75 inches high, weighs 7 pounds.
From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of Gandalf the
White bearing his wizard’s
staff.

Gandalf the White Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000
hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Gary Hunt.
Polystone, weighs 8 pounds.
Grishnákh Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000 handnumbered pieces, sculpted by Jamie Beswarick.
Polystone, 6.25 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.

Uruk-Hai Berserker Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000
hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Jonny Brough.
Polystone, 10 inches high, weighs 8 pounds.

The Two Towers Series 2 Figures
Galadhrim Archer Figure ($125). Limited edition of
2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Roger Lewis.
Polystone, 17.25 inches high,
weighs 12 pounds.
Gríma Wormtongue Figure
($125). Limited edition of
2,000 hand-numbered pieces,
sculpted by Mike Asquith.
Polystone, 11.5 inches high,
weighs 10 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
bust of an Uruk-Hai
Beserker, the front-line
“shock” troops, who were
first into battle.

Ugluk, Uruk-Hai Captain
Figure ($125). Limited edition of 2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Mike
Asqith and Jamie Beswarick. Polystone, 11.25 high,
weighs 10 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a sculpture
of a Galadhrim Archer.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

112

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 113

The Two Towers Series 3 Busts
Éomer Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by
Greg Tozer. Polystone, 8 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
King Théoden Bust ($60). Limited edition of 2,000 handnumbered pieces, sculpted by Virginia Lee. Polystone,
8.25 inches tall, weighs 5 pounds.
Uruk-Hai Swordsman Bust ($60). Limited edition of
2,000 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Greg Tozer.
Polystone, 9 inches tall, weighs 5 pounds.
The Witch-king of Angmar Bust ($60). Limited edition
of 1,500 hand-numbered pieces, sculpted by Mike
Asquith. Polystone, 11.5 inches high, weighs 3 pounds.

Exclusives
The Watcher in the Water Statue ($250). Limited edition of 750 pieces. Polystone, 10.5 inches high, 15.75
inches wide and 10.5 inches deep, weighs 20 pounds.
Bilbo Baggins Statue ($100). Limited edition of 1,000.
Polystone, 8.5 inches high, weighs 5 pounds.
Boromir, Son of Denethor Statue ($125). Limited edition of 2,000. Polystone, 11.5 inches high, weighs 6
pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of the Witchking, the Lord of the
Nazgûl.

Witch-king of Angmar Statue ($150). Limited edition
of 1,000, sculpted by Xander Forterie. Polystone, 16
inches high, weighs 18 pounds.
Orc Legion Helm ($25). Metal helm, 6.75 inches high,
weighs 3 pounds.
Orthanc ($95). Limited edition of 750 copies. Polystone
environment, 11.75 inches tall, with 5.5 inch wide sculpted
base, weighs 6 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
sculpture of the Orthanc
Tower, occupied by
Saruman.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

113

“No Admittance Except on Party Business” Bookends
($60). Sculpted by Oluf W. Hartivgson and Mary
MacLachlan, each polystone bookend measures 6.5
inches high and 5.25 inches deep. (Note: The bookends
are discontinued because Houghton Mifflin is selling
these with a one-volume edition of The Lord of the Rings
for $75.)

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

114 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A one-volume movie tie-in edition of
The Lord of the Rings, by Houghton
Mifflin, buttressed by a pair of Sideshow/
Weta bookends with Bilbo Baggins and
Gandalf the Wizard.

A close-up of a wall plaque showing the
four hobbits hiding from a Black Rider,
who is searching for them. The plaque
was sculpted by Virginia Lee, daughter of
Tolkien artist Alan Lee.

“Escape off the Road” Wall Plaque ($150). Limited edition of 5,000 copies,
sculpted by Virginia Lee (daughter of Alan Lee, Tolkien artist and conceptualizer
for the movies). The piece is signed by Virginia Lee and Weta director Richard
Taylor. Polystone plaque, 15.75 inches wide x 9.5 inches high, weighs 12 pounds.
Ringwraith and Steed Statue ($275). Limited to 5,000 copies. Polystone, 15 inches
high x 16 inches wide x 9 inches deep, weighs 17 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
saddled Black Rider and
his steed.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

114

A close-up of the steed
ridden by a Black Rider.

A back view of the Black
Rider on his steed sculpture.

10/28/2003, 8:57 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 115

The Alan Lee Lithograph and Filmstrip Collectible ($599). A limited edition of
1,000 (and 150 artist proofs) signed by director Peter Jackson, Weta director
Richard Taylor, and illustrator Alan Lee. A lithograph of the conceptual art of
Rivendell by Lee, with four frames cut from an actual reel of film donated by
Jackson, this matted and framed print measures 29 x 29 inches. (Note: The film
frames are backlit with a lighting device.)

From Sideshow/Weta, a numbered, limited
edition color lithograph, matted and framed
with a piece of authentic The Lord of the
Rings film and signed by Alan Lee (artist),
Peter Jackson (director), and Richard Taylor
(Weta creative director).

Cave Troll Bust ($70). Limited to 10,000 pieces. Polystone, weighs 8 pounds, size
unavailable.
The Balrog Statue ($300). Limited to 1,000 pieces. Heavy-weight polystone on a
sculpted base, 13.5 inches high, weighs 25 pounds.
The Cave Troll Figure ($300). Limited to 750 pieces, sculpted by Jamie Beswarick.
Polystone, 14.25 inches high x 10.25 inches wide x 18 inches long, weighs 25 pounds.
The Stone Trolls Statue ($300). Limited to 750 pieces. Polystone, 8 inches high x
10.5 inches deep x 16 inches long, weighs 30 pounds.
Gollum Bust ($250). Polystone, 12.5 inches high x 7.75 inches deep x 7.5 inches
wide, weighs 12 pounds. The Gollum nameplate bears the movie logo of “The
Lord of the Rings” and a hand-numbered edition size.

From Sideshow/
Weta, a bust of
Gollum.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

115

A close-up view
of the Gollum
bust.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

116 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Treebeard Bust ($300). Limited to 1,500 pieces. Heavy-weight polystone, handpainted, on a base. Sculpted by Brigitte Wuest and Daniel Falconer, 17.75 inches
high x 13 inches deep, weighs 15 pounds.

The Lord of the Rings Weapons Sets
The Arms of Aragorn ($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon
set, hand-numbered, the weapons are permanently mounted on the display plaque
and sit on an oval display base. Stands 9.5 inches high x 5.74 inches wide, weighs 3
pounds.
The Arms of Lurtz ($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon set,
hand-numbered, the weapons are permanently mounted on the display plaque and
sits on an oval display base. Stands 11.5 inches high x 7.25 inches wide, weighs 3
pounds.
The Arms of the Fellowship 1: Frodo, Gandalf the Grey, and Aragorn ($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon set, hand-numbered, the weapons
are permanently mounted on the display plaque and sit on an oval display base.
Stands 11.5 inches high x 7.25 inches wide, weighs 3 pounds.
The Arms of the Fellowship 2: Boromir and Merry ($40). Limited edition of 2,500
pieces. A polystone weapon set, hand-numbered, the weapons are permanently
mounted on the display plaque and sit on an oval display base. Stands 9.5 inches
high x 5.75 inches wide, weighs 3 pounds.
The Arms of Gimli ($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon set,
hand-numbered, the weapons are permanently mounted on the display plaque and
sit on an oval display base. Stands 11.75 inches high x 7.25 inches wide, weighs 3
pounds.
The Arms of Legolas, Collection #1 Weapon ($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces.
A polystone weapon set, hand-numbered, the weapons are permanently mounted
on the display plaque and sit on an oval display base. Stands 9.25 inches high x
5.75 inches wide, weighs 3 pounds.
The Arms of the Moria Orcs ($40). Limited edition of
2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon set, hand-numbered,
the weapons are permanently mounted on the display
plaque and sit on an oval display base. Stands 11.75
inches high x 7.5 inches wide, weighs 3 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a miniature reproduction of the
weapons carried by Legolas Greenleaf: a bow and arrow
and a pair of hunting knives, permanently mounted on a
plaque, set on a decorative base.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

116

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 117

The Arms of the Hobbits, Collection #1: Frodo, Samwise, Merry, and Pippin
($40). Limited edition of 2,500 pieces. A polystone weapon set, hand-numbered,
the weapons are permanently mounted on the display plaque and sit on an oval
display base. Stands 9.25 inches high x 5.75 inches wide, weighs 3 pounds.

The Lord of the Rings Medallions
Designed by Weta Workshop, the medallions are
hand-finished with a faux bronze patina, and are accompanied with a Certificate of Authenticity. Numbers 1
through 8 are The Fellowship of the Ring medallions, while
9 through 16 are for The Two Towers.
Medallion #1: The Orcs of Moria ($25). A limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in
diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
The certificate of
authenticity, numbered
and signed by the artist,
that accompanies each
medallion.

Medallion #2: The Nazgûl ($25). A limited edition of
10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter,
weighs 2 pounds.

Medallion #3: The Industry of
Isengard ($25). A limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in
diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #4: The Last Alliance ($25). A limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #5: The Birth of the Uruk-Hai ($25). A limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches
in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.

From Sideshow/Weta, a
medallion of orcs in
profile, titled “The Orcs of
Moria.”

Medallion #6: The Soldiers of the White Hand ($25). A
limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6
inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #7: The Cave Troll ($25). A limited edition
of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighing two pounds.
Medallion #8: The Watcher in the Water ($25). A limited edition of 10,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches
in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #9: The Uruk-Hai Beserkers ($25). A limited edition of 1,000 pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches
in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

117

The base of the “Orcs
of Moria” medallion,
numbered and signed
by the artist.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

118 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Medallion #10: The Ambitions of Grishnákh ($25). A limited edition of 1,000
pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #11: The Return of King Théoden ($25). A limited edition of 1,000
pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #12: The Warg Riders ($25). A limited edition of 1,000 pieces. Made of
polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #13: The Master of Fangorn ($25). A limited edition of 1,000 pieces.
Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #14: The Dilemmas of Sméagol ($25). A limited edition of 1,000 pieces.
Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #15: The Easterlings ($25). A limited edition of 1,000 pieces. Made of
polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.
Medallion #16: The Duel of Light and Fire ($25). A limited edition of 1,000
pieces. Made of polystone, 6 inches in diameter, weighs 2 pounds.

High-End Collectibles
Gandalf the Grey Bronze Statue. Sideshow/Weta has
moved into the realm of high-end collectibles with the
production of its first bronze statue. A limited edition
of only 36 pieces (and four artist proofs), with its edition number engraved on the piece and signed by sculptor Gary Hunt, the sculpture itself is 24 inches high
(with its marble base, 27 inches) and weighs 75 pounds.
The choice for the first statue—one of many to
come, I imagine—is an excellent choice: Gandalf the
Grey, as he battles the Balrog. Made by the traditional
“lost wax” process, the bronze piece is priced on a
sliding scale—copies 1–9, $4,995; 10–18, $5,495; 19–27,
$5,995; and 28–36, $6,495.
Made to order with a 4–6 week delivery schedule,
the bronze statue has a special acid-washed patina on
From Sideshow/Weta, a
Gandalf’s cloak, giving it a weathered look.
limited edition bronze
Appealing to well-heeled collectors who want the
sculpture of Gandalf the
very best, the Gandalf bronze fills the need for the highWizard.
end market, which has largely been ignored by the
licensing effort. One hopes that the program will expand to include bronzes of
other notable characters and creatures, including the Balrog, a Nazgûl, Treebeard,
Gandalf the White when he dramatically reappears before the Fellowship, and so
on.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

118

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 119

Supreme Edition Gollum Replica from Rubies ($250).
Although this replica is not from Sideshow/Weta, it is
an amazing high-end collectible well worth mentioning.
Three feet tall and mounted on a base, this is a prop
replica that looks and feels very real.

The Return of the King
At present time, images and information about the
tie-in collectibles for the third movie have not yet been
released. So far, four have been announced:
A close-up of the
Sideshow/Weta bronze
Gandalf sculpture.

Elrond, Herald of Gil-Galad ($125). Limited to 2,000
pieces. Heavy-weight polystone, hand-painted, on a
base. Statue is 13 inches high x 5 inches wide x 6.25
inches deep, weighs 7 pounds.

Fell Beast and Morgul Lord ($150). Limited to 3,000 pieces, in heavy-weight
polystone, sculpted by Jamie Beswarick and Brigette Wuest. This statue is 10.5
inches high x 5 inches wide x 8.5 inches deep, weighs approximately 7 pounds.
King Elessar Statue: Aragorn, King of Gondor Statue ($125). Limited to 2,000
pieces, in heavy-weight polystone, hand-painted, on a base. Sculpted by Gary Hunt,
12.5 inches high x 5.25 inches wide x 8.5 inches deep, weighs 7 pounds.
Théoden Statue ($125). Limited to 2,000 pieces, in heavy-weight polystone, hand
painted, on a base. Sculpted by Brigette Wuest, 16.5 inches high x 5.5 inches wide x
and 8.25 inches deep, weighs 12 pounds.

Sideshow Collectibles:
Going, Going, Gone!
Sculpture that is no longer being
manufactured is termed “retired.”
Furthermore, once the remaining
stock is sold out, it is not available
through retail outlets. At that point,
the piece has moved in status from “retired” to “sold out” and is generally
not available on the retail market.
However, it will likely resurface in the
secondary collectibles market, albeit at
a higher cost.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

119

Sideshow/Weta posts on its
Website (www.sideshowtoy.com) a section that lists the retired pieces from
The Lord of the Rings collection. That
notice should serve as a final warning
for fans who are interested in a piece
but haven’t yet bought: Buy it now, or
pay higher prices if and when it can be
located through other sources.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

120 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Swords by United Cutlery
Blades are United Cutlery’s sole business. Tolkien fans will be delighted to
learn that, in addition to an impressive line of existing swords and scabbards, the
product line will be fleshed out with hunting knives, fighting knives, staff replicas,
helmet replicas, the Sauron collection, Gimli’s axe replicas, bows, shields, spears,
pikes, crowns, and tiaras.
The designs are by Weta Workshop, which took on the formidable task of
literally outfitting an army of actors—men, dwarves, elves, orcs, and hobbits—
with weapons that had to be designed from scratch. In Sibley’s The Lord of the
Rings: The Making of the Movie Trilogy, Richard Taylor said that “We designed
and made 48,000 pieces of armor and had four people working 10 hours a day just
producing chain mail. We also produced 2,000 weapons, including swords, spears,
pikes and maces, longbows, crossbow, daggers, knives and axes.”
The goal, said Taylor, was to give the weapons distinctive looks—no generic
weapons, as is often the case with fantasy movies that are usually short of budget
and imagination, as well. The result: works of art reproduced as replicas that, like
the Sideshow/Weta line of sculpture, are worth collecting.

Blades
Hadhafang: Sword of Arwen ($310.99). Overall length, 38.125 inches; blade length,
30 inches; blade thickness, 0.25 inches; blade material, tempered 420 J2 stainless
steel, sharpened; hand grip, wood
with an Elven design, solid metal
pommel, rat-tail tang construction.
Rests on a wood display base, silkscreened with an Elven design. Accompanied by a Certificate of Hadhafang Display.
Authenticity printed on parchment.
On the blade, in Sindarin, is Elvish text that translates to: “this blade is called
Hadhafang, a noble defense against the enemy throng for a noble lady.”
A striking blade, this is wielded by Arwen
Evenstar, most notably in a scene from The Fellowship of the Ring in which she draws it to protect herself and Frodo, as Ringwraiths draw their dark blades
and attempt to cross the river to reach them. “If
you want him,” she says, pulling the sword and holding it over her head, “come and claim him!”
Hadhafang Handle.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

120

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

The Sword of
Strider.

The Sword of Strider ($348.99). Overall
length, 47.25 inches; blade length, 36 inches;
blade thickness, 0.25 inches; blade material,
tempered 420 J2 stainless steel; handle material, metal crossguard and pommel, antique
metal finish, genuine leather-wrapped grip,
rat-tail tang construction. Displayed on a wall
plaque with a silkscreened heraldic insignia of
the Kingdom of Gondor.
Accessory: A matching sword scabbard
with companion knife (forthcoming).
Shards of Narsil ($374.99). A limited edition
of 5,000 pieces. Overall length (mounted on
wall plaque), 47 inches; blade material, solid
metal, antiqued metal finish, false edged;
handle material, solid metal crossguard and
pommel, antique silver-plated finish, 24-karat
gold-plated fittings, engraved Elven runes,
leather-wrapped grip, rat-tail tang construction.
The Certificate of Authenticity is signed by
movie production artist, John Howe.
This is historically the most famous sword
in Middle-earth. In a battle against Sauron—
the Last Alliance of Elves and Men—this
sword was wielded by Elendil and broken in
battle. Elendil’s son, Isildur, picked up the
broken hilt and used it to cut off the One Ring
from Sauron’s hand. After the battle, the
shards were collected and subsequently stored
in Rivendell, because legend foretold that it
would one day be reforged when the king
(Aragorn) would return. On the blade, in
Sindarin, is engraved: “Narsil is my name, a
mighty sword; Telchar made me in Nogrod.”

Shards of
Narsil.

Narsil

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

u 121

121

Narsil ($348.99). Overall length, approximately 53 inches; blade thickness, 0.25 inches;
blade material, tempered 420 J2 stainless steel,
false edged; handle material, solid metal
crossguard and pommel, antique silver-plated
finish, 24-karat gold-plated fittings, engraved
Elven runes, leather-wrapped grip with rattail tang construction. Mounted on a wooden
plaque with Elven runes, accompanied by a
Certificate of Authenticity.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

122 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

As legends foretold, the blade that was broken would be restored. Shattered
into shards during battle against Sauron, this is the restored sword.
Uruk-Hai Scimitar ($148.99). Overall
length, approximately 32 inches; blade
thickness, 0.1875 inches; blade material,
high carbon steel, battle worn, with a
tarnished finish, and false edged; hand
grip, leather-wrapped, laminated wood,
full tang construction. Rests on a wall
plaque. Accompanied by a Certificate
of Authenticity.

Uruk-hai.

Forged in the mines of Orthanc, this is the
sword wielded by the Uruk-Hai, the special breed
of Orcs who comprise part of Saruman’s army.
(These Orcs bear on their shields the symbol of
Saruman’s white hand.)
Sword of the Ringwraiths ($348.99). Overall length,
53 inches; blade thickness, 0.25 inches; blade material, acid-etched, tempered, 420 J2 stainless steel,
false edged; hand grip, battle-worn solid metal
crossguard and pommel, with a leather grip, and
rat-tail tang construction. Rests on a wall plaque
with runes.
This is the weapon carried by the dreaded
Ringwraiths, formerly kings of men, corrupted by
evil—known as the Dark Riders of the Nazgûl,
their swords were forged in Mordor.
Sting ($223.99). Overall length, 22 inches; blade
length, 15 inches; blade thickness, 0.25 inches; blade
material, tempered 420 J2 stainless steel with etched
Elven runes; handle material, hardwood handgrip
adorned with an Elven design, solid metal guard
and pommel with antiqued metal finish, rat-tail tang
construction. Mounted on a wall plaque with Elven
runes.
This is the sword discovered by Bilbo Baggins
(in The Hobbit) and given to his nephew, Frodo
Baggins. The blade has a unique quality: It glows

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

122

Sword of the
Ringwraiths.

Sting on wall
plaque.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 123

blue in the presence of orcs. Its inscription is in Sindarin and states,
“Maegnas is my name, I am the
spider’s bane.” (This proves to be
true, when Samwise uses Sting to impale the giant spider Shelob in The
Two Towers).

Sting.

Sting scabbard ($73.99). Overall
length, approximately 18 inches; scabbard material, solid metal collar and
tip, antiqued metal finish, Elven vine
design, genuine leather wrap.

Sting Scabbard.

Sting scabbard belt ($45). Belt measures 1 inch x 6 feet, with scabbard support hangers. (This was manufactured by Blades by Brown, not United Cutlery.)

Glamdring ($348.99). Overall length, approximately 48 inches; blade length, 36 inches; blade
thickness, 0.25 inches; blade material, tempered
420 J2 stainless steel; handle material, solid metal
crossguard and pommel, with antiqued metal finish and engraved Elven runes, leather grip with rattail tang construction.
This is the sword wielded by Gandalf, who used
it to kill a Balrog in The Fellowship of the Ring.
The Elven runes states that this sword was forged
for Turgon, the King of Gondolin.

Glamdring.

The Sword of
the Witch-king.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

123

The Sword of the Witch-king ($348.99). Overall
length, approximately 55 inches; blade length, approximately 40 inches; blade thickness, 0.25 inches;
blade material, tempered 420 J2 stainless steel;
handle material, genuine leather-wrapped
handgrip, solid metal cross guard and pommel with
antique metal finish and engraved designs, rat-tail
tang construction. Mounted on a wall plaque with
Nazgûl designs.
As befitting his most evil stature, this sword is
wielded by the Lord of the Nazgûl, the leader of
the nine Ringwraiths.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

124 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Miniatures
The Shards of Narsil ($59.99). A hand-painted, cold cast
porcelain statue of an Elven princess with the sword’s
shards on a shield. Measures approximately 7.25 inches
high x 8 inches wide x 6 inches deep.
Narsil ($44.99). The sword is upright, its tip imbedded
in a cold-cast porcelain base. The sword measures approximately 11 inches and the base measures 2.5 inches
high.

The Shards of Narsil
Miniature.

Sword of the Ringwraiths ($44.99). The sword is upright, its
tip imbedded in a cold-cast porcelain base. The sword measures approximately 11 inches and the base measures 2.5
inches high.
Sting ($44.99). The sword is upright, its tip imbedded in a
cold-cast porcelain base. The sword measures approximately
7 inches high and the base measures 2.5 inches high.
Glamdring ($44.99). The sword is upright, its tip imbedded
in a cold-cast porcelain base. The sword measures approximately 7 inches and the base measures 2.5 inches high.

Sting Miniature.

Sword of the Witch-king ($44.99). The sword is upright, its tip
imbedded in a cold-cast porcelain base. The sword measures
approximately 11 inches and the base measures 2.5 inches high.

Forthcoming
Timed for release in conjunction with the movie, The
Return of the King, United Cutlery will be shipping six
new products:
u Anduril: The Sword of Aragorn
(a limited edition).
u Fighting Knives of Legolas (set of two).
u Elven Knife of Strider.
u The Sword of Strider Scabbard
(with companion knife and sheath).
Anduril.

u Helm of Gimli (a limited edition).
u Helm of King Elendil (a limited edition).

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

124

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 125

Fighting
Knives of
Legolas.

Elven
Knife of
Strider.

Helm of
Gimli.

Helm of
King Elendil.

Stamps
The stamps listed here are of New Zealand currency and were designed by
Weta Workshop.
LotR: The Two Towers Miniature Sheet First Day Cover Stamp and Envelope Set
($14.95). Six New Zealand stamps in various denominations, with key scenes from
the movie; the illustrative envelope for each depicts Éowyn.
LotR: The Two Towers Set of New Zealand Postcards and Official Stamps ($14.95).
This set includes six New Zealand stamps and six “Maximum” postcards (4 x 5.75
inches).
LotR: The Two Towers Stamp Book ($19.95). Two sets of six stamps in various
denominations. The stamp sets come with a booklet.
LotR: The Two Towers Stamp Presentation Pack ($32.95). A folio (9.5 x 8.25 inches)
inside which are 18 stamps.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

125

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

126 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

LotR: The Two Towers Ultimate Stamp Collection ($306.95). The complete set of
The Two Towers stamps, including: 12 gummed and self-adhesive stamps, six
gummed stamp sheets, stamp booklet of 10 self-adhesive stamps, set of six miniature sheets, set of six “Maximum” cards, two first-day covers, set of six miniature
sheet first day covers, and The Two Towers Presentation Pack, containing all the
limited edition commemorative official stamps.
LotR Framed Stamp Sheets ($39.95). Measuring 8 x 10 inches, with an original
New Zealand stamp sheet, each is matted and framed. Sheets include: Strider,
Boromir, Gandalf and Saruman, Frodo and Sam, Galadriel, and The Guardian of
Rivendell.

Coins
ReelCoinz
ReelCoinz offers two series of LotR collectible coins:
u LotR: The Fellowship of the Ring Collectible Coins (ReelCoinz, $14.95).
Five silver-colored medallions featuring, on the front, a character
(Gandalf, Strider, Frodo, Legolas, Gimli) and, on the back, a circle of
Elvish script. The 1-inch diameter coins are set in a cardboard holder
accompanied with a color booklet and reusable stickers. (Note: These
coins are collectibles, not currency.)
u LotR: The Two Towers Collectible Coins (ReelCoinz, $14.95). Designed
by The Royal Canadian Mint, five nickel alloy medallions featuring, on
the front, casts of Gandalf, Frodo, Sam, Éomer, and Éowyn and, on
the back, the official LotR logo. The medallions are set in a cardboard
case accompanied with reusable stickers.

The British Royal Mint
The British Royal Mint has released a series of coins bearing designs by
engraver Matthew Bonaccorsi, who created 44 different designs. The coins were
introduced at the 2003 American Numismatic Association’s World Fair of Money.
The coins are offered in sets, priced for every budget:
u Low end: An 18-coin set struck in cupronickel, consisting of
uncirculated 50-cent coins (50¢).
u Mid-range: A 24-coin set struck in silver, consisting of uncirculated
$1 coins ($1, New Zealand currency).
u High end: A three-coin set struck in gold ($10, New Zealand
currency).

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

126

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 127

Pobjoy Mint
Pobjoy Mint (www.pobjoy.com) offers a number of The Lord of the Rings
coins, including:
u Gandalf the White on his horse, Shadowfax: 1-ounce Crown, fine
999.9 gold.
u Gimli the dwarf brandishing two battle-axes: 0.50-ounce Crown, fine
999.9 gold.
u Legolas the elf, aiming his bow: 0.20-ounce Crown, fine 999.9 gold,
2,500 minted, $199 (U.S.).
u Aragorn, son of Arathorn: 0.10-ounce Crown, fine 999.9 gold, 3,500
minted, $119 (U.S.).
u Frodo brandishing Sting: 0.04-ounce Crown, fine 999.9 gold, 5,000
minted, $59 (U.S.).
u The Fellowship, Arwen, and Galadriel: in Sterling Silver Proof
(10,000 minted; $59 U.S.) and Uncirculated Cupro Nickel (100,000
minted; $17 U.S.).
Note: The five gold coins are available in a limited edition set of 1,000 ($1,899
U.S.); the presentation box is circular, with a 9-karat replica of the One Ring,
surrounded by the five gold coins.

Miscellaneous Collectibles
Magnets
These magnet sets were all produced for exclusive distribution by New Line
Cinemas.
The Lord of the Rings Heroes Magnet Set ($19.95). Five magnets: the group of
four hobbits, Gandalf and the Fellowship, and three of Frodo.
The Lord of the Rings Villains Magnet Set ($19.95). Five magnets: Saruman, a collage of the movie’s villains, Lurtz, and two of orcs.
The Lord of the Rings Oversized Magnet Set ($9.95). Five larger-sized magnets (5
inches each): Frodo, Gandalf, Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas.
The Two Towers Magnet Set A ($19.95). Five magnets (2.5 x 3.5 inches): the final
movie poster, Sauron’s Orthanc Tower, Sauron’s fortress (Barad-dûr), Legolas,
Aragorn, and Merry and Pippin being carried by Treebeard.
The Two Towers Magnet Set B ($19.95). Five magnets (2.5 x 3.5 inches): Frodo
with Sting drawn, Gandalf the White, the Fellowship, Éowyn, and Uruk-Hai troops.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

127

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

128 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Key Chains
The Lord of the Rings Key Chain Set A (Applause LLC, $9.95). Three key chains
each feature a scene from the movie—Frodo, Bilbo, and the Fellowship. The key
chains measure 2.5 x 3.5 inches.
The Lord of the Rings Key Chain Set B (Applause LLC, $9.95). Three key chains
each feature a portrait from the movie—Aragorn, Arwen, and Legolas. The key
chains measure 2.5 x 3.5 inches.
The Lord of the Rings Key Chain Set C (Applause LLC, $9.95). Three key chains
each feature a portrait—Saruman, Lurtz, and the Orcs. The key chains measure
2.5 x 3.5 inches.
The Fellowship of the Ring Key Chain Set (Applause LLC, $9.95). This set consists
of two metal medallions, each measuring 2.25 inches in diameter. One shows the
Elvish brooch worn by the members of the Fellowship, the other shows the Eye of
Sauron.

A key chain bearing an Elven
leaf design, a tie-in product of
The Fellowship of the Ring.

A key chain that shows “One
Ring to rule them all...” and a
decoration in the center (shown);
on the back, the Eye of Sauron.

The Two Towers Key Chain Set ($12.95). A set of three key chains: the Kingdom
of Rohan, the Uruk-Hai Warriors, and the Eye of Sauron.

Trading Cards
The Fellowship of the Ring Card Set (Topps, $20). Includes 90 foil-stamped images from the movie.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

128

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

LICENSED MOVIE-RELATED COLLECTIBLES

u 129

Playing Cards
The Fellowship of the Ring Playing Cards with Collector’s Tin ($9.95). Distributed
by New Line Cinemas, features two decks of playing cards—a set of heroes and a
set of villains—in a limited edition, numbered, tin case, measuring 3.5 x 6 inches.

Candy
LotR mints ($1.50). A 1.5-ounce pack of mints, in packets with film photos.
LotR sour gummies ($2.50). A 3.5-ounce pack of sour gummies, in packets with
film photos.

Movie Prop Auctions
At www.LordoftheRingsauction.com, you can bid on actual props, cutting room
footage, and other movie memorabilia, unavailable anywhere else.
The bidding mechanism is, of course, eBay, which has become the place where
auction houses specializing in collectibles go to sell their wares.
In the early days, film memorabilia—if not thrown out for lack of storage
space—was given away to interested fans as souvenirs. Disney cels, for instance,
were literally sold in open stacks at Disneyland for $5 each. (Now, these same cels
are being auctioned off at Sotheby’s for many thousands of dollars!)
The advantage of bidding at an authorized site like this is that you can be
assured you are getting the genuine article. Everything is sold with a letter of
authenticity. Buying from the source obviously ensures the provenance of the
piece.

07 Tolkien Chapter 7.pmd

129

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

CHAPTER 8

GAMING AND
MINIATURES

Most moviegoers will be content to see the movie trilogy once, on the large
screen, when it first comes out; a certain percentage of those will buy the VHS or
DVD, because they want their own copy. A smaller percentage will be interested
enough to buy The Lord of the Rings
and, possibly, The Hobbit, but go no
further. And then there are those
who will want to literally immerse
themselves in Middle-earth by becoming active participants and play
board games, role-playing games,
card games, computer games, or participate in a world-wide online game.
Welcome to the world of games
about Middle-earth.
It’s an all-encompassing world in
which one can become totally im- Metal miniatures of Gríma Wormtongue and
mersed, spending hours, possibly days, Saruman, designed to be hand-painted and
at one of the major tournaments used for role-playing games.
worldwide where fans—almost exclusively males, and predominantly young males—gather for a battle royal for significant cash prizes and, just as significant, bragging rights.
A detailed discussion about Tolkien and the various games his work has inspired is, properly, the subject of a separate book. For most readers of this book,
here’s a basic overview of the key players in the field, so to speak.
u 131 U

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

131

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

132 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Fantasy Flight Games (www.fantasyflightgames.com)
The Lord of the Rings ($44.95). Board game. Played on four boards, five players
take on their roles as hobbits—Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, and Fatty—working
to prevent the Ringbearer from being corrupted. As the hobbits move across the
boards, Sauron is on the move, too, toward them, corrupting any hobbit he meets,
causing him to drop out of the game. (If Sauron meets the Ringbearer, he is corrupted and the game ends.) Players can call on Gandalf for help or take matters in
their own hands by using the Ring, which carries its own risk—corruption.
The Hobbit ($42.95). Board game. The goal is to safely traverse the terrain—Edge
of the Wild, the Misty Mountains, the Carrock, Mirkwood, Long Lake, and Desolation of Smaug (the areas scorched by his breath, Erebor and Dale)—to emerge
victorious.
The Lord of the Rings Trivia ($39.95). A board game in which you (or your team)
take on the role of Frodo Baggins and must travel through 14 areas of Middleearth, where you are required to answer questions (prepared by Tolkien experts).
There are 400 trivia cards, with 1,200 questions.
Friends & Foes Expansion ($21.95). Board game. Find friends to help you conquer challenges (Treebeard, Strider, Tom Bombadil, Glorfindel), as you’re pitted
against 30 foes sent to bedevil you (spiders of Mirkwood, orcs of the Red Eye,
cave-trolls, wolf riders, and barrow-wights). Two new scenario boards have been
added (Bree and Isengard).
Sauron Expansion ($24.95). Board game. The tables are turned! One player is
Sauron and seeks to thwart the Fellowship.
The Lord of the Rings: The Confrontation ($19.95). For two players. One player
controls the nine members of the Fellowship, and the other controls Sauron’s minions. Opposing the Fellowship seeking to bring Frodo to Mordor, the dark forces
seek to capture him and save the One Ring from destruction.

Games Workshop: Strategy Battle Games
(us.games-workshop.com)
This company manufactures the licensed tie-in games, which includes The Lord
of the Rings Battle Game, The Fellowship of the Ring, The Two Towers, The Return
of the King, and a supplement game, Shadow and Flame.
These are tabletop battles using miniature figurines and dice to determine
the outcome of an encounter, be it a one-on-one engagement or a large-scale
engagement.
Part of the fun is that, although many of the pieces are metal, some are in plastic
and come with paint sets, so you can literally put on the “war” paint—especially
handy for the minions of evil, like the Uruk-Hai, for which customized paint jobs
are the order of the day.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

132

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 133

For those new to strategy battle gaming, Games Workshop provides a brief
tutorial on what to expect, using the example of a Rider of Rohan who has spotted
a Uruk-Hai scout warrior in advance of a raiding party. A player rolls his dice to
determine who goes first in all three phases of the turn—the move phase, the shoot
phase, and the fight phase.
In each phase, the roll of the dice determines the outcome—the movement of
the pieces, the right to use a weapon, and the result of the battle itself.
Unlike real war, in which anything goes and all’s fair, this mock-battle relies on
rules specified in the rules manual—to impose order on war, an admittedly chaotic
event. Lives (and fortunes) are won, or lost, with a throw of the dice.
Beyond the rulebook, there are several resources upon which to draw: battle
scenarios, rules for specific peoples, clarifications, and playsheets. In other words,
a strategy battle game offers levels of complexity and player commitment.

The Fellowship of the Ring
The principal game is The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Strategy
Battle Game ($40). Designed for two or more players, it includes a 128-page
rulebook, dice, and 48 unassembled and unpainted plastic miniatures (8 Men of
Gondor, 16 Elves, and 24 Moria Goblins), and a ruined building.
The forces can be expanded through box sets (all listed miniatures are
unassembled and unpainted):
Ambush at Amon Hen ($40). Plastic miniatures include: Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli,
Lurtz, dying Boromir, 1 Uruk-Hai with Merry, 1 Uruk-Hai with Pippin, and 3 more
Uruk-Hai.
Attack at Weathertop ($40). Plastic miniatures include: Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, Aragorn, the Witch-king, 4 Ringwraiths, and the Weathertop campfire.
Battle at Khazad-dûm ($45). Plastic miniatures include: Gandalf, and the Balrog.
Escape from Orthanc ($40). Plastic miniatures include: Saruman, the Palantir,
Gandalf, and Gwaihir.
The Fellowship of the Ring Box Set ($40). Recreates the journey of the Fellowship.
Plastic miniatures include: Gandalf, Frodo, Sam, Pippin, Merry, Aragorn, Boromir,
Legolas, and Gimli.
Warriors of the Last Alliance Box Set ($20). Reenacts the Last Alliance of Elves
and Men, at which Sauron is the central figure. This set includes: 8 High Elf Warriors, 8 High Elf Bowmen, and 8 Men of Gondor.
Moria Goblins Box Set ($20). Includes 24 Moria goblins under the command of
Sauron.
Sauron Box Set ($25). Plastic miniatures include: Sauron, Isildur, Elendil.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

133

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

134 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Free Peoples of The Fellowship of the Ring
(Note: all are metal figurines, unassembled and unpainted.)
u Arwen ($8).
u Bilbo Baggins ($8).

u Elendil and Isildur ($15)—
2 figurines.

u Dwarf Kings ($9)—2 figurines.

u Kings of Men ($9)—2 figurines.

u High Elves with spears ($9)—
3 figurines.

u Lorien Elf Bowmen ($9)—
3 figurines.

u Elrond ($15).

u Men of Gondor Bowmen ($9)—
3 figurines.

u Gil-Galad ($8).
u Galadriel and Celeborn
($15)—2 figurines and 1 figure
(Galadriel’s Mirror).

u Men of Gondor Spearmen ($9)—
3 figurines.
u Mounted Arwen with Frodo ($9).
u Mounted Boromir ($9).

u Haldir ($8).

The Forces of Darkness of The Fellowship of the Ring
(Note: all are metal figurines, unassembled and unpainted.)
u Cave Troll with Spear and
Chain ($15).

u Orc Warriors ($9)—
4 figurines.

u Lurtz ($8).

u Ringwraiths ($8).

u Moria Goblin Bowmen ($9)—
4 figurines.

u Saruman ($8).

u Moria Goblin Warriors ($9)—
4 figurines.
u Mounted Ringwraiths ($9).
u Orc Bowmen ($9)—4 figurines.

u Twilight Ringwraiths ($8).
u Uruk-Hai Bowmen ($9)—
3 figurines.
u Uruk-Hai Warriors ($9)—
3 figurines.

The Two Towers
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Strategy Battle Game ($40). Continues the
main action through the events in the second volume. It includes a 160-page
rulebook, 12 Riders of Rohan, 20 Fighting Uruk-Hai, ruins, and two differentcolored sets of dice.
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers—The Helm’s Deep Fortress (sold out, no
longer in production). Recreates the siege at Helm’s Deep between the free peoples
of Middle-earth and Saruman’s fighting Uruk-Hai.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

134

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 135

The Lord of the Rings Miniature Figures and Sets
u Riders of Rohan boxed set ($20)—6 warriors on horseback.
u Heroes of Helm’s Deep ($40)—Aragorn, Gimli, Legolas, Éowyn,
Théoden, Gamling, Haldir, and a Wood Elf Standard Bearer.
u Éomer ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted, in blister pack.
u Merry and Pippin vs. Grishnákh ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted, in
blister pack.
u Haldir’s Elves with swords ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted, in blister
pack.
u Haldir’s Elves with bows ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted, in blister
pack.
u The Warriors of Rohan Boxed Set ($20)—24 plastic figurines, unpainted
and unassembled.
u Gandalf on Shadowfax ($9). Metal figurine, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Warg Attack Box ($40). Plastic figurines, unpainted and unassembled,
including 2 Warg Riders, a Mounted Aragorn, a Mounted Théoden,
and a Mounted Sharku.
u Gollum, Sam, and Frodo ($9). Metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Gandalf the White ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted and unassembled.
u Treebeard, Mighty Ent carrying Merry and Pippin ($40). Metal figurine,
unpainted and unassembled.
u Captured by Gondor ($40)—5 Rangers (Faramir’s men), Faramir,
Gollum, Sam, and Frodo. Metal figurines, unpainted and unassembled.
u Faramir’s Rangers ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted and unassembled.
u Gamling: Rohan Royal Standard Bearer ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted
and unassembled.
u Legolas and Gimli on Horseback ($9). Metal figurine, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Rohan Royal Guard on Foot ($9). Metal figurine, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Rohan Royal Guard Mounted ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted and
unassembled.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

135

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

136 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Two Towers: Forces of Darkness
u The Fighting Uruk-Hai Boxed Set ($20)—10 warriors with pikes and
10 with swords and shields. Plastic figurines, unpainted and unassembled.
u Warg Riders ($40)—5 wargs with riders. Metal figurines, unpainted
and unassembled.
u Saruman ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted and unassembled.
u Uruk-Hai Siege Troops ($20)—8 engineers, 2 beserkers, 2 demolition
charges, and 4 ladders.
u The Uruk-Hai Siege Assault Ballista Box Set ($35)—1 Ballista, 1 loader,
1 winch operator, and 1 spotter. Metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Uruk-Hai Beserkers ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Uruk-Hai with Crossbows ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Uruk-Hai Battering Ram ($20)—1 metal battering ram figure and 4
Uruk-Hai figurines, unpainted and unassembled.
u Uruk-Hai Commanders ($9)—2 metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Wildmen of Dunland ($9)—3 metal figurines, unpainted and
unassembled.
u Gríma Wormtongue ($8). Metal figurine, unpainted and unassembled.
u Ringwraith on Fellbeast ($40)—2 metal figurines: the Ringwraith
mounted on the flying Fellbeast, with Frodo Baggins. Unpainted and
unassembled.

Shadow & Flame Expansion Board Game
A supplemental game, to play Shadow & Flame requires the rulebook for The
Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring and/or The Lord of the Rings: The Two
Towers strategy battle games. The game includes four scenarios: the Dwarves fighting Goblins and a Balrog, Good vs. Evil in Rivendell, at the Barrow-Downs, and
Fangorn Forest.
The Supplement is the basic document, containing the rules, detailing the scenarios, and providing painting tips ($15).

Shadow & Flame Packaged Subsets
u Balin and Khazad Guard Boxed Set ($35)—Balin and 8 Khazard
Guards. Metal figurines, unassembled and unpainted.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

136

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 137

u Fog on the Barrow-Downs ($35)—Tom Bombadil, Goldberry, 2
Barrow-wights, and 4 paralyzed Hobbits. Metal figurines, unassembled
and unpainted.

The Free Peoples: Shadow & Flame
(Note: all are metal figurines, unassembled and unpainted.)
u Dwarf Bowmen ($9)—3 figurines.
u Dwarf Warriors ($9)—3 figurines.
u Ellandan and Elrohir ($15)—2 figurines.
u Glorfindel ($15).
u Khazad Guard ($10)—3 figurines.
u Radagast the Brown ($l8).

The Forces of Darkness: Shadow & Flame
(Note: all are metal figurines, unassembled and unpainted.)
u Barrow-wights ($9)—2 figurines.
u Goblin King of Moria ($8).
u Moria Goblin Drummers ($9)—3 figurines.
u Moria Goblin Shaman ($8).
u Uruk-Hai Shaman ($8).

The Return of the King
(Figures and information not yet available at the time of this writing.)

Sabertooth Games (www.sabertoothgames.com)
The Lord of the Rings Tradeable Miniatures Game (November 2003).
Prepainted miniatures, 40 mm in height, with a hexagonal base are placed on a
fold-out hexagonal-gridded board. Similar to trading card games, this game is
expandable, with booster packs and expansion sets. The starter game comes with
a board, 120 starter pieces, and dice.
On the hexagonal base of each character you’ll find his attributes and, for
combat play, his point value—the higher the point value, the more valuable he is:
He’s simply harder to kill.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

137

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

138 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Middle-earth Online:
Vivendi Universal and Turbine Entertainment
(www.lordoftherings.com)
This much-anticipated, long-awaited, massively multiplayer (MMP) game will
debut in late 2004 for the Windows PC platform only. It is a subscription fee-based
game. A 3-D role-playing game that allows you to choose your character from
among the Free Peoples of Middle-earth—men, elves, or dwarves—the graphics
(judging from early screenshots) are state-of-the-art. You, as a character, will
literally walk through Tolkien’s Middle-earth. Moreover, in contrast to the restrictive choices found in similar games, this game doesn’t lock the player on predetermined paths. Instead, it allows the player to branch out on various paths and
enjoy different endings based on the choices he makes.
The key word here is “choices,” because every decision you make will ultimately have a bearing on your fate, which, in the end, puts you squarely on the
path for good...or evil. Again, your choice.
What will make this game so compelling is the extent to which you can customize your character. You can choose his physical characteristics (face, height, skin
color, and so on); craft appropriate armor, weapons, and accessories; and purchase homes, which can be customized and provide limited off-character storage.
In terms of story lines, the first scenario begins after the Fellowship emerges
from the Mines of Moria. Successive product expansions include the journey from
the Shire to Mirkwood, Mirkwood, the Lonely Mountain, and distant lands in
Middle-earth that have not been explored, such as Umbar and Rhûn.
The word immerse—used too often to describe games such as this—is certainly
appropriate in this instance. Of course, you, as a player, can choose your level of
immersion—a few hours a week or, if you’re a hard-core player, many more
hours, which comes with its own gaming rewards.
In terms of game-playing audience, quite literally, all the world’s a stage. You
will be able to go online and play with others anywhere in the world.
With its dazzling computer-generated graphics, customization features, and
scope of geography and scenarios, Middle-earth Online will soon be populated by
ordinary people who want to vicariously live an extraordinary life. The battle for
Middle-earth begins in late 2004.

Electronic Arts (www.ea.com)
EA currently has available The Two Towers, with The Return of the King and an
ambitious trilogy game in the works.
These games are playable on multiple machines (Sony PlayStation 2, Nintendo
GameBoy Advance and GameCube, and Microsoft Xbox). Typically, you assume
the role of a third-party character, who fights his way through multiple levels of
3-D environments to advance the gameplay.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

138

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 139

For instance, in The Two Towers ($49.99), you must choose your character
(Aragorn, Legolas, or Gimli), whom you must direct in battle using sword-play to
advance through 13 levels of gameplay—all rendered in lifelike, 3-D computer
animation.

Black Label Games (www.lotr.com/frame_ games.jsp)
This company publishes action/adventure games playable on multiple systems: PlayStation, PlayStation 2, Nintendo GameCube, PC CD-ROM, and Xbox.
The games include:
The Hobbit (not yet released). From the Website (www.lotr.com/frame_hobbit.jsp):
The Hobbit is an action adventure game in which the player assumes
the role of Bilbo Baggins. The player will control Bilbo from his
peaceful Hobbit hole in Hobbiton into the dark and harrowing
Mirkwood forest and finally to the Lonely Mountain, in which lies
Smaug the dragon. Sent on a journey by Gandalf the wizard, along
with Thorin the dwarf and his stout and sturdy cohorts, Bilbo will
acquire items, knowledge, and in the case of a Hobbit, courage to
help him complete the quest as he comes face to face with elves,
trolls, orcs, spiders, wolves, and more.
The Fellowship of the Ring ($49.99). Note: This follows the book, not the movie.
The Treason of Isengard (canceled). In an interview on the manufacturer’s Website
(www.gamespot.com), it stated: “We were due to ship Treason of Isengard this
November, but the game wasn’t going to deliver the experience that our fans
demand, so we knew the right choice was to cancel the project and move on.”
The War of the Ring (upcoming for spring 2004). The early screenshots show
exquisite rendering, very detailed and wholly convincing. This is a real-time strategy
game, not a third-person engagement game. From www.lordoftherings.com:
Massive battles will erupt as the peoples of Middle-earth fight for
control of Tolkien’s World. Play as the forces of good and valiantly
fight for the One Ring’s destruction or play as the forces of evil to
claim control over Middle-earth forever.
Highlights:
 Play as the forces of Good or Evil using multiple types of
character units.
 Single or Multi-player campaigns
 Character units gain experience and visual enhancements
as they destroy enemy units—strategic use of units is key
to success.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

139

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

140 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

 Real world environment and terrain effects alter the
outcome of skirmishes and battles.
 Some hero units will aid other units’ morale, increasing the
chances for victory in battle.

Decipher (www.decipher.com)
For new fans trying to decipher just what a role-playing game is, the best way
to get your feet wet, so to speak, is to go to a local retailer who sells these games
and hang out when players show up to compete.
At the core of role-playing is imagination. Rather than a board game, in which
players are typically on a fixed route and the roll of the dice determines outcomes
as players work toward an end goal, a role-playing game is more complex, with an
open architecture that allows expanding play through supplement volumes—books
with detailed information about the character, places, and imaginative world in
which you are playing.
Players interact through a Game Moderator (GM), who oversees the play of
the game itself. As players make decisions on questions to ask or actions to take,
the GM decides the outcome of those actions. In other words, unlike a traditional
board game, a role-playing game is about the journey, not the destination.
If your interest is Tolkien, the best place to start is an entry-level game that will
likely whet your appetite for the bigger, more expansive games. Decipher offers
two introductory role-playing adventure games:
Through the Mines of Moria Adventure Game ($29.95). This game begins at the
doors of Moria, which Gandalf opens by saying “friend” (in Elvish) and entering.
In this game, players choose roles among the Fellowship. This game then puts the
players through several close encounters with servants of the Shadow and, finally,
pits them against the Balrog.
The contents of the game are specifically designed to ease a newcomer into
the role-playing fantasy world of Tolkien’s, with a 32-page adventure, taking the
Fellowship through the Mines of Moria; a 24-page introductory guide to Middleearth, called “Welcome to Middle-earth”; a booklet explaining—for the newcomer—
just what role-playing is; four tactical maps to guide the major action sequences;
character and monster cut-outs with which to play the game; and a poster map of
Middle-earth.
An excellent way to enter Tolkien’s role-playing world, going through the
Mines of Moria is not a shortcut in the end, but that which doesn’t destroy you
will make you stronger.
The Two Towers Adventure Game ($29.95). Like Through the Mines of Moria,
this is the next step for new players. It’s a boxed adventure game that, timewise,
takes place after the Fellowship has been broken up and continues to the Battle
at Helm’s Deep. This set contains an adventure booklet, character sheets, tactical
maps, counters, and dice.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

140

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 141

Newcomers are advised to try a game like this before proceeding to the more
complex and demanding world that awaits in the Full Game System.

The Lord of the Rings Role-Playing Game (RPG)
[Full Game System]
A good role-playing game explores a universe so fully realized that one can
literally be immersed in its secondary reality. Decipher, which has developed an
entire line of RPGs (Star Trek, Star Wars, and of course, Middle-earth), constantly
expands its respective universes.
The Lord of the Rings RPG Core Book ($39.95) is the basic document. Designed
for extensive handling, it’s the prime reference book. You get to choose any
character you wish, and through that character you make your way through Middleearth. (For hardcore collectors, a limited edition core book is also available, for
$80. It’s a “premium printing,” packaged in a slipcase, including a limited edition
guide to hobbits and the Shire.)
Because the world of Middle-earth was so fully realized by Tolkien, it’s ideal
for role-playing, because, in his books, the scale of time encompasses four Ages,
with a cast of characters that number in the hundreds. In other words, Decipher
could spend decades expanding Tolkien’s universe with supplemental material
such as sourcebooks, maps, and journals, as players take on roles from Morgoth
(from the First Age) to Samwise (at the end of the Third Age). Just as Tolkien’s
fictional universe was limited only by his imagination, its role-playing universe is
also limited only by the imagination of the players, and the imagination of the
game designers that develop the overall game plan.
Note: Decipher publishes the role-playing game and trading-card game based
on Tolkien’s Middle-earth; the distinction is that the former is based on the book,
where the latter is based on the movies.
Beyond the core book, which is the “must have” document, the full game system of The Lord of the Rings RPG currently includes:
Maps of Middle-earth ($29.95). Drawn by Daniel Reeve, these six maps measure
17 x 22 inches, and the set includes a 32-page guide to the lands of Middle-earth.
Narrator’s Screen ($18.95). This fold-out screen, with reference tables from the Core
Book, includes character sheets and a 16-page adventure (“The House of Margil”).
The Fellowship of the Ring Sourcebook ($24.95). This is a 128-page, full-color hardback book detailing everything from the book and the movie. It provides a detailed
timeline, a guide to story events, game statistics, and 15 illustrated maps.
Hero’s Journal ($9.95). A useful accessory, this booklet is designed for recording
information about your character attributes and background. It includes step-bystep instructions on how to build your character, provides 14 pages of charts for
character skills, offers information on The Lord of the Rings, and provides specific
RPG strategies.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

141

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

142 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Fell Beasts and Wondrous Magic ($24.95). A 96-page hardback book in full color.
This exhaustively details the beasts of Middle-earth, as well as magical places.
Moria ($34.95). A boxed set with a 96-page book, a 32-page book, and maps. Details
the world of Moria, the domain of the dwarf lords. Described as a “subterranean
adventure with lots of twists, traps, and caverns, the Fellowship will be tested at
every turn as they journey through the twisted underground mazes of Moria.”
The Two Towers Sourcebook ($29.95). This 128-page, full-color hardback book, with
detailed information about everything in the book and film, provides expanded
rules for large-scale combat engagements, and detailed write-ups on Rohan, Edoras,
Meduseld, Isengard, Fangorn and the Ents, Gondor, Helm’s Dike, and the Glittering
Caves of Aglarond.
Maps of Middle-earth, Set 2: Cities and Strongholds ($29.95). A boxed set with a
32-page paperback book that includes in-depth background information on the
locations found on the six maps depicting Minas Tirith, Helm’s Deep, Rivendell,
Isengard, Edoras, and Umbar.
Helm’s Deep Sourcebook ($24.95). A 96-page, hardback book, in color, with in-depth
information about this fortress at which the Free Peoples of Middle-earth make a
stand against Saruman’s army.
Paths of the Wise: The Guide to Magicians & Loremasters ($24.95). A 96-page, hardback book, in full color, this is the reference manual to learn about the magician
and loremaster orders. Includes information on new abilities, skills, traits, and also
elite orders.

The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game
This is based on the movie, not the book. Sometimes abbreviated TCG
(Trading Card Game) or CCG (Customizable Card Game), the cards number in
the hundreds, packaged in expansion sets that
increasingly enlarge the gameplay by introducing
new characters and scenarios.
The best way of getting started is buying a
starter set, to introduce you to the game. As you
gain experience, buy booster packs to expand your
collection.
If you’re really good at it, consider entering
a local tournament or—if you’re the kind of person who sets his sights high—there’s always the
World Cup Teams. For most people, however,
A trading card game from
playing with friends or others at a gaming store
Decipher. Pictured are the cards,
the box, the rulebook, and playing
(a popular place to meet fellow gamers) will
pieces.
likely be the extent of involvement.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

142

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

GAMING

AND

MINIATURES

u 143

The list of individual cards is too extensive to reprint here (see related links
on page 144 for more information), but the existing sets of cards include:
u The Fellowship of the Ring (365 cards).
u Mines of Moria (122 cards).
u Realms of the Elf-lords (122 cards).
u The Two Towers (365 cards).
u Battle of Helm’s Deep (128 cards).
u Ents of Fangorn (128 cards).
u The Fellowship of the Ring Anthology (18).
u The Return of the King (approximately 365 cards).
u Siege of Gondor (approximately 122–128 cards).
u Mount Doom (approximately 122–128 cards).

From Decipher, an oversized trading
card. This one is inscribed to
Colleen Doran from Lawrence
Makoare (Lurtz). (Photo courtesy of
Colleen Doran.)

From Decipher, an oversized
trading card. This one is
inscribed to Colleen Doran from
Sala Baker (Sauron). (Photo
courtesy of Colleen Doran.)

Forthcoming Sets:
u Shadows.

u Rise of Saruman.

u Black Rider.

u Treachery and Deceit.

u Bloodlines.

u The Great Eye.

u The Return of the King
Anthology.

u Shelob’s Lair.
u Age’s End.

u The Hunters.

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

143

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

144 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Decipher Links
Recognizing that a large number of people will have experienced Tolkien’s
world through the film and not the book—and these games are directly linked to
the film—Decipher has provided numerous links on its Website to acquaint firsttimers on the basics of what a trading card game is, how to play it, and what to
expect:
f An explanation of what a trading card game is:
www.decipher.com/gettingstarted/
f A video tutorial:
www.decipher.com/lordoftherings/gettingstarted/videotutorial.html
f A printout of the video tutorial:
www.decipher.com/lordoftherings/gettingstarted/videotranscript.html
f General references and resources and a sample game in play:
www.decipher.com/lordoftherings/gettingstarted/samplegame.html
f The Two Towers starter rulebook (in Adobe PDF format). Designed for new
players, with a discussion of the basic rules:
www.decipher.com/lordoftherings/gettingstarted/
f The Two Towers downloadable starter decks. Download these and print them
out for gameplay. A good way to “try before you buy”:
www.decipher.com/lordoftherings/downloads/index.html

08 Tolkien Chapter 8.pmd

144

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

CHAPTER 9

THE NOBLE
COLLECTION

The Noble Collection’s line of collectibles is available only by mail order and
online order. Although readers of this book will be principally interested in the
Tolkien film-related offerings, the collectibles company offers other merchandise,
with an emphasis on fantasy- or historical-related objects.
The Tolkien film-related product line is divided into jewelry, “treasures,” and
weapons. The designs are based on the props constructed especially for the movie.
Where applicable I’ve indicated the jewelry’s provenance and also provided a
little background information on who wore it and its historical significance. When
the Noble Collection calls the piece a “reproduction,” it means that it is a facsimile
of the item as seen in the movie. When it states that it was “inspired” by the movie,
then it exists only as a replica and may not necessarily have any linkage to the
movie or the book.
Note: Jasmine Watson, who designed much of the jewelry for the movie
trilogy, was a consultant for the Noble Company, because most of the jewelry
the company sells is based on her original designs. (Her Website is at
www.jasminewatson.com).

Jewelry
The Evenstar Pendant of Arwen ($95). A reproduction made of sterling silver,
this is the pendant that, in the film, Arwen gives to Aragorn as a sign of her
undying love for him.
u 145 U

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

145

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

146 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

In the book: Daughter of Elrond and Celebrían, Arwen is an Eldarin princess
and chooses mortal love instead of joining her people as they leave Middle-earth
to go across the Sea.
The Elven Brooch ($65). A reproduction, this brooch
is designed in the shape of a green leaf.
In the book: In Chapter 8 (Farewell to Lórien),
each member comprising the Fellowship is given a hood
and cloak, fastened at the neck “with a brooch like a
green leaf veined with silver.”
The Fellowship necklace ($75) and earrings ($59). Inspired pieces that match the Elven Brooch.
The One Ring: Gold Edition ($295). A reproduction
made of 10-karat gold, a laser process is used to etch the
A reproduction of the leaf
Elvish writing. The ring is presented in an ornate and (in
brooch worn by members
of the Fellowship in The
my opinion) gaudy red box with silver highlights. This is
Fellowship of the Ring,
available in one size and not intended as fingerwear. No
manufactured by the
chain is provided on which to carry it around the neck.
Noble Collection.
In the movie and the book: Though the writing
(only visible when subjected to heat) is Elvish, the language is not. It is the language of Mordor and, translated, the inscription is two lines from a longer verse.
The inscription, roughly translated, means “One Ring to bring them all and in the
darkness bind them,” for this is the One Ring, the Ruling Ring, the Master Ring
that binds all the lesser Rings of Power.
The One Ring: Sterling Silver Edition ($129). A reproduction plated in “pure
gold,” this ring is actually constructed of sterling silver, which is why the engraved laser-etched Elvish inscription shows through in silver, instead of gold (as
with the $295, 10-karat gold ring). The ring comes with a 20-inch chain and is
mounted in a simple wooden display box.
The Revolving Elvish Script Ring ($75). A replica intended as fingerwear, this is
available in even sizes only, from 6 to 14. Made from sterling silver with the
Elvish inscription in black, etched by laser, the ring itself revolves around its
simple silver band. It is, however, the only such product of its kind offered by the
Noble Collection that’s actually designed to be worn.
The Headdress of Elrond ($195). A reproduction, this is an elegantly simple, flowing
headdress worn by Master Elrond, as befitting his royal stature among the Elves.
This headdress is made of solid sterling silver and rests on a blue presentation pillow.
The Ring of Elrond ($295). A reproduction made of 10-karat gold and available in
sizes 6–14, this is designed to be worn. Called Vilya (the Ring of Air), it is the
greatest of the Three Rings of the Elves and was given to Elrond by Gil-Galad,
whose banner he carried in the war of the Last Alliance.

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

146

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

THE NOBLE COLLECTION

u 147

This design is historically accurate. In the book, the ring is described as made
of gold and set with a sapphire.
The Elven Necklace ($129). A replica made of sterling silver, it is set with crystal
cabochons (a highly polished, unfaceted gem). Not in the movie or the book, this
was designed especially for the Noble Collection.
The Elven Choker ($97.50). A replica, this
is a black velvet and sterling silver choker,
with inlaid crystals. Not in the movie or
the book, this was designed especially for
the Noble Collection.

Jasmine Watson:
Jewelry Designer
Extraordinaire
Even if you do not know the name,
you know her work, and that’s more
important. Jasmine Watson—then
living in New Zealand, now living
in England—is the one responsible
for designing and creating the jewelry used in Peter Jackson’s movie
trilogy.
Though her LotR pieces are not
available directly from her—The
Noble Collection has issued the jewelry replica line, with her as a consultant—she does have a singular
piece for sale on her Website
(www.jasminewatson.com).
A silver leaf pendant with chain
($124.95) is the first piece in her 2003
collection. Limited to 2,000 pieces,
each numbered and stamped, this
silver pendant is 1.5 inches in length,
suspended from a sterling silver
Prince of Wales chain, and presented in a green-velvet case.

The Necklace and Earrings of Arwen ($95/
$65). Replications that match her Evenstar
Pendant (see the first item).
The Necklace and Earrings Set of Éowyn
($395). Reproductions from the movie, this
set is made of 14-karat gold set with crystal
cabochons.
Éowyn, daughter of Éomund and
Théodwyn, hails from Rohan and falls in
love with Aragorn. In The Return of the
King, at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields,
she is disguised as a man and kills both the
Lord of the Nazgûl—the Witch-king of
Angmar—and his mount.
The Brooch of King Théoden ($59). A replica worn by the 17th King of Rohan, cast
in sterling silver, plated in 14-karat gold, set
with an onyx in its center.
King Théoden, under the evil influence
of Saruman working through counselor
Gríma Wormtongue, is restored to his
former self after Gandalf the White exorcises Saruman. King Théoden falls in
battle, killed by the Lord of the Nazgûl, in
the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.

The Rohan Brooch ($75). A reproduction made in sterling silver, it is a stylized
symbol of a horse—appropriate, of course, because these are worn by the Riders
of Rohan, who bred and raised horses.

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

147

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

148 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Ring of Aragorn ($129). A reproduction made of sterling silver, with gold
accents and set with a green crystal. The product description notes that this was
“Known as the Ring of Barahir.”
In the book, the Ring of Barahir is an Elven ring given by Finrod to Barahir in
the First Age and then recovered by Beren. It survived to the Third Age. Though
Aragon didn’t wear this ring—a bit of film license—the replica is historically
accurate, with its design of twin serpents, though Tolkien states the serpents’
eyes are made of emerald, whereas this ring has a large emerald-green crystal set
in the middle of its design.
The Brooch and Headdress of Arwen ($145). Reproduction made of sterling silver,
these are worn by Arwen.
The Brooch of Galadriel ($97.50). A reproduction. Galadriel is the Queen of Lórien.
She is freely offered but refuses the One Ring from Frodo Baggins. To aid the
Fellowship, she gives them provisions for their journey and individual gifts.
The Ring of Galadriel ($129). A reproduction made of solid sterling silver and set
with a crystal.
In the book, this is the second of Three Rings of the Elves, and is made of
mithril (the chain mail that protects Frodo Baggins is also made of this priceless
metal—a gift from Bilbo Baggins).
The Elven Star Necklace and Earrings ($75). Replicas made of sterling silver, set
with faceted crystals.
The Dwarven Ring of Power ($97.50). A replica made of sterling silver set with a
blue crystal. Designed to be worn, it comes in full sizes from 6 to 14.
In the book, the race of dwarves is given seven of these Rings of Power.
The King of Men Ring ($97.50). A replica made of sterling silver and set with a
cornelian.
The Ring of the Witch-king [of Angmar] ($97.50). A reproduction made in solid
sterling silver and set with a cabochon, it is the Ring worn by the Lord of the Nazgûl.
The Ring and Brooch of Gandalf (ring, $295; brooch, $129). No indication as to
whether these are reproductions or replicas, the ring is made of 10-karat gold
and set with a red crystal. The brooch is made of sterling silver.

Treasures
The Staff of Gandalf: Votive Candle Holder ($59). A rather curious reproduction,
the top of the staff is cut off and mounted on an ornate base. Get the staff of
Gandalf instead.
The Staff of Gandalf the Grey ($295). A 66-inch reproduction of his wooden
walking staff, replete with a mirror-backed display plaque.

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

148

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

THE NOBLE COLLECTION

u 149

In the film and the book, Gandalf’s staff is not what it seems. To the unknowing, it appears to be a simple walker’s aid, appropriate for an aged man; but in the
hands of a wizard, it is a powerful weapon, as the King’s counselor, Gríma
Wormtongue, knew when he gave instructions to the guards to confiscate it before
allowing Gandalf to see King Théoden.
The Lord of the Rings Collector’s Chess Set ($495). The most expensive item in
the catalog, and certainly the most elaborate, this chess set features playing pieces
bearing the likenesses of the actors—“personally approved,” we are told, “by the
individual actor.”
The individual pieces are up to 3 inches in height, the board itself measures 15
x 15 inches and rises 4 inches, and the face of the board is a map of Middle-earth.
The two armies are imaginatively interpreted. The forces of good show hobbits
as pawns and the main characters as rooks, knights, and bishops, with Gandalf,
rather than Aragorn, as the King. Representing the forces of evil, the pieces
include the Tower of Orthanc as rooks, Black Riders as Knights, battle orcs as
pawns, and so on.
Mines of Moria Goblet ($59). At a height of 7 inches, this manufactured collectible,
made of solid pewter, bears an image of Gandalf holding a book.
At the Shire Goblet ($59). More than 7 inches in height, this pewter goblet shows
Bilbo Baggins in two scenes—his holding forth at his birthday party, and his holding the One Ring.
Quest for the Ring ($97.50). A manufactured collectible, this sculpture is 7 inches
tall and shows Ringwraiths on their black steeds, with a pillar, on which rests a
globe embedding the One Ring.
My Precious ($97.50). A manufactured collectible, this sculpture shows Gollum
staring at his coveted precious, the One Ring, which is suspended in a globe sitting
on a base of rocks. The sculpture is 7 inches high.
The One Ring: Mirage Holographic Image Chamber ($97.50). A curious item—
an ornate circular chamber, more than 7 inches in diameter, which projects an
image of the One Ring that can be seen but not physically touched.

Weapons
Sting: The Sword of Frodo ($295). A reproduction with a wall-mounted plaque
(Optional: a $55 scabbard).
In The Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins discovers this in a troll-cave along with other
booty. Named Sting by Bilbo, he gave it to Frodo as a gift—a most useful one,
because it glows with a blue light when orcs are nearby. Sting is also used by Sam
to wound the giant spider, Shelob, in The Two Towers (the book, not the movie).

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

149

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

150 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Glamdring: The Sword of Gandalf ($295). This 47-inch reproduction comes with
a mirror-backed wall plaque for display purposes. Glamdring—translated “foehammer,” and called by the orcs “Beater”—is an elf sword and, like Sting, glows
with a blue light when orcs are nearby.
The Axe of Gimli ($129). A reproduction measuring 34 inches in length, this twoheaded axe is the principal weapon of Gimli, who is one of the members of the
Fellowship and who distinguished himself in combat in subsequent battles during
the War of the Ring.
Narsil: The Broken Sword ($245). A reproduction, this shard is mounted on a
wooden wall plaque.

09 Tolkien Chapter 9.pmd

150

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

CHAPTER 10

SMAUG’S STASH:
TOLKIEN TREASURES

The notion of what is truly collectible and what is simply merchandised product is an important distinction, because the former has intrinsic value and the
latter has little or none.
By definition, a true collectible’s worth is driven by scarcity and demand, compounded by time. Judged by that standard, most of what is manufactured or published falls by the wayside: fool’s gold. But the real treasures—Smaug’s dragon-hoard,
as it were—appreciate in value with each passing year.
Because Tolkien fans are principally interested in the text and its creation,
manuscripts (holographic and typescript), letters, first editions, and limited editions are of prime interest.
Unfortunately, the rigorous examination of collectibles as offered through antiquarian booksellers does not necessarily apply to public auction houses such as
eBay, so descriptions therein are not necessarily accurate. These days, more than
ever, it’s important to know what you are buying, and from whom.
In terms of key Tolkien collectibles, which began with the publication of The
Hobbit in 1937, the gold standard—scarcity + demand + time’s passage—has
proven to be a reliable barometer. Tolkien is among the most collectible authors
in our time, challenged only by another British fantasy writer, J.K. Rowling.
For the serious Tolkien investor/collector, there are several factors that make
Tolkien a blue chip stock:
1. The enduring popularity of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. In
numerous reader’s polls—BBC, The Folio Society, Amazon.com,
Waterstone’s, and others—Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings ranked first,
u 151 U

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

151

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

152 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

to the dismay of some critics and academicians who feel strongly that
the book is overrated. Despite what they think, the fact remains that
among fantasy authors, Tolkien’s two major books—The Hobbit and
The Lord of the Rings—remain at the top of any list for fantasy lovers.
Published decades ago in relatively small quantities in England, copies
are scarce and, when found, expensive.
2. Tolkien was not a publicity-seeking author. Unlike other authors who
routinely took every advantage to promote and sell their books by
seeking media coverage and autograph opportunities at bookstores,
Tolkien granted few interviews and did not promote his books in
bookstores with personal appearances. Consequently, signed copies of
his books are hard to come by.
3. The first printings of The Hobbit and the three volumes of The Lord of
the Rings were modest: The Hobbit, 1,500 copies, according to Douglas
A. Anderson. Similarly, the three volumes of The Lord of the Rings, as
originally published by Allen & Unwin, went to press with relatively
low print runs, as well: 3,000, 3,250, and 7,000 copies, respectively.
4. Tolkien, who passed away in 1973, never came to the United States, his
biggest book market.
5. In 2001, Peter Jackson’s film adaptation of The Fellowship of the Ring,
which grossed a billion dollars worldwide, created a resurgence of
interest from fans who otherwise would not have been interested in
Tolkien.
6. Collectible Tolkien material, previously available from antiquarian book
dealers and auction houses, is now available worldwide because of the
Internet. Book dealers, traditional auction houses such as Sotheby’s,
and the emergence of eBay as a dominant force means that more people
are afforded the opportunity to buy these offerings. Low supply and
high demand, fueled by a worldwide audience, means increasing prices
for Tolkien treasures.
The bottom line is that the truly rare Tolkien treasure, a fitting gift for a king,
will command princely prices.
In general terms, the rarest commodities include manuscripts, original art,
first editions, and letters/postcards. These are the most desired Tolkien treasures,
some of which are available—if you know where to look and are willing to invest
accordingly.

Original Manuscripts
Tolkien wrote books the old-fashioned way, not with a computer (because they
didn’t exist at the time) but by hand, in several drafts (up to three per book), and
a typescript draft followed by a final typescript for submission.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

152

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 153

What most people don’t know is that the manuscripts for The Hobbit, The
Lord of the Rings, Farmer Giles of Ham, and Mr. Bliss were sold by Tolkien himself, in 1956, to Marquette University, for an average price of 70¢ per leaf (manuscript page). What is even more surprising is that Marquette University found
itself the only party interested in acquiring the original manuscripts, so there was
no competitive bidding.
If you want to get an idea of what a bargain Marquette University had gotten,
consider this: A single letter from Tolkien, in which he discussed The Lord of the
Rings, sold at auction in the United Kingdom, in 2002, for $7,672.
Put differently, at current market valuation, Marquette University could have
only afforded to buy two pages of original manuscript. But the University bought
wisely and well, and their dragon-hoard of Tolkien manuscripts—based on $7,672/
page—is conservatively worth $79 million dollars. And because these were not
merely letters talking about the manuscripts, but in fact were the actual manuscripts, intact, with all drafts, $100 million would be closer to the mark.
Tolkien could hardly be considered a fool of a Took for selling the pages for
$15,000, because he got the best price he could for a commodity that, as I pointed
out, had attracted no other buyers. And, like most authors, he simply needed the
money, as Clyde S. Kirby wrote, in Tolkien and the Silmarillion.
At this very late date, the only hope for those seeking an original manuscript
lies in the possible sale of fragments currently in the hands of Christopher Tolkien,
who edited The Silmarillion and the 12 volumes of The History of Middle-earth.
But don’t hold your breath. Christopher Tolkien—reportedly a recluse who lives
in a guarded estate in France, and who only visited England once in recent years—
has not yet offered for sale any of his father’s manuscripts, nor is it likely. (My
guess is that they will not appear on the open market but, instead, be deposited at
the Bodeleian Library at Oxford.)

First Editions
In lieu of original manuscripts, the next best thing would be first editions of
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. An Internet search turned up several copies
of each book, but be warned: Sticker shock may result!
Tolkien’s first book, The Hobbit, was published in 1937 by George Allen &
Unwin, in England, with a first printing of 1,500 copies, according to Douglas A.
Anderson. It had black-and-white pen-and-ink illustrations by Tolkien himself.
Depending on condition, prices vary. A jacketed copy, auctioned off by Sotheby’s
in 2002, went for $68,767.
On the Internet, as of this writing, a U.S. book dealer is offering a fine copy
with jacket for $85,000. Another dealer is offering a second impression (second
printing) for $71,978—an edition distinctive for its inclusion of color art by Tolkien;
only 2,300 copies were printed, of which 423 copies were destroyed in the bombing of London in 1940, according to Douglas A. Anderson.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

153

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

154 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Even a jacketless copy of the first edition can fetch $13,995. Of course, a
signed copy—Tolkien usually inscribed them to family and friends—adds a premium price. One bookseller estimated that a first edition with jacket in fine condition, if inscribed by Tolkien, would fetch up to $100,000, because he likely signed
very few of them.
Though The Hobbit has the virtue of being the first major Tolkien book and is
thus the most collectible of all his books, Tolkien collectors recognize that, in terms
of story, it whets the literary appetite, so to speak, for the larger, more ambitious
work that followed: The Lord of the Rings.
Though often referred to as a trilogy, The Lord of the Rings is, in fact, a single
book that was published as a trilogy for the convenience of its publisher. (Subsequently, one-volume editions were published, which is what Tolkien originally intended.) Issued as trade hardbacks with uniformly designed dust jackets, The
Fellowship of the Ring was published in 1954, followed by The Two Towers and The
Return of the King, both published in 1955.
Allen & Unwin was rightly concerned about the economics of publishing a
single volume of The Lord of the Rings—its cost was prohibitive, and it was risky
business—so the idea was to issue three separate volumes, taking into account
how well each volume did, so the print run of the next book could be adjusted
accordingly.
Current market prices vary as to condition, of course. A U.S. bookseller has
a set of the three books in fine condition for $47,500, with the caveat that the dust
jackets have had minor repairs done by a paper conservator.
A signed set of The Lord of the Rings commands a commensurately higher
price, of course, especially if all three volumes have been signed, as opposed to
only one of them.
Alternative choices: Consider buying one of his other works of fiction. A signed
copy of Farmer Giles of Ham (U.K. first edition, 1949) is currently being offered
for $12,000. Or consider buying a book that he’s inscribed, though he was not the
author; A bookseller is currently offering, for $1,519, a copy of Humbert Wolfe’s
London Sonnets, which bears the inscription: “S.R.T. / Because he doesn’t, / either
to you or me, / I do to you / J.R.T. 22.2.20.”
For those who absolutely must have a book signed by Tolkien, consider purchasing one of the books from his personal library, signed by him—some with handwritten notes in the margins. One bookseller had copies for as little as $400, but
they have since sold out. Now copies are commanding up to $2,000.

Signed Letters
A first edition of The Hobbit or The Lord of the Rings is understandably out of
reach for most people, so consider the purchase of a signed letter by Tolkien—not
cheap, but a collectible guaranteed to rise in value. As Humphrey Carpenter wrote
in the Introduction to The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien:

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

154

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 155

An immense amount of Tolkien’s time was taken up with the
written word: not just his academic work and the stories of ‘Middleearth’, but also letters. Many of these had to be written in the way
of business, but in any case letter-writing was on most occasions a
favourite activity with him.
A goodly number of letters are in response to his readers, who often wrote
and asked him specific questions about Middle-earth, its inhabitants, and its
languages—subjects that Tolkien could discuss at length.

The Bodeleian Library
In the matter of Tolkien manuscripts, foresight trumped hindsight. William Ready
recognized that The Hobbit and The Lord
of the Rings were classics and wasted no
time in contacting Tolkien, who reportedly had a tax bill to pay and could use the
unexpected but welcomed offer. The deal
was brokered through a London bookseller; soon thereafter, Ready’s employer,
Marquette University, acquired the crown
jewels—seven feet of manuscripts that
included the originals and all drafts of The
Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and Farmer
Giles of Ham.
Tolkien, I’m sure, would have preferred that his alma mater had asked for
the papers, but the Bodeleian Library at
Oxford never asked until years later,
when it realized that Tolkien was a national literary treasure.
Since that time, the Bodeleian Library
has wisely pursued collecting Tolkien’s
papers, and in its collection can be found
his personal and academic papers and the
manuscripts to The Silmarillion and “Leaf
by Niggle.” In time, it’s expected that
Christopher Tolkien may turn over additional papers—the notes, drafts, and final
copies of the papers that comprise The
History of Middle-earth—but this means

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

155

that the Tolkien scholar wishing to see
his principal works must journey not only
to England, but to Wisconsin, where
Marquette University is located.
The Bodeleian Library has published
several Tolkien items worth your attention: seven postcards, three posters, and a
catalog, available by mail or online.
The postcards include the dust jacket
art for The Hobbit and The Two Towers
and four whimsical cards: a “Maddo”
postcard, a “Code Letter” postcard, a
“Motor Bus” postcard, and a postcard
with an owl design—the “Owlamoo.”
The three posters, all in color and all
from The Hobbit, include “The Hill:
Hobbiton-across-the-Water,” “Bilbo
comes to the Huts of the Raft-elves,”
and the dust jacket to The Hobbit.
The real prize is a catalog of a
Tolkien exhibition in 1992, J.R.R.
Tolkien: Life and Legend (£14.95: Oxford,
Oxford Bodeleian Library, trade paperback). In full color, its 96 pages chronicle
250 items on exhibit, including original
letters, artwork, and a rebus, as well. A
great souvenir of the exhibit, especially
if you were not fortunate enough to see it
at the time.

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

156 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Whether written in his own hand (ALS: Autograph Letter, Signed) or typewritten, Tolkien’s letters ranged in length from one page (simple declinations, invitations, or generic thank-you notes) to dozens of pages.
The price of Tolkien letters varies widely, depending on condition, whether
or not a matching envelope is present, the length of the letter, whether it is handwritten or typed, and most important of all, its contents. A “bare bones” letter,
written in 1966, sold for $2,333. On eBay, another such letter, thanking a U.S.
reader for her interest in his books, went up for auction—and did not sell—for its
minimum of $2,500.
More substantiative letters sell for correspondingly more, of course. A onepage, handwritten letter to Ace Books publisher Donald A. Wolheim, regarding
its pirated edition, was offered for $6,500. In March 2002, the BBC reported that a
handwritten letter dated 1955, in which Tolkien discussed his difficulties in completing The Lord of the Rings, sold at auction for $7,672—twice its original estimate. In recent bookseller catalogs, a Tolkien letter generally sells for an average
of $7,500.
Demand for prime Tolkien material will continue to increase, because the popularity of Peter Jackson’s film adaptations have had a salutary effect on all things
Tolkien.

Collectible Tolkien Books
To rephrase a truism, nothing exceeds like excess, especially in the case of the
Tolkien movies and the extensive line of tie-in products—from the sublime to the
ridiculous—almost all of which use the word “collectible” with abandon.
What, then, is the new Tolkien fan to buy?
First, let’s agree on what the word “collectible” means. According to The American Heritage Dictionary, the word means “worthy of being collected.” Put differently, it infers that there is an intrinsic value in the item, as opposed to a
manufactured value or, worse, plain marketing hype.
With the hundreds of movie tie-in products, and more on the way, the new
collector—looking to buy true collectibles—is best advised to stick to the tried and
true: books by Tolkien.

Book Condition
The condition of the book is a key factor in its value. AB Bookman’s Weekly
uses four criteria:
1. “As New” should “be used only when the book is in the same immaculate
condition in which it was published.” In other words, even though you
are buying a used book, its condition is comparable to what it would be
if it came directly out of the shipping carton from its publisher. (Some
people prefer the term “mint” to indicate a flawless copy, but booksellers
prefer “as new” because it is more properly descriptive.)

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

156

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 157

2. “Very Good” describes “a used book that does show some small signs
of wear—but no tears—on either binding or paper.”
3. “Fair” describes “a worn book.... Binding, jacket (if any), etc., may
also be worn.”
4. “Poor” describes “a book that is sufficiently worn that its only merit
is as a Reading Copy....”
AB Bookman’s Weekly presumes that all listings in its magazine also clarify
other important considerations: Is it an ex-library copy? Is it a book club edition?
What (if any) are its defects? And (if thus issued) is the dust jacket present?
Furthermore, the presumption is that nothing is added by the book owner—no
bookplates and no handwriting.

Factors That Affect Valuation
These are the things that you should not do:
u Do not discard the dust jacket. Because it is an integral part of the
book, the overall value will be determined accordingly.
u Do not clip the price off the corner of the dust jacket. (This is
commonly done when bought as a present, so the recipient doesn’t
know what the giver has paid.)
u Do not paste in your own bookplate. (These are usually glued in and
cannot be removed.)
u Do not sign your name in the book, Unless you are the author. (In this
case, the preferred place is the title page on which your name appears.)
u Do not store the book in a place with high humidity, such as an attic
or an outside storage unit with no temperature control.
u Do not buy book club editions except for reading copies, because
these are usually inexpensive reprints and have no real collectible value.
u Do not buy ex-library copies except for reading copies only, because
these are usually well-read, shopworn, and likely in poor—or, at best,
fair—condition, with stampings and envelopes pasted in.
u Do not shrink-wrap a book, because shrink-wrapping can literally warp
a book over time.
u Do not put books where they are accessible by pets. (I have a friend
whose “As New” copy of a valuable Tolkien book was damaged when
her cat knocked a vase and water-stained its cloth binding—a nonrepairable flaw that significantly affects its value.)

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

157

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

158 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

These are the things that you should do:
u Buy from a reputable book dealer, preferably one who specializes in
antiquarian books, because he will know what he is selling, describe it
accurately, and ask a fair price.
u Be wary of signed Tolkien books or ephemera offered on general
auction Websites, such as eBay, where anyone can sell anything at any
price, and the provenance may be questionable. (That said, I have seen
signed letters by Tolkien on eBay that are incontrovertibly the real thing.
However, while forging the real One Ring is the stuff of fiction, forging
signatures is much easier!)
u Carefully inspect your copy for damage before storing it.
u Store books upright on a bookshelf. (Don’t do what a friend of mine
did: He painted his bookshelves white, and then put books on them
before proper drying. Since then, his books literally have “glued” to
the shelf!)
u Protect the dust jacket by using a Gaylord or Brodart acetate cover,
such as libraries use.
u On the bookshelf, do not cram books together to make them fit, which
can compress them.
u Consult a descriptive bibliography to ensure that the book you have
bought is, in fact, the edition you expected: J.R.R. Tolkien: A Descriptive
Bibliography by Wayne G. Hammond and Douglas A. Anderson is
indispensable.
u Store the book in a room with relatively low humidity.

Book Defects
These are the most common defects found in a book—defects that adversely
affect its condition:
f Clipped price. If people routinely give you books for gifts, ask them not to
clip the price or inscribe the book with a cheery celebratory greeting.
f Tears. Small tears turn into large tears. Be especially careful to inspect the
edges of the dust jacket and the interior pages of the book, because book manufacturing cannot guarantee trouble-free printing and binding for 100 percent
of the copies printed. (Bloomsbury, the U.K. publisher of J.K. Rowling’s popular Harry Potter novels, was surprised to discover that hundreds of books were
printed with pages missing. It can happen.)
f Torn or ripped pages. This is usually accidental, but these are fatal flaws.
f Chipping. Book jackets are particularly susceptible to small chips, which can,
like a tear, turn into a larger chip.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

158

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 159

f Creasing. This is usually unintentional and often affects corners, but a crease
cannot be repaired. It is a permanent flaw. (Sometimes people don’t use
bookmarkers—they just turn down the pages as convenient. This is particularly
a problem with library books.)
f Trimmed dust jacket. Publishers make jackets to fit the book exactly, so why
some people feel the need to trim them is a puzzlement. There’s no rational
reason to trim a book jacket!
f Tape. Often used to mend small tears, tape used by amateurs is usually acidic
and will yellow over time. (Book conservators use tape sparingly and only an
acid-free brand.)
f Adhesive sticker attached. This is the fault of the bookseller. The current worst
offender is Books-a-Million, which computerizes its titles but affixes a fiendishly
sticky label that, over time, actually becomes permanently bonded to the dust
jacket! Even when carefully removed, as much as possible, a sticky residue
remains.
f A close cousin of the adhesive sticker: a small plastic anti-theft device literally
affixed to the dust jacket or the inside of a book. When stuck on, this device
cannot be removed. (Barnes & Noble inserts these loose, placed randomly
between the pages of the book.)
f Written markings, usually the price. Booksellers who specialize in used books
often use a soft pencil to mark the price on the inside front cover—erasable,
fortunately. Beware if the price is in ink.
f Stamped markings. A book owner may use a stamp to print his name, address,
or phone number (or all three) in the book itself, presumably to prevent theft.
f An adhesive label. I actually bought a first edition of what turned out to be a
very valuable book—The Forever War by Joe Haldeman—that bore the bookseller’s adhesive address label permanently affixed to the inside front cover!
It’s a form of advertising for him, but it did detract from the value of the book
when I eventually resold it.
f Excessive wear. Obviously more of a problem with used books, but because
new books are returnable and some have been manhandled before being sent
back to the distributor or publisher, who in turn will reship it out as a new
book, beware. Inspect the book carefully.
f Water stains. Books are very susceptible to water damage and, in fact, cannot
be repaired when significantly wet. (After a water heater on the third floor of
my home burst, flooding the lower two levels, including the air-conditioned
storage area where some of my books are stored, three boxes of books were
literally soaked with water. The insurance adjuster couldn’t believe that these
books had no resale value—waterlogged with pages literally stuck together,
the books could not be salvaged.)

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

159

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

160 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

f Embossing. A favorite book tool is the customized hand-embosser, which
imprints in raised lettering your name, or initials, in a circular seal, “This book
is from the library of _____.” This physically damages the book beyond repair,
because the page itself has been permanently altered.
f Removed pages. This is usually a binding problem, and not always from old
age. New books, improperly bound, may have signatures falling out, as was the
case with a recently published 415-page book of Marilyn Monroe collectibles.
f Bumped corners. Books, if dropped, will inevitably land on a corner, permanently bumping it. Must be a law of physics.
f Remainder marks. These are designed to be nonremovable, because books
are returnable, and a book without an indelible marking could—if in the hands
of an unscrupulous bookseller—be purchased for pennies on the dollar and
returned for full value. For this reason, remainder marks usually bear the stamp
seal of the publisher or heavy black permanent ink marked as a solid line across
a book’s bottom edge.
f Annotated pages. Some people write in the margins. This can sometimes be a
real problem with collectible books that are used.
f Page discoloration. Usually a problem with older books, it can also be a problem
with new books if left in the sunlight—a sure way to fade the dust jacket or
cloth binding.
f Spine defects. A book’s spine is designed to hold the book together when it is
stored properly—upright, without too much compression, with books on either
side. If improperly stored, a book’s spine may crack, slant, or become loose.
This is repairable, but restoration is expensive and often easier to prevent than
to correct after the fact.

Terms Used to Identify Books
As in any other specialized profession, booksellers have their own vocabulary. The following terms are what you will most likely encounter when reading
descriptions for used books. If you understand the vocabulary, you’ll be in a
better position to know exactly what you’re buying.
f Proof copy. This is most commonly bound as a trade paperback and marked
“proof” or “proof copy” and is usually the uncorrected, typeset text that’s
published in small runs and given out to book reviewers who need long lead
times. (Time doesn’t permit the nicety of providing a typographically accurate
edition.) Because the text may change significantly, as the author makes
revisions, there’s usually a standard disclaimer to the effect that any quoted
text should be checked against the final printed book and not this proof copy.
Printed in relatively small runs, these are not sold, but some do find their way
into the hands of secondhand booksellers.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

160

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 161

f Limited edition. For the most part, Tolkien has not had limited editions
published, which are usually signed and numbered by the author, artist, or both.
What few limited editions I’ve seen in the Tolkien market have been issued by
his British publisher, HarperCollins. For example, to celebrate the 60th
anniversary of The Hobbit, 600 copies were specially bound and signed by artist
Alan Lee; to celebrate the centenary of Tolkien’s birth, 250 copies of the three
volumes of The Lord of the Rings were published, each volume individually
signed and numbered by Alan Lee; and 500 copies of The Silmarillion, specially
bound and slipcased, signed by Christopher Tolkien and Ted Nasmith.
f First edition. This is the most desired state—the first published copies of the
book. The edition is normally marked on the “legal” page, along with the
number of its printing. (As the book sells out and goes back to press, the
publisher notes which printing the book is currently in.) For instance, the First
American Edition of The Silmarillion, published in 1977, states “First American
Edition” and, at the bottom, bears a line of numbers; on the far right, the number
“1” indicates it is the first edition, first printing—the most valuable edition.
(When the book is reprinted, the number “1” is removed and the number “2”
shows—in this instance, a first edition with a second (or subsequent) printing.
It’s an important distinction, because the first printings of the first edition are the
most collectible.
f Second edition, first printing. This means the book has been revised, so it’s in
fact a new edition of the book. In this instance, the publisher usually indicates
on the cover, “revised” or “expanded” edition. The “legal” page will also reflect
the fact that the text has been altered.
f Second edition, second (or subsequent) printing. This means the book has
been revised and has gone back to press; the lowest number will indicate how
many printings the book has had.

Specific Terms
f Association copy. This is a copy of the book given to someone close, personally
or professionally, to the author. Typically, association copies are first editions
and very warmly inscribed, as well. Obviously, the stronger the association, the
more valuable the book. A first edition copy of The Hobbit, given by Tolkien to
his aunt Jane on his mother’s side (Emily Jane Suffield) fetched $66,630 at a
Sotheby’s auction in 2002. (She was the one who urged him to write a book
about Tom Bombadil—the result, The Adventures of Tom Bombadil.)
f First edition. I’ve discussed this earlier but want to emphasize that there is no
standardized method of identifying first editions; each publisher has his own
method, which complicates things needlessly for all in the book trade. The key
thing to remember is that the lowest number indicates its printing; thus, if a book
is marked “First Edition,” the number “1” indicates the first printing of that first
edition, the number “2” indicates a second printing of that first edition, etc.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

161

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

162 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

f Inscribed copy. When Tolkien gave out books, he often inscribed them, writing
a warm note, signing his name, and dating it. Typically, an author, especially
if pressed for time or inscribing for a stranger, will write “Best Wishes” or
something similar and short. A warmly inscribed copy to someone Tolkien
knew is, obviously, more valuable than an inscribed copy to someone with
whom he had no association—that is, a reader he didn’t personally know,
who had asked him to sign it.
f Out of print. This means the book is no longer available for sale in the book
trade through normal book channels—distributors and wholesalers. (The book
may still be available, as remaindered copies or as regular stock that’s unsold.)
f Paperback. There are two varieties of paperback books, mass market and trade.
Mass market are smaller, pocket-size books printed on low-quality paper. Trade
paperbacks, sometimes called “quality” paperbacks, are usually printed on
higher quality paper, have better covers, a larger trim size, and a price to match.
f Trade hardback. These are usually clothbound, with a dust jacket. Most of
Tolkien’s books have been issued in this fashion.
f Publication date. This is the actual date the book is allowed to be sold in the
bookstore. (These days, to prevent premature sales, big-name books are
released simultaneously on a specific day. For example, J.K. Rowling’s The
Order of the Phoenix was made available for sale worldwide one minute after
midnight on the day of release—June 21, 2003.)
f Remainder marks. Indelible markings usually on the bottom edge of the book
with black permanent ink, a stamp with the publisher’s logo, or with spray
paint—all impossible to remove. This indicates the publisher printed more than
could be sold through normal book channels and, thus, marked them down
and sold them to remainder companies that specialize in books. These copies
usually show up at the chain stores on bargain tables or in specialty bookstores
that carry remaindered books.
f Slipcase. Usually a cloth-covered case into which a book can be slipped. The
cloth case usually matches the cloth of the book itself. Normally done for more
valuable editions, such as the deluxe editions of The Hobbit, The Lord of the
Rings, The Silmarillion, and The History of Middle-earth (three volumes, each
slipcased, with the books printed on India paper).

On Autographs
Tolkien’s signature can be found on both handwritten and typed letters, on
copies of his books, and on books that were from his personal library.
Signed letters are the most affordable, especially if it’s short (one or two paragraphs) and its contents bland (thanking a reader for enjoying his books, or declining
an invitation). I’ve seen these come up for sale occasionally on eBay, for $2,500 and
up, but for the most part I’ve seen copies for sale through antiquarian booksellers.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

162

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 163

Christopher Tolkien also sold some books from his father’s library—grammar
books, in which J.R.R. Tolkien had signed his full name, with notes or grammatical
annotations—but the last copies I’ve seen for sale sold in early 2003 for $650 and
up. Those copies are now rapidly rising in value.
Considering Tolkien’s enduring popularity,
his importance in the fantasy field, and the fact
that he (unlike many authors) did not generally
support book signings, his signature is surprisingly
obtainable—if money is not a major consideration and you know exactly where to look.
Tolkien’s calligraphic signature.
The most valuable signatures are found on
holographic letters in which he discusses his major works, such as The Hobbit
and, especially, The Lord of the Rings. Likewise, his signature on first editions of
any of his books—especially the prize, a set of The Lord of the Rings individually
signed—will continue to command top dollar. (To one English reader who wrote
and identified himself as “Sam Gamgee,” after hearing he was in the story, Tolkien
sent a signed set of all three volumes.)
In addition to listings in booksellers’ catalogs, signed books and letters have,
in recent years, shown up at major auction houses and, of course, on eBay—a
reputable online “flea market” where it’s especially important to know what you’re
buying and from whom. Unfortunately, there are some unscrupulous, greedy people
who take advantage of others through the anonymity of the Internet and the gullibility of customers who can’t distinguish between a real signature and a fake one.
I have seen two authentic letters by Tolkien for sale, and have not seen any
fake signatures, but to borrow a line from Gandalf, don’t be a fool of a Took!
Know what you’re buying and from whom, to avoid disappointment.
Generally speaking, booksellers know their inventory and know the current
market values for the books they carry. Here’s a sampling of some of the first editions for sale, with approximate prices culled from booksellers’ catalogs and online
listings.
u The Hobbit, or There and Back Again (London: George Allen & Unwin,
1937). First edition, hardback, with first issue dust jacket: $85,000.
u The Lord of the Rings (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1954/1955).
First editions, hardback with dust jackets: $44,500.
u The Hobbit, or There and Back Again (London: George Allen and
Unwin, 1937). First edition, second printing, with dust jacket: $15,000.
Although 2,300 copies were printed, 423 copies, in sheet form, were
destroyed during World War II, when London was bombed. This edition
has Tolkien’s art in color, whereas the first edition has his art in black
and white.
u Farmer Giles of Ham (London: George Allan Unwin, 1949). First
edition, with dust jacket, signed with Tolkien’s full signature: $12,000.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

163

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

164 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

u A set of the deluxe editions of The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and
The Silmarillion (London: Harper Collins): $6,000. The Hobbit was a
limited edition of 600 copies; The Lord of the Rings was limited to 250
copies, signed by illustrator Alan Lee; and The Silmarillion was limited
to 500 copies, signed by Christopher Tolkien and illustrator Ted
Nasmith.
u The Hobbit (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1938). First edition. Hardback
with dust jacket: $4,500.
u The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle (Allen & Unwin, 1968). First
edition, signed by Tolkien, hardback, with dust jacket: $4,000.
u Smith of Wootton Major (Allen & Unwin, 1967). First edition, proof
copy, paperback: $3,000.
u The History of Middle-earth (12 volumes bound in three), The Hobbit,
The Lord of the Rings, and The Silmarillion, all printed on India paper,
with quarter-leather bindings, and slipcased: $2,000.
u Anthology Oxford Poetry (Oxford: B.H. Blackwell, 1915). Includes
“Goblin Feet” by Tolkien (his first appearance in book form),
paperback: $1,400.
u The Hobbit (Hatchard’s of London, 1997). Half-leather in slipcase,
each copy signed by its illustrator, Alan Lee: $1,200.
u Farmer Giles of Ham (London: Allen & Unwin, 1949). First edition,
hardback, with dust jacket: $800.
u The Adventures of Tom Bombadil (London: Allen & Unwin, 1962). First
edition, hardback, with dust jacket: $750.
u Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1979). First
edition, hardback, with slipcase: $200–400.
u Tree and Leaf (London: Allen & Unwin, 1964). First edition, hardback,
with dust jacket: $350.
u On Fairy Stories (London: Oxford University Press, 1947). First edition,
hardback, with dust jacket: $300.
u The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1984). First edition. hardback, with dust jacket: $250.
u The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle, Music by Donald Swann &
Poems by J.R.R. Tolkien (London: Allen and Unwin, 1968). Hardback,
with dust jacket: $250.
u Smith of Wootton Major (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967). Hardback,
with dust jacket: $200.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

164

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

SMAUG’S STASH: TOLKIEN TREASURES

u 165

u Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien (London: Allen & Unwin, 1981). Hardback,
with dust jacket: $150.
u A Tolkien Family Album (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992). Hardback,
with dust jacket: $150.
u The Road Goes Ever On (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967). Hardback,with dust jacket: $125.
u The Father Christmas Letters (London: Allen & Unwin, 1976). Hardback, with dust jacket: $125.
u The Silmarillion (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977). Hardback, with dust
jacket: $100.
u Mr. Bliss (London: Allen & Unwin, 1982). Hardback, with dust jacket:
$100.
u Unfinished Tales (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980). Hardback, with
dust jacket: $100.

Letters
Set in small type and totaling 502 pages, The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien is not
definitive, as its editor, Humphrey Carpenter, points out: “Despite the length of
this volume, and the great number of letters we have collected, there can be no
doubt that much of Tolkien’s correspondence still remains untraced.”
According to Houghton Mifflin, Tolkien was “one of the 20th century’s most
prolific letter writers” and, from the prices realized today on the open market, one
of the most collectible, as well.
Here are some of the letters offered for sale in the last half year, culled from
bookseller catalogs:
u A holographic letter, two pages, written in 1969: $13,000.
u A holographic letter, on Merton College letterhead, 1954: $7,500.
u A holographic correspondence card, with envelope, 1949: $7,300.
u A holographic letter mentioning The Hobbit, 1969: $4,900.
u A holographic letter to Tolkien biographer Humphrey Carpenter,
1968: $4,000.
u A typed letter, 1966: $3,000.
u A holographic letter (declining an invitation), 1956: $2,500.
u A typed letter (declining to review a book), 1967: $1,750.

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

165

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

10 Tolkien Chapter 10.pmd

166

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

CHAPTER 11

VISIONS OF
MIDDLE-EARTH:
TOLKIEN ART

As a writer and an artist himself, Tolkien was very concerned about the art
used for his books—especially cover art—and was vocal in raising his objections,
politely but firmly. It’s easy to understand Tolkien’s frustrations, because the book
publication process, as viewed from the publisher’s perspective, is worlds apart
from the author’s perspective. The former looks to save time and cut costs in every
way possible, but the latter imagines only the illustrative possibilities and the look
of the book. As a result, the two perspectives may be very different, as was the case
when Ballantine Books issued a mass market paperback of The Hobbit with a bulbous fruit-bearing tree surrounded by emus, which understandably upset Tolkien.
Expressing his strong disapproval, he was told the artist hadn’t had time to read
the book and that the tree was meant to suggest a Christmas tree. Tolkien’s understandable response was that he felt as if he had been shut up in a “madhouse.”
Since the publication of The Hobbit in 1937, with Tolkien’s own delightful illustrations, hundreds of artists—fan and pro—have attempted to visualize Tolkien’s
Middle-earth, with varying results. The Tolkien illustrator faces several formidable
obstacles, not the least of which is the reader’s individual vision as he imagines it in
his mind’s eye.
With the release of the Jackson film adaptations, yet another obstacle is created. The visuals from the films are firmly imprinted in one’s mind, so when thinking of Frodo Baggins, an image of the boyish Elijah Wood may come to mind.
Beyond the force of the visual imprinting from the film adaptations, there is
the subjective matter of individual visions from artists who clearly have their own
perceptions of how the people, places, and things in Middle-earth ought to look.
u 167 U

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

167

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

168 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Despite the formidable challenges involved in imagining and depicting Middleearth, with all its varied landscapes populated by orcs, trolls, hobbits, ents, wizards,
and elves (to name but a few), the best Tolkien artists rise to the occasion. Richly
imaginative, technically accomplished, and able to go beyond mere illustration by
evoking a sense of wonder, these artists know and love Tolkien’s work and give us
interpretations that ring true.
My personal favorite, about whom I’ve written at length elsewhere in this
book, is Tim Kirk—a fantasy artist who has illustrated H.P. Lovecraft, Lord
Dunsany, William Hope Hodgson, and, of course, Tolkien.
To date, four Tolkien art books have appeared: two collecting Tolkien’s own
work (Pictures by J.R.R. Tolkien and J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist & Illustrator) and two
anthologies (Tolkien’s World: Paintings of Middle-earth and Realms of Tolkien:
Images of Middle-earth). Regarding the two anthologies, the art—in my estimation—
runs the gamut in terms of quality.
We can consider Tolkien’s own art as definitive, and all others interpretive, but
all the artists share a considerable enthusiasm for Tolkien’s imaginative fiction.
Any discussion of Tolkien artists—drawn from the hundreds of fan and pro
artists who have illustrated his work—must, by necessity, be truncated. Rather than
a subjective approach, I’m limiting it to the work of professional artists who have
illustrated Tolkien’s books or calendars, or books about Tolkien.

Tolkien Artists: A Selective Overview
American Artists
Donato Giancola. A classically trained artist, Donato Giancola has already propelled himself in the first rank of fantasy illustrators with a series of imaginative,
boldly designed, and brilliantly executed book covers inspired not by previous fantasy illustrators but by Old World artists who excelled in draftsmanship.
Drawing in a realistic vein, Giancola’s cover for The Hobbit is an impressive
38 x 68 inches. A similarly themed painting, a portrait of the Fellowship, was done
for the Science Fiction Book Club edition of The Lord of the Rings, showing Aragorn
sheltering Frodo in the Mines of Moria. On a smaller scale, measuring 8 x 10 inches,
a rendition of the One Ring—a jewel-like painting done for a gaming card.
Complementing the book covers, a series of illustrations for gaming cards
amply shows Donato’s strong compositional skills and draftsmanship. (His portraits are, as you’d expect from someone inspired by the European masters, exquisitely rendered.)
The heir apparent to the title of “Best Professional Artist” in the science
fiction and fantasy field, Giancola’s the man to watch. His pieces of art are works
of wonder.
Open edition prints of his Tolkien art are available from his Website,
www.donatoart.com.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

168

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 169

Michael Hague. A former greeting card artist for Hallmark Cards and Current
Company, Michael Hague is best known for his watercolors illustrating children’s
classics, including The Wizard of Oz, The Wind in the Willows, The Reluctant Dragon,
Aesop’s Fables, and his series of children’s books done in collaboration with his
wife, Kathleen. Of special interest to Tolkien fans is Hague’s work for The Hobbit
(HarperCollins, $17.95, trade paperback), for which he rendered 48 color illustrations—seven of which were reprinted in Tolkien’s World: Paintings of Middle-earth.
No official Website exists and no prints are available.
Stephen Hickman. Principally a paperback book cover artist, with more than 350
to his credit, Hickman’s interpretations of Middle-earth strike a resonant chord in
me. Two of his Tolkien-inspired paintings were published in Realms of Tolkien
(HarperCollins, $30): from The Fellowship of the Ring, “The Black Rider,” showing Gaffer Gamgee confronted by a Nazgûl on his black steed; and from The
Return of the King, “The Siege of Gondor,” a magnificent battle scene, awash in
red, showing a horse-mounted Nazgûl directing the assault against the city.
Though long out of print, The Art of Stephen Hickman (originally published
by The Donning Company) is worth hunting down because it shows an excellent
selection of his cover paintings.
No prints of Hickman’s Tolkien work are currently available. His Website is
at www.stephenhickman.com.
Greg and Tim Hildebrandt. Commonly called the Brothers Hildebrandt (a nod, perhaps, to the Brothers Grimm?), Greg and Tim Hildebrandt are well known in Tolkien
circles because of their three Tolkien calendars published in 1977, 1978, and 1979.
Fans interested in the story behind their pictures will find Greg and Tim
Hildebrandt: The Tolkien Years (Watson-Guptill Publications) a fascinating read.
Written by Gregory Hildebrandt, Jr., the book sheds light on how the Hildebrandts
began their long association as Tolkien artists, when an editor at Del Rey Books
gave Greg and Tim an assignment to do a cover for a mass market paperback
edition of Smith of Wootton Major/Farmer Giles of Ham that recalled the art of
Maxfield Parrish.
In September 2002, an expanded edition was published in trade paperback
($24.95) included 12 additional pages and a pullout poster, as well.
Giclée prints are available of many of their illustrations from the calendars.
A little bit of history here: The Tolkien Years bears a dedication from Tim
Hildebrandt, who credits his wife for being the initial impetus to his Tolkien work:
To my wife Rita, who made it possible for me to have illustrated
the Ring calendars. She gave me the 1975 Tolkien calendar
[illustrated by Tim Kirk] as a Christmas gift. On the back, there
was an invitation for artists to contact the publisher if they were
interested in illustrating The Lord of the Rings. If I hadn’t received
this present, I would never have called [on the publisher].
Their Website is at www.brothershildebrandt.com.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

169

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

170 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Michael Kaluta. A well-regarded artist, best known for his work in the comic
book field, Kaluta has illustrated numerous major books, including Batman (DC
Comics) and Vampirella (DC Comics); profusely illustrated an edition of Metropolis (Donning Company); published two major artbooks collecting his work;
and has seen his Tolkien art published in calendar and book form. His Website is
at www.kaluta.com.
Tim Kirk. A former greeting card artist for both Hallmark Cards and Current
Company, Kirk has spent the bulk of his professional career as a senior designer at
Imagineering for the Walt Disney Company. Currently a partner in Kirk Design
Inc., Tim Kirk’s name is well known in organized fandom because of his whimsical cartoons and illustrations for fanzines, prozines, and book covers for small
presses and mainstream publishers, alike.
In 1980, a retrospective of his work, Kirk’s Works, was edited by George
Beahm. Published by Heresy Press, this book looks at Kirk’s works predating his
employment at Disney.
Kirk’s artwork is distinctive, not only in appearance but in execution. With
an art style uniquely his own, his lifelong interest in fantasy and affiliation with
fandom led to numerous assignments from small presses such as Arkham House,
Mirage Press, Whispers Press, and large publishers such as DAW Books.
An ardent Tolkien fan, Kirk illustrated the dust jacket for Robert Foster’s
Guide to Middle-earth, published by Mirage Press in 1971. But Tolkien fans know
his work best from the “1975 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar,” which was the first Tolkien
calendar to feature artwork by a sole artist (previous calendars had art by Tolkien
and Pauline Baynes).
Kirk’s Tolkien art came to the attention of Ian and Betty Ballantine, who saw
an exhibit of the original art at Worldcon in southern California in 1972. The
Ballantines then published the art to a worldwide audience. Of the 26 illustrations
originally drawn to fulfill the requirements for his master’s degree in art, 13 appeared in the calendar. For years a fan favorite, Tim Kirk’s work is now known
internationally in Tolkien circles.
What makes Tim Kirk unique among Tolkien artists is his unique vision and
powerful imagination that combines to evoke a sense of wonder. Kirk’s affinity for
and love of fantasy makes him, in my estimation, the Tolkien artist whose work
best visually depicts Middle-earth.
For information on some of his work, visit www.FlightsofImagination.com.
David Wenzel. As a book illustrator, Wenzel’s principal influence is a turn-ofthe-century British illustrator, Arthur Rackham (b. 1867). In terms of Tolkien
work, Wenzel has the singular distinction of having illustrated the only graphic
novel adaptation of any Tolkien book—The Hobbit (HarperCollins, $15), which
was designed to appeal especially to younger readers.
Working in watercolor, Wenzel’s Tolkien art is available as inkjet prints (13 x
19 inches, $60–90) and (to date) one lithograph, as well.
His work can be viewed at www.davidwenzel.com.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

170

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

David Wenzel’s art for his graphic novel
adaptation of The Hobbit.

u 171

A watercolor painting by David Wenzel
from The Hobbit, the graphic novel
adaptation.

Michael Whelan. Best known for his cover art for major science fiction and fantasy authors, Whelan’s sole contribution to the canvas of Tolkien art is a scene
from The Return of the King, in which Frodo and Sam have achieved their arduous mission—to destroy the One Ring by casting it back into the Crack of Doom,
from whence it was forged—and await their rescue by the eagles.
Titled “The Eagles are Coming,” this pivotal scene is from The Return of the
King (“The Fields of Cormallen”).
Whelan’s painting depicts Frodo and Sam on a volcanic outcrop, surrounded
by rivers of lava, as swirling plumes of smoke rise; in the background, two towers
are crumbling, and the light of day breaks through as the eagles—Gwaihir,
Landroval, and Meneldor—come to rescue them.
Rich in symbolism—the crumbling towers juxtaposed against the light of hope—
Whelan’s draftsmanship is buttressed by his ability to think through a painting,
determining the key image that best illustrates the work at hand. In this painting,
Whelan chose wisely and well, for everything in The Lord of the Rings has been
encapsulated in this painting. It is, simply, a masterpiece, though Whelan himself
principally sees its flaws. Painted years ago, “The Eagles are Coming” is representative, he says, of what he could do back then. Now, he knows, he would approach
the painting differently, bringing to bear additional years of knowledge and skill.
Most readers, I suspect, will look at the painting and gasp in delight. Whelan
has given us an image that most of us have seen, however inadequately, in our
collective mind’s eye and concretized it: This painting is what I see when that scene
comes to mind, which is the highest compliment I can pay.
Whelan’s ability to think through a cover painting, by reading it thoroughly
and picking a symbolic scene that encapsulates the entire work, is a rare gift. Also,
Whelan’s technical abilities as an artist—his composition, his color sense, and his
draftsmanship—are second to none.
It’s little wonder that Whelan has won more awards in the fantasy and science
fiction field than any other artist in the history of the genre—14 Hugos; three

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

171

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

172 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Howards (the maximum allowed by voting rules); and “Best Professional Artist,” as
voted on by the readership of the field’s trade journal, Locus, for 21 years in a row.
The illustrator of Stephen King’s first Dark Tower novel, The Dark Tower:
The Gunslinger (Donald M. Grant, Publisher, Inc.), Whelan has come full circle
by illustrating the seventh—and last—book in the Dark Tower series, simply
titled The Dark Tower (Donald M. Grant, Publishers, Inc.).
With a few paperback covers for DAW Books due in 2004, Whelan is concentrating on his gallery work and private paintings in the short term.
Many of Whelan’s prints are available through Glass Onion Graphics,
www.glassonion.com (see Appendix A for more information), but, alas, for Tolkien
fans, his signature piece of Frodo and Sam (“The Eagles are Coming”) is available
only in their original appearances: “The 1980 Tolkien Calendar: The Great Illustrators Edition” and Michael Whelan’s Works of Wonder (both by Ballantine Books).

Canadian Artists
Ted Nasmith. Completing the circle of officially endorsed artists prominently
featured on Tolkien’s official book Website, Ted Nasmith’s association as a Tolkien
artist began in 1987, when four paintings were used in the two versions of the
Tolkien calendar for that year (one published by Unwin Paperbacks, the other by
Ballantine). He followed that up with full calendars in 1990 (Ballantine), 1992
(Ballantine), 1996 (HarperCollins), and 2003 (Harper Entertainment), supplemented by Tolkien diary art, a poster book collection, and a fully illustrated edition of The Silmarillion, designed as a companion book to Alan Lee’s illustrated
editions of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit. Sumptuously illustrated with 20
full-color plates commissioned especially for this edition, The Silmarillion complements the other two masterworks by Tolkien. (Nasmith is currently painting 26
more pieces for a reissue of The Silmarillion.)
His official Website is at www.tednasmith.com. Giclée prints and original art
are available through Chalk Farm Gallery, www.chalkfarmgallery.com (see Appendix
E for further information).

British Artists
Pauline Baynes. Perhaps best known for her 350 illustrations for C.S. Lewis’s
The Chronicles of Narnia (HarperCollins), Pauline Baynes has a rare distinction
among Tolkien artists: She met him, by chance, at Allen & Unwin, when she went to
submit an art folio. Rejecting another artist’s folio for Farmer Giles of Ham, Tolkien
embraced her art, calling it (according to Humphrey Carpenter’s writing in J.R.R.
Tolkien: A Biography) “...more than illustrations, they are a collateral theme.”
Baynes’s art is charming and delightful, the perfect visual complement to the
lesser known Tolkien books, Farmer Giles of Ham (Houghton Mifflin), Smith of
Wootton Major (Ballantine Books), The Adventures of Tom Bombadil (in The

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

172

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 173

Tolkien Reader, by Ballantine Books), and Tree and Leaf (Houghton Mifflin);
most recently, she illustrated a short poem, Bilbo’s Last Song (Alfred A. Knopf),
which is more a showcase for her art than it is a showcase for Tolkien’s poem.
Unfortunately, no official Website exists, and no prints are available of her
work.
John Howe. At HarperCollins UK, the official Website of Tolkien’s British publisher, only three artists—excluding Tolkien himself—are highlighted: John Howe,
Alan Lee, and Ted Nasmith.
Howe’s Tolkien-related credits are extensive and impressive. In addition to
calendars, diaries, and related products, such as a poster collection and a postcard
book, he was a conceptual artist for Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings film
adaptation.
A fellow artist and conceptual artist for Jackson’s Tolkien films, Alan Lee,
wrote of John Howe, in an appreciation published on Howe’s Website (at www.johnhowe.com/biography/afterword.htm), that:
His love and respect for Tolkien’s world is apparent through the
imaginative power of his illustrations and the integrity he brings to
all aspects of his design work. Large tracks of Middle-earth are
brooded over by John’s awe-inspiring structures. His Barad-dûr,
glimpsed through clouds of swirling vapour, will be an enduring
image in many minds, as will his Gandalf striding purposefully
through the Shire.
Pictures of Howe’s Tolkien works are available in book form, including Images of Middle-earth: Poster Collection (HarperCollins UK, $22.95), Myth and
Magic Poster Collection (HarperCollins UK, $24.95), and Myth and Magic
(HarperCollins UK, $35), which feature art from The Hobbit, The Lord of the
Rings, The Silmarillion, and The History of Middle-earth.
John Howe’s Website is located at www.john-howe.com.
Alan Lee. In the collective mind of the public, if there is one artist who is most
strongly identified with Tolkien, that would be Alan Lee, who is one of three artists
featured on the official Website of Tolkien’s British publisher.
In Lee’s case, his singular distinction is that he is the only artist to have illustrated Tolkien’s two most popular works: The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit.
For The Lord of the Rings, he provided 50 paintings for a special one-volume
edition celebrating Tolkien’s 1892–1992 centenary (Houghton Mifflin, $70). The
art was subsequently reprinted in a three-volume set printed with matte paper that
enhanced the art reproduction.
Complementing his work on The Lord of the Rings, Lee illustrated The Hobbit
for its 60th anniversary (Houghton Mifflin, $35), as well, providing black-andwhite and color art.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

173

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

174 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Because of his work on these projects, he was hired by Peter Jackson as a
conceptual artist for the film adaptation of The Lord of the Rings, further solidifying his position as the premiere Tolkien illustrator.
In 1994, Lee illustrated David Day’s Tolkien’s Ring, providing color plates
and numerous black-and-white illustrations for an examination of ring-quest tales
that inspired Tolkien when fashioning his own story.
Lee’s artwork can also be found in three poster collections—Tolkien Poster
Collection (HarperCollins UK, $22.95), The Hobbit Poster Collection (HarperCollins
UK, $22.95), and two volumes of The Lord of the Rings Poster Collection
(HarperCollins UK, $24.95 each)—as well as two diaries, an address book, a birthday book, and the 1999 calendar from HarperCollins, with art from The Hobbit.
Fans of Lee’s evocative watercolor art will want to buy The Mabinogion
(HarperCollins UK, £25), with its 50 illustrations, many appearing in print for the
first time in this book.
Three poster book collections are in print, but no separate prints exist. There
is no official Website, though a small portfolio of art exists on the official Tolkien
Website, www.tolkien.co.uk.
J.R.R. Tolkien. It is rare that an accomplished writer is also a skilled artist, but
when this happy happenstance occurs, it illuminates the text and provides a unique
visual insight of the fiction—we literally see, through the artist/writer’s eyes, a creative vision, pure and undimmed.
Such is the case with Tolkien’s fiction. From his lesser-known works such as
Mr. Bliss to the artwork for The Hobbit, the book cover designs for The Lord of
the Rings, and its numerous illustrations—not to mention the devices and calligraphy—Tolkien’s art is inseparable from his fiction, a felicitous marriage of text
and art that combines to form a pleasing whole.
In Pictures by Tolkien (Houghton Mifflin), his previously published artwork,
from the books and calendars, give an excellent overview to his skills as an artist—
his own objections notwithstanding. In J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist & Illustrator (Houghton
Mifflin), the wide range of his art is on full display. No question: Tolkien, a selftaught artist, modestly considered himself an amateur, someone who drew for the
love of it, and never considered himself serious competition to professional artists
who would be called upon to illustrate his fiction. Nonetheless, Tolkien himself
provided illustrations for The Hobbit that have stood the test of time, despite his
modest assertion in Letters by J.R.R. Tolkien (Houghton Mifflin) that “The pictures seem to me mostly only to prove that the author cannot draw.” The pictures
Tolkien provided included eight black-and-white illustrations and a distinctive cover
illustration that, to my mind, are utterly enchanting and delightful, far preferable
to an illustrated edition by any other artist.
Unfortunately, too few prints, posters, or poster books of Tolkien’s own art
are available, but perhaps an enterprising publisher will remedy this lamentable
situation.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

174

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 175

Interviews and Art by Select J.R.R. Tolkien Artists
In terms of exposure, the work of Tolkien artists—those who illustrate his
works—are more likely to be seen than discussed. What, after all, needs to be discussed? To paraphrase Shakespeare, the picture’s the thing, and should it not speak
to the viewer?
Of course it does, but should not artists have the opportunity to speak directly
to their audience in ways other than visual?
In this section I’ve deliberately sought out my favorite artists to explain why
they’ve illustrated Tolkien and how they have gone about doing so. What they
have to say about Tolkien and his art is fascinating, though I suspect most people
will skip immediately to their art and only then read what they have to say.
I have heard Tim Kirk, Donato Giancola, and Colleen Doran talk extensively
about Tolkien, Tolkien art, and their enthusiasm for the man and his work. I think
you’d like to hear what they have to say, as well. My only regret is that these interviews aren’t recorded on CD and bound in with this book, because that would truly
give you a sense of how excited they are when discussing Tolkien.
I remember, especially, two lectures given by Donato at a Philcon in 2002. He
took the stage, talked at length about his work and exhibited color slides, and later
gave a demonstration of how he tackles a portrait—from a blank sheet of paper to
the finished work.
People were fascinated by the process and, as Donato is enthusiastic and articulate, his passions are infectious. The crowd came alive, became animated, and
began peppering him with questions.
For those of you who wonder just what artists are thinking before they sit down
to create art, this section is a brief glimpse into the art of imagination.

Tim Kirk’s Works
The late William Rotsler—a prolific
fan cartoonist, among his other talents—
termed Tim Kirk the “Wizard of Whimsey.”
There’s certainly some truth in that, because
Tim’s creatures, no matter how otherworldly, curiously resemble ourselves.
I was in high school when I first discovered Tim’s work, and by the time I was
in college, I eagerly collected his work. By
then, Tim was one of the most prolific and
obviously talented fan artists contributing
to the major fanzines of his time.
Fantasy illustrator Tim Kirk, in front of his house,
holds “Frodo Meditates”—one of his original
paintings from his “1975 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

175

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

176 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

It didn’t take long for Tim to make the leap
from fan to pro. Tim’s work adorned book covers, interiors, and magazines, and in all of it you
could see his obvious love for fantasy books and
illustration. Indeed, his library is jam-packed
with books under the imprints of Arkham
House; Donald M. Grant, Publisher, Inc.; Mirage Press; Whispers Press—all the specialty
houses in the fantasy field that knew Tim was
an artist of the first rank and quickly hired him
for cover and interior illustrations.
To me, what Tim brings to fantasy illustration, especially when illustrating Tolkien, is a visual affinity for “high” fantasy: Lord Dunsany,
Mervyn Peake, H.P. Lovecraft, Clark Ashton
An oil painting of Gandalf the
Smith, and, of course, Tolkien.
Wizard and Bilbo Baggins,
My great enthusiasm and unbridled admirapublished in his “1975 J.R.R.
tion
for Tim resulted in our collaborating on an
Tolkien Calendar.”
art index to his work, Kirk’s Works, published by
Heresy Press, helmed by Cuyler W. Brooks, Jr., who is the man responsible for
introducing me to organized fandom and who, incidentally, has one of the best
private collections of illustrated fantasy books I’ve ever seen.
For many years Tim was well known in fantasy circles—in fact, he was a
multiple recipient of the Hugo award for best fan artist—but in 1973 a happy
coincidence resulted in the publication of his paintings for The Lord of the Rings
as the first Tolkien calendar that was comprised wholly of art by a single artist.
The calendar, published in August 1974, for the
calendar year of 1975, quickly became a
collector’s item. It not only sold out, but now
commands collector’s prices.
Building on his success, after completing his
postgraduate work and receiving a master’s degree in Art, he moved from California to Kansas
City, where he worked for Hallmark Cards, then
subsequently moved to Colorado Springs to
briefly work for Current Cards, on the recommendation of Michael Hague, who was his nextdoor neighbor. His last move was back to
California, where his brother, Steve, urged him
to join Walt Disney’s Imagineering, where he finished a career of more than 20 years as a senior
designer. Tim currently lives in Long Beach, his
Art by Tim Kirk, published in his
hometown.
“1975 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

176

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 177

Currently a partner with his brother in Kirk Design Inc., Tim is designing the
Science Fiction Experience, the first museum of its kind in the world, to open in
the summer of 2004 in Seattle.
So, you ask, just how good is Tim Kirk? I think his art speaks for itself, but let
me call in my first and only witness—Michael Whelan.
About a year ago, I had asked
Michael Whelan to inscribe for
Tim a copy of his second art
book, a collection of his covers
for DAW Books. Michael, who
can inscribe a book quickly, deliberated and then began
writing...and writing...and writing. He had written several paragraphs and then closed the book
cover.
“Michael, you didn’t need to Titled “The Riddle Game,” this oil painting by Tim
write a book,” I jokingly said, and Kirk, of Bilbo Baggins and Gollum, was published
he just smiled.
in his “1975 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”
Weeks later, when I delivered the book to Tim, I saw Tim’s face light up when he read what Michael had
written. The gist of it was that Michael expressed his admiration for Tim’s art and
stated unequivocally that Tim’s illustrations of The Lord of the Rings were the best
he had ever seen, bar none. High praise, we both knew, from the artist who has
gotten more Hugo awards as pro artist than any other in the field. That’s how
good Tim Kirk is, and that’s why I’m pleased—after too long an absence from the
fantasy/science fiction community—to see him back, as he picks up his paintbrush and shows us new visions of Middle-earth.
A historical note: Tolkien fans worldwide know of Tim Kirk because of his
work for the Tolkien calendar in 1975, but not many of them realize that Tim, in
fact, had published a Tolkien calendar in 1969. Consisting of a
cover and six plates, each printed
in a different color, the calendar
sold for 50¢ and was available
through a southern California
fanzine publisher, Ken Rudolph,
who shipped it out with his
Tolkien zine, Mythlore. The calendar
plates
illustrated
Caradhras, Théoden’s Hall, The
Nimrodel in Lothlórien, The
An oil painting by Tim Kirk, titled “Road to
Gates of Gondor, Bilbo’s BirthMinas Tirith,” published in his “1975 J.R.R.
day Party, and The Stairs of
Tolkien Calendar.”
Cirith Ungol.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

177

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

178 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

An Autobiographical Note From Tim Kirk
I first read The Lord of the Rings in 1964—in high school—on a
friend’s recommendation. I was hooked, of course. When I’d finished, I immediately reread the entire thing, out loud, to my younger
brother over the course of that summer—I just had to share it
with someone! On a trip to England in 1967, a clerk at the wonderful Oxford bookstore, Blackwell’s, gave me Tolkien’s address,
and I made a pilgrimage to Professor Tolkien’s former home in an
Oxford suburb.
I went out to Professor Tolkien’s house just to stand worshipfully in front of it. I was certainly awestruck. I took a snapshot, which
I’ve managed to misplace, and went back to the bus stop. I wouldn’t
have dared to knock on the door, or even step onto the front path,
afraid of being struck by lightning, I suppose! (Not until much later
did I find out he had moved some time before to get away from
pesky, adoring fans like me!)
I joined the Mythopeic Society, a southern California-based
group devoted to the work of Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles
Williams, and began doing illustration work for their publications, Mythlore and Mythprint. I even went so far as to design and
build an orc costume, which I wore in the broiling summer heat
to a Renaissance Faire.
When the time came in 1971 for me to choose a subject for my
master’s thesis project in illustration at California State University at Long Beach, the choice was an easy one: a series of paintings based on The Lord of the Rings.
My Master’s Show was a lot of fun. We listed it in the program
book of a small regional Tolkien convention in 1972, and several of
the attendees came to the show in costume.
After graduation, I exhibited the complete project of 26 paintings at the World Science Fiction Convention in Los Angeles that
year. Ian and Betty Ballantine of Ballantine Books saw the collection and liked it well enough to publish 13 of the 26 pieces as the
“1975 J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar.”
One of the most important things Professor Tolkien achieved
with The Lord of the Rings was his creation of a totally believable,
completely immersive world—a unique synthesis that has inspired
a host of (less inspired) imitators. It is this uniqueness and vivid
imagery that also makes LotR such a challenge—and ultimately a
joy—to illustrate. The results are bound to be intensely personal
and heartfelt—and controversial! Everyone who reads the books
has her or his own vision of Frodo, Gandalf, Minas Tirith and
Mordor.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

178

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 179

I was delighted with Peter Jackson’s take on the books—it was
obvious, from the beginning, that the films were a labor of love for
him, his production company, and New Line Cinema. Frankly, I
can’t imagine a better result; turning any complex literary work
into a film, with the inevitable editing that results (witness Ray
Bradbury’s heroic struggle with John Huston and “Moby Dick”!),
is a monumental task at best. I am very, very happy that this production came together the way it did.

Unless you happened to have been at
the southern California convention
where Tim exhibited all of these paintings, you’ve only seen roughly half of
them, which were published in his
Tolkien calendar.
In book form, there are only a half
dozen copies showing all the pictures,
though these are reproduced in black
and white, because Tim’s master’s thesis was bound in hard boards (that is,
the illustrations are pasted in).
As Tim explains, the thesis was a
way to experiment with different media and in different sizes; and, as Tim
is quick to point out, some pieces are
more successful than others. (Beyond
these, there are a dozen more that
have never seen the light of day—the

“also rans” that Tim felt were not sufficiently developed, conceptually, to warrant a further investment of time.)
As with any artist, Tim is his harshest critic—indeed, only very recently, he
refused to hang his own art on the walls
of his home, but his wife, Linda, convinced him otherwise—and though
there are some favorites in this set, Tim
would prefer to go back to Middleearth to render new paintings, with the
benefit of 25-plus years of more experience at the drawing board. Just imagine how wonderful that would be!
In the interim, as we hope and
dream that he gets another opportunity
to do a new calendar or an art book,
we can enjoy these timeless images that
show us Tolkien in a new light.

The complete list of paintings:

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

• Gandalf & Bilbo.

• Tom Bombadil.

• The Road to Minas Tirith.

• Rivendell.

• The Well in Moria.

• The Temptation of Gandalf.

• The Riddle Game.

• The Balrog.

• The Watchers.

• Mirkwood.

• The Mirrormere.

• Two Orcs.

• Smaug.

• Galdadriel.

• Mordor.

• Fire and Water.

• Barad-dûr.

• The Cracks of Doom.

• Pipeweed.

• Treebeard.

• Farewell to the Grey Havens.

• Frodo Meditates.

• In the Emyn Muil.

• The Last Shore.

• Maggot’s Farm.

• Shelob.

179

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

180 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Current Projects
Kirk Design Inc. is currently (as of August 1, 2003) the principal design group
on two large projects: Paul Allen’s “Experience Science Fiction” Museum in
Seattle, the first museum in the world devoted exclusively to the world of science
fiction; and Lotte Dome Theater, a major theme park planned for Tokyo, Japan.
The company has also done work for a variety of other clients and venues, including the Aquarium of the Pacific (Long Beach, Calif.), Busch Gardens, Walt Disney
Pictures (“The Haunted Mansion,” to be released November 2003), and the Ronald
Reagan Presidential Foundation.

Colleen Doran: Drawn to Please
Colleen Doran is the best Tolkien illustrator you’ve never seen. Let me explain: Though she has hundreds of publishing credits for companies such as Marvel, DC Comics, LucasFilm, Walt Disney, and more small and independent presses
than you can shake a mallorn leaf at, she’s not yet had the opportunity to illustrate any of Tolkien’s work.
More’s the shame, because she brings to the field of Tolkien illustration a
distinct and elegant look that bespeaks her great interest in fantasy and in art.
She’s a Tolkien geek: her bookshelves groan under the weight of Tolkien
tomes, Sideshow/Weta statues and figures, and Toy Biz “dolls” of Arwen and
Frodo. Given a choice, she’d want to live in Rivendell or perhaps Hobbiton, as
she loves gardening.
I first encountered her when, at a local science fiction convention in the late
1970s, she took to the stage for a costume
contest; dressed in a white gown as Lady
Galadriel, she sang beautifully and stole the
show. I don’t think anyone gave any of the
Trekkies in costume a second look after her
performance.
A petite powerhouse with a lot of artistic talent, Colleen has always commanded
attention in the comics field—a maledominated industry with a long-established,
old-boys network that worked to keep her
in her place. Colleen understandably
bristles when fanboys call her the “little
woman,” or question her as to whether or
Actor Craig Parker (Haldir, in The
not she, in fact, has drawn the art for her
Two Towers) and Colleen Doran at
own books. What’s even more bizarre,
The Two Towers Oscar night party
some misguided souls see her as the ideal
sponsored by TheOneRing.net, in
trophy girlfriend or wife. (Sorry, guys, but
Hollywood, California.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

180

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 181

just because she’s pretty as a picture and can draw them, she has no place in your
fantasies. Her fantasies are more grounded in reality—putting pen to paper and
bringing to life imaginative art the likes of which you’ve never seen and could
never imagine.)
At the aforementioned local science fiction convention, when I first met her,
the day after the costume contest, I struck up a casual conversation with her, and
she showed me pages from her epic fantasy, which would eventually be published
as A Distant Soil. In her early work—pencil drawings for pages of A Distant Soil—
I could see the promise of more mature and better work to come. She would either
fulfill the promise...or join the ranks of frustrated artists who, for whatever reasons, never bridged the gap from fan to pro. That was years ago.
This is now: Colleen is arguably the most visible woman in the comic book
field today. Sought after as a convention guest and for interviews—in print, online,
and in DVDs—she’s personable, articulate, and, unlike most artists and writers
who wilt before a TV camera, comfortable in the spotlight. It is, she says, part of
her job. But given her druthers, she’d much prefer her cozy studio, with its oversized drawing table, as Howard Shore’s soundtrack plays in the background and
she draws up a storm, producing page after page of beautiful art. (When the
soundtrack isn’t playing, the appendices of the DVD to The Fellowship of the
Ring is playing, because she’s inspired by other creators who talk about their
work, who share her obvious joy in creating art.)
A world-builder by inclination, Colleen is nearing the end of her long-running
series, A Distant Soil, which she began drawing when she was 15 years old. Despite
ups and downs in the comics field, as the book has changed publishers several
times, she’s stuck to it and expects to see its completion within a year—possibly
two. What then?
Well, if the recently published Orbiter is any indication, and if the preview pages
from Reign of the Zodiac are reliable road marks (and I think they are), then we
are seeing the continued evolution of an artist who enjoys to push the envelope
and break new ground. Frankly, I think she’s a world-class conceptualizer, which
makes her the ideal candidate for film work, or for specialized book projects involving extensive design work, illustrations, and imaginative packaging. (One wonders what she would have created as the costume designer for The Lord of the
Rings, or as a conceptual designer for the movies as a whole.)
At this writing I have not seen all the art she’s done for this book, but from
what I’ve seen—pieces here and there—I think you’ll be surprise and pleased; and
my prediction (a safe one, I think) is that in time she will assume a position in the
first rank of Tolkien illustrators, because she is that good.
I am, of course, prejudiced; I am a big fan of her work, and a bigger fan of her
as a person, but those weren’t, professionally, sufficient reasons for her to illustrate this book: The sole reason is that I think she’s the perfect artist for the job,
bar none. On that note, Colleen’s Tolkien work not only sings and soars, but they
comprise a visual symphony: she gives us world unimagined and makes them real,
doing what only the best artists can do—instill in us a sense of wonder.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

181

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

182 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

An Interview With Colleen Doran
George
Beahm:
Colleen
Doran:

Please give us a brief professional bio and what you’re currently working on.
I like to keep busy—I am working on a number of projects at the
moment. I created, as well as write and draw, the series A Distant Soil
for Image Comics, and I am a cocreator of the new series Reign of the
Zodiac for DC Comics, which I illustrate and is written by Keith Giffen.
I have a new graphic novel out from DC Comics’s Vertigo division called
Orbiter, which is written by Warren Ellis. I am always doing various
projects off and on. I was the conceptual designer for an animated
science fiction show created by Warren Ellis, which is in development
limbo right now, and I am working on a new project for Image Comics
called Meanwhile, cowritten by me and Keith Giffen and illustrated
by me. I am also working on new illustrations for a Tolkien exhibit at
Storyopolis, in Los Angeles, in December 2003.

GB:

When did you first read Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings and what was
your initial response?

CD:

I first read it when I was about 10 years old. I remember it very well. It
was difficult going for a 10-year-old, but I had just read Malory’s La
Morte D’Arthur and was determined to get through The Lord of the
Rings, as well. I was struck by the extraordinary detail and sense of time
and place. I had very vivid memories of the places in the book that
were so real I felt as if I had been to them. The sights and smells and
feel of Middle-earth were presented with such exacting and loving attention that, to this day, I feel as if I have been there.

GB:

What, in your opinion, makes Tolkien unique among fantasy writers?

CD:

Tolkien does something that very few fantasy writers can pull off: He is
a true world-builder. His world is so well-realized on every level that
he makes almost every other work of fantasy ever written look shallow
by comparison. Tolkien spent years working on this story for his own
enjoyment. It is like an extraordinary piece of outsider art, a work created wholly outside the art and entertainment system and all its commercial considerations.
It is deeply personal and moving in a way that most modern commercial writers can’t even touch. That, combined with the purity and
goodness of the work, the deep ethical sensibility, combined with a true
sense of charity for mortal flaws, makes it a book of enormous heart
that touches deep truths and needs in every human heart. Its goodness
and beauty can be appreciated by many people. It is truly a universal
work of literature.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

182

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 183

GB:

What makes Tolkien such a challenge to illustrate?

CD:

I don’t find it a challenge in technical terms because I love it so much
and love to spend time in Middle-earth. I have been drawing Tolkien
pictures ever since I was a kid! My internal vision of the Tolkien world
is complete and very vivid. It is a wonderful place to visit.
The only challenge is conveying that sense to other people, who
also have extremely vivid mental images of Tolkien’s world. For that
reason, a lot of illustrators shy away from even trying to convey the
characters—they stick to landscapes. I am not afraid of drawing the
characters, because I never get offended or upset if another artist’s
vision doesn’t match mine.
I was nervous when I went to see the film, wondering if I would
actively dislike the casting. I worried that the visions of the artists who
worked on the film might differ from my own so profoundly that I would
find my own internal vision poisoned. Every artist worries about doing
the same thing! But frankly, the vision of Middle-earth in the films was
so close to my own vision in so many ways that I was utterly delighted!
For example, when Hugo Weaving came on the screen, I practically
jumped up and screeched “It’s Elrond!” He looked exactly as I had
pictured him!
I had drawn a picture of Thranduil that was on display at the San
Diego Comicon in July 2003, and, though it was not captioned, Tolkien
fans immediately recognized the character as Thranduil, with no
prompting from me. That tells me I have done my job—reached into
the book and pulled out the mental image for the reader. Some writers
I have worked with have told me that I am reading their minds! I don’t
know if that’s true, but I pay attention to the text. I try to get into the
writer’s mind and give visual expression to his words.
I obviously never had the opportunity to talk with Tolkien, but I
took the time to read his diaries and letters. I truly want to know what
the writer was thinking, what he meant, on every level. Tolkien was
thinking a heck of a lot! So there’s a lot of studying to do when illustrating Tolkien.

GB:

Given the commission to illustrate The Lord of the Rings, with covers
and interior illustrations, how would you approach the task of selecting what to illustrate and how many paintings/drawings would you feel
is necessary to adequately illustrate the three books?

CD:

The primary consideration would be deadline. Given my druthers, I
would like years to do hundreds of pictures! Of course, I am unlikely
to get that, but because I have spent most of my career working as a
cartoonist, which is the most grueling and demanding of all the illustration disciplines, I am accustomed to working under high pressure
and producing high volume.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

183

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

184 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

One consideration would be to avoid the standard images everyone else has already tackled. I would try to go for characters and
situations that are often overlooked. We rarely see characters like
Radagast, Elladan and Elrohir, Imrahil, Gildor, Elanor Gamgee, and
a dozen others I could name. I would want to do some of the major
characters of course, but it is so easy to do another shot of Gandalf
that it is almost cliché.
I would also love to do a large number of spot illustrations, little
decorative pieces of things from Middle-earth such as mallorn leaves,
elven bows, or a Rohirrim helmet. My dream is to do an edition in the
highly decorated tradition of turn-of-the-century books, heavily illustrated, heavily decorated, and designed from top to bottom as a piece
of art, a keepsake book with illuminated letters, the way great illustrators like Walter Crane decorated books.
GB:

What did you think of the Peter Jackson movie trilogy?

CD:

The films were so beautiful. They were incredibly close to my internal
vision of the books that I almost couldn’t believe it. Hobbiton looked
exactly as I dreamed!
In the months following the release of the first film, I had a brutal
seven-days-a-week work schedule and could only afford to take a half
day off each week, so my treat was a trip to Middle-earth every Friday,
for nine weeks straight. It completely transported me and allowed me
to relax through the vision of another world. I loved everything about
it—the casting, direction, the costume and set design. Every once in a
while I would think to myself, “I would have done it this way, but that’s
a great idea—it really looks good, too.” Sometimes I watch the first
part of the film when I want to relax. The vision of Hobbiton feels like
home to me.
Moreover, the changes from the books are interesting and respectful. I have rarely seen a film adaptation that showed so much devotion
to the source material.

GB:

Beyond The Lord of the Rings, what would you have liked to illustrate
from J.R.R. Tolkien’s other works?

CD:

The Silmarillion. If nothing in the The Lord of the Rings cycle is allowed,
then Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.

Steve Hickman: The Art of Imagination
Before I talk about the artist, let me tell you about the art. If you own a copy of
Realms of Tolkien: Images of Middle-earth (HarperCollins UK), look at the back
cover. The art is by Steve Hickman, and it’s a memorable scene from The Fellowship of the Ring: Samwise’s father, Gaffer Gamgee, is at the gate of his home and a
mounted Black Rider from Mordor is looking down at him, etched against a sky

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

184

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 185

with boiling clouds. Gamgee knows something is amiss—the Big People, as the
hobbits call men, are seldom seen in Hobbiton, but now an emissary from Mordor
has appeared, asking pointed questions about Frodo Baggins. Gaffer
Gamgee cleverly misdirects the Black
Rider to Bucklebury, and passes a
cautionary word on to his son.
Another painting from the
book—a battle scene, from the Siege
of Gondor—painted in yellow and
red, depicts a giant battering ram
being brought forth, directed by the
Black Captain, who is astride his
black steed.
Both paintings by Steve
Hickman show superb draftsmanship, compositional skills, and a rich
An oil painting by Steve Hickman, “The Black
imagination—no surprise to those
Rider,” published in Realms of Tolkien, an
who have seen his work on paper- original anthology of Tolkien art.
back covers, or to those who have
seen his first art book collection, The Art of Stephen Hickman (The Donning
Company), which unfortunately is out of print. (I remember that book well, especially because I suggested the idea to Steve and recommended it to my publisher, The Donning Company, where it was published as a handsome hardback,
with a lengthy introduction by Harlan Ellison.)
There’s been a lot of water under the bridge since then (back in 1987) but
what hasn’t changed is that Steve is one of the nicest guys you’d ever want to
meet, a convention favorite, and not
only prolific—his list of publishing
credits is far too long to reprint
here—but, with his paperback cover
art, he has endeared himself to a
score of fantasy writers whose books
are grabbed off bookshelves just so
a closer look at the cover art can be
had. (Forget the hype, but even with
the art obscured by cover text, Steve’s
art shines through.)
Akin to other artists who love
fantasy and, especially, Tolkien, he
brings an enthusiasm and a freshness
of vision that makes his work in
An unpublished oil painting by Steve Hickman
Realms of Tolkien so memorable.
of Ents at the entmoot.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

185

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

186 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

An Autobiographical Note From Steve Hickman
After attending art school at the Richmond Professional Institute, in the company of Michael Kaluta, Charles Vess, and Phil
Trumbo—and incidentally reading the Tolkien books as part of
the mythos of the times—I did a very brief stint in the comics business. At that time, the industry was so moribund that I drifted into
doing private commissions to make ends meet, and working on my
oil painting technique.
Then I landed a job with an emerging local T-shirt company
doing designs for their line. That was a blast and kept me working
until I could get my painting portfolio together to find work doing
paperback covers, which is
what, in my secret heart, I
had wanted to do all along
since seeing the magical covers painted by Roy Krenkel,
Jr., and Frank Frazetta for
the Ace editions of Edgar
Rice Burroughs. In fact, Ace
Books was the first company
I started working for. I sold
the printing rights to a piece
in my portfolio, and then
another, and then I got my
big chance: I was assigned to
do the cover for the reprint
of The Brain Stealers by
Murray Leinster; I must
have worked on that cover
for a month.
Steve Hickman
So I did reprint covers for
Ace Books for a while, learning on the job, so to speak—art school
did nothing to prepare me for earning a living as an illustrator—
and did private commissions now and then. During this time, I was
contacted by Chris Zavisa of Land of Enchantment to do a series
of Tolkien-inspired scenes for posters, and did four pictures that
are still being sold to this very day.
And that is essentially what I’ve been doing ever since, with the
occasional foray into writing fantasy fiction, sculpture, and a series
of stamps for the U.S. Postal Service: The Space Fantasy Commemorative Stamp Booklet, for which I won my first, and to date
only, Hugo Award.
My earliest associations with Tolkien are linked with my days in
Richmond, Virginia, in 1967. At the time, I was reading a lot of

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

186

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

Victorian fantasy—H. Ryder Haggard, Arthur Conan Doyle,
Christopher Percival Wren, and the like—and Tolkien’s writing
style interested me, because I felt at home with the British usages
and loved the way he could change his prose to classical voicings
when a more formal tone was required—the Council of Elrond
segment, for instance—or his use of alliteration in the King James
Bible in moments of greatest tension.
Later on, when my visual imagination had become more vivid,
the thing which drew me further into the mythos was the power
Tolkien had of evoking images in my mind, scenes both directly
described or implied, which I have worked at developing over the
25 years since I first read these books.
To my way of thinking, the aspect of Tolkien’s writings, which
make him pre-eminent among fantasists, and which, incidentally,
make him a supreme challenge to illustrate properly, is the intensely
poetic quality of the writing. In the beauty of the names, in the
creation of beautiful evocative languages or harsh horrifying languages, or in worthy rustic languages, he is absolutely the master. If
the sounds of these names do not evoke in you a magical sense of
reality, if you do not feel the yearning of the places that you visit in
these stories, or are not moved to awe by the beauty or the poignancy of these scenes and situations, then one should consider
illustrating other material, until these feelings become stronger over
the years of rereading.
The main difficulty is that Tolkien uses standard fantasy properties in his stories (elves, dwarves, goblins, little people, kings),
but in a way unique to himself, which imbues these traditional fantasy types with an archetypal power, a sense of place against a vast
backdrop of time and epic history. This makes the characterizations particularly difficult—the illustrator has to be especially careful to avoid what I call the “default setting” stereotypes if they are
to do justice to the stories.
Hobbits are the perfect example of this. They are not children,
nor are they short adults—they are hobbits, and any painting that
depicts hobbits should ring a bell in the mind of the viewer, which
lets them know, “Yes, that is what they would look like!” This is
not an easy job. Like any good author, Tolkien leaves room for
each reader to form their own image of what these characters
look like, and apparently the author himself was not sure of what
his characters looked like—the late Ian Ballantine related to me a
conversation in which Tolkien admitted as much. Considering that
Tolkien has done some of the most evocative illustrations for his
stories, this is a bit daunting.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

187

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

u 187

188 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Then there are the elves, the most magical and evocative characters in all the books, which makes them the most elusive of all to
visualize. In a real sense, the books are a history of the Elves, and
their story is the hub around which all the epic revolves. So if the
illustrator can draw hobbits and elves, they can do Tolkien. Or
any fantasy, for that matter—this is the post-graduate course for
the illustrator.
I would say the trick here is not to lean on your photo reference
too heavily, unless you have pictures of hobbits or dwarves or orcs.
Anyone can paint a picture, but the challenge of Tolkien is to do
just the right picture, to go for the gold ring, as it were. Dean Cornwell
used to paint his entire picture before he engaged his models, then
incorporate the touches he liked from the model into the painting
without losing the artistic unity he started with in the mundane
restrictions of ordinary life. Poetry is the essence of Tolkien, and
poetry has to be distilled from reality, not copied from it.
One of the things I was worried about before the films came
out was the characterizations. There were two in particular that I
thought a filmmaker could never get right: Frodo and Gollum. Well,
as it turns out, they couldn’t have been more perfect. To my way of
thinking, Gollum should take Best Supporting Actor at the next
Academy Awards. I was also delighted with Gandalf, Saruman,
and Legolas, not to mention Treebeard, the Balrog, the Black
Riders, and all the charming orcs. And, of course, the art direction
was superb throughout the films. It was all that the most fanatical
Tolkien reader could wish for, and more.
I’m inspired for the next private commissions I’m doing of
Tolkien’s work—I’ve got to work on the characterizations and settings, though!
The next step is working up my visualizations for The Silmarillion.
If the Ring trilogy is the postgraduate course in illustration, The
Silmarillion is the doctoral dissertation. Unlike my paintings for
The Lord of the Rings, I think I would drop the raised border and
title scroll format for these, as the scenes will be difficult enough to
do justice to without making it any harder on myself than necessary. There is a sublimity to the imagery in The Silmarillion that
makes this a real challenge. It is as if the poetic quality of The Lord
of the Rings book was distilled into a single exalted draught.

Donato Giancola’s Classical Art
The painting, simply titled “The Hobbit,” is in full color and measures 38 inches
by 68 inches—more than 3 feet tall and 5 feet wide! The original painting hung on
panels at an art show at a World Science Fiction Convention in Philadelphia in

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

188

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 189

Donato Giancola’s oil painting illustrating The Hobbit, for the cover of the
graphic novel edition.

2001, where Colleen Doran stared at it in admiration, suppressing an urge to grab
passersby and shout, “Look at this!” Reproduced as the cover to a graphic novel
adaptation of The Hobbit, the painting, with type overlaid, is remarkable; but to
see it full scale, the way the artist intended, is to experience firsthand the visual
impact of original art.
When Colleen returned from the convention and we went to the local Barnes
& Noble superstore, she pulled the graphic album off the shelf and handed it to me.
She didn’t need to say anything. I drank in the art, albeit in smaller form than she had
seen it, and I realized that this man had just raised the art bar in the field so high that
only he could clear it. Instead of drawing his inspiration from those who had gone
before him in the field, Donato went back even further, to classical illustrators such
as Rembrandt and Carravagio and Michelangelo; Donato’s draftsmanship was superb, his painting skills astonishing in their fidelity, his compositions arresting, and
his color sense—especially his use of chiaroscuro—remarkable.
Knowing nothing about the
man, I knew one thing: Here was
an artist who had read Tolkien
carefully, lovingly, and set out to
visually interpret Middle-earth
in a way that no other artist had
done. To see Middle-earth
through Donato’s eyes (and
paintbrush) is to see an Old
Master at work, with the freshness of a young man’s drive and
ambition, for Donato is but 36
Donato Giancola’s oil painting illustrating The
years old.
Lord of the Rings for the Science Fiction Book
Club edition.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

189

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

190 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A superb painter and designer,
Donato’s rendition of the One Ring,
done for a gaming card, is perfect—a gold
ring, on rock, surrounded by red-hot lava.
Or consider his cover for the Science Fiction Book Club edition of The Lord of
the Rings: In the Mines of Moria, Aragorn
shelters Frodo, as Gandalf looks back at
them.
Like his cover to The Hobbit,
Donato—feeling that a large canvas is
appropriate for The Lord of the Rings—
Donato Giancola’s oil painting illustrating
rendered a large-scale painting measurthe One Ring, done for a trading card game. ing 33 x 51 inches.
Months later, I was in Brooklyn, at Donato’s home/studio, where he directed
me to his living room. Over the couch hung The Hobbit—The Lord of the Rings
painting resides in a private collection in Los Angeles—and I was visually struck,
as was Colleen earlier, by its size, its power, and its visual impact. I could then
easily imagine how his painting for The Lord of the Rings would look because of its
large size. Words fail me.
As Donato showed me
painting after painting, and as he
discussed his enthusiasm for
Tolkien’s work and how he
imagined Middle-earth, my first
thought was, “Why hasn’t this
guy done a Tolkien calendar?”
My second thought was, “Why
hasn’t this guy published a
Tolkien art book? Or an art
book with the scope of The Art
of Michael Whelan?”
Most of Donato’s work illus- Donato Giancola’s oil painting illustrating a scene
trating Middle-earth can be from The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the
found on gaming cards, which is King, “Faramir at Osgiliath.”
not likely to be seen by most
Tolkien fans. Even the cover to the Science Fiction Book Club edition is not easy
to find, because only those in the United States who are members of the club can
buy it. Happily, the cover to The Hobbit, with interior art by David Wenzel, is available in bookstores everywhere.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

190

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 191

An Interview With Donato Giancola
George
Beahm:

Can you give me a brief professional biography and what you’re
currently working on?

Donato
Giancola: I have always drawn. I moved to
New York City from my native
Vermont after graduating from
Syracuse University in 1992 with
a BFA in painting to immerse
myself in New York’s rich and
varied art world. Within months
after the move, my first commissions arrived, illustrating classic
science fiction novels such as The
Time Machine, by H.G. Wells and
Journey to the Center of the Earth,
by Jules Verne. Since then, I have
produced hundreds of commis- Donato Giancola holds a copy of The
sioned illustrations for book cov- Lord of the Rings with his wraparound cover art for the Science
ers, game cards, editorials, and
Fiction Book Club edition.
advertising from such clients as
LucasArts, Milton-Bradley, Sony, Hasbro, Random House, Tor,
Ballantine, HarperCollins, The Franklin Mint, Wizards of the Coast,
and DC Comics.
My illustrations have won numerous awards, including nominations
for five Artist Hugo Awards; Seven Chesley Awards, from the Association of Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists; Gold and Silver Awards
from Spectrum: The Best in Contemporary Fantastical Art; and numerous awards from New York’s Society of Illustrators. In addition,
my work has been exhibited in dozens of shows at the Society of Illustrators and various galleries around the country.
I love to travel as a guest lecturer to various colleges, institutions,
game tournaments, and science fiction conventions around the globe,
where I interact with fans, perform painting demonstrations, lecture
on technique, and display original artworks.
My studio, home, wife, and two daughters are in Brooklyn, New
York.
GB:

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

When did you first read Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, and what was
your initial response?

191

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

192 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

DG:

Reading Tolkien’s works for the first time was an introduction into
the worlds of an incredible fantasy—the first novels I read for pleasure. As you can imagine, they left an impression so deep on my psyche
that they are forever a standard to which other novels are compared.
I remember being handed The Hobbit from my brother Michael on a
Saturday afternoon, and finishing it the following day. I was hooked.
Soon afterward, I purchased the three novels comprising The Lord of
the Rings, with paperback covers by Darrell Sweet. I still have those
copies in the studio today. The most enjoyable aspect of reading those
novels was the incredibly rich history of the cultures Tolkien provided for his readers. A never-ending dance began as I read The Fellowship and referred back to the appendices at the end of Return of
the King. Who was Beren? How old was Moria? When was the First
Age? It took forever to read each chapter as I looked up names, places,
and events in those notes; each offered a trip to another time and a
story as complex as the tale I was engrossed within. I needed to read
those books only once to be forever knowledgeable about their histories. With this compulsive behavior of referencing, you could imagine
I was thrilled to discover The Lost Tales, Unfinished Tales, and The
Silmarillion at my local library. I spent many afternoons there, immersed in the world of Middle-earth.

GB:

What makes Tolkien such a challenge to illustrate?

DG:

Creating a painting from the worlds of Middle-earth means you will
be placed under the most intense scrutiny when it comes to details
and accuracy. The admirers of Tolkien know no mercy when it comes
to deviations and inaccuracies, myself included! I know those books
inside and out, but still found myself making a few mistakes. I now
run my sketches past my friends as a double check to catch any errors. Luckily Tolkien provided artists with a large loophole for illustrating his novels—very little physical descriptions of either characters
or places. His descriptions are generally emotional and, for that reason, resonate with the reader more than the offerings of other authors.
This is what I love regarding the works, a strong emotional foundation
upon which to build a very broad range of physical interpretations.

GB:

If given the commission to illustrate The Lord of the Rings with covers
and interior illustrations, how would you approach the task of selecting what to illustrate and how many paintings or drawings would you
feel is necessary to adequately illustrate the three books?

DG:

I have always sought great challenges in my art. To this end, when looking for inspiration to illustrate novels and stories, I have always attempted to render those moments which are ill described or fleeting in
nature, yet capture the essence of the characters and narrative. Simple
domestic scenes are difficult to compose to appear compelling, yet a

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

192

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 193

successful painting in this manner can carry much more power than a
heroic battle scene. Consider your reader and viewer. They most likely
have never experienced the intensity of conflict nor the range of extremes most heroes travel through. It is upon a common ground of
emotion with which I attempt to build my narratives. And it is with
these simple scenes that J.R.R. Tolkien makes us feel the humanity of
his characters, the depths of utter darkness in Moria, Merry and Pippin
smoking pipe weed after the destruction of Isengard, Frodo and Sam
cooking a brace of rabbits in the shadow of Mordor.
As for the quantity of illustrations necessary to illustrate the three
books, I return back to my childhood. I was happy to have only the
three cover images from which to inform my imagination of The Lord
of the Rings. I think I would have been even pleased with none. The
power of Tolkien is that he does not need an artist to interpret his
works for them to come to life. Yet when the artist successfully steps
beyond mimicry, something more is added than mere words can describe. The two art forms resonate and create an emotional response
greater than the parts. This cannot always be achieved, by any artist,
but when it occurs, it is magical. I cannot say what number would be
correct for the illustrations, only that they should feel properly placed
in the context of the books.
GB:

How did you come to illustrate The Lord of the Rings for Book of the
Month Club and the gaming cards?

DG:

My first commission for the Middle-earth Collectible Card Game from
Iron Crown Enterprises (ICE) taught me a valuable lesson. I was an
avid gamer back in high school and college and began collecting the
ICE modules from Middle-earth, both for using them in games and
for the wonderful art on the covers and in the interiors. Being a huge
Tolkien fan and an aspiring artist, I sent ICE my portfolio during my
senior year at Syracuse University. I never heard back from them.
Bummer. It wasn’t until four years later that I received a call from
their art director. They were looking for new artists for their upcoming card game—MECCG: The Wizards—and was wondering if I could
send them down a new portfolio. I had improved since college, and I
now had a couple dozen professional book covers to show them. They
were blown away by my current work. An open offer was placed before me, how many cards would I like to take on: One? Five? 30? I
settled on 15 and had a wonderful time working on a subject I loved
dearly. Needless to say, they kept coming back with more commissions. The lesson? Be generous to everyone and treat all clients with
courtesy because you never know from where your next job may come.

GB:

Beyond LotR, what would you have liked to illustrate from J.R.R.
Tolkien’s other works?

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

193

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

194 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

DG:

Back to my childhood love of J.R.R. Tolkien’s writings, I would find
immense pleasure in tackling illustrations from any of the works related to Middle-earth, from The Lost Tales to The Silmarillion.

GB:

What is your reaction to the Peter Jackson film trilogy?

DG:

As I had mentioned before, regarding art forms which complement the
written word, I have found that the movies belong within this category.
Although different from the novels and paying uncompromising homage to them, they are a separate art form and add another level of
interpretation and enjoyment to the story. The realizations of Gollum
and his roller-coaster ride of emotions played out upon a grand screen
cannot be compared to the experience while one sits in the comfort of
one’s own home reading the novels. They are a welcome addition to
the wealth of art which has interpreted The Lord of the Rings through
the decades. I enjoy them thoroughly!

GB:

Are there any final comments you’d care to make?

DG:

The goal of a passionate artist is to try and make the masterpiece each
and every time, yet be wise enough to know you will fall short.

Michael Whelan: The Master
In 1980, Ballantine Books published “The J.R.R. Tolkien Calendar” and advertised it as “The Great Illustrators Edition.” Because critical assessments of
artists and their relative standings are subject to intense debate, and because no
two people would agree as to who the best illustrators are—my list, surely, is
quite different than yours—it’s the call of the publisher to make the final cuts and
the final call.
That said, there is no debate that one contributor to this calendar is the gold
standard in fantasy illustration—Michael Whelan. The winner of more awards in
the field than any other artist of our time, Michael is an artist’s artist, a painter’s
painter. He is a 14-time Hugo Award winner (voted on by the membership of the
World Science Fiction Convention), a three-time (maximum limit) Howard Award
winner (World Fantasy Convention), and voted “Best Professional Artist” by the
readership of Locus (the newszine of the fantasy and science fiction world) 21
years in a row, to cite some of his awards.
Not to put too fine a point on it, but what Michael does well, he does so well
that he’s in a league of his own. Let me explain. The process by which Michael
determines what he’s going to paint and how he’s going to paint it is anything but
accidental. After reading a manuscript carefully and making notes, Michael seeks
to distill the novel’s essence into a single iconic image. To arrive at that image, he
renders several detailed sketches until he’s reasonably satisfied. He then submits a
selection of these to the art director, who makes the final call. It’s not necessarily
the one Michael would have picked, but then, he’s not the client. He’s the hired
hand, and he’s being paid to produce what the client wants.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

194

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 195

The finished cover painting, usually
rendered in acrylic, will then adorn the
cover of a leading fantasy or science fiction novel, and, by doing so, will significantly enhance its eye-appeal at the
bookstore, which will help separate it
from the other books on the shelf.
In the end, it’s about professionalism; it’s about getting paid to do a job,
on time, and doing it to the best of your
ability; and it’s about giving value to the
client and to the book reader, who wants
representational art he can understand—
not abstract art that is reflective of the Artist Michael Whelan inscribes a copy of
The Art of Michael Whelan to Tim Kirk.
artist’s private vision.
That Michael more than fulfills the
publisher’s requirements by also creating a beautiful work of art in the process is
a bonus. Illustration and art, Michael has proven, are not mutually exclusive.
Rather than simply illustrate a novel, he likes to add his personal touches. Symbolism, an integral part of his personal work, can be seen in his commercial illustration, as well, lending a depth that is often lacking in the work of his contemporaries.
As for what makes him an artist’s artist, it is simply this: He is the master of
his craft. It’s that simple. He is the best at what he does because he has no areas
of deficiency. Imagination? First rate. Draftsmanship? Second to none. Composition? Perfect. Technique? Matchless. Ability to draw convincing people out of
his imagination? He stands alone.
Given all those things, you’d think that he’d be satisfied with himself and his
artistic ability, wouldn’t you?
Surprisingly to most people, he is not satisfied because he’s always looking to
improve, to stretch, and outdo himself. In fact, once he gets a painting back and it
hangs on the wall, he mostly notices its flaws, whereas we are more likely to notice
its qualities. But then, we don’t have to wonder how we would have done it better,
given more time.
These are “flaws,” mind you, that ordinary fans can’t see, as they coo in delight
and admiration when seeing his originals hang on panels at an art show at a convention. Furthermore, these are “flaws” that his fellow pros can’t see, as they, too,
succumb to the illustrative magic of Michael Whelan’s art. They scratch their heads
and wonder how he does it, and then go back to their drawing boards and try to
learn from his techniques.
Michael, I think, has the right mindset for an artist: He’s honest enough to
recognize that he’s in the first rank, but modest enough to continually seek selfimprovement. The case in point is the sole Tolkien painting he’s done, for the
aforementioned calendar. (The painting is reproduced in his second art book, as
well. Both, unfortunately, are out of print.)

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

195

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

196 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The painting is filled with symbolism. Illustrating what has to be the pivotal scene
of the entire novel—Samwise holding up an exhausted Frodo, who is missing one
finger, as the eagles come to rescue them, with the world literally crumbling apart
around them—Michael has distilled it with a singular image. It is, to my mind, flawless. I cannot begin to imagine how, in terms of a work of art, it could be improved.
Michael, however, can only think of how it can be improved, and proceeds to
illuminate me. It’s a discussion that an artist would be better equipped to understand, but the gist of it is that if he were to redo the painting today, it would look
different. Better, though? Hard to say. But there’s one thing for sure: I’d love to
see Michael go back to Middle-earth and give us more of his incomparable visions.
Currently working on illustrations for Stephen King’s last Dark Tower novel—a
fitting assignment in which both artist and author come full circle, because they
worked together on the first Dark Tower novel in 1982—Michael keeps up a blistering pace, producing covers for fantasy and science fiction novels, producing private paintings to explore his inner visions, and looking for new challenges, new
heights to scale.
In a recent interview with him, though the subject was, of course, Tolkien, the
conversation wandered a bit afield, and we talked about Stephen King. I remarked
that, for an artist, it’s high praise when the author says that the artist has drawn
the definitive rendition, as King has said of Michael’s Roland the Gunslinger.
Michael agreed and added that he had sent a digital image to King, to get some
early feedback. King responded positively, saying that Michael’s rendition of Oy,
one of the characters in the book, was dead-on. “He’s exactly as I had imagined
him,” King said.
Despite King’s reassurances, Michael repeated, several times, his concern that
the fans be happy with the work. As a King reader and a Whelan fan myself, I
appreciate his concern, but in this instance he need not worry. If he can please the
author—Stephen King, who is the harshest critic of art done for his books—he can
please anyone...and he will.
Higher praise than that an artist cannot get. And that is the art of Michael
Whelan.

An Interview With Michael Whelan
George
Beahm:

Michael
Whelan:

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

Bring us up to date on your current project. I know you’ve been working
exclusively on finishing the art for Stephen King’s seventh, and final,
Dark Tower novel. It’s been a real trek for him, with the fifth book due
out in November, as The Path of the Beam leads Roland’s ka-tet to a
border town, Calla Bryn Sturges. What’s it been like for you?
It’s been quite a journey. I’ve never worked so long on a single project.
It’s been quite a challenge because it’s a hell of a book, but I’m giving it
everything I’ve got. I hope people will be happy with what I’m doing.

196

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 197

I’m aiming to please myself on these. I have pretty specific ideas of
how Oy the Bumbler should look and other characters, and I’m doing
everything I can to stay as true to that as I can.
I sent King a digital photograph of one of the paintings that has the
whole ka-tet in it, and he said that I nailed Oy, so I feel good about
that. Oy’s in three of the paintings.
I think I’ll have 12 paintings altogether. I haven’t even done the
cover yet. I’ve put that off because I’ve got so many good ideas it’s hard
to settle on one.
GB:

Regarding the painting you did from The Lord of the Rings: Was this
done for a special project, or was it done just for the 1980 Tolkien
calendar?

MW:

It was done just for the calendar.

GB:

What is it about Tolkien’s fiction that makes his work so distinctive and
memorable from an illustrative point of view?

MW:

What captivates me is the beauty of the language. As you’re reading
The Lord of the Rings, he does such a fantastic job of creating pictures
in your mind that I don’t know how anyone could fail to be influenced
strongly by that and not have a desire to illustrate them.
I love the writing so much that I’ve listened, time and time again,
to the books on tape read by Rob Inglis for Recorded Books. I listen
to them with the same appreciation that I would an actual piece of
music.

GB:

How did the calendar assignment come about? And what can you say
about the art itself?

MW:

There isn’t a whole lot to say about the art—I just tried to visualize the
scene and bring it to life; there isn’t a whole lot of interpretation available there.
The way the calendars were being done at the time, Lester del Rey
would assign a particular image to a particular artist and literally underscore the part of the text he wanted to see as a painting and say,
“Paint this.” That’s pretty much how it was given to me.

GB:

It was directional art?

MW:

Yes. It’s like being given a screenplay and being told, “Make this look
real.”
Everyone’s got their own ideas of how Frodo and Sam would look,
and, unfortunately, in the painting they’re small, so I don’t really get a
chance to paint them as characters. I did what I could with the time
that was available to me.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

197

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

198 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

GB:

There’s a great deal of symbolism in your work, which indicates to me
that you’ve really thought through this process of what you’re going to
illustrate and how you’re going to illustrate it, as opposed to simply
transposing a photograph into a painting.

MW:

Because it takes me so long to get a painting done, I give it a lot of
thought before I get started on it. I don’t want to invest a big block of
time in something that is going to be frivolous or accidental—there’s
always a lot of thought in my paintings. Probably too much thought,
actually, but that’s the way I am and the way I work. It’s part of what
makes my work mine, I guess.

GB:

What’s next on the drawing board?

MW:

I’ve got several book covers slated for DAW Books, but they are longterm projects. I won’t be doing them until next year.
I really want to concentrate on my gallery work for the second half
of the year, if I can manage to keep myself free.

GB:

Let’s play “what if.” What if you were to have the opportunity to illustrate The Lord of the Rings? Would you do it?

MW:

Certainly I’d be interested. It’s the one goal in my career as an illustrator I haven’t been able to achieve yet. The essential question for me is
how much time I’m going to be given to get it done.
I was offered the book covers for The Hobbit and The Lord of the
Rings trilogy in the United States, but they wanted all the work done
in less than two months time. I won’t say who offered it to me, but
these are people who know how far I get booked up in advance. Aside
from the fact that I am booked up with other companies for 18 months
beyond when I was talking to these people, even if I had nothing else
scheduled, I wouldn’t be willing to risk rushing through the artwork—
I’d have to do it fast and it’d be a slapdash job on books so near and
dear to my heart.
Unless I was given the time to put my all into it, I wouldn’t do it.
That’d be the overriding issue in my mind—more important to me than
anything else.

GB:

Whose Tolkien art do you like?

MW:

I like Tim Kirk, John Howe, and Alan Lee, but Tim’s was the first that
really grabbed me. I said, “Finally, someone has done them right.”

GB:

What did you think of the Jackson movie trilogy?

MW:

When I saw the movies, I found out I was more of a Tolkien purist than
I realized. I enjoyed them immensely and am very grateful for all the
things that Peter Jackson got right, and that’s no small achievement. On
the other hand, I was dismayed to see that Jackson felt he had to change
story elements and add in material. But on the whole, I liked the movies

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

198

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 199

very much. I just wish that because he had gotten so close to getting it
just right that he had gone the extra distance and made them perfect.
I thought all the characters were very well cast and, generally, I had
a very positive feeling about the movies; in fact, Gollum couldn’t have
been better.
GB:

As you know, two Tolkien artists—Alan Lee and John Howe—were
conceptual designers handpicked by Jackson. What did you think of
their work for the movie trilogy?

MW:

There’s no doubt that they nailed it. It couldn’t have been better, in
my opinion. I think they did an amazing job.

Michael Kaluta: Flights of the Fantastic
In Realms of Tolkien (HarperPrism), to
which Kaluta contributed, his brief biography in the back states that he had done the
art for the 1992 Tolkien calendar. Armed
with that misinformation, fans will look in
vain for it, because in 1992 the Centenary
Calendar was published with Ted Nasmith’s
art. Kaluta’s appeared in the 1994 Tolkien
calendar.
A dream assignment for Kaluta, the
paintings took five months to create. The result was a new visual interpretation that has
a classic “storybook” feel to it: Gandalf and
his horse-drawn cart laden with fireworks in
boxes marked with runes, as excited hobbit
children follow in his wake; Éowyn standing in front of the gates of Meduseld, framed
between massive, ornate doors, as flying
birds form a symbolic circle; a scene of the
Entmoot, as the Ents gather to deliberate—
in due time—what to do with the information Merry and Pippin provide; and much
more.
Though the calendar is long out of print
and commands collector’s prices on the
secondary market, interested fans can see
one of the pieces, “Legolas Draws the Bow
of Galadriel,” printed in Realms of
Tolkien; and if you don’t have that book,
all the pieces are reprinted on Kaluta’s
Website (www.kaluta.com).

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

199

From his 1994 Tolkien Calendar, an
illustration by Michael Kaluta, titled
“Éowyn before the Gates of
Meduseld.”

Michael Kaluta’s illustration titled
“Legolas Draws the Bow of Galadriel,”
from his “1994 Tolkien Calendar.”

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

200 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Considered to be one of the leading artists in the comic book field—indeed,
his interpretation of The Shadow is classic, leading to early design work on the
movie—Kaluta’s strong sense of design and ability to conceptualize is apparent
most clearly in the 40 illustrations he rendered for Metropolis, by Thea von Harbou.
Supplementing his considerable body of work in the comic industry—covers,
interiors, and special projects—Kaluta has done a considerable amount of work
for trading card companies and the television and film industry, as well.
Kaluta’s major book collections include Wings of Twilight: The Art of Michael
Kaluta (NBM Publishing) and Echoes: The Drawings of M.W. Kaluta (Vanguard
Productions).

An Interview With Michael Kaluta
George
Beahm:
Michael
Kaluta:

Give me your biographical sketch and a sense of what you are currently working on.
I began my comic career at Charlton Comics in New York City and
soon moved on to do various stories and covers for DC and Marvel
Comics. In 1973, I was picked to draw the first DC comic revival of The
Shadow, the character I would later go on to visually define. I have
worked on Batman, The Spawn of Frankenstein, Metropolis, Starstruck,
Vampirella, Books of Magic, Aquaman, and most of DC’s 70s horror
line. Beyond the comic industry, I have done work for magazines, calendars, movies, television, album covers, trading cards, and more.
My most recent work has been done for collectible cards manufactured by the Wizards of the Coast, AEG, and Sabertooth Games. My
newest comic-related work, from DC Comics, was a Batman story in
Gotham Knights #32. In addition, two art books have recently been
published: Echoes, the drawings of Mw Kaluta and Wings of Twilight, a
full color book of my paintings and illustrations.
Forthcoming are more illustration and comic book work, including
an issue for the DC Comics “SOLO” line, and a number of private art
commissions of Tolkien-inspired art.

GB:

When did you first read Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings and what was
your initial response?

MK:

I first saw the books in hardback in a bookstore I haunted for my
science fiction fixes, and, although intrigued, the books, at six bucks
each, were priced beyond my means.
I first read the books when Ace put out the 75¢ unofficial versions,
and I fell in love with them, though it took three attempts before I
could read past” The Council of Elrond.” Back then it was a stumbling block, but now it’s the place I can’t wait to get to, because every
reading brings out more information!

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

200

10/28/2003, 8:58 AM

VISIONS

OF

MIDDLE-EARTH: TOLKIEN ART

u 201

GB:

What, in your opinion, makes Tolkien unique among fantasy writers?

MK:

His grasp of the entire picture and how everything in the world is
interrelated, his ability to suggest depth of story with an aside, and his
never being afraid to have his characters have human faults.

GB:

What makes Tolkien such a challenge to illustrate?

MK:

When one reads the words, the pictures appear in the mind. When
one goes to study those phrases for illustrative detail, it isn’t there.
Ian Ballantine once asked Tolkien if he knew what his characters
looked like. Tolkien’s replied, “I’d know them if I met them.” That’s
good enough for me, because I have the same sense. Try as I do to
“see” them in my drawings, I know I’ve never got as far in delineating
Tolkien’s characters as I wish I were able to.

GB:

Given the commission to illustrate The Lord of the Rings, with covers
and interior illustrations, how would you approach the task of selecting what to illustrate and how many paintings/drawings would you feel
is necessary to adequately illustrate the three books?

MK:

When doing the 1994 Calendar, I made certain to have one illustration
for each 1/12th of the books. I had about nine drawings done from an
attempt to interest the publishers years before. I used the one volume
edition and physically marked out the places where those drawings occurred in the text. Then I filled in between those places, finding areas
where I needed to have art.
Were I to illustrate the books, and had leave to do it as I wanted,
I’m afraid I’d have to draw forever, adding chapter headings, spot illustrations, tag drawings, and so on, so that when one flipped the pages,
one knew the book was full of art! That would be a bit inconsiderate to
the reader....
I want to illustrate Tolkien because of the imagery and wonderment he made me feel with his inspiring prose. Does the book really
need illustrations? Beyond maps, no!

GB:

How did you come to illustrate Tolkien?

MK:

In 1978, Ian Summer contacted Steve Hickman and me to snag the
1979/1980 Tolkien Calendar. Steve and I generated well over 16 illustrations in pencil that were submitted to the Ballantines but eventually
rejected. However, as we saw from the calendars that did come out just
post-Hildebrandt, Ian went to conventions, snagged any and all
Tolkien-inspired art he could find, and published them as that year’s
calendar.
Had Steve and I presented him with 12 finished paintings, I have
no doubt we’d have had the 1980 Calendar.

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

201

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

202 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

About 14 years later, Allen & Unwin’s Jane Johnston, who had
kept the photocopies on file that I had sent her years ago, called to
ask if I wanted the 1994 Calendar. I agreed and drew 11 illustrations.
GB:

Beyond The Lord of the Rings, what would you have liked to illustrate
from J.R.R. Tolkien’s other works?

MK:

Certainly any of the poems!

GB:

What is your reaction to the Jackson films?

MK:

My main reaction was relief! Knowing the film industry, I know the
result could have been such a tragedy.
I can watch Jackson’s movie trilogy. My hat’s off to a job well done!

11 Tolkien Chapter 11.pmd

202

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

CHAPTER 12

THE LITERARY
LANDSCAPE OF TOLKIEN’S
WORLD

Tolkien History
J.R.R. Tolkien spent almost his entire adult life in England, most of it—more
than 50 years—in Oxford.
Ironically, the geography of Tolkien’s life doesn’t begin in England. It begins
in Bloemfontein, South Africa, where he spent the first three years of his life. The
firstborn son of Arthur Reuel Tolkien and Mabel Tolkien, John Ronald Reuel
Tolkien was christened at Bloemfontein Cathedral on January 21, 1892, and lived
in the Bank House, a furnished residence provided by Arthur Tolkien’s employer,
the Bank of Africa, for which he was a manager. Two years later, they had a second
son, Hilary Arthur Reuel Tolkien. Tragedy struck in 1896; Mabel Tolkien and
her two sons were visiting family in England and informed by telegram that her
husband had died. He was buried in a cemetery on the grounds of the Anglican
cathedral near the market square, not far from where they had lived.
The Tolkiens never returned to South Africa.
Note: To avoid confusion because of surnames, John Ronald Reuel Tolkien
is referred herein as, simply, Ronald. Also, for this timeline, I have consulted
multiple sources, in print and on the Internet, which are listed at the end of the
chapter. For the general reader wanting more information, the most useful resource is Humphrey Carpenter’s biography, J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography, with its
two chronologies—personal and publications. For a much more detailed Tolkien
timeline, consult Scull and Hammond’s definitive reference book, The J.R.R.
Tolkien Companion and Guide.
u 203 U

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

203

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

204 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A modern industrial city ringed by rural communities, Ronald’s early years
were spent in and around Birmingham, owing to geographic displacement because
of educational and residential considerations.
When Mabel Tolkien returned from South Africa, in February 1896, after the
unexpected death of her husband, she moved in temporarily with her parents at
Ashefield Road. Later that year, Mabel moved her family to 5 Gracewell, a cottage
in Sarehole, a rural community on the southern side of Birmingham.
Sarehole Mill was a favorite haunt of Ronald and his brother Hilary, where
the older Miller earned the nickname of “The Black Ogre.” (“The White Ogre”
was a nickname reserved for a farmer who “once chased Ronald for picking mushrooms,” according to Tolkien biographer Humphrey Carpenter.)
The Sarehole Mill is located at Colebank Road, Hall Green, Birmingham,
B13 0DB. It is the only remaining mill in the area—once populous with dozens of
them—and is now a museum exhibiting a way of life that ceased to exist years ago.
Years later, as an adult, Ronald remarked fondly about the four years he had
spent in this rural environment, which he unabashedly loved and celebrated in his
fiction.
Moseley’s Bog, now a nature’s reserve, is believed to be the inspiration for the
Dead Marshes through which Sam Gamgee and Frodo Baggins crossed on their
journey to Mordor.
King Edward’s was the school attended by Tolkien’s father. Mabel Tolkien
enrolled Ronald in this school in 1900. Because of the commuting distance—four
miles—between Mabel Tolkien’s home and King Edward’s, which Ronald had to
walk because they could not afford public transportation, she moved the family
to an urban suburb of Moseley, where she rented a house within easy walking
distance.
After the house they were living in was demolished to make way for a public
structure, she moved temporary to King’s Heath, a terrace row. In 1902, she
moved again to 26 Oliver Road in Edgbaston, so her boys would be close to
school. They were enrolled in St. Phillip’s Grammar School.
In 1903, concerned about the quality of education at St. Phillip’s as compared
to the education Ronald had been receiving at King Edward’s, she reenrolled him
at King Edward’s, after having secured a Foundation Scholarship.
Not long after, Mabel was stricken with diabetes and unable to take care of
herself and her boys. She was hospitalized, and her boys moved in temporarily with
one of their aunts in Hove. Mabel Tolkien partially regainsed her health—enough
to set up house again—and, in June 1904, she took up residence in a rural community, Rednal, which reminded them of Sarehole. Ronald was then commuting by
train to King Edward’s.

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

204

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE LITERARY LANDSCAPE

OF

TOLKIEN’S WORLD

u 205

Unfortunately, the partial recovery proved deceptive: Mabel Tolkien, at age
34, died of complications resulting from diabetes, and the boys were orphaned.
Because of Mabel Tolkien’s conversion from the Anglican faith to the Catholic
faith, and the uproar it caused within her family, the guardian she appointed in her
will, Father Francis Morgan, elected one of their aunts, Beatrice Suffield, of Stirling
Road in Edgbaston, to care for them. However, though she provided for their physical needs, she was not otherwise involved in their lives.
Father Francis Morgan later moved the boys to 37 Duchess Road, the home
of Mrs. Faulkner. It is there that Ronald, then 16, met his future wife, Edith
Bratt, who was three years his senior.
Much to the concern about the growing love affair between Ronald and Edith,
Father Francis Morgan decided a physical separation was best. He moved the boys
to a nearby residence and sent Edith Bratt to neighboring Chentenham. Wanting
to move up and leave St. Edward’s behind, Ronald failed to win the scholarship to
Exeter that he had strived for, but refocused for a second attempt.
In 1910, Ronald won the elusive scholarship. Heeding his guardian’s wishes—
the custom at the time—he willingly postponed his love relationship for the time,
but found camaraderie among male friends (which ultimately became a lifelong
association). He attended Exeter and graduated in June 1915 with a degree in
English Language and Literature.
In 1916, he was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the Lancashire Fusiliers
and, instead of seeking a command posting, his natural aptitude for words and
languages proved useful as he secured the post of Battalion Signal Officer. He
married Edith Bratt in Warwick, moved to Great Haywood, then left for the front
in the war against France—World War I. Fighting in the trenches and seeing his
best friends die, Tolkien was understandably marked by the war, which is at the
core of The Lord of the Rings—the war for the One Ring.
In November 1917, the Tolkiens had their first son, John. In 1918, after the
war ended, Ronald returned to civilian life permanently and hoped to put the past
behind him. He moved the family to 50 St. John’s Street in Oxford, close to his
office on Broad Street (then the Old Ashmolean Museum, now the Museum of
the History of Science), where he worked as an assistant lexicographer on The
Oxford English Dictionary.
In 1919, the Tolkiens moved to 1 Alfred Street (now known as Pusey Street),
where they rented a small house. Michael, their second son, was born. They attended the nearby St. Aloysius church.
In 1920, Tolkien interviewed for a post as Reader in English Language at the
University of Leeds, and got the post. The Tolkiens moved, taking up temporary
quarters, then moved to a leased house at 11 St. Mark’s Terrace.
In 1924, Ronald became a professor at Leeds, and the Tolkiens bought their
first home, at 2 Darnley Road, West Park.
In 1925, he was elected Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo-Saxon at
Oxford. The Tolkiens had a third son, Christopher, who would later become his

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

205

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

206 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

father’s literary executor and, significantly, edit The Silmarillion, Unfinished Tales,
and the 12 volumes of The History of Middle-earth. The family then moved to northern Oxford, where Tolkien bought a house at 22 Northmoor Road. In 1929, daughter Priscilla was born, and in 1930, the Tolkiens moved to 20 Northmoor Road,
where they would live for 21 years. The family attended St. Aloysius Catholic
Church for mass, approximately a mile into town.
Tolkien and his fellow Inklings, including C.S. Lewis and Charles Williams,
met at the Eagle and Child Pub on St. Giles, where he read installments of The
Hobbit, and later, The Lord of the Rings. (The pub has a plaque that commemorates their meetings.)
In 1939, Tolkien gave a lecture, “On Fairy Stories,” at St. Andrews University.
In 1945, he was elected Merton Professor of English Language and Literature
at Oxford. He held that position until 1959.
In 1947, the Tolkien family—less two children, who by then had grown up and
moved out—moved to 3 Manor Road, a Merton College house they rented. Just as
the house on Northmoor Road had been too large, this house proved to be too
small. In 1950, they moved to 99 Holywell Street. It proved unsuitable because of
the incessant traffic noise. Another move, in 1953, brought the Tolkiens to 76
Sandfield Road in Headington, a suburb of Oxford.
In 1962, the Inklings moved across the street from Eagle and Child (known
locally as “The Bird and Baby”) to The Lamb and Flag.
In 1968, the Tolkiens—overwhelmed by the lack of privacy due to the endless
intrusion of fans—reluctantly decided to move from Oxford to Bournemouth, a
seaside town on the south coast. They movd to 19 Lakeside Road in Poole, adjacent to Bournemouth.
Edith Tolkien died in November 1971, and Ronald headed back to Oxford—
his last move. He moved into a flat at 21 Merton Street, provided by Merton College, which honored him as a resident honorary Fellow.
In September 1973, John Ronald Reuel Tolkien died at the age of 81, while
visiting friends in Bournemouth. He was buried alongside his wife at Wolvercote
Cemetery in Oxford.

Three other places are worth paying a visit, depending on your interests:
In 1992, in University Parks, two trees were planted in his honor, with a nearby
commemorative bench. (Also worth visiting is the Botanic Gardens in Oxford, and
its Pinus nigra tree, which Tolkien deemed his favorite.)

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

206

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE LITERARY LANDSCAPE

OF

TOLKIEN’S WORLD

u 207

Insofar as library collections go, two places stand out:
In England, the Bodeleian Library at Oxford is the repository for The Silmarillion
and other manuscripts. Christopher Tolkien has deposited personal and professional papers by his father, as well, which makes it a treasure trove for researchers.
In the United States, Marquette University has, in its Special Collection,
original manuscripts by Tolkien, purchased from him in 1956 for £1,500 (then
less than $5,000). The manuscripts included The Hobbit and all its revisions (1,586
pages), The Lord of the Rings and all its revisions (9,250 pages), Farmer Giles of
Ham, Mr. Bliss, and a vast amount of other Tolkieniana, including copies of his
other works (printed, not in manuscript), secondary material (books about him),
periodical literature, and private collections donated to the Special Collections
from Tolkien collectors. Intended as a resource for Tolkien scholars and researchers, Marquette University is the single best repository of Tolkien material in the
United States.
For detailed information on Marquette University’s Tolkien holdings, go to its
Website at www.marquette.edu/library/collections/archives/Mss/JRRT/JRRT.html.

New Zealand: Home of Middle-earth
No doubt about it, the folks at the New Zealand Tourism Bureau have brass.
Those cheeky monkeys have come up with the new ad slogan “New Zealand: Home
of Middle-earth.”
Tolkien fans, especially in England, will likely, and understandably, take umbrage at that assertion, because there’s a world of difference between England, the
ancestral home of J.R.R. Tolkien, and New Zealand, which is the home of film
director Peter Jackson, who chose his own country to film The Lord of the Rings in
its entirety.
From New Zealand’s Website (www.newzealand.com/homeofmiddleearth/):
Here’s your opportunity to take a closer look at the country behind
The Lord of the Rings film trilogy. New Zealand’s diverse and
sometimes extreme landscapes made it the one place in the world
that could bring Tolkien’s epic masterpiece to life. Discover the
amazing real-life locations behind the films, and learn about the
unique experiences of the cast and crew.
The Website features actor Karl Urban (“Éomer”) who takes the viewer on a
tour of New Zealand’s film-inspired sites, supplemented by “Explore Middleearth,” a feature that presents individual movies that show the country’s connection to the Tolkien film, where 90 locations were used to help bring The Lord of
the Rings to life.

Guidebook
For those of you who plan on actually making the trip to New Zealand, as well
as for armchair travelers who enjoy reading guidebooks to get a vicarious travel-

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

207

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

208 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

ing experience, avoid the usual bumper crop of books about New Zealand from
the established travel book publishers. Instead, buy The Lord of the Rings Location Guidebook (HarperCollins Publishers), written by Ian Brodie, a native of
New Zealand.
With a foreword by Peter Jackson, contributions from cast and crew, and an article
on location selection by illustrator Alan Lee,
Come to Middle-earth...in
this guidebook offers unprecedented insight
into the process of turning New Zealand into
New Zealand?
the embodiment of Tolkien’s intricate world.
“It was Peter Jackson’s
Author Ian Brodie has skillfully woven tovisionary decision to shoot as
gether local history, movie lore, Maori mymuch of the film as possible
thology, and Elvish legend to provide the
on location in his native New
definitive guide for the practical traveler. And
Zealand. Not using just any
locations, but those that were
because every good hobbit knows the importhe most visually arresting
tance of a comfortable bed and good food,
and, often, the most remote
accommodation and dining tips are included.
and inaccessible.”
In addition to detailed maps and easy-to—Brian Sibley, The Lord
follow directions, GPS references are provided
of the Rings: The Making
to accurately pinpoint major locations. Inforof the Movie Trilogy
mation regarding Websites and tour companies
is also provided to help those looking for specialist The Lord of the Rings activities and tours.
This definitive guide is lavishly illustrated with photographs of the locations
and movie stills provided by New Line Cinema. The book is available at
nzfpm.marketeer.co.nz/index.pasp. (On the site’s menu at the left, click “Lord of
the Rings Location Guidebook,” under “Store”).

At first thought, the idea that The Lord of the Rings was filmed in New Zealand
makes one wonder: What in the world was director Peter Jackson thinking?
Jackson was looking for a majestic landscape, pristine in its beauty and suggestive of a European environment, with all its varied topography, before industrialization forever marred the landscape. Clearly, England was not a suitable
location for filming The Lord of the Rings. Indeed, Europe itself was out of the
question, because much of it has been “civilized.”
Literally in his own backyard, Jackson found what he had been looking for:
the ideal place to film Tolkien’s book, with all its varied geography, that suggested an Earth at some point in its distant past, with a pre-industrial “feel.”

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

208

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE LITERARY LANDSCAPE

OF

TOLKIEN’S WORLD

u 209

A country with a combined land mass roughly equivalent to England, New
Zealand’s tourism department got for free what money couldn’t buy: an unsolicited, extended advertisement for its country prominently featured in Jackson’s movie
trilogy.
The predictable result was an influx of tourists who did not go to see New
Zealand, per se, but to see firsthand the locations where Jackson’s film crews set
up to shoot what is unarguably the most expensive movie in cinematic history—
the three movie installments of The Lord of the Rings.
Exactly just what kind of impact has the movie had on tourism? For starters,
in 2002 alone, tourism added up to 2 million people, more than half of New
Zealand’s entire population!
A place where the U.S. dollar can go far (a New Zealand dollar is worth
approximately half of the U.S. dollar, at current exchange rates) and where English is spoken, New Zealand is a great place to get away from it all—the perfect
travel destination, if you don’t mind an 18-hour plane flight (from Los Angeles).
For Tolkien fans, the best way to see New Zealand is through an established
tour group, for several reasons. First, the group will have secured permission with
local landowners to allow passage. Second, the group will know exactly where the
locations are and the best way to get there. And, third, by offering tour packages,
the cost can be kept within reason, because the alternative is a private tour, which
is more expensive than what most people would want to pay.
New Zealand is comprised of two main islands—the North Island and the South
Island—with a very small island (Steward Island) at its southernmost tip.
Following is a sampling of some of the places you’ll want to visit when touring
“Middle-earth.”

The North Island
u The party tree that opens The Fellowship of the Ring: Hobbiton is near
the town of Hamilton, in Matama. Its rolling green hills made it the
ideal place to construct the Shire.
u Mordor is located in the Volcanic Plateau. It includes the spectacular
Mt. Ruapehu, in Tongariro National Park, which forms the slopes of
Mount Doom.
u The field for the Last Great Alliance of Elves and Men is located south
of the Rangipo Desert.
u One of the rivers of the Anduin can be found at the twisty Rangitikei
River.
u Wellington is not only the capital of New Zealand but the home of
Peter Jackson and Weta Workshop, the special effects company
responsible for bringing the movies to life. Outside the city itself, one
can find several key places in Middle-earth, including Helm’s Deep,
the Bree gate, the Weathertop Hillside, and the Outer Shire.

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

209

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

210 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The South Island
u In Dimrill Dale, several scenes were shot on location.
u In Nelson, visit the “World of Wearable Art” gallery, where local
craftsmen celebrate the diversity of art that can be worn, including
armor-maker Stuart Johnson, whose work can be seen in the movie
trilogy.
u In the Canbury high country, visit Edoras, the capital of Rohan. Also,
near the town of Twizel, at a sheep station (Ben Ohau), the Battle of
the Pelennor Fields was fought.
u Extensive shooting took place in the Southern Alps.
u The aptly named Paradise is also another site where extensive shooting
took place.
u Queenstown was a site for shooting locations.
u On the South Island, in Fiordland, near Lake Manapouri, in the remote
Norwest Lake area, one can find the Misty Mountains.
u On the South Island, southeast of Poolburn, one can find the Plains of
Rohan.
u On the South Island, the area around Queenstown was the site for
Rivendell and Lothlórien, as well as the battle at Amon Hen.
u On the South Island, near its southernmost point, one can find Fiorland,
site of shooting locations.

Tours
For fans who want a cybertour of Middle-earth, go to www.newzealand.com/
homeofmiddleearth, where detailed information is provided on various locations,
with drop-down menus and sidebars. (Note: This requires the Flash plug-in.)
For fans who want a tour package, the company of choice is Red Carpet
Tours (www.redcarpet-tours.com), which has planned out a 13-day itinerary that
covers all the high points. From its Website (with my notes):
Day 1:

Arrive in Auckland, New Zealand.

Day 2:

To Rotorua, via Hobbiton (private land owned by a
farmer; Red Carpet Tours worked out an agreement to
allow them to bring sightseers).

Day 3:

To Ohakune, via the Mt. Ruapehu sites of Emyn Muil,
Mordor, and Gollum’s fishing pool.

Day 4:

To Wellington, via the River Anduin, Rivendell, and
Helm’s Deep.

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

210

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE LITERARY LANDSCAPE

OF

TOLKIEN’S WORLD

u 211

Day 5:

Fly to Christchurch, the “Garden City.”

Day 6:

To Twizel, via Edoras, Mt. Cook, and the Pelennor Fields.

Day 7:

To Alexandra, via the Great Chase location and Rohan.

Day 8:

To Te Anau, via Fangorn Forest.

Day 9:

Explore the Te Anau area or take a day trip to Milford
Sound.

Day 10:

To Queenstown, via the Ford of Bruinen, the path of the
Rohan refugees and the place where Aragorn goes over the
cliff.

Day 11:

A visit to Amon Hen and optional jet-boating through
Lothlórien country.

Day 12:

Optional activities, such as rafting past the Pillars of
Argonath.

Day 13:

Tour ends.

For Tolkien fans who want the ultimate experience, for December 2003, one
day is added to the itinerary, so fans can enjoy the world premiere of The Return of
the King in Wellington.

Sources Consulted for the Tolkien History
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. New York: Houghton
Mifflin, 2000.
“JRR Tolkien’s Oxford.” July 2003. <www.chem.ox.ac.uk/oxfordtour/tolkientour/
index.html>.
“Tolkien Timeline.” July 2003. <www.jrrtolkien.org.uk/tolkien_timeline.htm>.
“The Tolkien Timeline.” July 2003. <gollum.usask.ca/tolkien>.
“24 Hour Museum” July 2003. <www.24hourmuseum.org.uk>.

12 Tolkien Chapter 12.pmd

211

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

CHAPTER 13

TOLKIEN WEBSITES:
THE ROAD GOES
EVER ON

If you were to type in “Tolkien Website” with the Google.com search engine
and read every single reference, you’d be busy for a long, long time, because
more than 93,000 will be displayed. Granted, there’s a lot of repetition, with multiple references to sites with lots of pages, but the fact remains that searching the
Internet for Tolkien sites is no easy matter!
In the listing that follows, I’ve included what I feel is the tip of the iceberg, so
to speak. I think these sites are good places to start, and as with all things on the
Internet, sites with links will take you down another road—an analogy that recalls
the Tolkien poem, “The Road Goes Ever On.”

Organizations
The Tolkien Society, www.tolkiensociety.org. Founded in 1969, this nonprofit organization was established to “further interest in the life and works of J.R.R. Tolkien,”
according to its Website. Based in the United Kingdom, this society has several
gatherings, the largest being the Oxonmoot, in September, and publishes periodicals of interest, notably Amon Hen (a bi-monthly newszine) and Mallorn (a collection of critical essays). The Society will be holding a major conference in 2005 to
celebrate the 50th anniversary of the publication of The Lord of the Rings: The
Fellowship of the Ring. Most useful to new readers is a mail-order store with an
excellent selection.
The Mythopoeic Society, www.mythsoc.org. The U.S. counterpart to the Tolkien
Society, the Mythopoeic Society is (from the Website):
u 213 U

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

213

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

214 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

...a non-profit international literary and educational organization
for the study, discussion, and enjoyment of fantasy and mythic
literature, especially the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and
Charles Williams. Members of the Mythopoeic Society include
scholars, writers, and readers of mythic and fantasy literature.
The Society sponsors an annual Mythopoeic Conference
(Mythcon), Discussion and Special Interest Groups, the
Mythopoeic Awards, and three periodical publications.
This society publishes Mythprint (monthly), Mythlore (quarterly), The Mythic
Circle, and issues its own books. Unlike The Tolkien Society, it does not carry general merchandise, though it does offer such items through its Amazon.com associate program.

Travel
24 Hour Museum, www.24hourmuseum.org.uk. As the Website states, the 24 Hour
Museum is a “Gateway to over 2,500 UK museums, galleries and heritage attractions.” Type “Tolkien” in the search engine and two “trails” discussing scenery
with photos are available for exploration: “Fellowship of the Ring” and “The Two
Towers.” Expect a third trail, “The Return of the King,” to be available once the
final Peter Jackson film is released.

Educational
National Geographic, www.nationalgeographic.com/ngbeyond. To promote its feature about Tolkien (Beyond the Movie: The Lord of the Rings), this site provides
information about Tolkien’s life and influences on The Lord of the Rings; cultural
and linguistic conservation, Tolkien’s love of languages, and reflections of “real”
languages in Tolkien’s tongues; creating a mythological identity for England, and
the myths that inspired The Lord of the Rings; and a forum, “Do individuals today,
no matter how epic their quests, really have any power?”
Tolkien’s Oxford, users.ox.ac.uk/~tolksoc/TolkiensOxford. An informal pictorial
guide of key places in Oxford, England, associated with J.R.R. Tolkien.
The Scholar’s Guide to Oxford, www.oxford-info.com. The best site for information about Oxford, with recommendations on lodging, a guide to the university and
to the city itself, a restaurant and pub guide, information on a walking tour, and
other resources.
The BBC, www.bbc.co.uk. The British Broadcast System is the best source for
general-interest news about Tolkien and current events. Typing “Tolkien” in the
BBCi (BBC Internet) or BBC yields news about him that does not generally get
reported in the United States, such as a story about a new CD with Tolkien reading

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

214

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN WEBSITES: THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

u 215

from The Fellowship of the Ring, discovered in the archives of the British Library,
and Professor Michael Drout’s discovery of Tolkien’s translation of Beowulf.
(Tolkien news will usually get posted on the Tolkien Society Website, with the
benefit of it being put in context.)
Marion E. Wade Center (Wheaton College), www.wheaton.edu/learnres/wade.
According to the Website, Wheaton College houses
...a major research collection of the books and papers of seven
British authors: Owen Barfield, G.K. Chesterton, C.S. Lewis,
George MacDonald, Dorothy L. Sayers, J.R.R. Tolkien, and
Charles Williams. These writers are well known for their impact
on contemporary literature and Christian thought. Together they
produced over four hundred books including novels, drama, poetry,
fantasy, children’s books, and Christian treatises. Overall, the Wade
Center has more than 11,000 volumes including first editions and
critical works. Other holdings on the seven authors include letters,
manuscripts, audio and videotapes, artwork, dissertations,
periodicals, photographs, and related materials. Any of these
resources may be studied in the quiet surroundings of the Kilby
Reading Room.
It also has a museum that holds, among other literary curiosities, a desk owned
by J.R.R. Tolkien.
Marquette University Special Collections: J.R.R. Tolkien, www.mu.edu/library/
collections/archives/tolkien.html. A stellar collection of Tolkien material is on deposit at Marquette University. At its nucleus are original manuscripts of The Hobbit,
The Lord of the Rings, and Farmer Giles of Ham purchased for $5,000 from J.R.R.
Tolkien in 1956 due to the vision of William B. Ready, who recognized their historic importance.
The university has supplemented the original manuscripts with a large collection of secondary material—notably books and periodicals—and, through its bequests program, it is continually adding to its impressive collection.
An excellent resource for students, scholars, and researchers.
Original manuscripts have become increasingly rare, because today’s author is
likely to use a computer and not save early drafts. But in the precomputer days,
manuscripts were typewritten several times in order to achieve a final copy, and sometimes typed only after several drafts were composed by hand—the method by which
The Magic Ring (the original working title of The Lord of the Rings) was written.
The collection of Tolkien material, currently inaccessible until Marquette’s
new library is constructed and all holdings safety transferred, is a treasure trove for
Tolkien fans who want to see his masterwork, in his own hand.
For the just plain curious, the display of actual manuscript pages—some of
them, anyway—will be enough. For serious students, scholars, researchers, writers, and academicians, access to the holdings is a significant resource.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

215

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

216 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Understandably, the original manuscripts are not physically available, nor is
that desirable, because excessively handled paper will inevitably show signs of irreversible wear and tear—damage that cannot be repaired. For this reason, Marquette
University, like all universities, archives manuscripts on microfilm, which serves
the students well and preserves the physical manuscript, which, over time, will become increasingly fragile, because the acid-based paper will slowly deteriorate.

William Ready, Marquette University, and Tolkien
The late William Ready posseses two
distinctions in the Tolkien universe: He
is the author of The Tolkien Relation
(Warner Books, 1968), which Tolkien
himself called “insulting and offensive”
(according to Carpenter’s biography),
and he is also the visionary who, back
in 1956, contacted Tolkien with the
hope of adding original manuscripts to
the permanent collection of his employer, Marquette University. He had
been tasked as a newly appointed library director to aggressively expand
its holdings, and he set out to do just
that, in a field that he loved—fantasy
literature.
Ready recognized Tolkien’s genius
and contacted Tolkien himself, who was
agreeable to selling his manuscripts, but
only through an intermediary. A London bookseller, the late Bertram Rota,
served as that intermediary and, after
£1,250 was received, literally thousands
of pages of original manuscripts were
packed up and shipped off to Marquette
University.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

216

To say that Marquette University had
gotten a bargain would be an understatement. With more than 11,000 pages of
original manuscripts to three major
Tolkien works (The Hobbit, The Lord of
the Rings, and Farmer Giles of Ham), the
university had bought two literary
“silmarilli”—jewels of incomparable
beauty and incalculable worth. (The third
jewel, the manuscript of The Silmarillion
was later deposited at the Bodeleian Library at Oxford.)
Though general estimates as to the
holdings conservatively runs into the
millions, what, one asks, might those
pages be worth?
To be honest, they are priceless,
one-of-a-kind, and irreplaceable, which
is why they are kept in a temperature
and humidity controlled vault, the
leaves carefully inserted in acid-free
folders that are stored in acid-free
boxes—state-of-the-art conservation
methods designed to prolong the life of
papers that would otherwise undergo a
slow decay.

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN WEBSITES: THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

u 217

It should be noted that the Tolkien estate retains copyright on these materials, so photocopies can only be made if written permission is secured from the
estate. Likewise, this material can only be published if permission is secured.
A reading room is set up to peruse the holdings. So exactly what, you ask,
does Marquette University have in its considerable holdings? On its Website, the
university provides a detailed listing. However, the general summary provided on
the site is sufficient to give one an idea of the scope of the holdings. The following
is reprinted as it appears on www.marquette.edu/library/collections/archives/Mss/
JRRT/mss-jrrt-sc.html:
Series 1, The Hobbit, ca. 1930–1937, contains a holograph version of the
novel, typescripts with corrections by Tolkien, a printer’s typescript with
corrections by JRRT, and three sets of page proofs with the author’s
corrections. Also included are a watercolor rendering by Tolkien of the
dust jacket used by Allen and Unwin, printed maps with corrections by
Tolkien, and a dust jacket from the German edition of The Hobbit. The
records are arranged by type of manuscript and by chapter thereunder,
corresponding to the final published version.
Series 2, Farmer Giles of Ham, ca. 1933–1938, 1948–1949, contains a
holograph version, three typescripts with corrections by Tolkien, and two
sets of galley sheets with corrections by Tolkien. It is arranged by type of
manuscript.
Series 3, The Lord of the Rings, ca. 1937–1955, includes holograph
renderings, typescripts with corrections by Tolkien, a typescript for the
printer with corrections by JRRT, and galley sheets with corrections by the
author. There are two sets of galley sheets for Books I and II, and three
sets for Books II and IV. Also included are an advance proof copy of The
Return of the King, printed maps, dust jackets from the original Houghton
Mifflin edition, several drafts for an unpublished “Epilogue,” a number of
unpublished sketches, and manuscript fragments for The Silmarillion. The
records are arranged by book and by type of manuscript and chapter
thereunder, corresponding to the final published version. Additional
manuscripts presented by Christopher Tolkien between 1987–1998 are
arranged separately.
Series 4, Mr. Bliss, ca. 1935, is a children’s story by Tolkien. The manuscript
is in Tolkien’s calligraphic hand, illustrated throughout with ink and colored
pencil drawings by the author. It is a 50-page booklet, in finished form. A
photocopy is included, along with a transcription and a set of 51 color slides,
as well as galley sheets and an advance proof copy of the facsimile edition
published in 1982. The condition of the Mr. Bliss manuscript precludes
frequent handling. The Archives reserves the right to offer patrons the set
of slides for viewing rather than the original document.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

217

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

218 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Series 5, Printed Literature and Other Secondary Material Relating to
Tolkien, 1938–, consists of secondary material on Tolkien and/or his works.
Conference announcements, press clippings, book reviews, magazine and
journal articles, books, posters, phonograph records, audiotapes, videotapes
and DVDs, and ephemera are included. The series is arranged by type of
material and chronologically thereunder. All books by and about J.R.R.
Tolkien are cataloged in MARQCAT, Marquette University Libraries
electronic catalog.
Series 6, Periodical Literature on Tolkien and Related Fantasy Writers,
1965–, contains fanzines and journals by groups of Tolkien enthusiasts. It is
arranged by title of publication and/or organization and chronologically
thereunder.
Series 7, Other Tolkien Writings, 1911–1976, the bulk of which were
contributed by John Rateliff, contains photocopies of 30 poems by Tolkien,
published from 1911 to 1974, and copies of letters and extracts of letters by
Tolkien, as well as scholarly articles and obituaries. The series is arranged
by type of material and thereunder chronologically.
Series 8, Screen Treatment, Scripts, and Screenplays 1957–1978, consists
of a screen treatment by Morton Grady Zimmerman, written in 1957 for
an animated version of The Lord of the Rings, with annotations by J.R.R.
Tolkien; production notes and correspondence concerning the project;
original donated by Morton Grady Zimmerman. Also the original script
and production materials for a play cycle for “From The Lord of the Rings
by J.R.R. Tolkien,” written by Marian L. Kleinau and performed in 1967 at
South Illinois University, donated by Richard E. Blackwelder. Also a
photocopy of a screenplay of The Lord of the Rings by John Boorman and
Rospo Pallenberg, prepared in 1970 for United Artists but never produced;
and photocopies of three drafts of the screenplay by Chris Conkling and
Peter S. Beagle, 1976–1978, of the animated version of “The Lord of the
Rings,” directed by Ralph Bakshi, donated by David N. Villalpando.

In addition, the library has acquired a considerable collection of secondary
holdings, including books by and about Tolkien (approximately 300 volumes), other
literature, and Tolkieniana (quoted from www.marquette.edu/library/collections/archives/tolkien.html#secondary)—“sketches and paintings, calendars, games and
puzzles, and teaching materials, in addition to audio recordings or readings and
radio adaptations and video recordings of movie adaptations and commemorative
documentaries.”

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

218

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN WEBSITES: THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

u 219

Marquette is, of course, interested in bequests and gifts, and interested parties should contact the university’s archivist directly, at:
Matt Blessing, Department Head/University Archivist
Marquette University Libraries
1415 W. Wisconsin Avenue
P.O. Box 3141
Milwaukee, WI 53201-3141
Phone: (414) 288-7256
Fax: (414) 288-3123
E-mail: Matt.Blessing@marquette.edu
Access the university Website at www.marquette.edu/library/collections/archives/tolkien.
J.R.R. Tolkien’s Oxford, www.chem.ox.ac.uk/oxfordtour/tolkientour/index.html.
Using a timeline and Apple’s Quicktime, this site offers a unique look at the educational, professional, and personal places in Oxford associated with Tolkien. What
makes this site unusual is that the plug-in software allows the viewer to literally
rotate the view a full 360 degrees. Thus, starting with a frontal view of, say, a Tolkien
residence, you can “swing” the camera around to see what it looks like down and
across the street as well—a fascinating perspective obviously not available in book
form.

Languages
Resources for Tolkienian Linguistics: An Annotated Guide, www.elvish.org/
resources.html. A good starting point for those interested in studying Tolkien’s invented languages, with information on primary works, secondary works, recommended reading, publications, and library holdings.
Ardalambion: Of the Tongues of Arda, the Invented World of J.R.R. Tolkien,
www.uib.no/People/hnohf/. For serious linguists who wish to know everything there
is to know about Tolkien’s many languages. (Note: Some of the pages are difficult
to read, with black text on electric blue or parrot-green backgrounds.)

General Reference
The Encyclopedia of Arda, www.glyphweb.com/arda/default.htm. An online encyclopedia with thousands of entries on the people, places, and things in Tolkien’s
world. (An offline version is also available for the Windows computer platform
only.)

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

219

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

220 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Bibliography
A Chronological Bibliography of the Writings of J.R.R. Tolkien (Compiled by
Ake Bertenstam), www.forodrim.org/arda/tbchron.html. Beginning in 1910, with
an annotation for a “Debating Society [Report],” this list literally covers Tolkien’s
published writings. It has 162 separate entries, concluding with entries on Beowulf
and the Critics (ed. Michael D.C. Trout) and The History of The Hobbit (ed. John
Rateliff).

Personal Websites
Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull, www.bcn.net/~whammond. An editing
team with numerous credits (Tolkien’s Roverandom, the 50th anniversary edition
of Farmer Giles of Ham, and J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist and Illustrator), their forthcoming project, J.R.R. Tolkien: A Companion and Guide, from Houghton Mifflin, will
offer a concordance to persons, places, events, and issues to his life and a detailed
chronology, as well.
They also publish The Tolkien Collector, which is, according to their Website
(www.bcn.net/~whammond/collect):
...an occasional magazine for collectors of J.R.R. Tolkien. Each
issue, usually 32 pages, includes news about new and forthcoming
books by and about Tolkien, translations of Tolkien’s works,
recordings, videos, and other Tolkieniana, and Tolkien items
offered for sale in booksellers’ and auction catalogues and on the
Internet; and feature articles on aspects of collecting Tolkien and
Tolkien bibliography.

Booksellers
AbeBooks, www.abebooks.com. A network of member booksellers worldwide
list their used books on this site with a database searchable by title, author, keyword, or publisher. This is the place to look for the truly rare or exotic edition of
any Tolkien book.
Amazon, www.amazon.com. This is the U.S. site. The U.K. site is at www.amazon.co.uk
Note: When buying from the U.K. site, I highly recommend paying extra for
airmail shipment and insuring the order for full replacement value.
Blackwell’s, bookshop.blackwell.com/bobus/scripts/welcome.jsp. The premiere U.K.
bookseller’s U.S. site. Carries all the in-print Tolkien books and, of course, virtually anything else in print from U.K. publishers. Offers a searchable database and
an out-of-print search. Free shipping to the United States.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

220

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN WEBSITES: THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

u 221

Barnes and Noble, www.bn.com. The online Website of the biggest book chain in
the United States.
Daeron’s Books, www.daerons.co.uk. Independent bookstore in the United Kingdom.
It carries a wide inventory of new and used books by and about Tolkien. Bills
itself as “Possibly the largest Tolkien bookdealer in the world!”
Thornton’s Bookshop, www.thorntonsbooks.co.uk. Independent bookstore in the
United Kingdom. New and used Tolkien books. Its inventory is searchable by seller
via the www.abebooks.com database.
The Tolkien Society, www.tolkiensociety.org. Specializes in in-print material published in the United Kingdom. (Does not carry out-of-print material.)
UK Bookworld, www.ukbookworld.com. Searchable database of independent
booksellers in the United Kingdom. Especially useful to find out-of-print books.

Movie-Related
Official Movie Site, www.lordoftherings.net. The official movie Website is the place
to go for the most authoritative information on the Peter Jackson film adaptations. Features extensive text and photos and trailers from the films, plus links for
its Web shop and fan club.
Official Movie Fan Club, www.lotrfanclub.com. Designed to support the films, the
fan club is run by Decipher and, for an annual membership fee, offers a professionally produced magazine published bi-monthly, access to a special “members only”
online community, and discounts on movie-related memorabilia, some of which is
not available elsewhere.
Unofficial Fan Club, www.theonering.net. Though it is a general-interest fan club
devoted to Tolkien, its current emphasis—because of their overwhelming media
presence—is on the films. Abbreviated T.O.R.N., this site is a labor of love with an
emphasis on the word “fan.”
Cold Spring Press published a collection of nonfiction pieces from the Website,
The People’s Guide to J.R.R. Tolkien (May 2003, 416 pages, $16.95). Informal and
very fannish, as opposed to a collection of academic papers, The People’s Guide is
a catchall collection of individual perspectives by die-hard Tolkien fans.
Weta Workshop, www.wetadigital.com/workshop/collectibles/. Informative site explaining the history of the collectibles program developed for The Lord of the Rings,
profile of creators, interviews with creators, and links to other Websites.

Individual Actor Websites
The list of official Websites is growing, but the list of unofficial Websites constantly changes (most often because the real world intrudes and a site goes temporarily down or is permanently closed).

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

221

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

222 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

A good site to check, with updated links on both official and unofficial sites
of the actors from the movie trilogy, can be found at www.unotime-eleni.net/
chemicalheart/fansites.html.

Official
u Ian McKellen (Gandalf): www.mckellen.com.
u Sean Austin (Samwise Gamgee): www.seanaustin.com.
u Billy Boyd (Peregrin “Pippin” Took): www.billyboyd.com.
u John Rhys-Davies (Gimli Gloin): www.johnrhys-davies.com.
u Andy Serkis (Gollum): www.serkis.com.

Unofficial
u Sean Bean (Boromir): www.compleatseanbean.com.
u Cate Blanchett (Lady Galadriel): groups.msn.com/
TheUltimateCateBlanchettWebsite.
u Orlando Bloom (Legolas Greenleaf):
www.theorlandobloomfiles.com/.
u Peter Jackson (movie director): tbhl.theonering.net/index.shtml,
home of the Official Peter Jackson Fan Club.
u Viggo Mortensen (Aragorn):
www.frostyland.com/Viggo/viggo.index.shtml
oberongirl.com/viggo/.
www.geocities.com/nzmermaid2003/LinksViggo.htm.
u Hugo Weaving (Elrond Half-Elven): www.nuli.net/me.html.
u Dominic Monaghan (Meriadoc “Merry” Brandybuck):
unofficialdom.fateback.com/home.html.
u Liv Tyler (Arwen Undomiel): www.lovelylivtyler.com/.
u Brad Dourif (Gríma Wormtongue): www.dourif.net.

General Merchandising
(Licensed Through Tolkien Enterprises)
Danbury Mint, www.danburymint.co.uk/lor/index.html. A British company that
manufactures sculptures, plates, and replicas.
Mithril, www.mithril.ie. Based in Ireland, this company manufactures an extensive line of Tolkien-related miniatures from The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

222

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN WEBSITES: THE ROAD GOES EVER ON

u 223

Movie Merchandising
(Licensed Through New Line Cinema)
Advanced Graphics. (No Website.) Life-sized standups of characters from the
films: Gandalf, Gimli, Legolas, Aragorn, the four hobbits, Frodo, and Saruman.
Antioch, www.antioch.com. Bookmarkers.
Artbox, www.artboxent.com. Trading cards called “3-D Action Flipz.”
Cedco Publishing, www.cedco.com. Products for the student market, principally
student planners, calendars, and journals.
Decipher, www.decipher.com. Trading card games and role-playing games. Runs
the official movie tie-in fan club (see www.lotrfanclub.com).
Games Workshop, www.games-workshop.com. Miniature gaming based on The
Lord of the Rings. Uses a rule book, miniature figurines, and dice to play simulated battles—you supply the strategy.
Noble Collection, www.noblecollection.com. Sells direct to the public via Website
and mail-order catalog, though some of these products are sold on the official
movie Website’s shop. The most extensive line of jewelry from the movie, including rings, brooches, pendants, earrings, necklaces, bracelets, headdresses, and chokers; a selection of swords (like United Cutlery); and collectibles, such as sculptures,
a holographic image chamber, and a chess set.
Playalong Toys, www.playalongtoys.com. Miniature toys (figures and playsets)
designed for children, as opposed to gaming product.
Serious CD Cardz, www.serioususa.com. CD-ROM cards (80 megabytes) with
movie-specific content for each of the three films—the movie trailer, character
biographies, movie stills, behind-the-scenes stills, e-mailable postcards, screensavers,
wallpaper, and music from the soundtrack.
Sideshow, www.sideshowcollectibles.com. An outstanding line of limited edition
products—intricately painted polystone sculptures and figurines, medallions, and
lithographs. For investment value and for overall quality, these products are genuine collectibles and worth your investment of time.
Topps, www.topps.com. Trading cards.
Toybiz, www.marvel.com/toybiz/lotr. A line of quality toys and figurines from the
movie—action figures (Sauron, Treebeard, a Nazgûl on horse, Arwen), and horse
and rider sets. Excellent packaging.
Upper Deck, www.upperdeckstore.com. Half-foot “bobble-head” dolls based on
the characters in the film. Mathoms, all.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

223

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

224 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

United Cutlery, www.unitedcutlery.com. Manufactures replicas from the film, including a line of swords, knives, full-scale helmets, staffs, Gimli’s axe, bows, shields,
spears, pikes, crowns, and tiaras. A first-rate line of high-quality product issued in
limited runs. Click on “retail links” to find a source, because United Cutlery does
not sell directly to the public.
Wrebbit, www.wrebbit.com. Puzzles based on the movie—two-dimensional and
three-dimensional (Golden Hall, Endoras; and Orthanc Tower, Isengard).

Mail-Order Stores
The Tolkien Shop, www.tolkienshop.com. Independent store specializing in
Tolkien. If there is a single source for anything and everything about Tolkien in
any form, this is that store. Prices are in Euro dollars. Proprietor Rene van
Rossenberg also carries an impressive line of other fantasy material. A great
place to find the rare, the unusual, and the collectible!
Tolkientown.com, www.TolkienTown.com. An excellent single-source store for
all things Tolkien.

Music
Tolkien Music, www.tolkien-music.com. Lists and provides links to nearly 900
CDs of music inspired by Tolkien and his work. As expected, most are from
unknowns who self-publish their work and share it online or issue small run CDs.
Tolkien Ensemble, www.tolkienensemble.dk. A professional group of musicians
who are in the process of musically interpreting all of the poems and songs in The
Lord of the Rings. To date, two CDs (with 24 songs) have been issued.

Publishers
HarperCollins UK, www.tolkien.co.uk. Excellent source of information from
Tolkien’s primary publisher. Biographical information, interviews, competitions,
interactive quizzes, art portfolios, information about all the books in print,
downloadable screensavers and wallpaper for the computer—it’s all here. Drink
deep. Hoom, hoom!
Houghton Mifflin (U.S.), www.houghtonmifflinbooks.com/features/lordoftheringstrilogy.
Detailed information on the frontlist, backlist, movie tie-in books, etc., organized by section. More for booksellers than fans—unlike the U.K. publishing
counterpart—the site is well-organized and easy to navigate.
Random House: Ballantine Books (U.S.), www.randomhouse.com/delrey/. Ballantine
is the paperback publisher for Tolkien titles in the United States. The site provides a basic listing, nothing more.

13 Tolkien Chapter 13.pmd

224

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

CHAPTER 14

THE ESSENTIAL
J.R.R. TOLKIEN:
MY PERSONAL PICKS

There are literally thousands of editions of Tolkien books, books about Tolkien,
related memorabilia, and movie-related material. If I were to pick the items I think
are especially attractive to a Tolkien fan, they would include the following:

The Hobbit
Though it’s not necessary to have read this book before reading The Lord of
the Rings, it makes sense to do so because of chronology. The Hobbit precedes the
events of The Lord of The Rings and, thus, sets the stage for what is to follow—the
great War of the Ring. In The Hobbit, we are introduced to the denizens of Middleearth—hobbits (especially one in particular, Bilbo Baggins), Gollum, Gandalf the
Wizard, Gwaihir the Windlord (an eagle), Thorin Oakenshield and company, and
the great and terrible dragon, Smaug.
Two editions stand out: The Annotated Hobbit (Houghton Mifflin), annotated
by Douglas A. Anderson; and The Hobbit (HarperCollins UK, deluxe edition).
The Annotated Hobbit (398 numbered pages, $28) is a work of scholarship.
starting with the preferred text (restored and corrected), this revised and expanded
edition is fully annotated by Tolkien expert Douglas A. Anderson, who explicates
“the sources, characters, places, and things” (as the dust jacket copy notes), so the
reader can appreciate the historical references—necessary for a book written by a
linguist and scholar. Visually, this edition offers 150 illustrations—including
Tolkien’s own work in various forms, from drafts to finished paintings—that show
how this book has fired the imagination of artists worldwide. Bracketing the book,
u 225 U

14 Tolkien Chapter 14.pmd

225

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

226 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Tolkien and Correspondence
“He liked visitors, but he liked to know them before they arrived, and he
preferred to ask them himself.”
—J.R.R. Tolkien, The Hobbit: Chapter 1, “An Unexpected Party”
An author’s time is his own to spend,
but even when the author, the publisher, and the readers are in full agreement—as was the case with Tolkien
and The Silmarillion—he found himself
needlessly distracted, most often by
correspondence.
While it is understandable that a
writer would get fan mail, it also stands to
reason that he must, in the end, strike a
balance. The work, after all, is the reason
why fans write in the first place. Should
those precious hours available for writing be spent producing more work or answering individual letters?
For professional writers, the answer
is clear: The work is the priority and everything else a distant second. For this
reason, writers such as Arthur C. Clarke
and Stephen King use preprinted form
postcards to respond to mail. On his
Website, King put it simply. He couldn’t
do both, so wouldn’t most fans prefer he
spend time creating new work?
As biographer Humphrey Carpenter
explained, in Tolkien’s case, after he had
retired from Oxford in 1959, the usual
matters of publishing—revising and updating earlier works, completing shorter
works—commanded his attention. But
The Silmarillion, the book fans were most
anxious to read, remained unfinished. Unfortunately, it would remain thus, because
Tolkien found himself too easily distracted by the minutia of being an author.
Personal correspondence, for instance, was his joy...and bane. Wrote
Carpenter, “A lot of his time was also
spent simply in answering letters.
Readers wrote to him by the score, prais-

14 Tolkien Chapter 14.pmd

226

ing, criticizing, and asking for more information about elements in the stories.
Tolkien took every letter seriously....”
Too seriously, as it turned out. According to Carpenter, Tolkien would
sometimes write draft after draft of a
letter that sometimes would never be
sent. The correspondent on the other
end might think that Tolkien couldn’t
be bothered to respond, but, in fact,
Tolkien was a perfectionist, especially
in literary matters, and wouldn’t send
out a reply unless it exactly expressed
what he wanted to say—close was not
good enough, and, for that reason, some
letters, even after multiple drafts, remained unfinished and never sent.
Carpenter also pointed out that
Tolkien, who lived in a house crammed
with books and papers, found it all too
easy to misplace the correspondence
that so commanded his attention, with
the result that he spent “hours turning
out the garage or his study-bedroom
until he had found it.” Days, we are told,
were thus spent—precious time wasted,
time that could have been spent more
productively.
Back then, there was no such thing
as cellular phones, e-mail, and voicemail.
Back then, long distance phone calls were
expensive, and transatlantic air fares
exorbitant.
The world is a much smaller place
now and celebrities are under siege
not only from the media but from wellintentioned but aggressive fans who
feel a best-selling author is a public
commodity.

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN: MY PERSONAL PICKS

u 227

an extensive illustrated introduction that tells of the history of the book and its
evolution, and extensive appendices that include “The Quest of Erebor,” by Tolkien,
which tells of how Gandalf came to arrange the adventure told in this book; a
discussion of regular runes and moon-runes that play an important part in this
book; and a necessarily abbreviated bibliography, with useful notes.
For those who prefer a traditionally illustrated edition, Houghton Mifflin’s gift
edition, a large format (8 x 10.25 inches) hardback, with art by Alan Lee, is a good
choice, designed to complement Lee’s illustrated one volume edition of The Lord of
the Rings and Nasmith’s illustrated The Silmarillion (both also Houghton Mifflin).
The Hobbit U.K. deluxe edition is out of print but worth searching for, because it matches the deluxe volumes of The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion,
as well, all from HarperCollins UK. Originally published in 2001, quarter-bound
in leather, the book measures 7.75 x 9.75 inches, and is limited to 2,500 copies,
protected by a matching slipcase. Printed on India paper (that is, Bible paper)
stock, the book is a fine example of bookmaking and, surely, the most elegant
edition ever published.

The Lord of the Rings
The cornerstone of any Tolkien collection, the challenge here is in picking,
from the many available, which editions are the best value and the most collectible.
The best non-illustrated edition is the one-volume “Leatherette Collector’s
Edition” (Houghton Mifflin, $75). Bound in red leatherette with a matching slipcase,
the book itself is printed in two color inks (red and black) and measures 7.75 x 9.75
inches. The paper stock is an off white—perfect for reading, providing the best
contrast—and a map is folded inside a free endpaper. A beautiful edition at an
affordable price, the Collector’s Edition is the preferred edition for fans who want
the book as the author intended, in one volume, and without illustrations.
The best illustrated edition is the three-volume, slipcased edition (Houghton
Mifflin, $80) with 50 watercolors by Alan Lee. Oversized (8 x 10.25 inches) and
printed on semi-matte paper, this edition allows the positioning of the art as close
as possible to the referenced text page. (Two other editions using the Lee art, both
from Houghton Mifflin, are in print—a three-volume, slipcased edition for $65,
printed on book stock and inserted color plates, and the one-volume, $70 edition,
printed, alas, on thin paper that shows bleed-through and makes the text on subsequent pages is visible.)
The best U.K. edition is the deluxe volume, from HarperCollins UK, printed
on India paper. Quarter-bound in black leather with a matching slipcase, this is the
matching volume to The Hobbit and The Silmarillion (both also HarperCollins UK).

The Silmarillion
The U.S. edition of choice is the gift edition, illustrated by Ted Nasmith,
published in a large format (Houghton Mifflin, $35, 7 x 10 inches).

14 Tolkien Chapter 14.pmd

227

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

228 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The U.K. edition of choice is the Deluxe Edition, quarter-bound in leather,
with black cloth, and a matching slipcase (HarperCollins UK).

The History of Middle-Earth
The 12 individual volumes are available from Houghton Mifflin in trade hardback—the best editions available in the United States.
The preferred editions, in this case, are the U.K. deluxe editions, all from
HarperCollins UK, which collect all 12 in three volumes, printed on fine paper
and slipcased.
The alternative choice is the U.K. trade edition, also from HarperCollins, which
is available in three hardbacks with a matching slipcase.

Recorded Books
For those of us who love books on tape, or CD, Recorded Books offers the
best line of fiction and nonfiction imaginable. For purposes of this discussion, however, let’s talk Tolkien.
Available on audiocassette and CD, unabridged recordings of The Hobbit
and The Lord of the Rings are available for purchase or rental. Read by Rob Inglis
and recorded with fidelity—the sound quality is extraordinary—any Tolkien fan
would love to add these to his collection.
The artist Michael Whelan has practically worn out his audiocassette copies
of The Lord of the Rings, and (as he put it in an interview previously in this book)
considers these readings to be music to his ears.

The One Ring
Movie interest and tie-in licensing has produced a cascade of rings, from cheap
to expensive, in various metals. As with all things of great beauty, simplicity is best.
Although not authorized, my rings of choice are the ones crafted by the New Zealand
firm, Jens Hansen Gold & Silversmith. This company made the One Rings seen in
the movies, but did not seek a licensing agreement. The rings, therefore, do not
have the Elvish inscription on the bands. Despite that omission, the rings are simple
in design and elegant, available in various precious metals. Each ring comes in an
elegantly packaged wooden presentation box.

Swords
Two lines of swords are available—from the Noble Collection and from United
Cutlery—but my preference is for the latter line, because they specialize in blades
and have the most extensive, and ambitious, line.

14 Tolkien Chapter 14.pmd

228

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN: MY PERSONAL PICKS

u 229

Choosing one sword from the United Cutlery selection is admittedly difficult
because there are so many splendid designs from which to choose, but for its
beauty, elegance, and craftsmanship, the line of Elven weapons is most impressive. Hadhafang, the Sword of Arwen, is especially eye-catching. Measuring approximately 38 inches, its blade constructed of tempered steel, with a wood grip
and solid metal pommel, it is mounted on an ornate display stand.

Books About Tolkien
There are two indispensable books, both by Humphrey Carpenter: The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien (Houghton Mifflin), which gives his worldview captured in
personal and business correspondence, and J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography (Houghton
Mifflin), which is definitive and authoritative.

Sculpture
The line manufactured by Sideshow/Weta is first class. Issued in limited runs,
constructed of polystone, hand-painted for maximum detail, and likenesses approved by the actors in the movie, this affordably priced line of busts and figures
offers something for everyone.
There are so many to choose from, all excellent, but the standout value is
“The Galadhrim Archer” ($125), which stands 17.25 inches tall. A run of only
2,000 pieces, this statue of an Elven warrior is a magnificent work of art.

14 Tolkien Chapter 14.pmd

229

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

FINAL WORD

THE IMPORTANCE
STORY

OF

In 2005, Tolkien devotees worldwide will celebrate the silver anniversary publication of The Lord of the Rings—a party worth celebrating. The book has stood
the test of time, more than fulfilling the author’s original intent (upon which he
elaborated in a foreword to the second edition of The Lord of the Rings): to write
“a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse them, delight
them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move them.” As his own worst
critic, he found “many defects,” but the author acknowledged one flaw noted by
others: “the book is too short.”
Given that The Lord of the Rings is 1,137 pages in Houghton Mifflin’s singlevolume movie tie-in edition, a question arises: How can a book of that length be
considered “too short”?
The short answer is that it’s the essential difference between the film trilogy’s
theatrical release versions and the DVD extended edition. Fans want more detail,
more information. In fact, they’ll take all they can get.
Not limited to the book itself, of which there are more than 100 million copies
in print, the story has enjoyed unparalleled success in multiple forms, from audio
adaptations to the hugely successful film adaptations that have rejuvenated an
enduring entertainment franchise—the World of Tolkien.
At a time when Hollywood favors risk avoidance by releasing sequels and
tailoring its movies for predetermined audiences, and when book publishers look
backward instead of forward, preferring proven retreads to new visions, it’s worth
noting that in today’s commercial mentality, The Lord of the Rings might never
have gotten past the first reader. A long work of fantasy by an unknown author
u 231 U

15 Tolkien Final Word.pmd

231

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

232 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

who abhorred celebrity and never shilled the book to the media or attended book
signings, Tolkien’s book has prospered by virtue of word of mouth.
The story, in short, sells itself. No hype, no huge marketing campaign, no meetand-greet with the media. Just an old-fashioned epic fantasy, plainly told, by a traditional storyteller who was motivated not by money but by love of story, love of
language, and a love for history.
No one, suggests Tom Shipley in J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century, could
have written The Lord of the Rings except Tolkien himself. And for that reason, we
will never see another book—or an author—quite like The Lord of the Rings again.

Of Beren and Lúthien
On a simple headstone at a gravesite in
the Oxford suburb of Wolvercotte, the
words “Lúthien” and “Beren” are engraved. The words strike a dissonant
chord: In sharp contrast to the English
names on the headstone, these are
otherworldly names, recognizable only
to Tolkien fans who appreciate their
significance.
The gravestone reads:


EDITH MARY TOLKIEN
LÚTHIEN
1889–1971
JOHN RONALD
REUEL TOLKIEN
BEREN
1892–1973

15 Tolkien Final Word.pmd

232

In “Quenta Silmarillion” (in The
Silmarillion), chapter XIX tells “Of Beren
and Luthein.” Tolkien writes, “Among
the tales of sorrow and of ruin that come
down to us from the darkness of those
days there are yet some in which amid
weeping there is joy and under the shadow
of death light that endures.”
It is the tale of Beren and Lúthien, a
mortal man who loves an immortal elfmaiden, who becomes mortal to love
him “that thus whatever grief might lie
in wait, the fates of Beren and Lúthien
might be joined, and their paths lead
together beyond the confines of the
world.”
In a letter to his son Christopher,
J.R.R. Tolkien explained why he chose
“Lúthien” for her tombstone. “She was
(and knew she was) my Lúthien. I will
say no more now.”
Two years after Lúthien was buried,
so, too, was Beren.

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

THE IMPORTANCE

OF

STORY

u 233

Long before The Lord of the Rings went into film production, Tolkien fans
have quietly gathered for years at an annual conference in Oxford, England, sponsored by the Tolkien Society to celebrate the work. It is a time to celebrate the
importance of story, to celebrate a man whose literary life work was inspired not
by money but the love of a well-told story.
As Tolkien fans line up to see the The Return of the King in the theater in
December 2003, as they raid the bookstores for the new editions of his works and
the movie tie-in editions, and as they buy advanced tickets for the traveling exhibit
of movie memorabilia that is drawing record crowds, one can’t help but think that
Tolkien himself might be pleased. Neither he, nor any biographer, could ever have
guessed that, from a tiny literary seed—a note scribbled about a hobbit on the back
of an examination paper—would spring The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, The
Silmarillion, and The History of Middle-earth. From seed to branch, from leaf to
tree, and from forest to an imagined world called Middle-earth, the fruits of
Tolkien’s imagination bore literary Silmarilli—narrative jewels of incomparable
beauty that, as they have for nearly half a century, reaffirm the importance of stories and, in their telling, instill in us a sense of wonder.

15 Tolkien Final Word.pmd

233

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

15 Tolkien Final Word.pmd

234

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX A

GLASS ONION
GRAPHICS

www.glassonion.com (redirects you to www.michaelwhelan.com)
www.michaelwhelan.com
Most fantasy artists only see their
artwork hung for public display in the
art show at conventions—not the best
presentation, because lighting is usually
dim and the pegboard mounting system
leaves a lot to be desired.
I can only think of one fantasy artist
who has a museum devoted exclusively
to his work—Frank Frazetta, the
Grand Master of fantasy illustration—
The front of The Glass Onion Gallery in
but it is not open year-round.
Connecticut, the official gallery for artist
Michael Whelan is fortunate that
Michael Whelan.
he does have a gallery open yearround, where his posters, prints,
lithographs, and original art are on permanent display, with most of it for sale.
Located in a strip mall in Brookfield, approximately one hour north of New
York City, Glass Onion Graphics—named after the Beatles’ song, “Glass Onion”—
is owned and operated by Audrey Price, who is quick to point out that she’s probably
the world’s biggest Whelan fan. And, incidentally, she’s his wife.
Whereas Michael prefers to concentrate on producing work, Audrey
concentrates on publishing, marketing, and selling it. Of course, in the store, what
catches the eye most readily are the eye-poppingly gorgeous works of original art,
which range from small color compositions to finished acrylic paintings, already
framed, and ready to hang on the wall.
u 235 U

21 Tolkien Appendix A.pmd

235

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

236 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Interested in an original? Here’s a sampling of some of the prices:
f A 9 x 12-inch tonal “sketch” (actually, it’s more detailed than what most artists
term a sketch) for Goldwing, the cover art to Whelan’s 2003 wall calendar
(published by Ronnie Sellers Productions). In its matching 14 x 17-inch frame,
this work of art is $2,800. The art shows a dragon taking off from a cliff, etched
against a setting sun.
f A 16 x 25-inch acrylic painting, in color, for Amazons 2, which shows two
amazons—pirates in battle, balanced precariously on what looks to be a wooden
bridge, possibly an extension from their ship—as they fight men. (You can tell
this is a book cover because the top third is blank—space needed to drop in
the title of the book and so on.) The price is $8,500.
f Titled “Lord Protector,” an acrylic painting on watercolor measuring 20 x 32
inches, this striking image shows a man standing on an outcropping of rock,
with a dragon—wings stretched out—in the background in full glory. The colors
are gorgeous: orange, yellow, and red, suggesting fire (an appropriate symbol,
as dragons do breathe fire). The original is $9,200.
f The crème de la crème, the piece de resistance: “Elric Demonslayer,” an acrylic
painting on panel, measuring 16 x 24 inches. It was originally rendered as the
frontispiece of The Vanishing Tower by Michael Moorcock; published by
Archival Press, this beautiful small press book has numerous plates by Whelan
and, as a book, shows just how beautiful a book can be. This painting was
subsequently used as the cover to The World’s Best Fantasy (St. Martin’s Press),
where a larger world could see it. The image is available both as a poster and a
signed print by Whelan—both inexpensive alternatives to owning the original,
which is $38,000.
For anyone who loves fantasy art and is interested in seeing the work of a
contemporary master, a trip to the gallery itself is well worth your time. But if time
and circumstances do not allow a personal visit, check out its Web store, which
often has seasonal sales on select items—mostly numbered and signed prints, framed
and ready to hang on the wall.
As a longtime art lover who can’t resist any gallery with an exhibit of fantasyoriented art, I’m happy to see Michael Whelan well served by this gallery that
offers a varied selection of product at reasonable prices to fit anyone’s budget, and
also shows off his work to best effect.
Glass Onion Graphics
PO Box 88
Brookfield, CT 06804
Phone: (877) 798-6063
E-mail: glassonion@michaelwhelan.com

21 Tolkien Appendix A.pmd

236

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX B

THE LORD OF THE RINGS
MOTION PICTURE TRILOGY:
THE EXHIBITION

www.sciencemuseum.org.uk
Opening to record crowds, an exhibition of movie memorabilia from Peter
Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings film trilogy is currently being shown at the Science
Museum in London, until January 11, 2004. The exhibition’s next venue will be the
Boston Museum of Science (August–October 2004) and then the Powerhouse
Museum in Sydney, Australia (2005), after which it will return home to New Zealand.
Developed and presented by the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa,
in partnership with New Line Cinema, the exhibit includes not only art and artifacts but interactive exhibits as well, including 700 props and 15 stations to show
documentaries about the making of the film.
According to the Website of the Science Museum in London, this touring exhibition spotlights costumes, jewelry, armor, weapons, make-up, special effects,
models, digital effects, video interviews, and interactive and immersive experiences.
The following descriptions are quoted from the site (www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/
exhibitions/lordoftherings/overview.asp):

Costumes
As well as enjoying an exciting range of props, jewelry, and weapons
used in The Lord of the Rings, you’ll also see a range of exquisitely made
costumes from the films. They are designed by Oscar-nominated Kiwi
designer, Ngila Dickson. Some of the favourite costumes featured in
the exhibition include Arwen’s riding costume, Galadriel’s stunning dress,
and Gandalf’s robes.

Jewelry
The One Ring forms the central part of the entire The Lord of the Rings
motion picture trilogy. As well as the One Ring, this exhibition will feature
other beautifully crafted jewelry from the films, including Elven brooches,

u 237 U

22 Tolkien Appendix B.pmd

237

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

238 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Ringwraith crowns and rings, the Evenstar—the jewel that Arwen gives
to Aragorn, and Galadriel’s and Gandalf’s Rings of Power.

Armour and weapons
With so many battle scenes, The Lord of the Rings trilogy used a lot
of armour and many weapons—most of which were made by
professionals skilled in medieval crafts, such as making chain-mail. An
“armour corridor” in this exhibition features 12 complete sets of armour
including King Théoden’s from The Two Towers. Weapons belonging
to Arwen, Gandalf, Frodo, and Aragorn are also featured.

Make-up and special effects
The Lord of the Rings films use a vast range of make-up and special
effects. In this exhibition you will learn how some of the amazing special
effects in The Lord of the Rings were achieved, and you can see how
make-up was used to such great effect. A display on prosthetics includes
Hobbit feet, Orc teeth, Lurtz’s facial prosthetic, and the contact lenses
used to give the Orcs their unique look.

Models
To create the epic world of Middle-earth, many magnificent miniature
sets and maquettes had to be constructed. These intricate models, created
in painstaking detail, took incredible skill, creativity, and patience to create.
Models featured in this exhibition include Frodo’s vision of the ruined
Hobbiton Mill, The Tower of Orthanc, and Sauron’s tower, Barad-dûr.

Digital effects
The Lord of the Rings films have become well-known for their
brilliant use of digital effects. Effects explained in this exhibition include
motion capture and motion control—the combining of “real” and
“digital” action—and CGI (computer-generated-image technology).

Video interviews
During and after the filming of The Lord of the Rings trilogy,
interviews were recorded with many of the cast and crew. These
fascinating behind-the-scenes conversations reveal more secrets
about the making of the films. Also featured are recent interviews
with Oscar-winning special effects wizard Richard Taylor, artist
Alan Lee, and producer Barrie Osbourne.

Interactive and immersive experiences
This exhibition includes both immersive and interactive
experiences. Visitors will walk in and be surrounded by a “ring of
fire” as they see one of the most important objects in the entire
trilogy—the One Ring. Interactive exhibits include a “scaling”
demonstration. By sitting on a cart and seeing how they are “scaled,”
visitors can understand the scaling technology used in the films that
enabled human actors to play both large and small creatures.

22 Tolkien Appendix B.pmd

238

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX C

TALL TOWERS, BRAVE KINGS,
WISE WIZARDS, AND PRECIOUS RINGS:
A CELEBRATION OF FANTASY ART

www.storyopolis.com
www.FlightsofImagination.com
Since 1938, hundreds of professional illustrators have tried their hand at visually depicting Middle-earth, but there have been too few exhibits of those works of
original art.
Storyopolis, a Los Angeles gallery and bookstore, will be exhibiting original art
by American artists who have illustrated Tolkien. Though the list of artists has not
yet been finalized, the tentative list includes Tim Kirk, Donato Giancola, Steve
Hickman, Colleen Doran, and David Wenzel.
Kirk has illustrated the “1975 Tolkien Calendar” (U.S.), Donato Giancola
has illustrated the cover to The Hobbit (graphic novel) and The Lord of the Rings
(for the Science Fiction Book Club), and dozens of gaming cards set in Middleearth. Steve Hickman has published two paintings in Realms of Tolkien, and David
Wenzel illustrated The Hobbit. (For more information on these and other Tolkien
artists, see Chapter 11.)
In addition to original art on display, there may be licensed movie tie-in products on exhibit from Sideshow/Weta, United Cutlery, and the Noble Collection.
The dates of the exhibit are tentative; at this time, the exhibit is set to run
from December 13, 2003 through January 2004.
For the first weekend of the exhibit, several of the artists will be on hand to
meet the public and sign autographs. Confirmed artists in attendance include Tim
Kirk, Donato Giancola, Colleen Doran, and Stephen Hickman.
The exhibit will be sponsored in conjunction with Flights of Imagination, a company specializing in marketing, selling, and promoting the work of fantasy artists.

u 239 U

23 Tolkien Appendix C.pmd

239

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

240 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Presentation is everything. I was able to see The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring in Los Angeles, at a theater that had several “director’s halls.”
The only such places in the United States, these halls show first-run movies in the
best possible way: The viewing experience is unparalleled, with an extra-large
screen, a 70mm print, the best sound system ever engineered for film presentation, extra-wide leather seats, and large aisles.
And so it is with original art. Most Tolkien art has been produced for commercial usage—book covers, interior illustrations, game board box designs, calendars, and so on. Disregarding the matters of reproduction, size, and overprinting
of text, the printed version is a poor cousin to the original art.
To see, for instance, a 5-foot-wide painting of The Hobbit by Donato
Giancola—the scale preferred by the Old Masters, who preferred big canvases—is
to view it the way the artist had intended it to be seen. To see a delicate pencil
drawing by Colleen Doran, with its exquisite line work—a drawing that takes hours,
sometimes days to render—is to realize the jewel-like precision and attention to
detail that informs her work. Or to see the 2 x 3-foot painting, by Tim Kirk, of Orcs
marching off to war is to see a vista unfold—a large-scale, detailed, carefully painted
work of art.
This, then, is why galleries exist: to not only introduce artists to the world at
large, but to present their work in the best possible light, which is the goal of
Storyopolis for the Tolkien exhibit.
Because I think an artist should have the last word on this subject, I asked
Colleen Doran why exhibits such as this serve the public, and she responded:
They’ll get to see some interpretations of the Tolkien work that
they probably have not had much access to, like the Tim Kirk work
that has not been in print since 1975 or the Hickman work that
has not been in print for years.
Some of the work that’s going to be in the show is unpublished,
including private commissions, so people are going to see art that’s
never before been seen by the general public.
Of course, it’s always cool to see the originals, because some
people think art is all done by machines. It freaks me out when I go
to shows like San Diego and people ask the same questions time
and again about my art: Yeah, I really drew this with my hands; a
machine didn’t do it, and a team of people didn’t do it. This is an
individual handcrafted effort that did not exist before.

23 Tolkien Appendix C.pmd

240

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX D

FLIGHTS

OF

IMAGINATION

www.FlightsofImagination.com
Flights of Imagination specializes in fantasy art and illustration. Representing
fantasy artists exclusively, the company sells original art and prints by leading fantasy
artists, arranges exhibits of original art, and packages books and other specialized
projects, with the goal of reaching well beyond the fan markets to reach mainstream
audiences.
In the fall of 2003, the Website will feature in-depth interviews, profiles, photos,
and Quicktime movies about Storyopolis and the artists who will be exhibiting at
that gallery for the Tolkien-inspired exhibit, which will run from December 2003
to January 2004.
In addition, this Website will feature additional information and links for
Tolkien fans who want more information on the man and his work.
In time, the gallery will have a permanent online exhibit, a gallery of fantasy
artwork, and provide numerous links to fantasy-related galleries, artists, exhibits,
and conventions.
The company can be reached at:
Flights of Imagination
P.O. Box 3602
Williamsburg, VA 23187

u 241 U

24 Tolkien Appendix D.pmd

241

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX E

AND

TED NASMITH,
HIS TOLKIEN ART,
THE CHALK FARM GALLERY

When I interpret Tolkien, I fell genuinely at home with it
and derive great satisfaction from exploring all potential
aspects of Middle-earth. With each new illustration, I feel
a little bit more of it is captured: characters, locales,
atmosphere, and drama.
—Ted Nasmith, from his official Website,
www.tednasmith.com
Santa Fe, New Mexico, is a town of only 60,000 people, but it supports an
astonishing 600 art galleries, including the Chalk Farm Gallery, owned and operated by Sunaha Gibson. What makes her gallery unique is its inventory; more
specifically, the Tolkien art by Ted Nasmith, which is, in terms of imagination,
worlds apart from the Native American and Western-themed art that predominates at the other galleries in town.
Gibson says:
At first, people were shocked and didn’t know what to make of it.
But as time passed, I was constantly told by everyone who comes
in here that this is their favorite gallery in town. I think I’m needed
here because people get tired of the straightforward western
landscapes and want something with more imagination.
It’s hard to argue with Gibson’s perception, because Nasmith’s Tolkien art
has been warmly received at her gallery, first in her native England six years ago,
and now in New Mexico, where she transplanted it in 2000.

u 243 U

25 Tolkien Appendix E.pmd

243

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

244 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The difference, she says, is that selling Tolkien art is harder here than in
Europe, where Tolkien’s presence throws a very long shadow across the literary
landscape. As Gibson explains:
The Tolkien following in Europe is far greater than it is here in
America. People there literally know the book inside and out. Just
by hearing the title of the art piece, they know the scene and will
reserve the painting after knowing its size and price.
The prices, by the way, range from a hobbit-sized $90 for a 2-x-2-inch painting to a kingly $6,900 for a major work of art, such as “Boromir’s Last Stand.”
Fortunately, an affordable alternative exists—limited editions prints, with a price
range of $125 to $275, issued in editions of 275 to 475 copies. (The prints of
Rivendell and Minas Tirith are close to sell-out.)
Nasmith, 41 years old, has an advantage that most of his peers do not: He
had shown his early Tolkien art to J.R.R. Tolkien and gotten an enthusiastic
response, so Naismith’s art is officially sanctioned. It is why the Tolkien Estate
sought him out to illustrate The Silmarillion, posthumously published and edited
by Christopher Tolkien.
Up until recently, the available prints have been printed via offset lithography, but the new printing technologies offer better fidelity and offer the cost
advantage of smaller runs, unlike lithos requiring runs of 500 to 1,000. For these
reasons, Nasmith favors the Giclée printing process and will be using it exclusively, according to Gibson.

The exclusive agent for selling Nasmith’s Tolkien originals, Chalk Farm Gallery
maintains a wide inventory of original art and prints on a year-round basis, rotating the stock to ensure “fresh” exposure. Once a year, however, all the Nasmith
work is gathered and hung for a Nasmith-themed show, with an emphasis on the
newer originals and prints.
For 2003, two new pieces have been published—a landscape of the menacing
“Fangorn Forest” ($195, signed and numbered edition of 100 prints, 11 x 15 inches)
and “Fire at Weathertop” ($275, signed and numbered edition of 100 prints, 14.75
x 26 inches), a dramatic rendering of the Fellowship.
The forthcoming show is scheduled to run from December 5, 2003, through
January 31, 2004. Although Nasmith maintains a busy schedule, Gibson says she’s
confident that he’ll make an appearance for the exhibit’s opening weekend, which
traditionally is a Tolkien celebration. In the past, for instance, local schoolchildren

25 Tolkien Appendix E.pmd

244

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TED NASMITH...TOKLIEN ART...CHALK FARM GALLERY

u 245

submitted Tolkien-inspired art for a contest sponsored by the gallery, fans dressed
up in costume, and Ted—wielding a guitar instead of a paintbrush—belted out
Tolkien songs he’s composed. Not your usual gallery weekend!
Current prints available include:
u “The Glittering Caves of Algarond” ($165).
u “Lúthien in the Garden” ($165).
u “Minas Tirith at Dawn” ($245).
u “Riders at the Ford” ($165).
u “Rivendell” ($265).
u “Shores of Valinor” ($165).
For more information about the gallery and Nasmith’s art, visit Chalk Farm
Gallery in Santa Fe, or visit its Website at www.chalkfarmgallery.com.
For more information, contact Suhana Gibson at the gallery:
Chalk Farm Gallery
Attn: Susan Gibson
330 Old Santa Fe Trail
Santa Fe, NM 87501
Phone (505) 983-7125
Fax (505) 983-7128

25 Tolkien Appendix E.pmd

245

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

APPENDIX F

AND

TOLKIEN, LICENSING,
COPYRIGHTS...AND WRONGS

Please understand the consequences of what you’re doing
with my property when you make unfair use of my stories
and images: you can literally destroy my life’s work by doing
that, so consider carefully if you want to do that to me. I’ve
never harmed you in any way, so please don’t do that to me.
You are literally in a position to take something from me
that took decades to create. Why would you do that? Please
don’t.
—Colleen Doran, on the theft of her copyrighted
work by overzealous fans
Disclaimer: The material provided herein is for informational
purposes only and is no substitute for advice provided by an
attorney specializing in intellectual property rights.
Like every other literary creator, Tolkien’s works are protected by copyrights
and trademarks, and the rights to reproduce, distribute, perform, or display the
copyrighted works are owned by the Tolkien Estate, unless they have been sold or
transferred.
What’s changed since Tolkien’s time is the advent of the Internet and technologies that allow creative work in any form—audio, visual, textual—to be digitized, stored, copied, and published to a worldwide audience, without a system of
checks and balances. Clearly, the right to publish implies a right to publish responsibly, but a quick sampling of the thousands of Websites devoted to Tolkien (or,
indeed, other writers and artists) shows a fundamental lack of knowledge regarding copyright and the fair use clause by Webmasters, which gives one pause: Is this
indifference, ignorance, or a little of both?
u 247 U

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

247

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

248 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

Licensing
The eye-opening success of Jackson’s movie trilogy has overshadowed everything that has gone before in the Tolkien universe. The first two movies have grossed
nearly $2 billion worldwide, creating an awareness of Tolkien that dwarfs what
Tolkien’s own publishers could not accomplish in a half century of book publishing. The movie tie-in merchandising alone—from the ludicrous “bobbing head”
dolls to elegant reproductions of the One Ring—is in itself a major industry, with
no signs of abatement.
Predictably, the surging interest in Tolkien in the mainstream has been reflected, in part, by Webmasters who have discovered the joy of exploring Middleearth online, with an inexhaustive supply of material—visual, textual, and audio.
Unfortunately, far too many of these Websites, including semi-official fan
sites with hundreds of pages, interpret the fair use clause far too liberally. They
feel they have the right to publish anything and everything at will, when, in fact,
the fair use clause gives limited rights for specific purposes. It is not, nor was it
ever intended to be, the mechanism by which people could publish with impunity.
The general guidelines for fair use—best interpreted by lawyers specializing
in intellectual property—recognize that for purposes of “criticism, comment,
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and research,” copyrighted works may be
reproduced without permission, tempered by the following considerations (from
www.copyright.gov/fls/fl102.html):
1. The purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of
commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes.
2. The nature of the copyrighted work.
3. Amount of substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
copyrighted work as a whole.
4. The effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
copyrighted work.
The bottom line is item 4—the effect of the use on the potential market—
because copyright means, literally, the right to copy, which is a right reserved for
the copyright holder.
Unfortunately, the Tolkien Estate—often portrayed as the villain in any such
discussions—is legally forced to protect its copyrights or risk losing them forever. If the Estate neglects to enforce the copyrights, the courts may decide that
the Estate has, by default, abandoned them, at which point the previously protected copyrighted material may potentially fall into the public domain. If this
happens, anyone, anywhere, at any time, could do anything they want with it—a
nightmarish scenario that no creator wants to see.
Goosed by the movie trilogy, thousands of related Websites have literally
sprung up overnight, many with little or no recognition of the limitations of fair

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

248

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN, LICENSING,

AND

COPYRIGHTS...AND WRONGS

u 249

use. Consequently, the Tolkien Estate’s retained law firm has had to write ceaseand-desist letters to Webmasters who, whether by intent or default, have exceeded the bounds of fair use.
So, you ask, what, specifically, can you do—and not do? And how do you
protect yourself from the prospect of an expensive and needless lawsuit?

Copyrights and Wrongs
f You can write a book about Tolkien. Whether it’s a parody, a biography, a
companion-style book collecting original or reprinted articles and art about
him, a volume of literary criticism, a collection of essays, or a book collating
news, you can usually expect to publish without fear of reprisal from the Tolkien
Estate. But you cannot publish a “prequel” or “sequel” to Tolkiens works or
stories about Tolkien’s imaginative universe and creations.
Case in point: In 2002, a copyright infringement lawsuit was filed by the
Tolkien Estate against Michael W. Perry and his small press, because of the
impending publication of a book tentatively titled The Lord of the Rings Diary:
A Chronology of J.R.R. Tolkien’s Best-selling Epic. The lawsuit asked for $750,000
in damages.
After several rewrites, the Tolkien Estate dropped the suit, saying it does
not approve or endorse the book, but it did withdraw its objection to publication.
Ironically, Mr. Perry—who apparently has rearranged the events from
Tolkien’s book and put them in order, with added commentary and discussion—
impeded progress toward the resolution of the lawsuit by wanting the Estate’s
lawyers to sign a nondisclosure agreement because of his concerns that his
“format” would be stolen!
In the book publishing industry, the prevailing opinion is that the Tolkien
Estate has been very tolerant of books written about Tolkien and his works,
because Tolkien himself was an academician. But clearly, where necessary, the
Estate draws the line as to when there’s the possibility of infringement, and
takes legal action as necessary.
f You can write a book about Tolkien’s poetry, but you cannot reproduce even a
single line of poetry without permission from the Tolkien Estate. Given its
brevity, even one line of poetry exceeds fair use.
f You can write about Tolkien’s unpublished letters, but you cannot publish their
contents, even if you own them. Ownership of the original artifact is one thing,
but the content is protected by copyright and cannot be published without permission of the Tolkien Estate.
f You can write, in book form or online, about Tolkien’s artwork, and reproduce some as examples, but you cannot abuse this right and publish an entire
gallery of artwork, in book form or online. The rights to the art are owned by
either the publisher or the artist, either of whom retain the right to publish
the work on their respective Websites.

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

249

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

250 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The wholesale abuse by Webmasters of Tolkien artwork has reached
epidemic proportions, with some publishing virtual galleries with hundreds of
images, some by professional artists who drew those for books, calendar, or
other licensed Tolkien-related products. In one particularly egregious instance,
a Website had posted nearly 11,000 images!
f You cannot reproduce whole maps that appear in Tolkien’s books without
permission. (For purposes of criticism or scholarship, a small portion of a map
could be reproduced, within the fair use clause.)
f You cannot publish extended sound files of audio recordings or dramatizations online, except brief portions as samples.
f You cannot publish an entire article from a newspaper, a magazine, or other
printed source, because it will materially damage sales of the original source
publication. Many newspapers maintain archives that can be accessed for a
fee, but why pay a fee for an article when, for instance, a Tolkien Website has
reprinted the text in question in full? Or why buy a current issue of a magazine,
when all you want is the article about Tolkien, which an online Tolkien Webzine
has reprinted in full?
f Once fixed in form—that is, once it is written down, drawn, or recorded—a
work is under copyright protection. Registration, though desirable, is not a
prerequisite for copyright protection. Therefore, a Webmaster who reproduces
work without any copyright notice from other sources—whether downloaded
or scanned—is clearly violating someone’s copyright, even if he doesn’t know
its source.
One common excuse when reprinting art is that the Webmaster states he’s
gotten it from another source on the Internet, where it was uncredited and had
no copyright notice, and therefore, he’s reprinting it sans credit as well. The
fact remains, though, that it was created by an artist who retained the copyright
and, in every case, someone scanned it and posted it online, and everyone else
who follows has simply copied it and perpetuated the infringement on a
wholesale basis.
f Regarding fan fiction published on the Internet, especially “slash” fiction,
with its erotic and pornographic themes, the definitive legal ruling has yet to
be made, because no court case has been filed—yet. Some authors (notably,
Anne Rice) staunchly demand that no fan fiction be written based on their
characters—create your own, they say. Other authors simply look the other
way.
This may well be the next area of major litigation regarding online publication. These are not only derivative works but also violate the spirit of the
original work, as well.

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

250

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN, LICENSING,

AND

COPYRIGHTS...AND WRONGS

u 251

Cause and Effect
Here’s where we get to the heart of the issue. Consider the following:
u On your favorite Tolkien Website, you see a scanned article, with
photos, from the current issue of a popular magazine. You read it or
download it, print it out, and, in doing so, have no need to buy it from
the original source.
Fair use: The Website has selected excerpts from the article in question, with a summary or discussion, and perhaps one or two small images reproduced. By doing so, he doesn’t remove the incentive to buy
the original publication.
u In an online virtual gallery, you see artwork by your favorite Tolkien
artist. Scanned at high resolution, it is large enough to produce a color
print for yourself. That being the case, why would you buy the printed
postcard, the poster, the print, or the book in which the art originally
appeared? Often, virtual galleries are comprised of images scanned
from printed books or calendars—good enough, in many cases, to reproduce prints of astonishing fidelity.
Fair use: The Website displays a few small images, at low resolution, for purposes of news, discussion, or criticism.
u You see a Website with hundreds of images from the Tolkien movie
trilogy—video captures or publicity photos from press kits. What, then,
is your incentive to buy the posters, the posterbooks, or any other printed
product that draws from the same source?
Fair use: Artist/writer Colleen Doran’s commonsense policy toward
online usage is straightforward: She allows the use of up to three color
images and five black-and-white images (as 72 dpi JPEG files, to limit
resolution) and requires that her copyright and trademark information be posted prominently. This theoretically protects her art from
wholesale abuse, in which an unlimited number of her images are reproduced online at high resolution with no stated copyright or trademark notice.
Other artists have more draconian policies. In terms of virtual
galleries “honoring” him, Michael Whelan is the most ripped-off
fantasy artist of our time. His policy, as stated on his Website
(www.michaelwhelan.com), makes his position crystal-clear:
We receive numerous requests from fans every day asking to
use Michael’s images on their Web pages. Unfortunately,
Michael does not authorize free use of his images on either
commercial or non-commercial Websites. If you send a simple
request as such, you will receive a form letter response politely
declining your request.

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

251

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

252 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

It is a difficult situation for any artist to say no to fans,
particularly when it is a fan base as large and devoted as Michael’s
has been over the past three decades. The decision was not made
lightly, and Michael does appreciate everyone’s respect for his
copyrights and ownership of his work.
In short, if your use of someone else’s copyrighted material infringes on his
ability to profit from his own work, you have crossed the line between fair use and
infringement.
Every artist with a Website usually posts information regarding copyright of
his images and his policy on Web reproduction of his work on other sites. If you
want to exercise your right to construct a Website using other people’s works, you
have an obligation to seek out the creator and find out his policy, or ask permission
if there’s a question as to reproduction rights.

Common Fan Defenses: Copyright Misconceptions
The “Time” Defense
I’ve had this stuff up on my Website for five years, and it’s
never been a problem. So why’s it a problem now?
Because the length of time is immaterial—whether one day, one year, or five
years—the material you’ve published exceeds fair use, and you don’t have the
right to publish it without permission. (This, by the way, is not a hypothetical
case. The Tolkien Estate discovered a fan had published Tolkien’s maps on his
site, which had been up for five years.)

The “Not For Profit” Defense
I’m not making any money on this, so why is the Tolkien
Estate threatening me?
Whether you realize it or not, you may be profiting from your Website, by
accepting money for banners, by accepting donations to help underwrite your expenses in running the site, by publishing through a host that gives you a discounted
(or free) rate in exchange for pop-up advertising, and—in extreme cases—by asking for subscriptions of fees to defray your expenses. Obviously, the defense that
you’re “not making much money at all” is also an indefensible position.
Bottom line: If your usage of the copyrighted work exceeds fair use, you
should expect to get a sternly worded letter from the Tolkien Estate.

The “News” Defense
I’m publishing a newszine online, so why can’t I reproduce
images?
You can, but it doesn’t mean you can publish the equivalent of a printed book
online, with hundreds of images. Doesn’t a print publisher licensed to do so reserve that right? And doesn’t your use of those hundreds of high-quality JPEGs,
often posted with no commentary or criticism, violate that right?

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

252

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN, LICENSING,

AND

COPYRIGHTS...AND WRONGS

u 253

For Your Own Self-Protection
As any judge will tell you in court, ignorance of the law is no excuse. Therefore, the best protection is self-protection. Make an effort to understand what
you can and cannot do, which should minimize the likelihood of receiving a
nastygram from a lawyer asserting copyright infringement.
Here’s a primer on how to protect yourself:
1. Read up on copyright law. Rather than relying on a vague or misinformed notion of what you think copyright law is, read up on the basics
and know what the law says. Written in plain English and comprehensible to the average reader, copyright law is largely common sense: Your
right to use my copyrighted works ends where infringement begins.
Go to www.loc.gov/copyright and check out all the related links on
the basics of copyright, the fair use clause, and so on, so you have a
basic, working knowledge of the subject.
I’m willing to bet that most Webmasters have never bothered to
even check out this Website, though I think every Webmaster should
link to it, because anyone who publishes online must have a working
knowledge of copyrights...and wrongs.
2. Buy and read The Copyright Handbook: How to Protect & Use Written
Works, Stephen Fishman’s excellent text on the subject, published by
Nolo Press ($39.99, trade paperback, with CD-ROM). Nolo Press
publishes, in my opinion, the best line of law-related books on the
market.
3. If there’s still a question about copyrights, consult an attorney—not
just your garden-variety general practitioner, but an attorney who
specializes in intellectual property law.
4. When publishing copyrighted material, always put the proper copyright
or trademark notice on the work, to acknowledge the original copyright
holder.
In the end, if there’s any question as to whether or not you can use the copyrighted materials—if you aren’t confident that your usage is within fair use—then
contact the copyright holder, who will either grant you permission or not, or ask
you to make appropriate changes.
These four steps should keep you from receiving correspondence from the
Tolkien Estate’s solicitors, Manches & Co. (an international law firm based in
London).

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

253

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

254 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

The Warning Letter
The communiqué from Manches & Co. will be polite but firm. It will usually cite
the infringement(s) and give the recipient 48 hours to take down all the infringed
material—or face litigation.
Remember, as I’ve said before, the key legal point is that if the Estate fails to
defend its copyrights, it risks losing them forever.

Licensing Entities
New Tolkien fans are understandably confused when they see One Ring replicas and sword reproductions manufactured by different licensees. Traditionally, one licensee has the exclusive right to manufacture a specific line of products,
otherwise, confusion will ensue. In Tolkien’s case, replicas of the One Ring are
available through Paul Badali Jewelry (licensed by Saul Zaentz’s Tolkien Enterprises) and through The Noble Collection (licensed through Tolkien Enterprises
to New Line Cinema). Similarly, sword replicas are available from both United
Cutlery and The Noble Collection.

Tolkien Enterprises
Because of the general confusion regarding licensing rights, Tolkien Enterprises recently updated its Website (www.tolkien-ent.com) to reflect the distinctions, so potential licensees could contact the appropriate entity:
u For rights to “produce merchandise or services based on the artwork
in the New Line Cinema film trilogy,” contact New Line Cinema’s
Director of Licensing.
u For rights to “produce printed published matter based on non-film
artwork,” contact the Permissions Department at HarperCollins UK,
who in turn will consult the Tolkien estate.
u Other questions about licensing should simply be directed to Tolkien
Enterprises for clarification.
As explained on the Website (www.tolkien-ent.com), Tolkien Enterprises is a
division of Saul Zaentz, which owns:
...certain worldwide exclusive rights to the titles of The Hobbit
and The Lord of the Rings, the names of characters, persons, places,
scenes, things and events appearing or described in The Hobbit
and The Lord of the Rings, and certain short phrases, short sayings,
and the like...licenses these titles, names, and short phrases for use
as trademarks and service marks in connection with various lines
of merchandise.

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

254

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

TOLKIEN, LICENSING,

AND

COPYRIGHTS...AND WRONGS

u 255

Saul Zaentz’s worldwide licensing program has encompassed a wide range of
products, including:
...dramatizations, musicals, puppet performances,...board games,
puzzles, computer games, chess sets, collectible card games, roleplaying games, t-shirts, costumes, masks, buttons, belt buckles,
daggers and swords, dolls, puppets, pewter figurines, porcelain
figurines, action figures, metal miniature figures, coloring books,
music, linens, collector plates, clocks, bulletin boards, mirrors,
posters, calendars, note-cards, stationary, decals and bumper
stickers.
In other words, these are rights the Tolkien Estate does not own, nor has any
say in, and obviously does not materially benefit from in any way.
The licensing properties by Tolkien not owned by Saul Zaentz include The
Silmarillion, the volumes of The History of Middle-earth, his other fiction (such as
“Leaf by Niggle,” Farmer Giles of Ham, and The Father Christmas Letters), and
any unpublished works.
Admittedly, by obtaining the rights to The Hobbit and, especially, The Lord of
the Rings, Saul Zaentz had obtained the crown jewels.

The Tolkien Estate
Any rights not held or represented by the previously listed entities are retained by the Tolkien Estate, which is represented by a London-based law firm,
Manches & Co.
The Estate is administered by J.R.R. Tolkien’s son Christopher, who is understandably protective of his father’s literary and artistic estate.
The youngest of the four children, Christopher Tolkien, at 77, has established the Tolkien Trust, to ensure the estate’s interests are protected after he
and the two remaining surviving children pass on.
In time, Tolkien’s creations will fall out of copyright protection, and the feeding frenzy will begin. Any and all things Middle-earth will be published, manufactured, and sold, with no compensation to the Tolkien Trust. In other words, the
well-guarded family literary jewels will simply be up for grabs, and it won’t be a
pretty sight.
For now, and the foreseeable future, however, the Estate does have a say in
what is done with Tolkien’s works, so we will not see e-books (too easy to steal
online, despite encryption efforts) and we will see familiar names illustrating The
Silmarillion and other cherished works, because the Estate works hand-in-hand
with HarperCollins UK and personally approves the illustrators for the British
and American texts.
As for the movie trilogy, the Estate was offered a chance to be involved, but
passed, citing that they’d want either total control—or none. Given those two

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

255

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

256 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

choices, New Line Cinema was forced to choose “none.” Therefore, the movie
trilogy has neither the approval nor endorsement of the Estate. Obviously, because rights were licensed by Zaentz to New Line Cinema, the Estate can claim
no legal objection to the movie trilogy.
The Estate does have a say, apparently, in a by-product of the movie trilogy—
a traveling exhibition of movie-related memorabilia, currently on exhibit in
England, where it is enjoying record crowds. For whatever reasons, the Estate
has limited its run to the duration of the theatrical showing of The Return of the
King, which impedes film director Peter Jackson’s desire to establish, in
Wellington, a permanent exhibit of the art and artifacts from his movie trilogy.
On this note, I believe I can speak for most Tolkien fans when I say that I
would prefer to see the movie memorabilia in a permanent museum, instead of
experiencing it in an online virtual gallery, on a DVD-ROM, or in book form.
In all of these discussions about The Lord of the Rings—the product of one
man’s imagination—we must remember that it was published in 1954 and 1955 and
has stood the test of time. It has inspired and influenced generations of fantasy
writers, entertained millions worldwide, and is likely to remain as an inimitable
classic, as long as people hunger for epic tales, to be produced in forms yet
unimagined, through technologies still yet to be invented, to be enjoyed by generations yet to come.

Addresses
Tolkien Enterprises
Attn: Director of Licensing
2600 Tenth Street
Berkeley, CA 94710
Fax: (510) 486-2015
E-mail: tolkien@fantasyjazz.com

HarperCollins Publishers
Attn: Permissions Department
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
Hammersmith
London W6 8JB
United Kingdom

New Line Cinema
Attn: Director of Licensing
888 Seventh Avenue
New York, NY 10106
Fax: (212) 956-1941

The Tolkien Estate, represented by:
Manches & Co.
Attn: Cathleen Blackburn
3 Worcester Street
OXFORD
United Kingdom
OX1 2PZ

26 Tolkien Appendix F.pmd

256

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
AND ILLUSTRATOR
George Beahm

wrote his first book in high

school, and saw it published after graduation from college. A lifelong fantasy and science fiction fan, Beahm’s
books included art indices on Vaughn Bode, Tim Kirk,
and Richard Corben.
A self-published author, a regional publisher, and author of several
books for Andrews and McMeel, St. Martin’s Press, Running Press, and
Brassey’s, Beahm is currently at work on new nonfiction and fiction book
projects.
He occasionally updates his personal Website, www.GeorgeBeahm.com.

Colleen Doran won her first award for drawing at the age of five in a contest sponsored by the
Walt Disney Company and was a professional illustrator by the age of 15. She now has hundreds of credits as a cartoonist on books such as Amazing Spiderman,
Sandman, Wonder Woman, Captain America, and dozens of others. She created, writes, and illustrates the
critically acclaimed graphic novel series A Distant Soil
for Image Comics—a project she began working on
u 257 U

90 Tolkien Auth and Ill.pmd

257

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

258 U

THE ESSENTIAL J.R.R. TOLKIEN SOURCEBOOK

at the age of 12. Colleen also has a new graphic novel in wide release with
Warren Ellis called Orbiter, a science fiction tale with an optimistic view of
the manned space program published in 2003 by the Vertigo division of
DC Comics.
In 2004, she will be publishing Seasons of Spring, an original graphic
novel from Image Comics. Her current work also includes cocreating the
series Reign of the Zodiac with writer Keith Giffen for DC Comics. The
tale of the 12 warring royal houses of the zodiac required that Doran
design hundreds of costumes and complex sets, as well as continue to
draw the new monthly series. Doran has also illustrated the work of Clive
Barker, Anne Rice, and Neil Gaiman. She is a member of the National
Cartoonists Society, the Association of Science Fiction and Fantasy Artists, and the American Society of Portrait Artists, and is a guest of honor
at Ring*Con, a licensed Tolkien convention in Germany. She has exhibited her work at galleries in Milan, Venice, Portugal, Spain, and New
York, and is creating new art for a gallery exhibition at Stroyopolis in
Los Angeles.
She maintains two Websites, www.ColleenDoran.com and
www.ADistantSoil.com.

90 Tolkien Auth and Ill.pmd

258

10/28/2003, 8:59 AM

99 Tolkien last illustra.pmd

259

10/28/2003, 9:00 AM

