35615791.JPG

BOOKS BY HARRY TURTLEDOVE

The Guns of the South

THE WORLDWAR SAGA
Worldwar: In the Balance
Worldwar: Tilting the Balance
Worldwar: Upsetting the Balance
Worldwar: Striking the Balance

Homeward Bound

THE VIDESSOS CYCLE
The Misplaced Legion
An Emperor for the Legion
The Legion of Videssos
Swords of the Legion

THE TALE OF KRISPOS
Krispos Rising
Krispos of Videssos
Krispos the Emperor

THE TIME OF TROUBLES SERIES
The Stolen Throne
Hammer and Anvil
The Thousand Cities
Videssos Besieged
A World of Difference
Departures
How Few Remain

THE GREAT WAR
The Great War: American Front
The Great War: Walk in Hell
The Great War: Breakthroughs

AMERICAN EMPIRE
American Empire: Blood and Iron
American Empire: The Center
Cannot Hold
American Empire: The Victorious
Opposition

SETTLING ACCOUNTS
Settling Accounts: Return

Engagement
Settling Accounts: Drive to the East
Settling Accounts: The Grapple
Settling Accounts: In at the Death

Every Inch a King

The Man with the Iron Heart

20 JULY 1936—OUTSIDE LISBON

General José Sanjurjo was a short, heavyset man in his early
sixties. He looked from the light plane to the pilot and back again. “Is
everything in readiness?” he asked, his tone saying heads would
roll if the pilot told him no.
Major Juan Antonio Ansaldo didn’t tell him anything, not right away.
Ansaldo was pacing back and forth, his agitation growing with every
stride. He watched as Sanjurjo’s aides shoved two large, heavy
trunks into the airplane. “Those look heavy,” Ansaldo said at last.

“They hold the general’s uniforms!” an aide said, as if to a
simpleton. “On the eve of his victorious march into Madrid, he can’t
arrive in Burgos without uniforms!”
Nervously, Ansaldo lit a cigarette. Who was he, a major, to tell
Spain’s most senior—and most prestigious—general what to do?
He’d placed himself at the disposal of the Spanish state…which
Sanjurjo would embody, once he flew from Portugal to Burgos to
take charge of the rising against the Spanish Republic.
When he flew to Burgos? If he flew to Burgos! The city, in northcentral Spain, was a long way from Lisbon. The plane, a two-seater,
had only so much fuel and only so strong a motor.
“General…” Ansaldo said.
“What is it?” growled the man people called the Lion of the Rif
because of his victories in Spanish Morocco.
“¡Viva Sanjurjo!” the general’s men shouted. “¡Viva España!”
Sanjurjo preened…as well as a short, heavyset man in his sixties
could preen. “Now I know my flag is waving over Spain,” he boomed
like a courting grouse. “When I hear the Royal March again, I will be
ready to die!”
That gave Major Ansaldo the opening he needed. “General, I don’t
want you to die before you get to Spain, before you hear the Royal
March again.”
“What are you talking about?” Sanjurjo demanded.
“Sir, those trunks your men put aboard—”
“What about them? They’re my uniforms, as my aides told you. A
man is hardly a man without his uniforms.” At the moment, Sanjurjo
was wearing a light gray summer-weight civilian suit. He looked and
acted quite manly enough for Ansaldo.
“They weigh a lot.” The pilot gestured. “Look at the pine trees all
around the airstrip. I need the plane’s full power to take off. I have
to make sure I have enough fuel to fly you to Burgos. I don’t want
anything to happen to you, Señor. Spain needs you too much to
take chances.”
General Sanjurjo frowned—not fearsomely, but thoughtfully. “I can’t
fly into Burgos like this.” He brushed at the gray linen of his sleeve.
“Why not, your Excellency? Why not?” Ansaldo asked. “Don’t you
think the people of Burgos would be delighted—would be honored
—to give you anything you need? Aren’t there any uniforms in
Burgos? God help the rising if that’s true!”
“God help the rising.” Sanjurjo crossed himself. Major Ansaldo

followed suit. The general took a gold case from an inside jacket
pocket and lit a cigarette of his own. He smoked in abrupt, savage
drags. “So you think we’ll crash with my uniforms on board, do you?
”
“When you’re flying, you never know,” the pilot answered. “That’s
why you don’t want to take any chances you don’t have to.”
Sanjurjo grunted. He took a couple of more puffs on the aromatic
Turkish cigarette, then ground it out under his heel. “Luis! Orlando!”
he called. “Get the trunks off the plane!”
His aides stared as if they couldn’t believe their ears. “Are you sure,
your Excellency?” one of them asked.
“Of course I’m sure, dammit.” By the way José Sanjurjo spoke, he
was always sure. And so he probably was. “Spain comes first, and
Spain needs me more than I need my uniforms. As the pilot here
says, there are many uniforms. Por Dios, amigos, there is only one
Sanjurjo!” The general struck a pose.
The aides didn’t argue any more. They did what Sanjurjo told them
to do. Wrestling the trunks out of the plane’s narrow fuselage
proved harder than stuffing them in had been. It took a lot of bad
language and help from three other men before they managed it.
Major Ansaldo wondered how many kilos he’d saved. Fifty? A
hundred? He didn’t know, and he never would—no scale was close
by. But now he would fly with the kind of load the light plane was
made to carry. He liked that.
“If your Excellency will take the right-hand seat…” he said.
“Certainly.” Sanjurjo was as spry as a man of half his age and half
his bulk.
After Ansaldo started the motor, he ran through the usual flight
checks. Everything looked good. He gave the plane all the throttle
he could. He needed to get up quickly, to clear the trees beyond the
far edge of the bumpy field.
When he pulled back on the stick, the nose lifted. The fixed
undercarriage left the ground. The bumping stopped. The air, for
the moment, was smooth as fine brandy. A slow smile spread across
General Sanjurjo’s face. “Do you know what this is, Major?” he said.
“A miracle, that’s what! To fly like a bird, like an angel…”
“It’s only an airplane, sir,” said Ansaldo, as matter-of-fact as any
pilot worth his pay.
“Only an airplane!” Sanjurjo’s eyebrows leaped. “And a woman is
only a woman! It is an airplane that takes me out of exile, an
airplane that takes me out of Portugal, an airplane that takes me
away from the hisses and sneezes and coughs of Portuguese.…”

“Sí, Señor.” Major Ansaldo knew how the general felt there. If a
Spaniard and a Portuguese spoke slowly and clearly, or if they
wrote things out, they could generally manage to understand each
other. But Portuguese always sounded funny—sounded wrong—in
a Spaniard’s ears. The reverse was also bound to be true, but the
pilot never once thought of that.
And his important passenger hadn’t finished: “It is an airplane that
takes me back to Spain, back to my country—and Spain will be my
country once we settle with the Republican rabble. It is—what does
Matthew say?—a pearl of great price.” He crossed himself again.
So did Juan Antonio Ansaldo. “You have the soul of a poet, your
Excellency,” he said. General Sanjurjo smiled like a cat in front of a
pitcher of cream. Ansaldo did, too, but only to himself; a little
judicious flattery, especially flattery from an unexpected direction,
never hurt. But he also had a serious point to make: “I’m glad you
chose not to endanger the plane—and yourself, a more valuable
pearl—with those trunks. Spain needs you.”
“Well, yes,” Sanjurjo agreed complacently. “Who would command
the forces of the right, the forces of truth, against the atheists and
Communists and liberals in the Republic if anything happened to
me? Millán Astray?”
“I don’t think so, sir!” Ansaldo exclaimed, and that wasn’t flattery.
Astray, the founder of the Spanish Foreign Legion, was a very
brave man. Colonial fighting had cost him an arm and an eye. He
still led the Legion, whose war cry was “¡Viva la muerte!”—Long live
death! Men like that were valuable in the officer corps, but who
would want such a skeletal fanatic leading a country?
“Bueno. I don’t think so, either.” Yes, Sanjurjo sounded complacent,
all right. And why not, when he held the rising in the palm of his
hand? He couldn’t resist throwing out the name of another possible
replacement: “Or what about General Franco?”
“Not likely, your Excellency!” Again, Major Ansaldo meant what he
said. No one had ever questioned Francisco Franco’s courage,
either, even if he wasn’t so showy about displaying it as Millán
Astray was. But the plump little general was no great leader of men.
With Sanjurjo’s personality, he could stand beside—could, at need,
stand up to—Mussolini and Hitler. Franco? Franco had all the
warmth, all the excitement, of a canceled postage stamp.
“No, not likely at all,” General Sanjurjo said. “Once I get to Burgos,
the true business of setting Spain to rights can begin.”
“Sí, Señor,” Ansaldo said once more. The light plane droned on:
toward Spain, toward Burgos, toward victory, toward the birth of a
whole new world.

29 SEPTEMBER 1938—MUNICH

Adolf Hitler was not a happy man. Oh, yes, he was going to get
Czechoslovakia. The British and French had come here to hand him
his hateful neighbor—what an abortion of a country! one more
crime of Versailles!—all trussed up on a silver platter, ready for the
slaughter.
But, for all the fuss the Sudeten Germans had kicked up inside
Czechoslovakia (fuss orchestrated from the Reich), to Hitler the
Slavic state wasn’t an end in itself, only a means to an end. The end
was dominating Europe. Had that required dropping the Sudeten
German Party he’d fed and watered for so long, he would have
dropped it like a live grenade.
Getting his hands on Czechoslovakia would be nice, yes. What he
really wanted, though, was war.
He was ready. He was convinced the enemy wasn’t. Chamberlain
and Daladier wouldn’t have been so pathetically eager to sell their
ally down the river if they were.
The trouble was, they were too damned eager. They kept falling all
over themselves to make whatever concessions he demanded. The
more they yielded, the less excuse he had to send in the
Wehrmacht.
His generals would be relieved if he got what he wanted without
fighting. He wasn’t happy with the halfhearted way so many of them
were readying themselves and their units. And Mussolini, while a
good fellow, had more chin than balls. The Duce kept insisting Italy
wasn’t ready to take on England and France, and wouldn’t be for
another two or three years.
“Dummkopf,” Hitler muttered under his breath. The real point, the
point Mussolini didn’t get, was that England and France weren’t
ready. Not only did they not want war, their factories weren’t geared
up for it. And the Russians were in even worse shape. Every day, it
seemed, Stalin knocked off a new general, or a handful of them.
When the Reds laid on a purge, they didn’t fool around.
General Sanjurjo got it. Spain stood foursquare behind Germany.
Well, actually, Spain stood about two-and-a-half-square behind
Germany; the Communists and anarchists of the Republic still hung
on to the rest of the battered country. But Sanjurjo had a proper
Spanish sense of honor and obligation. He would do what he could
against his benefactor’s enemies.
The time was now. The Führer could feel it in his bones. Of all the
gifts a great ruler had, knowing when to strike was one of the most
vital. He’d shown he had it when he got rid of Ernst Röhm in the

Night of Long Knives, and again when he swallowed Austria in the
Anschluss. (Oh, all right—the Beer-Hall Putsch hadn’t quite worked
out. But that was fifteen years ago now. Back in those days, he was
still learning which end was up.)
He was ready to fight. The Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe were
ready, even if some generals tried dragging their feet. Even if the
French and English did declare war when he hit Czechoslovakia, he
was sure they wouldn’t do anything much in the West. They’d wait,
they’d dither…and then, as soon as he’d stomped the Czechs into
the mud, he’d turn around and smash them, too.
Yes, he was ready. But tall, stork-necked Chamberlain—with
Daladier scuttling along in his wake like a squat, swarthy little halftrained puppy—was also ready: ready to hand him Czechoslovakia
without any fighting at all. The British Prime Minister was so abject
about the whole business, even the hard-bitten Führer would have
been embarrassed to order the panzers to roll forward and the
bombers to take off. Chamberlain, damn his gawky soul, gave away
so much, Hitler couldn’t very well demand more. There was no more
to give.
And so they played out the charade here in Munich. Hitler and
Mussolini, Chamberlain and Daladier sat down together and calmly
arranged for the transfer of the Sudetenland—and its mountain
barriers and its fortifications, second only to those of the Maginot
Line—from Czechoslovakia to Germany. Without those works, the
Czechs hadn’t a prayer of being able to fight.
They knew it, too. They’d sent a couple of nervous observers to
Munich to learn their fate. The Czechs cooled their heels at a
distant hotel; the Führer wouldn’t let them attend the conference.
The Soviet Union was similarly excluded.
On with the farce, then. The Führerbau was the National Socialists’
chief office building in Munich. Hitler had taken a major role in its
design, but it wasn’t a full success. A hundred yards long and fifty
deep, it was only three stories high. To an uncharitable observer, it
looked like nothing so much as an overgrown barracks hall.
Nevertheless, Hitler thought the big bronze eagle over the entryway
particularly fine. Mussolini, Chamberlain, and Daladier were already
there by the time the Führer and the interpreter, Paul Otto Schmidt,
came in. So was Göring, in a fancy white uniform—he’d motored in
with Daladier.
The Duce spoke with Chamberlain in English and Daladier in
French. He spoke German, too, after a fashion. Hitler, who knew
only his own language, envied his fellow dictator’s linguistic skills.
He consoled himself by noting how plain the handful of British and
French aides in civilian clothes appeared in contrast to his
uniformed henchmen, and Mussolini’s.

Hitler led the heads of government into his office. The big oblong
room had a fireplace at one end, with a portrait of Bismarck above
it. Light-colored chairs and a matching sofa faced the fireplace.
There were no name tags—not even any pads and pencils for
taking notes. There was no agenda. Discussion darted where it
would. Everyone already had a good notion of how things would
end up.
“Now that we are all here, we must decide soon,” Hitler said, and
smacked one fist into the palm of the other hand.
But things moved more slowly than he wanted them to. The heads
of the two leading democracies had to get their views on record.
The Führer supposed that was for domestic consumption. It
wouldn’t change anything here.
His temper began to fray. “You know nothing of the dreadful tyranny
the Czechs exert over the Sudeten Germans,” he said loudly.
“Nothing, I tell you! They torture them, showing no mercy. They
expel them by the thousands, in panic-stricken herds. They have
even forced the Sudeten Germans’ leader, Konrad Henlein, to flee
from his native land.”
“One jump ahead of the gendarmes, I shouldn’t wonder,” Daladier
said dryly.
“Joke if you care to, but I—” Hitler stopped in surprise at a loud
knock on the door.
“What’s going on?” Neville Chamberlain asked.
“I don’t know,” Hitler answered after Dr. Schmidt translated the
question. “I left clear orders that we were not to be disturbed.”
When he gave orders like that, he expected them to be obeyed,
too.
But, even for the Führer, expectations didn’t always match reality.
The knock came again, louder and more insistent than before. Hitler
sprang to his feet and hurried toward the door. Somebody out there
in the hallway was going to regret being born.
“Whatever he’s selling, tell him we don’t want any,” Mussolini said in
his inimitable German. Daladier and Chamberlain both smiled once
the interpreters made them understand the crack. Hitler didn’t. He’d
never had much of a sense of humor, and the interruption pushed
him towards one of his volcanic eruptions of fury.
He flung the door open. There stood Colonel Friedrich Hossbach,
his adjutant. “Well?” Hitler growled ominously. “What is the meaning
of this—this interruption?”
Hossbach was a stoic man on the far end of middle age. “I’m sorry
to bother you, mein Führer, but—”

“But what?” Hitler demanded. “Whatever the devil it is, it had better
be important.”
“Yes, sir. I believe it is.” Hossbach took a sheet of flimsy yellow
paper from his left breast pocket. “Here is a telegram we have just
received. You will know Herr Henlein has had to take refuge in the
Reich because of Czech outrages.…”
“Of course, of course,” the Führer said impatiently. “I was just now
talking about his plight, as a matter of fact. What’s going on with
him?”
Colonel Hossbach licked his lips. “Sir, he has been shot. Shot dead,
I should say. The murderer is in custody. He is a certain Jaroslav
Stribny: a Czech, sir. His passport shows a Prague address.”
Hitler stared at him in astonishment, disbelief, and then sudden
crazy joy. “Ich bin vom Himmel gefallen!” he blurted. I’ve fallen from
heaven! was what the words meant literally, but what they really
conveyed was his utter amazement.
“What shall we do, mein Führer?” Hossbach asked nervously.
A moment later, it was his turn to be amazed, because Hitler bussed
him on both cheeks like a Frenchman. “Leave that to me, my dear
Hossbach,” he answered. “Oh, yes. Leave that to me!”
He was almost chortling as he turned back to the statesmen and
officials and interpreters inside his office. He’d thought about getting
rid of Henlein to give himself a casus belli against Czechoslovakia.
He’d thought about it, yes, and put it aside. It would have been too
raw, too unlikely, for anyone to swallow.
But Herr Jaroslav Stribny had just handed him that casus belli in a
fancy package with a ribbon around it. The Reich would have to
execute Stribny as a murderer. Hitler understood the need, and he’d
never been shy about disposing of anyone who needed disposing
of. All the same, what he wanted to do was pin a medal on Stribny’s
chest. Talk about advancing Germany’s cause…!
“What is it, Führer?” Mussolini asked. “By the look in your eye, it is
truly important, whatever it is.”
“Ja,” Hitler said, and the pause that followed gave him the chance to
pull his thoughts together and figure out how best to use the
extraordinary opportunity that had fallen into his lap. “Truly
important, indeed. Colonel Hossbach brings me word that Konrad
Henlein, whom I mentioned only a few minutes ago, has been
viciously and brutally assassinated. Assassinated by one Jaroslav
Stribny, of Prague. Not content with forcing him out of the
Sudetenland, the Czechs followed him into Germany and finished
him off here.”
“Dio mio!” Mussolini exclaimed, eyes bulging in astonishment.

Dr. Schmidt translated for Chamberlain. Daladier had his own
interpreter. The leaders of the two democracies gaped at the
Führer. Chamberlain murmured something. Hitler looked sharply at
Schmidt. “He says he can hardly believe it, mein Führer,” the
translator said.
“Well, I can hardly believe it, either,” Hitler said. “I can hardly believe
the perfidy of the Czech government, the perfidy of the whole Czech
race, that has brought things to such a pass. You can surely see
that we in the Reich did everything we could to be reasonable, to be
generous, toward Czechoslovakia. But what thanks do we get?
Murder! And I am afraid, gentlemen, that I see no choice but to
avenge the insult with blood.”
Edouard Daladier frowned. Hitler almost told him how ridiculous he
looked, with a few long, pathetic strands of hair combed over a vast
bald pate. “This seems too convenient for words,” Daladier said.
“Too convenient for you, too convenient for your aggression.”
Hitler almost told him he hadn’t rubbed out Henlein for just that
reason. But, while he might have been so frank with Mussolini,
whom he esteemed, he felt only contempt for the miserable little
Frenchman. “Before God and before the spirit of history, I had
nothing to do with it,” he declared.
“Monsieur Daladier is right,” Chamberlain said. “The advantage you
gain from this almost surpasses belief.”
“Believe whatever you please.” No, Hitler hadn’t arranged for
Henlein’s elimination. But he intended to use it. Oh, yes! Warming to
his theme, he went on, “I have said all along that these Slavs are
not to be trusted. I have said all along that they do not deserve
nations of their own. Look what happened to Archduke Franz
Ferdinand in 1914. Those murderous Serbian maniacs plunged a
continent into war. And now the Slavs have done it again!”
“This need not be,” Neville Chamberlain said urgently. “As a result
of this most unfortunate incident, I am sure we can extract more
concessions from Mr. Masarik and Mr. Mastny.” The Foreign Ministry
counselor and the Czech minister to Germany waited to hear what
the great powers would decree for their country. The British Prime
Minister continued, “And I do not see how the government of
Czechoslovakia can fail to ratify whatever agreement we reach.”
“No,” Hitler said. “Not a soul can claim I was unwilling to meet you
halfway, your Excellency. My thought all along was that
Czechoslovakia deserved punishment for her arrogance and
brutality. But I restrained myself. I convened this meeting at your
request. You persuaded me the Czechs could be trusted far enough
to make it worthwhile. In this we were both mistaken.”
He paused to let Dr. Schmidt translate. Schmidt was an artist,

keeping a speaker’s tone as well as his meaning. Hitler’s tone, at
the moment, had iron in it. So did the interpreter’s when he spoke
English.
“You could overlook the enormity if you chose,” Chamberlain
insisted. When turning his words into German, Schmidt somehow
sounded like a fussy old man. “Henlein was, after all, a citizen of
Czechoslovakia, not of the German Reich—”
“He was a German!” Hitler thundered, loud and fierce enough to
make every pair of eyes in the room turn his way. “He was a
German!” he repeated, a little more softly. “That is the whole point
of what we have been discussing. All the Germans of the
Sudetenland belong within the Reich. Because the Czechs will not
allow this and go on persecuting them, we see disasters like this
latest one. I am very sorry, your Excellency, very sorry indeed, but,
as I said, blood calls for blood. As soon as I leave this office,
Germany will declare war on Czechoslovakia.”
“May Monsieur Daladier and I have a few minutes to confer with
each other?” Chamberlain asked, adding, “The situation has
changed quite profoundly in the past few minutes, you understand.”
Would they throw Czechoslovakia over the side because of what
Stribny had done? If they would, Hitler was willing to give them as
much time as they needed. Their turn would come next anyhow.
“You may do as you please,” the Führer said. “I must ask you to
step outside to talk, though; as I said, I shall not leave the room
without declaring war.”
Chamberlain, Daladier, and their flunkies almost fell over one
another in their haste to leave. As soon as they were gone,
Mussolini asked, “Did you—?”
He left the question hanging, but Hitler knew what he meant. “Nein,”
he said roughly. As he shook his head, a lock of hair flopped down
over one eye. Impatiently, he pushed it back. “The Czechs did it
themselves. They did it to themselves. And they will pay. By God,
they will pay!”
“Italy still is not truly ready for this struggle,” the Duce warned.
“When the Czechs murder the leader of an oppressed minority, will
you let them get away with it?” Hitler asked in astonishment. Full of
righteous indignation that the Untermenschen should dare such a
thing, he forgot for the moment all his own murders.
“They shouldn’t,” Mussolini admitted. “Still, England and France and
Russia…”
“Russia? What good is Russia?” Hitler said scornfully. “She doesn’t
even border Czechoslovakia. Do you think the Poles or the
Romanians will let her ship soldiers across their territory? If she
tries, we’ll have two new allies like that.” He snapped his fingers.

tries, we’ll have two new allies like that.” He snapped his fingers.
“I suppose so.…” Mussolini still didn’t sound convinced.
Hitler was ready to argue with him all day, but didn’t get the chance.
Chamberlain and Daladier returned to the office. Both heads of
government looked thoroughly grim, their aides even grimmer.
Daladier spoke for them: “I regret to have to say that, if Germany
attacks Czechoslovakia, the French Republic and the United
Kingdom will honor their commitments to their ally. We cannot
believe that the murder of Monsieur Henlein is anything but a
trumped-up provocation. Peace and war, then, lie entirely in your
hands.”
Hitler almost screamed wild laughter. He wanted war, yes. But to
have the leaders of the democracies ready to fight him because
they were sure he’d done something of which he was entirely
innocent…If that wasn’t irony, what was?
“I must tell you, you are making a dreadful mistake,” he said. “That
Czech, that Stribny, murdered Herr Henlein on his own. I had
nothing to do with it. Germany had nothing to do with it. Henlein left
Czechoslovakia and entered the Reich because he feared for his
own safety. And now we see he had reason to fear. If anyone
inspired Stribny, it was the wicked Slavs in Prague, just as the
wicked Slavs in Belgrade inspired Gavrilo Princip a generation ago.”
Every single word of that was the gospel truth. But it fell on deaf
ears. He could tell as much even while Dr. Schmidt was translating.
Chamberlain and Daladier had made up their minds. If he told them
the sun was shining outside, they would call him a liar.
Chamberlain murmured something in English. “What did he say?”
Hitler asked sharply.
“He said, ‘And then you wake up,’ mein Führer,” Schmidt replied.
“What does that mean?”
“It’s slang, sir. It means he doesn’t believe you.”
“Donnerwetter!” Hitler could see the Allies’ propaganda mill spewing
out endless lies. They would shout that he was a murderer, that
he’d got rid of his own henchman to start a war. They would make
him look bad to all the neutrals in Europe and Asia and the
Americas. The Allies had trounced Germany and Austria-Hungary in
the propaganda war during the World War. Now they had a great
chance to do it again.
“If you are truly innocent of this crime, then do not assume the guilt
of plunging the world into battle because of it,” Daladier said.
“This is madness!” Hitler cried. “If I had ordered Henlein killed,
maybe a guilty conscience would keep me from taking advantage of

it. But my conscience is clean.” Of this, anyhow he added, but only
to himself. He got angrier by the word as he went on, “Konrad
Henlein must have vengeance. The Sudeten Germans must have
vengeance. Germany, to which they were about to return, must
have vengeance. Czechoslovakia must be punished. If you want to
line up behind a pack of skulking, cowardly assassins, go ahead
—and be damned to you!”
“Mein Führer—” Göring began.
“No!” Hitler roared. He was in full spate now. Nothing could stop him,
or even slow him down. “They want war? They can have war! They
will have war! War!…War! War! War!”
He threw open the doors to his office. “Is everything all right, mein
Führer?” one of the guards asked. “We could hear you shouting.…”
So even the thick oak doors hadn’t muffled him? Well, too bad! “It is
war!” he bellowed. “Colonel Hossbach!”
“Ja, mein Führer?” his adjutant said.
“Begin Case Green. Immediately! War with Czechoslovakia! Now!”
Yes, Hitler had what he most wanted, handed to him by, of all
people, a Czech.

GUNS THUNDERED ON BOTH SIDES of the Ebro. General
Sanjurjo’s Fascists had modern German and Italian pieces, guns
that could put a shell on an outspread blanket five miles away. The
Republic had a few Russian howitzers that weren’t bad. The rest
were the artillery pieces the Republicans had started the fight with.
After more than two years of civil war, they kept only vestiges of
their original rifling—and they weren’t such hot stuff back when they
were new.
Crouching in a foxhole west of the Ebro, Chaim Weinberg decided
he feared his own side’s guns more than the Fascists’. When the
enemy Spaniards or their German advisers opened up, at least you
had a good notion of what they were shooting at. If it wasn’t you,
you could relax.
But when the Republican artillery started shooting, you always
needed to be on the jump. Those shells might come down on the
Fascists’ head…or they might come down on yours. You never
could tell. Neither could the poor, sorry bastards firing the guns.
“Aren’t you glad we came from the States?” asked Mike Carroll,
another volunteer from the Lincoln Battalion.
Before Chaim could answer, somebody’s shell burst much too close.
Shrapnel and shards of shattered stone screamed through the air.
He listened for shrieks, but didn’t hear any. Luck. Nothing but dumb

frigging luck.
“Aren’t you?” Carroll persisted.
“Chinga tu madre,” Chaim told him. He wouldn’t have said anything
like that even in English before he sailed to Spain. Well, he was a
new man now. That new man needed a shave (at the moment, he
also needed a razor). He was scrawny and hungry. He was filthy. He
was lousy. But damned if he wasn’t new.
He’d never fired a rifle before he got to Spain. Hell, he’d never even
handled a rifle. He could field-strip his Mauser blindfolded now. He’d
started out with a crappy French piece, and got this much better
German one off a dead Nationalist soldier. Keeping it in cartridges
was a bitch. But keeping the French rifle in ammo would have been
a bitch, too. Logistics was only a bitter joke to the Republicans.
The shelling went on, but none of the other rounds burst close
enough to make him pucker. He lit a cigarette. The tobacco was
allegedly French. It smelled like horseshit. It tasted the way he
imagined smoldering horseshit would taste, too.
“No pasarán,” Mike said, and then, “Gimme one of those.”
“Here.” Chaim handed him the pack.
Mike took a smoke from it. He leaned close to Chaim to get it going.
After his first drag, he made a face. “Boy, that’s rotten.”
“Uh-huh.” Chaim held out his hand, palm up. Reluctantly, his buddy
returned the cigarettes. Chaim stuck them back in the breast pocket
of his ragged khaki tunic. “Only thing worse than rotten tobacco’s
no tobacco at all.”
“No kidding,” Mike said.
Chaim took a cautious look out of the trench. Nothing special was
going on in the Nationalist lines a few hundred yards away
—everybody here talked about meters, but they seemed like play
money to him. The shelling was just…shelling. A few people on both
sides would get maimed or killed, and it wouldn’t move the war any
closer to the end, not even a nickel’s worth.
“No pasarán,” Chaim echoed. “They’d fucking better not pass, not
here, or we’re butcher’s meat.” He sucked in more smoke. “Hell,
we’re dead meat anyway, sooner or later. I still hope it’s later,
though.”
“Yeah, me, too.” Mike Carroll sounded like Boston. Before he came
to Spain, he’d worked in a steel mill somewhere in Massachusetts.
That was what he said, anyway. A lot of guys had stories that didn’t
add up. Chaim didn’t get all hot and bothered about it. He didn’t tell
the whole truth and nothing but the truth about himself, either. The
only thing that really mattered was that you hated Fascism enough

to hop on a boat and try to do something about it.
“Amazing thing is, the Republic’s still in there kicking,” Chaim said.
Mike nodded. General Sanjurjo and his pack of reactionary
bastards must have thought their foes would fall apart in nothing
flat. Who could have blamed them? They had the trained troops,
and they had Mussolini and Hitler—which meant Italian and German
matériel and soldiers—on their side.
But it didn’t pan out that way. The brutal farce of noninterference
kept the Republicans from getting munitions and reinforcements.
Like the rest of the men in the Lincoln Battalion, Chaim and Mike
had to sneak over the border from France, dodging patrols every
step of the way. Russia sent arms and advisers, though not enough
to offset what the Fascists fed Sanjurjo.
And the Republicans squabbled among themselves. Did they ever!
Anarchists and Trotskyists didn’t like admitting that, since Stalin was
paying the piper, he could call the tune. They also complained that
Communist units got the best weapons. Chaim was a Party member,
even if he’d left his card in New York City when he sailed. Most
(though not all) of the foreign volunteers—men from every corner of
the Earth—were. But the Spaniards themselves did the bulk of the
fighting and dying.
An airplane buzzed by overhead. Chaim automatically started to
duck; German and Italian aircraft ruled the skies. But this was a
Republican plane: a Russian biplane fighter. Its blunt forward profile
made the Spaniards call it Chato—flat-nosed. It dove to shoot up
the Nationalists’ trenches, then scooted off to the east.
“‘Bout time those mothers caught it for a change,” Mike said.
“Yeah,” Chaim agreed doubtfully. “But now we’ll get it twice as hard
to make up, you know?” The Spaniards on both sides thought like
that and fought like that. It made for a rugged kind of combat.
Mike started to answer. Before he could, a runner came up from the
rear yelling, “War! War!”
Mike and Chaim started laughing like maniacs. “The fuck ya think
we’re in now?” Chaim said. “A ladies’ sewing circle?”
“No, goddammit—a big war,” the runner said. “The Munich giveaway
just fell apart. A Czech murdered some Sudeten Nazi big shot inside
Germany—that’s what Hitler says, anyway. And he’s gonna jump on
Czechoslovakia, and England and France can’t back down now. And
if they get in, the Russians do, too.”
“Holy Jesus!” Mike said. Chaim nodded. If the gloves came off in the
rest of Europe, they’d have to come off in Spain, too…wouldn’t
they? No more noninterference? Hot damn! Maybe things here just
evened up.

Corporal Vaclav Jezek crouched in a hastily dug trench just in front
of Troppau. If the Germans came—when they came—this was one
of the places they’d hit hardest. Slice through here in the north,
push through from what had been Austria till a few months ago
down in the south, and you would bite Czechoslovakia in half. Then
you could settle with the Czechs in Bohemia and Moravia—the
important part of the country, as far as Vaclav was concerned—at
your leisure.
The Czechoslovakian General Staff wasn’t blind, or stupid. Some of
the heaviest fortifications in the whole country lay along this stretch
of the border. If Vaclav stood up in the trench, he could see them:
big, rounded, squarish lumps of reinforced concrete that had good
fields of fire from high ground and plugged valleys through which
tanks might otherwise charge freely.
He didn’t stand up. His khaki uniform and brown, bowl-shaped
helmet offered good camouflage, but they weren’t perfect.
Somewhere on the other side of the border, some bastard in a fieldgray uniform and a black coal-scuttle helmet would be sweeping the
area with heavy-duty field glasses. Vaclav didn’t want him marking
this position.
Trucks and teams of horses rushed machine guns and cannon and
ammunition to the Czechoslovak forts. Not all of them were done
yet. The government hadn’t really got serious about them till the
Anschluss. But with Nazi troops in Austria, Czechoslovakia was
surrounded on three sides. Without fortifications, it wouldn’t last
long. It might not last long with them, but they gave it the best
—likely the only—chance it had.
Maybe the German with the field glasses wouldn’t be able to see too
much. It was cool and overcast, with a little mist in the air: autumn in
Central Europe, sure as hell. But some of the Sudeten shitheads
were bound to be sneaking over the border to tell their cousins on
the other side what was going on here. If Vaclav ran the world, he
would have shipped them out or shot them to nip that crap in the
bud. But would the big shots listen to a corporal who drove a taxi in
Prague before he got called up? Fat chance!

The air might be cool and moist, but he smelled burning bridges all
the same. Diplomats were going home by plane and train. Armies
that hadn’t been mobilized were getting ready for the big plunge.
The Poles, damn them, were concentrating opposite Teschen
(spelled three different ways, depending on whether you were a
German, a Czech, or a Pole). Didn’t they see they were the next
course on Hitler’s menu? If they didn’t, how stupid were they?
“Got a smoke on you, Corporal?” asked Jan Dzurinda, one of the
soldiers in Vaclav’s squad.
“Sure.” Jezek held out the pack. Dzurinda took a cigarette, then
waited expectantly for a light. With a small sigh, Vaclav struck a
match.
Dzurinda leaned close and got the cigarette started. He took a deep
drag, then blew out two perfect smoke rings. “Thanks a bunch.
Much obliged.”
“Any time,” Vaclav said. Dzurinda puffed away without a care in the
world, blowing more smoke rings. Just hearing his voice made
Corporal Jezek worry. Jan was a Slovak, not a Czech. Czech and
Slovak were brother languages, but they weren’t the same. Czechs
and Slovaks could tell what you were as soon as you opened your
mouth.
And Czechs and Slovaks weren’t the same, either. Czechs thought
of Slovaks as hicks, rubes, country bumpkins. Before the World
War, Slovakia had been in the Hungarian half of Austria-Hungary,
and the Hungarians made a point of keeping the Slovaks ignorant
and down on the farm. Things had changed since 1918, but only so
much. The Czechoslovakian Army had something like 140 general
officers. Just one was a Slovak.
If Slovaks were rubes to Czechs, Czechs were city slickers to
Slovaks. A lot of Slovaks thought the Czechs, who were twice as
numerous, ran Czechoslovakia for their own benefit. They thought
Slovakia got hind tit, and wanted more autonomy—maybe outright
independence—for it.
Vaclav had no idea whether Jan belonged to Father Hlinka’s Slovak
People’s Party, the main nationalist outfit. Hlinka had died six weeks
before, but another cleric, Father Tiso, was heading the party now.
The Nazis had brownshirts; the Slovak People’s Party had Hlinka
Guards.
If the shooting started, how hard would Jan Dzurinda and thousands
more like him fight for Czechoslovakia? A lot of Slovak People’s
Party men figured Berlin would give them what they wanted if
Prague didn’t. If you thought that way, how loyal would you be
toward your nominal country?
Since Vaclav didn’t know and didn’t want to ask straight out, he lit a

cigarette of his own. The harsh smoke relaxed him…a little. He said,
“At least we’ve weeded most of the Germans out of the Army.” The
Sudetens damn well weren’t loyal. They’d made that plain enough.
“Well, sure,” Jan Dzurinda said, which might mean anything or
nothing.
Corporal Jezek decided to push a little harder. If the Slovaks were
going to run off or give up first chance they got, how could the army
hope to defend Czechoslovakia? The noncom said, “Now we have
to run off the buggers on the other side of the frontier, eh?”
“Reckon so.” Dammit, Dzurinda did sound like a hick. He went on,
“Anybody tries to shoot me, I expect I better nail him first.”
“Sounds good to me.” Jezek decided he had to be content with that.
He could have heard plenty worse from a Slovak. Up and down the
lines, how many worried Czech noncoms and lieutenants and
captains were hearing worse from Slovaks right about now? How
many who weren’t hearing worse were being lied to? He muttered to
himself and lit another cigarette and wished his canteen held
something stronger than water.

“FORWARD!” SERGEANT LUDWIG ROTHE CALLED softly. He
laughed at himself as the Panzer II crawled toward the start line
through the darkness of the wee small hours. With all the motors
belching and farting around him, he could have yelled his head off
without giving himself away to the Czechs on the other side of the
border.
He rode head and shoulders out of the turret. He had to, if he
wanted to see where he was going. They said later models of the
Panzer II would boast a cupola with episcopes so the commander
could look around without risking his life whenever he did. That
didn’t do him any good. All he had was a two-flapped steel hatch in
the top of the turret.
Engineers had set up white tapes to guide panzers and personnel
carriers to their assigned jumping-off points. The whole Third
Panzer Division was on the move. Hell, the whole Wehrmacht was
on the move, near enough. Oh, there were covering forces on the
border with France, and smaller ones on the Polish frontier and
inside East Prussia, but everything that mattered was going to teach
the Czechs they couldn’t mess around with good Germans unlucky
enough to be stuck inside their lousy country.
Other panzers—more IIs and the smaller Panzer Is—were dim
shapes in the night. Ludwig affectionately patted his machine. The
Panzer II was a great improvement over the I.
The driver’s voice floated out through the speaking tube: “Kinda
hate to leave Katscher. Found this little waitress there—she doesn’t

hate to leave Katscher. Found this little waitress there—she doesn’t
know how to say no.”
“Jesus, Fritz!” Rothe said. “D’you pass shortarm inspection?”
Fritz Bittenfeld chuckled. “Doesn’t hurt when I piss, so I guess
everything’s all right.”
“Wonderful,” the panzer commander muttered. Fritz only laughed.
The third member of the crew—the radio operator, Theo Kessler
—sat in the back of the fighting compartment. The only way he
could see out was through peepholes. Ludwig wasn’t sure whether
he couldn’t hear the conversation or just ignored it. But then, he
wasn’t sure about Theo a lot of the time.
“Halt!” The command floated out of the night. Rothe relayed it to
Bittenfeld, who was driving buttoned up. The panzer stopped. They
were where they were supposed to be…unless some Czech
infiltrator was screwing them over. Rothe shook his head. Natural to
be nervous before the balloon went up, but that was pushing things.
Nothing left to do but wait. Ludwig pushed back the sleeve of his
black panzer coveralls to get a look at the radium-glowing hands on
his watch. A quarter to four. Right on time. Everything was supposed
to start at 0600. That gave him something else to worry about. It
would still be almost dark. If the clouds overhead lingered, it might
really be dark.
And if the clouds lingered, the Luftwaffe wouldn’t be able to do as
much as it was supposed to. How could you see what to bomb and
shoot up if low clouds and fog blotted out the landscape?
This kind of weather was normal for this time of year. Ludwig hoped
the fellows with the General Staff’s red stripes on their trousers
knew what the hell they were up to. If they didn’t, a lot of good
Landers would get buried in makeshift graves with only a rifle and a
helmet for a headstone.
As if picking that thought out of his head, Fritz said, “The Führer
knows what he’s doing. Those dirty Czechs, they deserve
everything we’ll give ‘em. They can’t go murdering people inside
Germany.”
“Sure,” Ludwig said. He thought the Czechs had a lot of nerve
bumping off Konrad Henlein, too. But he was fretting about how
much the Wehrmacht would take, not what it would dish out.
Again, Theo didn’t say a thing. Well, he didn’t have a speaking tube
to Fritz. And he’d been wearing his earphones. Rothe wondered
why. Radio silence was bound to be tighter than Fritz’s waitress’
works. The only signal that might come was one calling everything
off because peace had broken out. The panzer commander didn’t
expect that. Nobody else did, either.

Ludwig looked at his watch again. 0400. At this rate, he’d feel as if
he’d aged a year before things started happening. He couldn’t even
smoke. Somebody out there would skin him alive if he showed a
match. And you had to be even more desperate for a butt than he
was to light up inside the turret, what with all the ammo in there.
Nothing to do but wait and fidget.
As 0600 neared, the sky slowly began to get light. A few minutes
before the hour, he thought he heard thunder in the air. Then he
realized it was nothing of the sort: it was untold hundreds or
thousands of airplane engines, all of them roaring toward
Czechoslovakia.
Fritz heard them, too. You’d have to be deaf not to. “Boy, those
Czech assholes are really gonna catch it,” he said happily.
“Ja,” Ludwig said, and let it go at that.
Behind them, artillery started bellowing. Red flares leaped into the
sky—the go signal! Without waiting for an order, Fritz put the
Panzer II in gear and started forward. Other panzers were heading
for the border—heading over the border—too. Half-seen German
soldiers trotted along with them, clutching Mausers and hunching
low to make themselves smaller targets.
A shell burst a couple of hundred meters away. Maybe it was a short
round. More likely, it was the goddamn Czechs shooting back. Dirt
and a couple of men flew up into the air. Poor bastards, Ludwig
thought. He wondered what would happen if a 75 or a 105 hit his
panzer. Then he wished he hadn’t.
More shells fell on the Germans. He’d thought the opening
bombardment would silence the enemy guns. Evidently not. One
shell did hit a little Panzer I. It slewed sideways and started to burn.
Machine-gun ammunition inside started cooking off—pop-pop-pop!
It sounded absurdly cheerful.
Somebody in a khaki uniform—almost brown, really—popped up
from a hole in the ground and fired at the Germans. They were over
the border, then. Ludwig traversed the turret and squeezed off a
burst of machine-gun fire at the Czech soldier. He didn’t know
whether he hit the man. If he made him duck and stop shooting, that
would do.
Things inside Czechoslovakia didn’t look much different from the
way they did on the German side of the line. The terrain was
rugged. One reason the Czechs didn’t want to give back the
Sudetenland was that the rough ground and the forts they’d built in
it gave them their best shield against attack. Best or not, it wouldn’t
be good enough…Ludwig hoped.
The panzer clanked past a house. It looked like the ones inside the
Reich, too. Well, why not? Germans were Germans, on that side of

the frontier or on this one. Past the house was a forest. Ludwig
thought it seemed wilder than woods in Germany would have. The
Czechs probably didn’t care for it the way they should.
Or maybe they wanted it all jungly and overgrown. A machine gun in
there started spraying death at the German infantry. When a bullet
cracked past Ludwig’s ear, he realized that machine gun could kill
him, too. He ducked reflexively. He almost pissed himself. The
Czechs were playing for keeps, all right.
They had more than machine guns in the woods, too. An antitank
gun spat a long tongue of flame. A Panzer II just like Ludwig’s
caught fire. A perfect smoke ring came out through the
commander’s hatch. Ludwig didn’t see any of the crew get away.
“Do we go into that, Sergeant?” Fritz asked.
Ludwig understood why he hesitated. Open country was best for
panzers. Out on the plains and meadows, you could see trouble
coming. But somebody’d forgotten to issue a whole lot of plains and
meadows to this part of Czechoslovakia. “Yes, we do,” Rothe
answered. “Our job is to smash through their defensive lines. Once
we do that, the rest of the country falls into our lap.”
“If they don’t blow our balls off first.” That wasn’t Fritz; it was Theo.
So the radioman was listening after all. Ludwig would have come
down on him for sounding defeatist if he weren’t so likely to be right.
Into the woods. Other panzers were pushing forward, too. Things
were better—or seemed better, anyhow—when you had company.
There was, of course, the saying about misery.
A bullet struck sparks as it spanged off the panzer’s hull. That left
Ludwig with a couple of really unpleasant choices. If he stayed
where he was, he was much too likely to get shot. But if he ducked
down inside the turret and shut the hatch, he would have the devil’s
own time seeing where he was going. All kinds of bad things were
liable to happen to the panzer then.
He stayed where he was. Every so often, he fired a short burst from
his machine gun. The other panzer commanders were doing the
same thing. Foot soldiers banged away, too. With enough lead in
the air, the Czechs would be too busy taking cover and dying to
shoot back much.
He hoped. Boy, did he!
The Panzer II emerged from the woods onto open ground that had
taken a beating from bombs and artillery. As soon as it did, Ludwig
wished it hadn’t, because there sat a Panzer I, burning like nobody’s
business. The commander had tried to get out of the turret, but he
hadn’t made it. Something nasty lurked in the next stretch of trees.
“There it is!” Fritz screamed. “One o’clock! Panzer! Goddamn

Czech panzer!”
The Czech LT-35 was a light tank, as its initials suggested. It was
still bigger and heavier and better armored than a Panzer II. And the
bastard carried a 37mm gun: a real cannon that could fire a real HE
round as well as armor-piercing ammo. The Panzer II’s 2cm main
armament had decent AP rounds, but they just weren’t big enough
to carry a useful amount of high explosive.
One good thing about the Panzer II’s little gun, though: it was an
automatic weapon, firing from ten-round magazines. Ludwig
traversed the turret toward the LT-35, all the while wishing for a
power assist. He’d just about brought the gun on target when the
Czechs fired. Their AP round chewed a groove in the field a few
meters to his left. They’d be reloading as fast as they could.…
His 2.5X sight brought the target a lot closer. The trigger was on the
elevating wheel. He squeezed off a four-round burst. Smoke rose
from the Czech tank. “Hit!” Fritz yelled. “You hit the son of a bitch!”
“Do you have to sound so surprised?” Actually, Ludwig was
surprised he’d hit the panzer at all. The gun was noisy enough to
make him glad he was sober. “Come on—put the beast back in
gear. We don’t want to hang around in one spot, or some other
bastard’ll draw a bead on us.”
He breathed a sigh of relief as the panzer raced toward the cover of
the woods. He hadn’t wanted to go into the first belt, but he’d
discovered being out in the open was dangerous, too. It was a war,
for Christ’s sake. Everything was dangerous. He just hoped it would
be more dangerous for the Czechs.
• • •

BOMBS STARTED FALLING ON MARIANSKE LAZNE—Marienbad, if
you liked the old German name better—at six o’clock in the
morning. Peggy Druce hadn’t gone to bed till three. Just because
you were here to take the waters (which smelled like rotten eggs,
tasted almost as bad, and kept you on the pot like you wouldn’t
believe) didn’t mean you couldn’t do other things, too. Peggy’d
been playing fiery bridge with an English couple and a young man
who might have come from almost anywhere.
Everyone thought she was crazy for coming over from Philadelphia
with the war clouds thickening by the day. Even after Henlein got
shot, she’d pooh-poohed the idea that things would actually go
boom. “We already had one war this century,” she’d said. She
remembered very precisely, because she was squeezing every trick
from a small slam in diamonds. “Wasn’t that enough to teach the
whole world we don’t need another one?”

Well…no.
The first explosions might almost have been mistaken for thunder.
The couple right after that burst much too close to the BalmoralOsborne Hotel de Luxe to leave any doubt about what they were.
They knocked Peggy out of bed and onto the floor with a bump and
a squawk. She said something most unladylike when she scrambled
up again, because she’d cut both feet on shards of glass that
hadn’t been there a moment before.
People were yelling and screaming and—probably—jumping up and
down. Peggy threw a robe over her silk peignoir. She made as if to
rush for the door, then caught herself. Her feet would be raw meat
and gore if she tried. The only shoes she could grab in a hurry were
last night’s heels. They’d have to do.
Out she went—but not without her handbag, which held passport
and cash and traveler’s checks. Everybody else in the hall was in
the same state of dishabille. People dashed for the elevator: the lift,
everyone called it here, in the English fashion. Peggy was almost
there when the lights went out.
Shrieks filled the air as darkness descended. She turned around
and went the other way, against the confused tide. If the lights
weren’t working, the goddamn elevator wouldn’t, either. The stairs
were…that way.
Peggy liked to think she looked ten years younger than her fortyfive. She hadn’t put on weight, and peroxide kept her hair about the
same color it had always been. But, in spite of her misplaced
optimism the night before, she had a coldly practical streak. When
she was Peggy Eubank, growing up a devil of a long way from the
Main Line, her mother told her, “Kid, you’re eleven going on twentyone.” If Mom had been half as smart as she thought she was, she
would’ve been twice as smart as she really was. But she’d hit that
nail right on the head.
And so—the stairs. Peggy found the door as much by Braille as any
other way. The stairwell wasn’t very light, either. Somebody bumped
into her and said, “Excusez-moi.”
“Don’t worry about it,” Peggy said, and then, “C’est la guerre.” And
wasn’t that the sad and sorry truth?
Gray early-morning light spilled out of the door that led to the lobby.
Three flights of stairs had made Peggy’s feet start to hurt, but more
broken glass crunched under her soles. She would hurt worse if she
took off the heels.
The lobby looked like hell, and smelled pretty bad, too. It reminded
her of a butcher’s shop with a whole bunch of fresh meat. Some of
this meat came in trousers and dresses and nightclothes, though.
Stewards and bellhops—they had different titles here, but basically

the same jobs—were doing what they could to help the wounded.
One of them was noisily sick on the floor, which only made the stink
worse.
And, in what looked at first like a scene from a Three Stooges
tworeeler, a couple of men near the front desk were punching and
kicking each other and poking each other in the eye. Even with
more bombs going off not terribly far away, they went at it hammer
and tongs. But one of them swore in Czech, the other in guttural
German. The big war had started, and so had their own little private
one.
“Mon Dieu!” exclaimed a man standing next to Peggy. His voice said
he was the fellow who’d bumped her on the stairs. “C’est—” He
broke off, at a loss for words.
“It’s hell on wheels,” Peggy said. “You understand? Comprenez?”
“Yes. But what am I to do?” He spoke good British English. “I was for
two years a prisoner in the last war. If the Boches come here, they
will intern me again, as an enemy alien. I do not wish this at all.”
If the Germans came to Marianske Lazne? No, when they came.
The border wasn’t more than a long spit to the west. Peggy had her
passport. The United States was neutral. The Nazis would treat her
better than that poor Frenchman…if they or the Czechs didn’t blow
her to the moon while they were bashing each other over the head.
Right this minute, that looked like a pretty big if.
“Maybe you can get a train out of town if you hustle,” she said.
“It could be, Mademoiselle,” he said, not noticing the ring on her
finger. Herb was still in Philadelphia. He’d been set to join her in
Paris in a couple of weeks. Well, that wouldn’t happen now. All kinds
of things wouldn’t happen, and all kinds of worse ones would. The
man went on, “Will you accompany me? This is no more—no longer
—a good place to be.”
He was dead right—no, live right—about that. “Let’s go,” Peggy
said.
As soon as she got her first look at a bomb crater, she wasn’t sure
outside was the best place to be. Marianske Lazne sat in a valley
with pines and firs all around. The hotels and other buildings were
mostly Austro-Hungarian leftovers from before the war (before the
last war, she thought). They had more architectural gingerbread
than the wicked witch’s house in the Grimm fairy tale.
Right now, Peggy was trapped in a grim fairy tale of her own. Some
of those buildings had chunks bitten out of them. Several were
burning. Wounded people, bodies, and pieces of bodies lay in the
streets. And everybody who wasn’t wounded or blown to bits
seemed to be running toward the train stations.

All kinds of people took the waters here. Some were ordinary
Czechs and Slovaks. Some were Germans. Some came from other
European countries. Peggy spotted half a dozen Jews in long black
coats and wide-brimmed black hats. If the Frenchman beside her
didn’t want to deal with the Germans, they really didn’t want to—and
who could blame them?
There was a shriek in the air, getting louder by the moment. The
Frenchman knocked her down and lay flat on top of her. She
started to scream. Then more explosions shook Marianske Lazne,
and she realized he hadn’t gone mad and wasn’t trying to assault
her right out in the middle of the street.
“Artillery!” he bawled in her ear. “When you hear that sound, for
God’s sake get down!”
Peggy did scream then, but on a note different from the one she
might have used a moment earlier. Through the shell bursts she
heard more shrieks, men’s and women’s and Lord only knew whose.
Something warm and wet and sticky splashed her hand. She looked
at it. It was blood—not hers, or she didn’t think so. With a little
disgusted cry, she wiped it off her robe. No, not hers: no more
welled out.
More and more shells landed on and around Marianske Lazne. How
many guns did the Germans have, anyway? “Make it stop!” she
yelled to the Frenchman. “Jesus, make it stop!”
“I wish I could, Mademoiselle,” he replied.
Peggy heard guns going off, too, in the woods around the spas.
The Czechs were making a fight of it, anyhow, or trying to. But
Marianske Lazne was within artillery range of the border, as she
knew much, much too well. How long could this little country hold off
Hitler’s armored legions?
After what seemed forever, the bombardment eased. Peggy raised
her head and looked around. She wished she hadn’t. Her husband
had fought in the Great War. He’d never talked much about what
he’d done and what he’d seen. If it was anything like this…Peggy
understood why not. She would spend the rest of her life wishing
she could forget what artillery did to the civilians in Marianske
Lazne. She remembered one thing Herb had said, talking to
someone else who’d seen the elephant: “Artillery—that’s the killer.”
Jesus, he wasn’t kidding.
As politely as she could, she tapped the Frenchman on top of her
on the shoulder. “Could you move, please? You’re squashing me.”
He had to weigh close to 200 pounds, and there was nothing
between her and the sidewalk but two layers of silk.
“I do apologize,” he said, and rolled to one side. “This is…very bad.
Very, very bad. But if you hear that sound in the air, you must get

down at once, without hesitation. It is your best chance to save
yourself.”
“God forbid I ever hear it again,” Peggy said. The Frenchman
crossed himself.
No trains went out. No trains came in. Maybe the Germans had
bombed the tracks. Maybe Czechoslovakia was using the railroads
to haul troops around. Peggy saw no dun-colored Czech uniforms in
town. Every so often, though, the guns in the woods boomed. What
kind of forts lay between the border and Marianske Lazne? How
long would the Germans take to break through them. Two good
questions. Peggy had no good answers.
The town was full of clinics. They weren’t equipped for carnage like
this, but they did their best. Unhurt people did what they could for
the wounded. Peggy carried stretcher after stretcher. She got more
blood on her robe, but hardly noticed. The hotels set out the usual
massive spread of cold cuts for breakfast. She ate…somewhere.
About ten o’clock, the mist retreated and a wan sun came out.
Airplane motors throbbed overhead. Peggy looked up. She’d never
seen anything like those ungainly vulture-winged planes before.
One after another, they peeled off in dives. It was fascinating to
watch. But the shrieks they let out as they dove reminded her of
incoming artillery. She got down, as the polite but portly Frenchman
had said she should.
People gave her funny looks—for a few seconds, till the first bomb
went off and the vulture-winged planes started machine-gunning the
town as they zoomed away.
Half a dozen Czech biplane fighters showed up then. They looked
like last year’s models next to the vulture-winged jobs with the
swastikas on their tails, but they shot down two of them. Peggy
wasn’t the only one cheering her head off.
She went on lugging stretchers till her feet started to bleed.
Somebody gave her a pair of flats. They were too big, but still an
improvement. She moved more casualties, and more, and more yet.
By midafternoon, she heard small-arms fire off to the west. It kept
getting closer. She feared she knew what that meant: the Germans
were pushing the Czechs back. She spotted more of the Nazi divebombers. Now that they’d delivered their terror message, they were
doing serious work, pounding Czech positions.
The hotels kept putting out food. It was about all they could do. One
displayed a sign in several languages: WE HAVE LOCKED UP OUR
GERMANS. That was brave. It might also have been stupid. If the
Nazis rolled into town, they wouldn’t be happy.
When the Nazis rolled in, Peggy feared. That evening, she got a
blanket and a chair and counted herself lucky. Sleep wouldn’t come,

blanket and a chair and counted herself lucky. Sleep wouldn’t come,
no matter how exhausted she was. She would have looked to play
more bridge, but fireplace and candles didn’t give enough light. The
electricity stayed off. She sat there and listened to the advancing
gunfire.
About midnight, Czech soldiers fell back through Marianske Lazne.
One of them, dirty, weary, harried—peered into the hotel. He shook
his head and walked on. The Czechs didn’t try to fight in the town.
Peggy supposed she should have been grateful to them for not
causing more civilian casualties. She hoped it wouldn’t hurt their
defense.
Rattling, clanking German vehicles entered Marianske Lazne at
3:17, Czech cuckoo-clock time. Peggy went out to look. She almost
got shot. A peremptory wave from a tough-looking, black-uniformed
man in a tank sent her reeling back into the hotel. Under new
management, she thought, and finally started to cry.

LUC HARCOURT DIDN’T LIKE SERGEANT DEMANGE. What private
in his right mind did like his sergeant? Demange was little and
skinny and tough, with a tongue sharper than a bayonet. He looked
unwontedly serious now as he gathered his squad together. Without
preamble, he said, “The French Republic is at war with Germany.”
Along with the rest of the men, Luc stared at the sergeant. He was
just a conscript himself. All he’d ever wanted to do was serve his
time and get out. The first thing he found out when he put on the
uniform and the Adrian helmet was that nobody gave a damn about
what he wanted.
Demange paused to light a Gitane. He even smoked like a tough
guy, with the cigarette hanging down from the corner of his mouth.
“England is with us,” he said. “And the Russians have declared war
on Germany, too.”
“Oh, joy,” Paul Renouvin said. He wasn’t a bad guy, but he’d been
at a university somewhere before the draft got him, and he liked
showing off how much he knew. “That would matter a lot more if
Russia bordered Germany. Or even Czechoslovakia.”
Sergeant Demange looked as if he wanted to spit in Renouvin’s
eye. He contented himself with blowing smoke in the college kid’s
face. “Shut up, punk,” he rasped. “The point is, we’ve got allies,
dammit. So when we march into Germany, it’s not like we’re
marching in all by ourselves.”
We? Luc wondered. We as in France, or we as in this squad? He
wanted to know—it was his neck, after all. But he didn’t ask. One
way or the other, he figured he’d find out pretty damn quick.

And he did. “We move out in half an hour,” the sergeant said.
“Remember, we’re doing this for the poor goddamn Czechs.” He
sounded like a guy telling his girl they’d be doing it for love. Who
cared why? They’d be doing it.
“What happens if the Boches shoot at us?” somebody asked.
“Well, we’re supposed to be cautious,” Demange said. “But we’re
supposed to move forward, too, so we will. And we’ll shoot back, by
God.”
“My father did this in 1914,” Luc said. “Red kepi, blue tunic, red
trousers—there are photos at home. Not color photos, of course,
but you know what the colors were.” Several of the other soldiers
nodded.
So did Sergeant Demange. “They were targets, that’s what,” he
said. “I did it myself in 1918. We wore horizon-blue by then. Not as
good as khaki”—he tapped his sleeve—“but Christ, better than red.
How many times your old man get wounded?”
“Twice,” Luc answered, not without pride.
“Sounds about right. He was luckier than a lot, that’s for goddamn
sure.” Demange glanced at his watch. “Twenty minutes now. If we
aren’t marching at 0630 on the dot, I’ll be in trouble. And if I’m in
trouble, you sorry assholes are in big trouble.”
Luc wondered why 0630 was so sacred. Would the war be lost if
they started five minutes late? As far as Czechoslovakia was
concerned, they were starting three days late. The Czechs said
they were still fighting hard. The Germans claimed enormous
victories. Somebody was lying. Maybe two somebodies were.
The border bulged south below Saarbrücken. At 0630 on the dot
—Sergeant Demange and his ilk knew how to get what they wanted
—French soldiers started moving into the bulge. A few French guns
fired at the German positions ahead. A few German guns shot back.
Both sides seemed halfhearted. Lou had been through much
scarier drills.
Fields on the German side of the border looked—surprise!—just
like fields on the French side. The only way Luc could be sure he’d
crossed into Germany was by looking over at a German frontier
post, abandoned now, that lay athwart a two-lane macadam road a
few hundred meters off to the southeast.
Soldiers from another company poked through the frontier station
as if they’d just occupied Berlin. Then, without warning, something
over there went boom! Sergeant Demange hit the dirt. For a
moment, Luc thought he’d been hurt. But then he got up and
brushed wheat stubble off himself, altogether unselfconscious. “You
hear a noise like that, you better get flat,” he remarked. “I bet those
Nazi cocksuckers booby-trapped the station.”

Nazi cocksuckers booby-trapped the station.”
Something had blown out part of one wall. Now the French soldiers
over there scurried around like ants in a disturbed hill. Luc saw one
man lying in the roadway. Even from this distance, he would have
bet the poor bastard wouldn’t get up again.
“Lesson number one,” the sergeant said. “If it looks like they want
you to pick it up, they probably do. Wouldn’t be surprised if there
are mines in these fields, too.”
“Merde alors!” Luc muttered. The very ground under his feet might
betray him. He tried to walk like a ballerina, on tippytoe. It didn’t
work very well in army-issue clodhoppers with a heavy pack on his
back. Feeling foolish, he gave up after a few steps.
A belt of trees lay ahead. Did Germans lurk there? Sure as hell,
they did. A spatter of rifle fire came from the woods. After the first
bullet cracked past him, Luc needed no urging to flatten out. Prone,
he fired back. His MAS36 slammed against his shoulder. In between
rounds, he dug a scrape for himself with his entrenching tool.
Very cautiously, the French advanced. They took a few casualties,
which made them more cautious yet. The Germans didn’t make
much of a fight, though. They melted back toward their fancy
Westwall. It wasn’t supposed to be as good as the Maginot Line
—nothing was, not even the Czech forts—but everybody said it was
tough even so.
When Luc finally reached the woods, he found several countrymen
exclaiming over a dead German. The redheaded guy in field-gray
had taken one in the chest. He didn’t look especially unhappy—just
surprised. Luc wondered if he’d killed the Boche himself. Not likely,
but not impossible, either. He felt like a warrior and a murderer at
the same time.

It was six in the morning in Peking, which meant it was yesterday
afternoon back in New York City. Corporal Pete McGill and several
of the other Marines at the American Legation clustered in front of a
shortwave set, listening to the World Series. The Yankees were up

shortwave set, listening to the World Series. The Yankees were up
on the Cubs, two games to none. They were leading in game three,
too. Joe Gordon had already singled with the bases loaded and
homered, and Hoot Pearson was cruising along on the mound.
“Cubs are history,” McGill said happily—he was from the Bronx.
“Three straight Series for the Yanks, it’s gonna be. Nobody’s ever
done that before.”
None of the other leathernecks argued with him. He would have
liked to see them try! When the Cubs got done losing today (or
yesterday, or whatever the hell day it really was), they would have to
sweep four to take the championship. Nobody did that, not against
the Bronx Bombers!
A Polack named Herman Szulc—which he insisted was pronounced
Schultz—said, “I bet they won’t be as good next year.”
“Oh, yeah, wise guy? How come?” McGill had brick-red hair,
freckles, and the temper that went with them. And if you affronted
his team, you affronted him, too.
“Only stands to reason. Shit, look at Gehrig,” Szulc said. “He didn’t
even hit .300 this year. He’s getting old, wearing out.”
“Nah, he’ll be back strong. You wait and see,” McGill said. “Sheesh!
A little bit of an off year for one guy, and you want to write off the
ball-club.”
Before the argument could go any further, a Chinese servant
brought in a tray with coffee and sausages and rolls stuffed with this
and that for the Marines. None of it except the coffee was what
McGill would have eaten in the States, but it would all be tasty. Duty
at the Legation was as sweet as it got.
“Sheh-sheh, Wang,” Szulc said as the servant set the tray down on
a table. That meant thank you in Chinese. McGill had learned a few
phrases, too. They came in handy every once in a while.
Wang grinned a toothy grin. Several of his front teeth were gold. A
twenty-four-carat smile meant you were somebody here. “Eat,” he
said—he knew bits of English, the way the Marines knew bits of
Chinese. He waved at the tray. “Hao.” That meant it was good.
And it was. “Wonder what’s in the sausages,” somebody said with
his mouth full.
“Your mother,” somebody else came back, which almost made Pete
squirt coffee out his nose.
“The Missing Link,” Szulc suggested. That wasn’t even so farfetched. They’d found prehistoric human bones in these parts that
were God only knew how old.

It also wasn’t so far-fetched for another reason. Chinamen would
cook and eat damn near everything. You could get snake. It was
supposed to be good for your one-eyed snake. You could get dog,
which was also supposed to make John Henry perk up. You could
get fried grasshoppers. McGill had eaten one once, on a bet. It
wasn’t even bad, and he picked up five bucks crunching it.
Out went the Cubs again. A singing commercial came on. Szulc
fiddled with the radio dial. “What the hell you doing?” McGill asked.
“Seeing if I can find some news between innings,” Szulc answered.
“Check what’s up with the war.”
“Oh. Okay,” McGill said. The war was as important as the Series.
Back in the States, people wouldn’t have believed it. McGill was
sure of that. But back in the States, people weren’t right around the
corner from the Japanese Legation and its garrison of tough
bastards—not as tough as Marines, McGill was sure, but tough.
Back in the States, people were doing their best to forget the Japs
had bombed the crap out of the Panay the December before, even
though she was flying the American flag.
Japan apologized, didn’t she? She paid an indemnity, didn’t she?
That made everything all right, didn’t it? Maybe so—back in the
States. Not in Peking. Not even close.
Back in the States, people forgot the Japs had a zillion more
soldiers sitting in Manchuria. Manchukuo, they called the puppet
state there these days. If they decided they wanted a war with the
USA, how long would this garrison last? Hell, back in the States,
most people didn’t know it existed.
If the balloon goes up with the Japs, it’s my ass, McGill thought.
Szulc got a couple of bursts of static. Then he found the BBC. The
announcer had a much posher accent than most of the Royal
Marines at the British Legation. They called themselves
leathernecks, too, and they made damn fine drinking buddies even
if they did talk funny.
“—vakia continues to offer stout resistance to Hitler’s aggression,”
the announcer said. “Russian volunteers and aircraft have begun
appearing in Ruthenia and Slovakia. Both Poland and Romania
deny consenting to their crossing.”
“Fuck, I would, too,” Szulc said. “Picking between Hitler and Stalin’s
gotta be worse’n the devil and the deep blue sea.”
“Shut up already, if you want to listen to the news,” somebody told
him.
That supercivilized-sounding BBC announcer was continuing: “
—another day of fierce air raids against Prague. Civilian casualties
are said to be very heavy. The Czechoslovak government has

condemned what it calls ‘the barbarous German onslaught against
defenseless non-combatants.’”
“Nice war,” McGill muttered. Blasting the crap out of anything that
got in your way wasn’t anything the Marines hadn’t heard about and
seen before. The Japs did it all the time here, now that their war
against China had heated up. But you expected better from
Europeans, somehow. Then again, the difference between what you
expected and what you got made a pretty good measure of how
fucked up the world was.
“Czechoslovakia insists that reports of unrest in Slovakia are greatly
exaggerated. Uprisings by the so-called Hlinka Guard”—the
announcer read the name with fastidious distaste—“are being
suppressed in Bratislava, Radio Prague declares, and elsewhere in
that area.”
“C’mon—put the ballgame back on,” said a big, burly PFC named
Puccinelli and inevitably called Pooch.
“In a second,” Szulc said. “He’ll get to the rest of the shit, and then
we’ll go back.” Pooch muttered to himself, but didn’t reach for the
tuning dial himself.
“France continues its advance into Germany. German resistance is
termed light,” the BBC newsman said. “France has occupied the
Warndt Forest, and seized the towns of Lauterwald and Bübingen.”
“Wherever the hell those are,” McGill put in. He’d never heard of
either one of them before. That probably meant you could piss
across them.
The limey’s voice grew stern. “For the second night in a row, air
pirates from Spain bombed Hendaye and Biarritz in southwestern
France. It is not yet known whether the bombers were flown by
native Spanish Fascists of the Sanjurjo junta or by Nazis of the
Condor Legion mercenary group. In any case, French aid to the
rival Spanish Republican government, including men, munitions,
aircraft, and tanks, continues to flood across the Pyrenees.”
“Yeah, it floods now, after the frogs and the limeys spent years
keeping it out.” Max Weinstein was a rare duck: a pink, almost Red,
Marine. He wasn’t real big, but he was tough. With politics like his,
he had to be. He got into more than his share of brawls, and won
more than his share, too.
“Prime Minister Chamberlain was in Manchester today, reassuring
anxious citizens that, despite the long, difficult road ahead, victory
will inevitably—”
Herman Szulc turned back to the World Series. The Cubs had one
out in the seventh. They were going down the drain, all right, the
same way the Giants had in ‘36 or ‘37.

“Wonder whether the Japs are listening to the Series or the BBC,”
McGill said. It wasn’t obvious. Japan was crazy for baseball. On the
Fourth of July in ‘37—three days before the fighting between Japan
and China broke out for real—a Marine team had played a
doubleheader against a squad from the Japanese garrison. They’d
split two games rougher than any John McGraw’s Orioles played
back in the ‘90s.
“Wonder whether Japan will go after Russia like she means it if the
Russians start going at it hot and heavy with Hitler,” Szulc said.
“That would be just like the damn Japs,” Max said, and for once
nobody wanted to argue with him. Japan and Russia had been
banging heads for a couple of years now, up on the border between
Manchukuo and Mongolia. Most of the official bulletins talked about
Manchukuan and Mongolian soldiers, but anybody who knew
anything knew better. The puppets wouldn’t dance that way without
their masters pulling the strings.
“Hey, I hope the Japs do go north,” Pete said. Weinstein gave him a
furious look. Before the champion of the Soviet workers and
peasants could start screaming, McGill went on, “If they don’t, they’ll
hit the USA, and everybody here is fucking dead meat if they do.”
Max opened his mouth. A moment later, he closed it again. Nobody
could say Pete was wrong there. Japan occupied northern China
these days. She occupied all of Peking except the Legation Quarter.
If she went to war with the United States, the few hundred Marines in
the garrison wouldn’t last long.
Japanese soldiers were little and scrawny. Their equipment was
nothing to write home about. But they were rugged sons of bitches,
and there were swarms of them. Oh, America would eventually kick
the snot out of them. Eventually, though, was way too late to do
anybody here any good.

SERGEANT HIDEKI FUJITA HATED MANCHUKUO. He hated
Mongolia even more. And getting sent to the border between the
Japanese puppet state and the one the Russians propped up
combined the worst of both worlds.
Japan claimed the border between Manchukuo and Mongolia lay
along the Halha River. The Mongolians and Russians insisted it
belonged a good many kilometers farther east. Japan and Russia
had banged heads along Manchukuo’s borders before: here, and
along the Amur River, and near Korea, where Russian territory
dipped down as far as Vladivostok.
The Mongolians had found a new game to get on their neighbors’
nerves. They would light grass fires near the frontier—wherever the
hell it was—and let the prevailing westerlies sweep the flames into
Manchukuan territory. Naturally, that made the locals come running

Manchukuan territory. Naturally, that made the locals come running
to the Japanese, screaming that they should do something. When
you set up a puppet, you had to hold him upright or else he wasn’t
worth anything.
Not that Fujita thought the Manchukuans were worth anything. But
their country—to give it the benefit of the doubt—had more timber
than anybody knew what to do with. It raised lots of rice and wheat
and millet, too. And it drew ever more Japanese colonists, people
who wanted more land and a better chance than they’d ever get in
the overcrowded home islands. Whether the Manchukuans did or
not, real Japanese people needed protecting.
Trouble was, even if the border lay on the Halha, the way Japan
said it did, the Mongolians and Russians still had the better of it.
The land west of the Halha, on the Mongolian side, stood fifty or
sixty meters higher than it did over here. High ground counted,
same as always.
Only a couple of days earlier, on October 4, the Mongolians had
fired from the high ground at two dozen Japanese surveyors riding
through what was plainly Japanese territory…if you accepted the
Japanese view of the frontier, anyhow. Sergeant Fujita did, of
course.
One of the other men in his little detachment, a corporal named
Masanori Kawakami, asked, “Excuse me, Sergeant-san, but would
the Mongolians harass us if the Russians didn’t want them to?”
“Not bloody likely,” Fujita said with a snort. He was short and squat
and tough—the kind of noncom whose men hated and feared him
but couldn’t help respecting him, too. “The Mongols can’t wipe their
raggedy asses unless some Russian commissar says they can.”
“Hai.” Kawakami nodded. He was younger than Fujita, a conscript
rather than a career soldier. “That’s what I thought.”
“Funny they would do it with the war in Europe heating up,” Superior
Private Shinjiro Hayashi said.
“What’s that got to do with anything?” Fujita rumbled ominously. He
wanted to boot Hayashi around, but sometimes even a sergeant in
the Imperial Japanese Army had to be careful. Yes, Hayashi was a
conscript, with no rights or privileges to speak of. Yes, he was
clumsy and four-eyed, and so deserved thumping more than most
of the other soldiers.
But he was also a university student. He talked like a damn
professor. A guy like that was bound to have connections. If he
complained, Sergeant Fujita was too likely never to see anything
but the dusty Mongolian frontier for the rest of his days.
Hayashi smiled now. He liked explaining things. “If the Russians
really are fighting in Czechoslovakia”—a name that sounded very

really are fighting in Czechoslovakia”—a name that sounded very
strange in Japanese—“why would they also want to fight us? A man
with two enemies at the same time has trouble.”
“Maybe,” Fujita said with a grudging nod. “You can see that—but
you’re almost as smart as you think you are.” He wouldn’t give any
praise without putting a sting in its tail. “Are the dumb foreigners
clever enough to see it, too?”
“I think so, Sergeant-san.” Hayashi knew better than to piss Fujita
off on purpose. “Lots of countries know the rules of diplomacy and
war.”
Corporal Kawakami pointed west. “I think I just saw something move,
Sergeant.…There, about one o’clock.”
“I’ll check it out.” Fujita wore binoculars on a leather strap around
his neck. Japanese optics were some of the best in the world. He’d
looked through captured Russian field glasses, and they were crap.
Pure junk. He’d also seen fancy German binoculars—from Zeiss, no
less. Those were okay, but not a sen’s worth better than his own
pair.
He scanned the plain on this side of the Halha. Yellow dirt,
yellowish-green grass, the occasional bush—that was about it. The
steppe rolled on for countless kilometers. Then he spotted the
horseman.
A Mongolian, he thought at once. He had trouble knowing how he
was so sure. Manchukuan cavalrymen rode the same kind of
shaggy little steppe ponies. They carried carbines slung on their
backs, too, and wore the same mix of uniforms and native garb.
Then Fujita realized why he knew. The horseman kept glancing
back over his shoulder, toward the east. If he expected trouble, it
was from this direction, yet he was the only man in sight.
“Let’s reel him in,” Fujita said. “Hayashi! Fire two shots in the air.”
“Two shots. Yes, Sergeant-san.” Superior Private Hayashi obeyed
without question. Bang! Bang! The reports rolled across the steppe.
Fujita kept the field glasses on the rider. When the fellow heard the
gunshots, he jerked in the saddle, looked around wildly in all
directions, and started to grab for his weapon. Then he checked
himself. “Two more shots, Hayashi,” the sergeant said. “And we’ll
show ourselves. If he comes in, fine. I think he will. But if he doesn’t,
we just have to deal with him.”
Bang! Bang! The sergeant and the men from his squad stood up.
He waved. He hoped the shots wouldn’t draw artillery fire from the
other side of the river. If the horseman was what Fujita thought he
was, the bastards over there might want to see him dead even if he
was on this side of the line…not that they admitted the Halha was
the line, anyway.

the line, anyway.
The Mongolian looked back toward the other side of the river again,
too. He wore a fur cap with earflaps up right now—the day was mild.
After reaching under it to scratch his head, he rode slowly toward
the Japanese soldiers.
As he got closer, he waved his hand to show he was friendly. Then
he must have decided that wasn’t enough, because he threw down
the carbine. He shouted something in his own language. It sounded
like dogs barking to Fujita.
“I don’t know what the devil you’re talking about,” the Japanese
sergeant yelled back. “Come ahead anyhow, though.” He gestured
emphatically.
When the Mongolian called again, it was in a different tongue.
“That’s Chinese, Sergeant,” Hayashi said.
“You understand it?” Fujita asked. Maybe the four-eyed guy was
good for something after all.
And Hayashi nodded. “I studied it in school.”
“All right. Talk to him. Find out what’s what.”
Whatever Hayashi said was only singsong gibberish to Fujita. But
the Mongolian understood it. He answered eagerly. He and Hayashi
had to go back and forth and round and round—neither was exactly
fluent. After a bit, the senior private turned back to Fujita. “About
what we would have guessed, Sergeant. He thought they were
going to purge him, and he figured he’d better bug out while he was
still breathing.”
Fujita grunted. “The Mongolians are crazy, and they caught it from
the Russians.” Russia had been purging its officer corps for a
couple of years now. People just disappeared. Captains, colonels,
generals…It didn’t matter. And, since Marshal Choibalsan’s
Mongolia imitated Stalin’s Russia in all things, Mongol officers
started disappearing off the face of the earth, too. More and more
of the ones who feared they might be next fled to Manchukuo
instead—which made Choibalsan look for still more new traitors.
This fellow said something else in his hesitant Chinese. Fujita
looked a question to Hayashi. “He says—I think he says—he can tell
us a lot about their dispositions on the far side of the Halha.”
Hearing that improved Fujita’s disposition. “Can he? Well, he’ll get
his chance. We’ll take him in, and he’d better sing like a cricket in a
cage. Tell him so, Hayashi.”
“I don’t know if I can say that in Chinese, Sergeant-san.”
“Shit. Tell him we’ll cut his balls off if he doesn’t talk. That ought to

do it.”
Hayashi spoke slowly. The Mongolian officer’s face didn’t show
much. He was darker than most Japanese, maybe because he was
born that way, maybe just because he was weathered, which he
certainly was. Left in the oven too long, Fujita thought scornfully.
The Mongolian did gnaw on his lower lip for a moment before
answering. “He says he’ll tell us whatever we want to know,” Hayashi
reported. “He says he knew all along he’d have to do that.”
“All right. Good. You and Kawakami take him back to our officers.”
Fujita held up a hand. “Wait! Ask him one thing first. Ask him if the
Russians and Mongols aim to jump us any time soon.”
Hayashi put the question. The deserter shook his head. He said
something. Hayashi translated: “No, Sergeant. He says they’re just
hoping we leave them alone. The Russians are almost pissing
themselves about what’s going on in Europe, he says.”
“Ichi-ban!” Fujita said enthusiastically. “That’s good intelligence. If
they’re afraid we’ll jump on them, maybe now’s the time to do it,
neh?”
Senior Private Hayashi shrugged. He wasn’t about to argue with a
superior. He and Corporal Kawakami just took the Mongolian back
toward battalion headquarters.

ARMORERS WHEELED BOMBS TOWARD LIEUTENANT Sergei
Yaroslavsky’s Tupolev SB-2. The medium bomber would hold half a
dozen 100kg bombs or one big, hefty 500kg firework. The big
bombs were in short supply, though. Yaroslavsky was glad the
armorers had enough of the smaller ones to fill up the bomb bay.
He was a stolid, broad-faced blond, getting close to thirty. He’d had
a tour against the Fascists in Spain. Now he was doing it again,
flying out of a field near Poprad in eastern Slovakia. Officially, he
was a volunteer, aiding the people of democratic Czechoslovakia
against the Nazi invasion. And, in a way, he supposed he had
volunteered. They would have shot him if he’d said no. They were
shooting lots of officers these days. They were jumpy as cats in a
rocking-chair factory. They’d shoot you without any excuse if they
felt like it. If you gave them one, you were dead for sure.
Of course, the Germans were liable to shoot him, too. Things were
simpler and safer in Spain. Back in early 1937, the SB-2 could
outrun anything the Spanish Nationalists, the Condor Legion, or the
Italians put in the air.
It wasn’t like that here. The Messerschmitt 109 was a very nasty
piece of work. It was faster than both Russian flat-nosed
Polikarpovs and biplane Czech Avias. It was a hell of a lot faster
than an SB-2. The best recipe for not getting shot down was not

than an SB-2. The best recipe for not getting shot down was not
getting seen.
The armorers were Czechs. When they talked with one another,
Sergei could almost understand them. He really could follow
Ruthenian, which was just Ukrainian with another name. Slovak? He
didn’t know about Slovak. Sentries around the airstrip kept Slovaks
away. The squadron was flying out of Slovakia, but the place wasn’t
exactly loyal to the country of which it was supposed to be a part.
Clanging noises said the bombardier was closing the bomb bay.
“We ready, Ivan?” Yaroslavsky called.
“Da, Comrade Lieutenant,” Ivan Kuchkov replied. He was dark and
stocky and muscular and hairy. People sometimes called him
“Chimp.” Not very often, though, not after he broke a man’s jaw for
doing it. He had the right slot—a bombardier needed muscle.
“Start them up, Anastas,” Sergei told the copilot.
Anastas Mouradian nodded. “I will do it.” His throaty Armenian
accent grated on Yaroslavsky’s ears. Damned swarthy bastards
from the Caucasus…But you couldn’t say that, not when Comrade
Stalin was a Georgian. Better not even to think it.
At least the Georgians and Armenians were Christians, not Muslims
like the Azerbaijanis and Chechens. In the officially atheist USSR,
you weren’t supposed to think things like that, either. But, while
Sergei might be a New Soviet Man, he was also and always a
Russian.
The two M-100A radial engines thundered to life. The props blurred
into invisibility. Yaroslavsky checked the instruments, one after
another. Everything looked good. The mechanics were Czechs, too.
They were better than any Russian mechanics he’d ever had. They
seemed to care more about the work they did.
Five more bombers were also warming up on the airstrip. They were
going to give the Nazis one right in the eye. Sergei hoped so,
anyhow. More than a week into the war, and the Germans still hadn’t
cut Czechoslovakia in half. Lots of the Czech army was pulling back
into Slovakia to keep up the fight here—and to sit on the proFascist Slovaks.
Down the runway bounced the SB-2. It was made for taking off from
grassy fields. Paved runways were as rare as capitalists inside the
Soviet Union.
Sergei pulled back on the stick. The bomber’s nose came up. No
more bouncing—he was airborne. He’d shake again soon enough,
when they started shooting at him. Best to enjoy the calm while he
could.
If running didn’t help, he could shoot back. Mouradian was in

charge of two machine guns in the SB-2’s nose. Kuchkov had a
machine-gun blister on the back of the airplane and another in its
belly. Those looked like a good idea. Bombardiers were rapidly
discovering, though, that you had to be lucky to hit anything with
either gun. If you weren’t lucky, you might use the dorsal gun to
shoot off your own tail. At least one intrepid bombardier had already
done that.
If he’d lived, they would have court-martialed him and then shot him.
As things were, he saved them the trouble.
“All good,” Mouradian shouted, pointing to the instruments. He
wasn’t in the front glasshouse yet. With 840 horsepower roaring
away to either side, you had to yell to make yourself heard.
“I see ‘em.” Sergei nodded. “Let’s hope they stay that way.” The SB2 was a robust warplane. It could take a beating. Sergei didn’t want
it to this time around.
On he flew with his buddies. Down below, bursting shells and bombs
told when they entered the combat zone. The Czechs were still
pulling back through the gap between the Nazi armies advancing
from the north and south. If the Czechs got enough men and
matériel into eastern Moravia and Slovakia before the Germans
finally sealed that gap, they could keep fighting a while longer.
When Sergei said as much to Anastas Mouradian, the copilot—who
also served as gunner and bomb-aimer and navigator—nodded.
“Da,” he said, for all the world as if he were a real Russian. Then he
added, “If they don’t, they’re fucked.” Any Russian might have said
that, too. He sure wouldn’t have been wrong if he did.
Antiaircraft fire started bursting around the bombers. Yaroslavsky
jinked, going up and down to the left and right at random and
slowing down and speeding up to keep the German gunners from
being able to lead him like a duck. When a shell filled the air with
nasty black smoke close by, it was as if he drove over a big pothole.
His teeth came together with a click.
Mouradian growled something in what had to be Armenian. Then he
came back to words Sergei could understand: “Too damn close.”
“No kidding,” the pilot said. Just then, another shell went off even
closer to the SB-2. A fragment clanged off—or, more likely, bit
through—the fuselage. Yaroslavsky checked the controls to the
rudder and elevator. They answered—no cables cut. He yelled into
the speaking tube to the bombardier: “You all right, Ivan?”
“Khorosho,” Kuchkov answered. “A little draftier, but no damage.”
“Get ready,” Sergei told him. “We’re almost there.”
They were almost there if Mouradian’s navigating was worth a
kopek, anyway. He’d got them where they were supposed to go

before. The target this time was just outside of Brno, the biggest
factory town in Moravia. The Czechs were still holding out there, still
holding up the Nazis. If 600 kilos of high explosive could help them
hang on a little longer, Sergei would deliver the goods.
That thick cloud of smoke ahead had to be Brno. Who needs
navigation? Sergei thought wryly. The Germans were bombing the
crap out of Czechoslovakian civilians. Thousands and thousands
were supposed to be dead in Prague. Brno was catching it, too.
“So where’s our target from here?” Yaroslavsky asked.
“Southwest, Comrade Pilot,” Mouradian answered from the nose
—he was ready to fight now.
That made sense: it was the direction from which the Nazis were
advancing. Sergei didn’t want his bombs coming down on the
Czechs’ heads. He spotted something ahead that looked like a
division HQ. “Aim for those tents,” he ordered. “I’ll bring us in low
and straight.”
“We’ll get ‘em,” Ivan Kuchkov said. And maybe they would, and
maybe they wouldn’t. But they’d scare the crap out of the Nazis if
they didn’t.
The bomb bay opened. The extra drag slowed the SB-2 and made it
sluggish in the air. At Mouradian’s shouted command, the bombs
tumbled free, one after another. The plane would be livelier with
them gone: they made up about a tenth of the weight it was
carrying.
And the Tupolev bomber would need to be livelier, too. German
fighters jumped the Russians just as they were finishing their
bombing runs. These Messerschmitts were terrifying. They could
have been more maneuverable, but they were well armed and fast
as the Devil’s godson. And diving down on the SB-2s made them
faster yet.
One of the bombers fell out of the sky. By the way it dove, the pilot
was dead at the controls. Fire filled the left wing. Another SB-2 fled
east with smoke trailing from one engine. Maybe it could get down
safely in Czech-held territory. Maybe the Germans would hack it
down first.
Sergei couldn’t worry much about the other SB-2s. He had to worry
about his own. The Chimp started blazing away from the dorsal
turret. Tracers snarled past the bomber from behind.
But Ivan made the 109 pull up. From the nose, Mouradian squeezed
off a long burst at the lean, predatory shape. The enemy fighter
didn’t catch fire or go down. But it didn’t try another attack, either.
With all the throttle he could use, Sergei got out of there. Then he
had another bad moment, when two Czech Avias buzzed up in what

might have been another attack. At the last second, they saw he
was no Nazi and swung away. One of the pilots waved from his
cockpit. Yaroslavsky returned the compliment.
Then he had to find the airstrip again. Mouradian came back to help
him. Between them, they figured out where the hell Poprad was.
They got down smoothly enough. One other plane from the flight
came in a few minutes later. Sergei could hope some of the rest had
landed elsewhere. The one that had plummeted to the ground…He
shuddered. Better not to think of such things.
He had to, though, because he needed to report to his superiors.
“One of our planes damaged, one definitely lost,” he said.
They nodded. All part of the game, as far as they were concerned.
“We’ll keep banging away,” one of them said. Till you’re expended,
too, Sergei thought, and made himself nod.

VACLAV JEZEK DUG LIKE A MOLE. What was left of his company
was trying to hold the Germans out of Kopecek, a little town six or
eight kilometers northeast of Olomouc. In and of itself, Kopecek
hardly mattered. But Olomouc did. Olomouc was the last surviving
northern rampart against the Nazi flood. The Czech army was
pulling back to the east between Olomouc and Brno. If Hitler’s
bastards closed off that passageway…
Then we’re fucked, Jezek though, making the dirt fly with his
entrenching tool. Czechoslovakia was probably fucked anyway. No,
scratch probably. Czechoslovakia was fucked anyway. But the
stubborn Czechs were making Germany pay a hell of a high price.
Artillery came down in and around Kopecek. The Nazis were
shelling the pilgrimage church. It stood on a hill a couple of hundred
meters above the plain, and made an observation post dangerous
to them. Vaclav would have been surprised if his side didn’t have
some guns of its own around the church.
“Hey, Corporal! Got a smoke?” Otakar Prsemysl asked.
“Everybody bums cigarettes off me,” Jezek grumbled, but he gave
the private one. Back just before the shooting started, Jan Dzurinda
had scrounged a butt from him. Vaclav didn’t know where Dzurinda
was now. Maybe he’d got killed when the Germans dropped
everything and the kitchen sink on the Czech lines by the border. Or
maybe he’d just bugged out. A hell of a lot of Slovaks had. The
miserable rubes didn’t think this was their fight—or else they
thought they were on the wrong side when they wore Czech brown.
“Tanks!” somebody shouted. Everyone who heard that yell grew
fearfully alert. Without tanks, the Nazis would still be banging their
heads against the Czech lines. But they had them, and they had

more of them than Czechoslovakia did. Breakthrough machines,
that’s what tanks were.
A machine gun chattered. That was wasted ammo. Machine-gun
bullets wouldn’t pierce a panzer’s steel hide. Tanks could kill you,
and you couldn’t kill the sons of bitches inside them. Was that fair?
Then Vaclav heard the bigger boom of an antitank rifle. Those fired
heavy, large-caliber, armor-piercing bullets out of a long barrel that
gave high muzzle velocity. They could get through…sometimes,
anyhow. The rifles weigh a tonne and kicked like a jackass, but so
what? They worked…again, sometimes.
One of the panzers up ahead stopped. Smoke poured from the
engine compartment. The two-man crew bailed out. Vaclav didn’t
think either Nazi in black coveralls made it to shelter. Too bad, he
thought. Yeah. Toooo bad.
Avias and Messerschmitts dueled overhead. The German fighters
were faster, but the Czech biplanes seemed more nimble. People
cheered like maniacs when a 109 spun out of control and went
down. It was like watching a football match, except you counted lives
instead of goals. Score one for our side!
Trouble was, not many Avias were left. The Nazis kept pounding the
airfields from which they flew. The Messerschmitts came out of
Germany, of course. A few Czech air raids on German soil had
made Hitler and Goebbels scream and squeal, but the Luftwaffe
had a big edge there.
“Wish the French would push harder, take some pressure off us,”
Private Prsemysl said.
“Yeah, me, too,” Jezek agreed. “Wish for the moon while you’re at
it.” He supposed the Czechs had to count themselves lucky France
had moved at all. Great. Some luck.
No sooner had that gloomy thought gone through his mind than
cries of alarm came from the west. “They’re through! They’re
through!” somebody howled, which sounded bad. Then someone
else shouted, “They’re into Olomouc! Get away while you can!”
Otakar Prsemysl crossed himself. That looked like a good idea to
Vaclav, so he did the same thing. It couldn’t hurt, anyhow.
“South and east! South and east!” That was an officer’s
authoritative shout. “We pull back farther into Moravia and keep
fighting. They haven’t whipped us yet, by God!”
No, but how much longer will it be? And what good will keeping up
the fight do except get more of us killed? Still, Corporal Jezek had
no better ideas. The only other choices were surrendering, which
he couldn’t stomach, and dying in place, which also struck him as
unattractive.

He got out of his foxhole and stumbled through the streets of
Kopecek. To his surprise, trucks—mostly commandeered civilian
jobs—waited on the southern edge of town. He piled into one of
them. A moment later, he saw Otakar and pulled him into it, too. A
moment after that, the truck rattled away.
“Where are we going?” Prsemysl asked.
“Beats me,” Vaclav answered. “But did you want to stay where we
were?” The other man shook his head. This couldn’t be worse
…Unless we get bombed, of course. One more thought Jezek could
have done without.

Another gray day in Münster. People in the Westphalian town said it
was either raining or the church bells were ringing. Sarah Goldman
could hear the bells, but it was raining anyhow. That didn’t seem
fair.
Of course, for Sarah the past five years had seemed gray and
gloomy and weepy even when the sun did come out. Since she was
only seventeen, that seemed like forever. She hadn’t understood
why the Nazis decided they had to clamp down on Jews—she and
her family weren’t hurting anybody. She still didn’t understand, not
really. But the time since Hitler took over had been plenty to teach
her that people could act like vicious idiots without having any good
reason for it.
Her mother had the radio on. She was listening to a German station.
Listening to foreign broadcasts was illegal for everybody. But
ordinary Germans who did something like that might escape with a
warning if they got caught—the first time, anyway. Any infraction at
all would send Jews straight to Dachau or Buchenwald.

“German storm troops fight today on the outskirts of Prague!” the
announcer shouted. He had a hoarse, braying voice and a strong
Berlin accent. Sarah thought he sounded like a Prussian jackass,
which he probably was. “Czech air pirates dropped bombs on a
school in Dresden, murdering seventeen innocent children at play!”
“Why were children playing during an air raid?” Hanna Goldman
asked. The same question had formed in Sarah’s mind. She
wondered how many people thought that way. Not very many,
evidently, or the announcer couldn’t have got away with spewing
such nonsense.
“Farther east, our victorious soldiers advancing from north and
south have met in Moravia, sealing the fate of the Czech army and
of what was the vicious bandit state of Czechoslovakia!” he
trumpeted. “Now we can help the Slovaks achieve their national
aspirations and whip the Bolshevik dogs back to their Russian
kennel.”
“Do you hear that, Sarah?” her mother called from the kitchen. She
was trying to make meager, bland rations into something worth
eating for supper. Most of the time, she did it, too.
“Ja, I hear it,” Sarah answered.
“Such rubbish,” her mother said. “Listening to that crap makes me
embarrassed to be a German.”
“I know what you mean.” And Sarah did, too. In spite of everything,
she still felt like a German. Why shouldn’t she? Her father had
fought in the World War (the First World War, she supposed you
would have to call it now) like every other German man his age.
He’d won an Iron Cross, too. And he had an amazing scar on his
arm where a French bullet had gouged a furrow in his flesh.

Her older brother was such a good football player, the Aryans didn’t
want him taken off their team. They cared more about winning than
about whether Saul was circumcised. That made nothing but sense
to Sarah, but it had scandalized a lot of people in Münster. Tough
men in black uniforms had paid some unofficial visits. Saul didn’t
play for the Foresters any more.
But he still thought he was a German, too, in spite of everything. He
and Samuel Goldman were doing their best to prove it today. Sarah
didn’t know whether to hope they would fail or succeed.
The braying announcer didn’t say anything about the fighting on the
Western Front. He hardly ever did. The Czechs were giving the war
everything they had in them. The French and the English didn’t
seem to have their hearts in it.
After an almost tearful appeal to buy war bonds, the newsman
finally went away. The radio started playing music again. That was a
relief. Music was—mostly—harmless. But you never heard jazz any
more. The government said it was degenerate, like modern art. If
the government didn’t like it, Sarah thought she should.
She was working on an essay on Goethe—Münster’s Jewish school
naturally taught the German poets—when the front door opened.
She put down her pen and dashed downstairs.
One glance at her father’s face, and her brother’s, told her
everything she needed to know. “They wouldn’t take you?” she
blurted.
“Bastards!” Saul seemed ready to kick something that wasn’t a
football.
He towered over Father, who looked more sad than angry. “I had my
discharge papers. I had my medal. I had my wound certificate. I had

a letter from Max Lambert, who was my captain during the war. I had
everything,” he said. “And we went into Wehrkreis headquarters,
and they wouldn’t let us joint the Wehrmacht.”
“Bastards!” Saul said again.
Wehrkreis—Military District VI—was centered on Münster. It drew in
recruits from all over Westphalia and from western Hanover. But it
didn’t want a couple of Jews, even if one was a veteran and the
other a fine physical specimen.
Sarah’s mother came out of the kitchen. “What did they tell you?”
she asked.
“They told us no, that’s what. There’s a law, it seems, from 1935,
that says Jews can’t join up,” Samuel Goldman answered. One
corner of his mouth curled up in a wry smile. “Even so, I don’t think
they expected to see us sticking our heads into the lion’s mouth.”
“We didn’t,” Saul said. “If we’d tried to join the SS, now…”
In spite of five years of ever harder times, in spite of a day of
crushing disappointment, Father started to laugh. When he did, the
rest of the Goldmans did, too. He lit a cigarette. German tobacco
smelled nastier than it had a couple of years before. Sarah didn’t
smoke, but Father said it tasted worse, too. Fewer imports…
Father blew out a gray cloud. “In fact, I’m sure they didn’t expect
anyone like us,” he said.
“Why are you so sure?” Mother asked, as she was supposed to.
“Why? I’ll tell you why.” Samuel Goldman’s mouth quirked again, but
this time it was more grimace than smile. “Because the Feldwebel
we talked to wasn’t even mean to us. He just said it was impossible,

and he kept on saying it, and he finally went and got a captain who
said the same thing. The captain was polite, too—turns out he
knows Max. If they had orders about how to deal with Jews trying to
volunteer, they would have screamed at us and called us filthy
Jewish pigdogs and maybe said we’d just volunteered to clean
toilets—”
“With our tongues,” Saul broke in.
“That’s disgusting!” Sarah exclaimed.
“That’s why they do it,” her brother said, and then, “Bastards!”
again.
“Anyhow, they looked at my papers. I showed them my scar,”
Samuel Goldman said. “I showed them the letter. I showed them the
Iron Cross, but it was only Second Class, not First.” He shrugged. “I
was a corporal. Almost impossible for an enlisted man to get an Iron
Cross, First Class, in the last war.”
“The Führer did,” Sarah said. He was proud of it, too. He wore it on
his left breast pocket all the time.
Father sighed. “I know. But he was one of a handful. The Feldwebel
told me to be sure to hang on to the papers. ‘You can’t wear the
uniform again,’ he said, ‘but that stuff may save your bacon
anyway.’ Then he laughed like a loon, because he thought saving a
Jew’s bacon was funny.”
“What do you think he meant?” Sarah asked.
“Well, things aren’t as bad for us because I’m a veteran,” Father
answered. “Even the Nazis respect that some. Not enough, but
some.”

“I can’t say I’m really sorry they did turn you down,” Mother said.
“Now I won’t have to worry about the two of you off at the ends of
the earth with nasty people shooting at you.”
Father only sighed. “Plenty of things closer to home to worry about.
Where are we going to find money? What will they do to us? We
should have got out before the war started. Too late now. One of
the things I thought was—” He broke off.
“What?” Sarah asked it before Mother could. Or, more likely, Mother
already knew.
Samuel Goldman looked at her. “If your brother and I—or even one
of us—got into the Wehrmacht, nobody could say we weren’t proper
Germans. Nobody would do anything to the family because we
weren’t proper Germans, either.” He gave Mother an ironic nod.
“We might have been safer at the front than here in Münster, you
know.”
Mother’s mouth twisted. “Don’t talk about such things.”
“Why not? It’s not as if talking about them makes them come true.”
But then Father was the one who looked as if he’d bitten down on a
lemon. Hitler had spent years talking about all the things he wanted
to do to Jews. He talked about them, and talked about them, and
talked about them—and the more he talked, the more of them did
come true.
That was why Father didn’t teach Roman history at the university
any more. Jews were forbidden from holding academic positions.
Father still made some money writing articles for the monumental
Pauly-Wissowa Real-Encyclopädie der klassischen
Altertumswissenschaft: basically, a multivolume encyclopedia of
everything that was known about ancient Greece and Rome, up to
the sixth century A.D. Samuel Goldman wasn’t the only displaced

the sixth century A.D. Samuel Goldman wasn’t the only displaced
Jewish professor putting cash in his pocket and bread on his table
that way. If you had an Aryan academic friend who would steer
things your way—who would, sometimes, put his name on what
you’d written…You wouldn’t get rich, but you might get by.
Editors paid by the page, too. Jewish scholars had written some
monumental articles because of that. Scholars of the next
generation would have a hard time finding anything more to say
about quite a few topics.
If, of course, the next generation cared a pfennig’s worth about
classical antiquity. Maybe all the Aryan scholars would study Goths
and Vandals and Vikings instead of Greeks and Romans. But even
then, Sarah knew, Pauly-Wissowa would help.
If anything helped, anyway…

FROM CALAIS, ALISTAIR WALSH COULD look across the Channel
and see the white cliffs of Dover smudging the northeastern
horizon. He’d been in France before, in 1918. He’d been a private
then, an unhappy conscript. But he’d discovered he liked soldiering,
even if getting shot in the leg meant he spent Armistice Day flat on
his back in a military hospital.
So here he was again, this time with the three stripes and crown of
a staff sergeant on his sleeve. He’d come as far as he was likely to.
They wouldn’t make him an officer even if the sky fell. He’d got what
little education he owned in the army, and he had a buzzing Welsh
accent.
Still, staff sergeant wasn’t bad. It beat the hell out of a lifetime in a
factory or a coal mine, which he would have had if he hadn’t stayed

a soldier. He could break in new men. And he could talk back to
lieutenants, a lot of whom weren’t much more than half his age.
He also had the pleasure of the company of his own kind. The
British army would have come to pieces without its senior sergeants,
and was smart enough to know it. Lying right across the Channel
from Blighty, Calais had a better notion of what made a proper pub
than most foreign places. In fact, the fellow who ran the Green Duck
was an Englishman. He’d got wounded during the war, too, and
ended up marrying his pretty French nurse and staying behind
here.
Since the British Expeditionary Force crossed, the Green Duck had
become the unofficial headquarters for people like Alistair: men
who’d been through the mill, who wanted a place where they could
get a pint or three and sit around and drink them and have a smoke
without getting bothered by officers or yapping soldiers. If they
thought they knew more about what was going on than the General
Staff did…well, sergeants have had such thoughts since the days of
Caesar, if not since those of Hammurabi.
Walsh lit a Brutus and blew smoke up toward the dim ceiling. He
turned to the man sitting next to him. “I tell you, Joe, it’s not like it
was in the last go-round.”
“Too bloody right it’s not.” Joe Collins’ clotted speech said he came
from London’s East End. He was a wiry little fellow, tough as a ratcatching terrier and about as sentimental. He held out a hand.
“Gimme one o’ them.”
“Here you go.” Walsh handed him the packet, then leaned close to
let him have a light. “It’s not, I tell you.”
“I said the same fing myself.” Collins blew out smoke, then whistled

respectfully. “Bastard’s strong as the devil. Turkish blend?”
“That’s right. If you aren’t going to taste it, why smoke it?” Walsh
said.
“Knocks the socks off Navy Cut Gold, it does,” Collins said.
“I should hope so.” Alistair took a pull at his pint. Some places on
the Continent, they sold beer by the half-liter, which wasn’t enough.
None of that nonsense at the Green Duck, though. Walsh repeated,
“If you aren’t going to taste it, why smoke it? And if you aren’t going
to fight, why send the bloody Expeditionary Force over here?”
“Politics.” Joe Collins turned it into the filthiest word in the world.
“The froggies, they’d break out in arseholes if we wasn’t here, so we
bleedin’ well are.”
“Sounds right to me,” Alistair agreed. “But say what you please
about the frogs, last time around they wanted to have a go at the
Boche. So did we. Everybody was dead keen to get in there and mix
it up. Not now.”
“No, not now. Sufferin’ Jesus!” The other senior sergeant drained
his pint and waved for another one. “The way those sorry sods are
tippytoeing into ‘Unland…and they ‘aven’t moved us up towards the
front at all.”
“Don’t I know it!” Alistair said. “We just sit around soaking up beer
and pinching the barmaids’ bums.…”
“You try it, dearie, and you’ll draw back a bloody stump,” said the
broad-shouldered blonde who brought Collins his refill. The words
carried a bit of a French accent. The sentiment could have come
from any British barmaid from Londonderry to Dover.

“Don’t pay him no mind, sweet’eart,” Joe Collins said. “If I get my
mitts on you, now, you’ll love every minute of it.”
“And then you wake up,” she retorted. Away she went, with a little
extra roll to her hips to show the soldiers what they were missing.
Collins chuckled. “She’d be a ‘andful and a ‘alf, she would.”
“You might say so.” But Alistair wanted to talk about the war, not
women. They could always come back to women, and they probably
would. For now, though…“Only ones who fight like they mean it are
the Czechs—and the Germans in Czecho, too.”
“Fat lot of good it does the bloody Czechs,” Collins said. “They’d be
better off if they lay down for old Adolf.”
“Tell that to the next Czech you see,” Walsh said. “Go on—I dare
you. But make sure I’m there, mind, on account of I want to watch
him wallop the snot out of you. And he will, too. You’re a tough
bugger, Joe, but these blokes from the middle of Europe, they
bloody well mean it. Tell me I’m wrong.”
“Oh, I could lick a Czech or a Pole,” Collins said. “But if I turned me
back ‘arf a mo’, ‘e’d bloody well pull a knife out of ‘is boot top and
give me one right in the kidney. They don’t fight fair in those parts.”
Maybe that was it. Maybe it was just that Central Europeans were
dreadfully in earnest. The one who’d plugged Henlein and touched
off this mess—he must have known he wouldn’t get away. He did it
anyhow. A generation earlier, Gavrilo Princip and his Balkan
buddies hadn’t counted the cost, either.
“I wish they’d move us forward,” Walsh said. “I don’t give a shit
about hanging out my washing on the Siegfried Line, but I’d like to
see the goddamn thing.”

“Careful what you wish for—you may get it,” Collins said.
“Not here, by God.” Alistair Walsh shook his head. “The Frenchies
say they did their duty by Czecho when they stuck half of one toe
into Germany. And we did ours by the Frenchies when we crossed
over. Fight? Oh, no, dear!” His voice rose to a shrill, effeminate
falsetto.
Joe Collins laughed. So did the Englishman behind the bar. The
tap-man could afford to. He’d done his bit the last time around, and
paid enough so that nobody wanted anything else from him now.
Walsh soaked up the beer. This was soft duty. He knew he shouldn’t
complain. Drinking pints in a Calais pub when he should have been
in a trench brewing tea with hot water from the cooling jacket of his
machine gun didn’t feel right, though. Somebody in charge knew
damn all about what was going on.
Or maybe that somebody knew entirely too well. There was a notion
more frightening still.

PRAGUE DEAD AHEAD. LUDWIG ROTHE’S Panzer II approached
the capital of Czechoslovakia from the east. Prague was
surrounded, utterly cut off from any hope of relief. If the Czechs had
any brains, they would surrender. If they had any brains, they would
have surrendered a long time ago.
Luftwaffe planes dropped leaflets on the capital along with bombs.
Winds swept some of the leaflets far from the target. Ludwig had
seen a couple of them. They showed Prague in flames while Jewishlooking men labeled FRANCE and ENGLAND played the violin. The
German caption beneath them read Your allies fiddle while Prague
burns; Ludwig presumed the Czech forest of consonants meant the

same thing.
Burn Prague did. The sour smell of smoke and damp clogged the
panzer commander’s nostrils. There was just enough drizzle to cut
down visibility—not enough to do much against fires. Prague had
been catching it since the war started. Not much of the place could
still be standing. How many civilians and soldiers had died in the
rain of high explosives? Ludwig could smell corpses, too.
But the Czechs fought on in the ruins, perhaps fueled by the
courage of despair. If you want us, come and get us. Come pay the
butcher’s bill for us, they seemed to say. And they were making it as
expensive as they could.
Fritz Bittenfeld drove the panzer past the burnt-out hulk of a Czech
T-35, and then past a dead Panzer I that had had the turret blown
clean off the chassis. Ludwig winced when he saw that. Nobody’d
really intended the Panzer I for anything more than a training
vehicle. It didn’t have the firepower or the armor to fight other tanks.
If an emergency came along before your bigger machines were
ready, though…If that happened, you used what you had and
hoped for the best. And sometimes you got it, and sometimes you
bought the farm like the two sorry sons of bitches inside that baby
panzer.
Ludwig knew too well his own Panzer II was only a small step up. Its
main armament was a good deal better than the Panzer I’s pair of
rifle-caliber machine guns. It carried thicker armor, too. But the
armor wasn’t that much thicker. The cannon on Czech tanks had no
trouble piercing it.
He looked this way, that way, the other way. While he was at it, he
wished for eyes in the back of his head. Smashed buildings came
closer and closer together as the Wehrmacht pushed into Prague’s

closer and closer together as the Wehrmacht pushed into Prague’s
suburbs. Tanks and antitank guns and Czech soldiers with Molotov
cocktails had all kinds of places to hide.
Landsers were supposed to root out such dangers. Panzers and
foot soldiers worked best together. Each helped protect the other.
Armor was great for disposing of machine-gun nests that could
hang infantry up for days. Ground pounders returned the favor by
spotting lurking soldiers or guns.
Broad-winged Heinkel 111s and slim Dornier bombers—Flying
Pencils, people called them—gave Prague one more dose of
modern war. Antiaircraft shells burst all around them. Not many
Avias rose to challenge the bombers. The little biplanes sure looked
as if they came out of the last war, but they’d given Germany’s fancy
new 109s all they wanted and then some. The Messerschmitts
hadn’t knocked them out of the sky. Bombers had finally plastered
so many Czech airstrips that few Avias could get off the ground.
A Czech machine gun up ahead barked. Ludwig got ready to dive
back into the turret. Anybody who talked about how the Slavs were
a bunch of Untermenschen had never run into Czech engineering
—or Czech infantry, for that matter. The guys in the brown uniforms
knew what they were doing. They meant business, too.
Then, all of a sudden, the machine gun fell silent. So did all the
guns on the Czech side. Little by little, German firing also wound
down. Fritz’s voice floated out of the speaking tube: “What’s going
on?”
“Beats me,” Ludwig answered. “Stay ready for anything. It’s liable to
be some kind of trick.”
“Don’t worry. My asshole’s puckered good and tight,” the driver
said. Ludwig laughed. Then he wondered why. If you hadn’t shit

said. Ludwig laughed. Then he wondered why. If you hadn’t shit
yourself or come close, you hadn’t really been in combat.
A Czech officer with a flag of truce came out from behind a battered
house. He was an older man, old enough to have started out in the
Austro-Hungarian army. He walked toward Ludwig’s panzer,
probably because it was the closest vehicle with a German cross on
it. “Will you take me back to your commanders?” he called. Sure as
hell, his German had a cloyingly sweet Vienna accent, with Slavic
palatals under that.
“I will, sir, but what for?” Ludwig asked.
“I have come to arrange the surrender of Prague.” No matter how
sugary his accent, the Czech sounded infinitely bitter. “You’ve
murdered enough innocent civilians. We can’t stand it any more. I
hope you’re satisfied.”
“I just want to get out of this in one piece,” Ludwig said.
The Czech looked at him. “Ja, you go where they tell you and do
what they tell you. You’re nothing but a little cog in the machine
—but it’s a big machine, and it’s slaughtered us. Will you give me a
ride?”
“Of course, sir, if you can clamber on up. Not much room inside
here, but you can ride on top of the turret. I’ll take you back to
Regimental HQ, and they’ll know what to do with you.…Theo!”
“What is it?” the radioman asked.
“Get on the horn with the regiment. Tell ‘em I’m bringing back a
Czech colonel—I think he’s a colonel—with a surrender offer for
Prague. Tell ‘em it looks like we’ve got a cease-fire up here for the
time being, too.”

“Nobody tells me anything,” Theo grumbled. Sitting there at the
back of the fighting compartment, he was the last to know, all right.
“I’m telling you now,” Ludwig said.
He gave the Czech officer a hand. The man might not be young, but
he was spry—he didn’t really need the help. He might—he
undoubtedly did—hate everything the German stood for, but he
stayed polite about it. What did the diplomats call that? Correct
—that was the word. Ludwig held out a pack of cigarettes. The
Czech took one. “Thank you,” he said again. “Have you also got a
blindfold for me?”
The accent that made Ludwig think of strudel didn’t go well with the
cynical question. Trying to stay polite himself, the panzer
commander said, “Your men fought well.”
“We are still fighting well,” the Czech said proudly. “This surrender
offer is for Prague, perhaps for Bohemia, but not for all of
Czechoslovakia. The war goes on in the east.”
Ludwig didn’t think his superiors would like that. He shrugged. He
was only a sergeant. It wasn’t his worry. From the bowels of the
panzer, Theo said, “Regiment says to bring him in. And they say the
truce here can hold, as far as they’re concerned.”
“In the last war, we did not have communications like these,” the
Czech officer said. “Do all of your panzers have radio sets?”
He sounded casual—so casual, he made Ludwig wary. “Sir, I’d
better not talk about that. Security, you know,” the German said. He
spoke into the tube that let him talk to the driver: “Back to HQ, Fritz.”
“Right, Sergeant.” The Panzer II turned nimbly and headed back

toward the east. The Czech officer seemed to be taking mental
notes. If he was coming in to surrender, it might not matter. Ludwig
sure hoped it wouldn’t.

FIGHTERS DUELED OVER THE EBRO. Chaim Weinberg watched
the new French machines mixing it up with the 109s. Now that
France and Germany were at war, the supply spigot to Spain finally
got turned on. The Republic had seen more new equipment the
past two weeks than in the two years before.
Just because it was new didn’t mean it was good. A French fighter
spun out of control, trailing smoke. The Messerschmitt that downed
it sought fresh prey.
Chaim wasn’t the only guy from the International Brigades who
swore. In how many tongues did those curses rise? He’d thought
—everybody’d thought—enough stuff would come from France to
let the Republic settle the Nationalists’ hash in nothing flat. There
was more, but there wasn’t that much more. And Sanjurjo’s bastards
still seemed to be getting stuff from Germany and Italy. That
shouldn’t have happened, either.
England had the biggest navy in the world, didn’t she? And the
French had lots of ships, too. So why weren’t they doing a better job
of closing down Sanjurjo’s supply lines? The only answer he could
think of was that they didn’t give a damn.
Then he stopped worrying about their strategic options. A couple of
those Messerschmitts dove for the deck. They weren’t running from
the French planes. They were going to shoot up the Republican
trenches.
Bullets kicked up spurts of dust, closer and closer. Chaim was too

far from a dugout to dive into one. He folded himself into a ball to
make as small a target as he could. The roar of the powerful engine
and the hammering guns filled his world.
The 109 was overhead, so low that he imagined he felt the wind of
its passage—or maybe it wasn’t his imagination. Then the plane
was gone. But even if the wind was imagination, he didn’t want to
unfold. He had to will himself into doing it.
Somebody not far away was groaning. That got him moving. You did
for a buddy, because you wanted to be sure a buddy would do for
you, too.
That big blond guy wasn’t an American. Chaim thought Gyula was
from Hungary. Gyula spoke several languages, including English. In
every damn one of them, he sounded like the guy who played
Dracula. What he said now wasn’t in any language Chaim knew. It
sounded impressive as hell, though.
“Wow,” he said. “What’s that mean?”
Gyula looked at him. The Hungarian had a mashed foot—no
wonder he was groaning. He’d be lucky to keep it. “A horse’s cock
up your ass,” he said in English.
For a second, Chaim thought the other guy was cussing at him.
Then he realized Gyula was just answering his question. “Let me
bandage you up,” Chaim said. He yelled for stretcher-bearers in
English and Spanish. His own accent was god-awful, but people
would understand that.
“You better cut my shoe off,” Gyula said. “Don’t try to yank it over
the wound. I kill you if you do that.”
With that damn Bela Lugosi voice, he should have sounded silly. He

should have—and no doubt he would have, if he didn’t so obviously
mean it. Clumsily, Chaim took the bayonet off his rifle. At least it had
a blade; it wasn’t one of the damn spears the French liked.
Gyula’s boot was falling apart anyway. That made things easier.
Chaim winced when he got a good look at the wound. The
Hungarian’s instep was smashed all to hell. Yeah, he’d lose most of
the foot if not all of it.
He saw the same thing. As Chaim wrapped a puttee around the
wound to slow the bleeding, he said, “I can go home now. Admiral
Horthy won’t draft me.”
“Mazel tov,” Chaim said dryly. “He’ll shoot you instead, and not in
the foot.” Gyula was close to forty. He’d fought in the last war, and
for Bela Kun in Hungary’s short-lived Communist revolution. If he
went back to Budapest, he’d be about as welcome as the smallpox.
“Right now, I wouldn’t mind. Hurts like a motherfucker,” Gyula said.
“Got any morphine?”
Chaim shook his head. “Sorry. Wish I did.” He meant that. He could
have got nailed as easily as Gyula. Dumb luck, one way or the
other.
The stretcher-bearers showed up then. They were Internationals,
too. That was good—or Chaim thought so. They’d be gentler with
Gyula as they took him away. Spaniards faced their own pain with
stolid indifference…and they were even more indifferent when
somebody else got hurt.
Away they went. They wore Red Cross smocks and armbands. That
might keep the Nationalists from shooting at them. On the other
hand, it might not. This was a rough old war. You really didn’t want
to let the other side capture you, no matter which side you were on.

Cautiously, Chaim straightened up till he could peer over the lip of
the trench. He wanted to make sure Sanjurjo’s bastards weren’t
swarming forward. As soon as he did, he ducked down again. He
wouldn’t come up again in the same spot. He knew better than that.
Why give the snipers a free shot at you? Guys who did that ended
up with a new hole in the head.
He took a swig from his water bottle. It wasn’t water, but sour white
wine—horse piss, really. But it was less likely to give you the
galloping shits than Ebro water was. He’d had dysentery once, and
was glad he’d got over it. He sure as hell didn’t want it again.
When he looked again, ten or fifteen yards down the trench from
the place where he’d last popped up, he spied two or three
Nationalists looking out of their trenches a couple of hundred yards
away and toward him. As he ducked, he saw them ducking at the
same time.
They’re scared of me, he thought, not without pride. They even
looked like Fascist assholes. Like most of Sanjurjo’s better troops,
they wore German-style helmets. But they were scared of a dumb
Jew from New York City. If that wasn’t a kick in the nuts, he didn’t
know what would be.
If you had a rifle in your hands, you were dangerous. It was as
simple as that. The thing you had to remember, though, was that
the other son of a bitch was dangerous as long as he had a rifle,
too.

VACLAV JEZEK STUMBLED OVER THE border. Behind him,
Slovakia was going to hell in a handbasket. The Germans were
breaking in from the west. The Hungarians, not about to miss a

chance to seize again what they’d ruled for centuries, were breaking
in from the south. The Slovaks were up in arms—German-supplied
arms—against what was left of Czechoslovakian authority. Ingrate
bastards, Jezek thought, not that anybody gave a damn about his
opinion.
He didn’t know what the Poles would do with him—to him—either.
Poland was also more or less at war with Czechoslovakia. By now,
Tesin would be Cieszun, or however the hell the Poles spelled it. He
doubted whether his own country tried very hard to defend the
mining town. When a lion jumped you, you didn’t worry about the
jackals.
The country was rough and broken. Most of the leaves were off the
trees, though, which made people easier to spot. And, being off the
trees, the leaves lay underfoot. Every time Vaclav took a step, they
crunched underfoot. They might as well have shouted Here I am!
But so what? He didn’t want to sit around in a Nazi POW camp till
the war ended. Whatever the Poles did to him had to be better than
that…didn’t it? Behind him, he could still hear bombs and shells
bursting and machine guns going off. More Czech soldiers—the
ones who could—were stumbling north, out of the fighting. They’d
made the same calculation he had. Now…were the lot of them right?
Somebody up ahead shouted something. Vaclav almost understood
it. Polish and Czech were closely related—not so closely as Czech
and Slovak, but still.…A word here and there came through, even if
each of them seemed to carry an extra syllable or two.
Vaclav stood still. He thought that was what the Pole was telling him
to do. “I give up!” he shouted back. “You can intern me!”
The Pole came out from behind a tree. He wore a greenish uniform,

not brown like Vaclav’s (not filthy and tattered like Vaclav’s, either)
or German field-gray. The bayoneted rifle he carried looked
extremely businesslike. Moving slowly and carefully, Vaclav unslung
his own piece and laid it on the ground in front of his feet.
With a nod, the Pole advanced on him. They tried to talk. It was an
exercise in near misses and frustration. Then the Pole—a big blond
fellow—raised an ironic eyebrow and asked, “Sprechen Sie
Deutsch?”
“Ja,” Jezek said miserably. Two Slavs, having to go back and forth in
German!
“Gut,” the Pole said. “Jetzt können wir wirklich einander verstehen.”
And they could really understand each other now, no matter how
much Vaclav loathed the idea. Still in German, the Pole went on,
“Give me your name and rank and unit.”
Dully, Vaclav did. “What will you do with me?” he asked.
“We have a camp a few kilometers to the north,” the Polish soldier
answered. “Did you say you wanted to be interned before?”
“Ja,” Vaclav said again.
“I thought so, but I wasn’t sure,” the Pole said. “Well, you will be.
You are not a prisoner of war, not here. Poland and Czechoslovakia
are not formally at war.”
“No. You just grabbed,” Jezek said bitterly.
With a shrug, the big man in the green uniform answered, “So did
you Czechs, after the last war. Otherwise, the coal mines down
there would have been ours all along. And then you act like your
shit doesn’t stink.”

“Oh, mine does. I know that,” Vaclav said. “But if you are friends with
Hitler, he will make you sorry.”
“Better him than Stalin and the damned Reds,” the Pole retorted.
“You find friends where you can. At least the Russians did
something for us. More than France and England did,” Vaclav said.
“What did you expect? They’re full of Jews,” the Pole said. No
wonder he liked Hitler better than Stalin. He stooped, picked up
Vaclav’s rifle, and slung it over his own shoulder. Then he pointed
north. “The camp is that way. Get moving, Corporal Jezek.”
Shoulders slumped in despair, Vaclav got moving.

The night was cool and damp. Most nights were, as October moved
toward November. Willi Dernen peered at the Frenchmen who’d
nipped off a few square kilometers of German soil.
They were warmer than he was. They’d started a fire and sat

around it. From 300 meters, he could have potted them easily.
Orders were not to piss them off, no matter what. If they wanted to
sit on their asses as if they hadn’t crossed the border, they were
welcome to.
If they’d really come loaded for bear…
Willi’s shiver had nothing to do with the weather. He was a blond,
stolid watchmaker’s son from Breslau, all the way over on the other
side of the Reich. He could hardly follow the German they spoke
here, and the locals had trouble with his accent, too. But he’d been
on the Westwall since France and England declared war. He knew
what would have happened had the French put some muscle into a
push instead of tiptoeing over the border.
They would have smashed the Westwall as if they were made of
cardboard. Not a Landser here thought any differently. The
Westwall was Goebbels’ joke on the democracies. On paper, and on
the radio, it was as formidable as the Maginot Line. For real,
construction gangs were still frantically building forts and
obstructions. And the Westwall didn’t have nearly enough troops to
man what was already built.
Most of the Wehrmacht had gone off to kick Czechoslovakia’s ass.
What was left…the French outnumbered somewhere between three
and five to one. That was the bad news. The good news was, they
didn’t seem to know it.
One of the Frenchmen pulled out a concertina and began to play.
The thin, plaintive notes made Willi shake his head. How could the
guys on the other side listen to crap like that? Horns, drums, fiddles
—that was music.
Beside Dernen, Wolfgang Storch whispered, “We ought to plug him
just so he’ll shut up, you know?”

just so he’ll shut up, you know?”
Trust Wolfgang to come up with something like that, Willi thought.
He whispered back: “Damn you, you almost made me laugh out
loud. That wouldn’t be so good.”
“Why not?” Storch said. “Probably make the Frenchmen piss
themselves.”
Willi did snort then, not because Wolfgang was wrong but because
he was right. Willi had come that close to pissing himself when he
was part of a firefight right after the French came over the border.
The guy next to him took one right in the belly. The noises Klaus
made…You didn’t want to remember things like that, but you
couldn’t very well forget them. When Willi went to sleep, he heard
Klaus shrieking in his nightmares. He smelled the other man’s
blood, like hot iron—and his shit, too.
One of the Frenchmen looked up. The guy with the concertina
stopped playing. All of the men in khaki looked around. Willi
pretended he wasn’t there as hard as he could. It must have
worked, because none of the enemy soldiers got to his feet or
anything. Tiny in the distance, one of them shrugged a comically
French shrug. The concertina player started up again.
“Let’s head back and report in,” Wolfgang said.
“Now you’re talking. You and your stupid jokes.” It was hard to stay
really mad when you were whispering in a tiny voice, but Willi gave it
his best shot. “We wouldn’t’ve got in a jam if you weren’t such a
damn smartass.”
“Your mother,” Wolfgang answered sweetly.
Both Germans drew back as softly as they could. The French

soldier with the concertina went on playing. Willi took that as a good
sign. Maybe the Frenchmen were using the noise as cover. That
would be a smart thing to do. It would also be an aggressive thing to
do. The French might be smart. They’d shown no sign of
aggressiveness.
All the same, Willi wanted no part of a nasty surprise. All it would
take was a sergeant who’d been through the mill the last time
around. Willi’s father was a guy like that. When he and his buddies
got together and drank some beer, they’d start telling stories. Like
any kid, Willi listened. There probably weren’t a lot of guys his age
who hadn’t heard stories like that. Some veterans, though, didn’t
care to talk. Willi hadn’t understood that, not till Klaus got it. He did
now.
They’d gone about half a kilometer when a no-doubt-about-it
German voice challenged them: “Halt! Who goes there?”
“Two German soldiers: Dernen and Storch,” Willi answered. He and
Wolfgang were out in the middle of a field. The Landser who owned
that voice might have been…anywhere.
“Give the password,” the man said.
“Sonnenschein,” Willi and Wolfgang chorused. A Frenchman poking
around could have picked it up from them, but the French didn’t do
much of that kind of poking.
“Pass on,” the sentry said.
They did. The Germans were ready for anything. The French didn’t
seem to be. They didn’t have to be, either—they had numbers, and
the Wehrmacht didn’t. But they acted as if that would go on forever.
And it wouldn’t.

Willi got a glimpse of just how true that was when he and Wolfgang
finished making their report. They ducked out of Colonel Bauer’s
tent and found themselves in the middle of chaos. Soldiers were
jumping down from trucks whose headlights were cut down to slits
by masking tape. Some of the belching, farting monsters there
weren’t trucks at all. They were panzers.
Both Willi and Wolfgang gaped at them. Willi hadn’t seen a panzer
up till now in all the time he’d spent on the Western Front. He
supposed there were a few, in case the French decided they were
serious about attacking here. But he sure hadn’t seen any.
“It must be all over in Czechoslovakia,” he said.
“Ja.” Wolfgang nodded. “Took longer than it should have, too.”
“Everything takes longer than it’s supposed to,” Willi said. “No
matter how smart the generals are, the bastards on the other side
have generals, too.”
Wolfgang laughed at him. “Generals? Smart? What have you been
drinking? Whatever it is, I want some, too.”
“Oh, come on. You know what I mean. If the guys with the red
stripes on their trousers”—Willi meant the General Staff—“don’t end
up smarter than the generals on the other side, we’re in trouble.”
“But everybody knows the generals on the other side are a bunch
of jerks,” Wolfgang said. “So how smart do our fellows need to be?”
Before Willi could answer, more panzers rumbled up. Shouting
sergeants ordered them under such trees as there were. Not all of
them would fit there. Soldiers spread camouflage netting over the
ones that had to stay out in the open. Not many French
reconnaissance planes came over, but the Wehrmacht didn’t

believe in taking chances when it didn’t have to.
Wolfgang Storch pointed back toward the French soldiers they’d
been watching. “Hope those assholes don’t hear the racket and
start wondering what’s up.”
“Don’t worry about it,” Willi told him. They laughed. Why not? Their
side was doing things. The enemy was sitting around. If the French
had no stomach for a fight but one came to them anyway…

“BURN EVERYTHING,” SERGEANT DEMANGE SAID. “When we pull
back into France, we want the Germans to remember we were
here.” The cigarette in the corner of his mouth jerked up and down
as he spoke.
One of the guys in Luc Harcourt’s squad splashed kerosene against
the side of a barn. Luc grabbed a burning stick from the cookfire
and touched it to a wet place. He had to jump back, or the flames
might have got him. The barn sent a black plume of smoke into the
leaden sky.
Other soldiers were torching the farmhouse near the barn. “Hey,
Sergeant?” Luc called.
Demange eyed him as if he were a chancre on humanity’s scrotum.
But then, Demange looked at everybody and everything that way.
“What do you want, kid?” he said. Make it good, or else lurked
menacingly under the words.
“If we’re doing everything we can to hurt the Boches, how come
we’re pulling out, not going forward?” As far as Luc could see, the
whole halfhearted invasion was nothing but a sad, unfunny joke.
Now it was ending without even a punch line.

“Well, we went in to give the Czechs a hand, oui?” the sergeant
said.
“Sure,” Harcourt answered. “So?”
“So now there’s no more Czechoslovakia, so what’s the point of
hanging around any longer? That’s how I heard it from the
lieutenant, so that’s what the brass is saying.” Demange looked
around to make sure no officers were in earshot. Satisfied, he went
on, “You ask me what the real story is, we’re scared green.”
Maybe Demange would end up in trouble for defeatism if somebody
reported him to the lieutenant. More likely, he’d eat the platoon
commander without salt. And what he said made an unpleasant
amount of sense. “We haven’t fought enough to see how tough the
Nazis really are,” Luc said.
“You know that. I know that. You think the old men in the fancy kepis
know that?” Demange made as if to wipe his ass, presumably with
the collected wisdom of the French General Staff. “Come on, get
moving!” the underofficer added. “I think you just want to stand
around and gab instead of working.”
Luc liked work no better than anyone else in his right mind. Even
standing around with thirty-odd kilos on his back wasn’t his idea of
fun. But the fire warmed the chilly morning. He sighed as he trudged
away. Pretty soon, tramping along under all that weight would warm
him up, too, but not so pleasantly.
Every once in a while, somebody off in the distance would fire a rifle
or squeeze off a burst from a machine gun. For the most part,
though, the Germans seemed content to let the French leave if they
wanted to.

Here and there, the retreating French troops passed men warily
waiting in foxholes and sandbagged machine-gun nests. The rear
guard would give the Boches a hard time if they were inclined to get
frisky. The soldiers Luc could see looked serious about their job.
They probably thought they were saving the French army from
destruction. And maybe they were right.
Maybe. But it didn’t look that way now.
Luc’s company marched out of Germany at almost exactly the place
where they’d gone in a month earlier. Luc eyed the customs post,
now wrecked, that marked the frontier. Men had suffered there. And
for what? Maybe the important people, the people who ran things,
understood. Luc had no idea.
“It’s the capitalists who are making us pull out,” Jacques Vallat said.
He’d been drafted out of an army factory in Lyon, and was as Red
as Sergeant Demange’s eyes. “The fools are more afraid of Stalin
than they are of Hitler.”
“Shut your yap, Vallat,” the sergeant said without much heat. “Just
keep picking ‘em up and laying ‘em down. When you get to be a
general, then you can talk politics.”
“If I get to be a general, France has more trouble than she knows
what to do with,” Vallat replied.
“You said it. I didn’t.” Demange might have come out of an auto
factory in Lyon himself. He showed no weariness, or even strain. By
the way he marched, he could have tramped across France with no
more than some gasoline and an oil change or two.
Luc wished he had that endless, effortless endurance. He was a lot
harder than he had been when he got drafted, but he knew he
couldn’t match the sergeant. Demange was a professional, a

mercenary in the service of his own country. With a white kepi on his
head, he wouldn’t have been out of place in the Foreign Legion.
“Back in France,” Paul Renouvin said. “Funny—it doesn’t look any
different. Doesn’t feel any different, either.”
“Oh, some, maybe,” Luc said. “When I camp tonight, I won’t have
the feeling some bastard’s watching me from the bushes.”
“No, huh? You don’t think the Germans’ll sneak after us?” Paul said.
“Merde!” Luc hadn’t thought of that. He’d figured that, once the
French pulled back from Germany, the Boches would leave them
alone. Why not? The Germans had pretty much left them alone
while they were inside Germany.
“We’re going to pay for this,” Jacques Vallat predicted. “We had our
chance, and we didn’t grab it. Now they’re done in Czechoslovakia.
Where do they go next?”
“Didn’t I tell you once to shut up?” Sergeant Demange’s voice
stayed flat, but now it held a certain edge. “You want to go pissing
and moaning, go piss and moan to the captain.”
“He’d throw me in the stockade,” Vallat said with gloomy certainty.
“You’d deserve it, too,” Demange said. “Running your mouth when
you don’t know shit…But if you’re in the stockade, you can’t do
anything useful. Tonight, you fill up everybody’s canteen.”
Jacques’ sigh was martyred. Everyone took turns at the different
fatigue duties. That one was more fatiguing than most. And the men
had already been marching all day. Not that the day was very long.
Darkness came early, and with it rain. Luc’s helmet kept the water
off his head, and the greatcoat let him stay pretty dry, but marching

through rain and deepening twilight wasn’t his cup of tea.
But tents and hot food and strong coffee waited for the soldiers
who’d withdrawn from Germany. It wasn’t as good as ending up in
bed with a pretty girl—but what was? Nobody was shooting at him.
He had a full belly, and he was warm. When you were a soldier, that
seemed better than good enough.

PEGGY DRUCE HAD HOT FOOD, even if most of it was boiled
potatoes and turnips. She had coffee. The Germans insisted it was
the same stuff they drank. If it was, she pitied them. Nobody was
shooting at her. She’d never thought she would have to worry about
that…till the day she did.
She was a neutral, which meant the Germans treated her better
than the English and French they’d also caught at Marianske
Lazne. She got plenty of potatoes and turnips and godawful coffee.
They had enough to keep body and soul together, but not much
more. And if she were a Jew…
Till the war started, she’d looked down her snub nose at Jews. If you
weren’t one, you did. She’d taken it for granted, the same way she’d
taken for granted that nothing bad could ever happen to her. She
was an American. She had money. She had looks.
Shells didn’t care. Neither did machine-gun bullets. She’d seen
things at Marianske Lazne she wouldn’t forget as long as she lived.
(And she wouldn’t call the place Marienbad any more, even if that
was easier to say. The Germans used the old name anew. If they
did, she wouldn’t.)
Not all of what she wished she could forget came during the
bombardment, or when she was bandaging wounded afterwards.

Quite a few Jews had been stuck in the resort with everybody else.
The ones who were foreign nationals aimed their passports at the
Nazis the way you’d aim a crucifix at a vampire. Peggy had no idea
whether crucifixes worked; in that part of Europe, some people
might. But the passports did. By their growls, the German soldiers
and the SS men who followed them into Marianske Lazne might
have been Dobermans brought up short by their chains. However
much they growled, though, they treated Jews who weren’t from
Czechoslovakia no worse than any other foreign nationals they’d
nabbed.
Jews who were from Czechoslovakia…Peggy shuddered at the
memories. Jews from Czechoslovakia were basically fair game. It
wasn’t so much that the Blackshirts kicked some of them around for
the fun of it. It wasn’t even that the soldiers set others to scrubbing
sidewalks with toothbrushes.
No. It was the way the Germans grinned when they did it. Peggy had
had the misfortune to watch several SS men surround a plump,
dignified, bearded, middle-aged Jew. The Jew wore ghetto attire:
black trousers, long black coat, broad-brimmed black hat. In color,
his clothes matched the Nazis’ uniforms.
Which did him less than no good at all. One of the Blackshirts
grabbed his hat and scaled it. He might have been a nasty kid on a
schoolyard flinging another boy’s cap. He might have been, yes, if
he and his buddies didn’t carry pistols and have the might of a
mechanized army behind them. A schoolboy could punch another
schoolboy in the nose. The Jew would have been committing suicide
if he tried.
He just stood there, hoping they’d go away now that they’d had their
sport. No such luck. A different SS man pulled out a big pair of

pinking shears. He went to work on the Jew’s beard. If he got some
cheek or nose or ear while he did his barbering, that was part of the
fun.
And the Jew just went on standing there. The look in his eyes was a
million years old. It said his ancestors had been through this before,
again and again. It said he hadn’t done anything to deserve it, but
deserving had nothing to do with anything. It said…It said Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do. Yes, that was from the
New Testament, but so what? After all, what was Jesus to the
Romans? Just another goddamn Jew.
Later, Peggy wondered why she didn’t charge the SS bastards. I
should have, she thought bitterly. Most of the time, she was
somebody who went ahead first and worried about it later. Here, she
only stood and watched. Maybe horror froze her. Maybe it was
sheer disbelief. Could this really be happening right here before her
eyes, here in Europe, cradle and beacon of civilization, here near
the middle of the twentieth century?
It could. It was.
The Jew didn’t say a word as he was shorn. He didn’t flinch—much
—whenever the shears drew blood. He just…looked at the SS men
with those ancient, pain-filled eyes. And that didn’t do him any good,
either. When the barber was satisfied with his handiwork, he hauled
off and slapped the Jew, hard enough to turn his head around.
Another Nazi kicked the man in the ass. That got a groan from him
and doubled him over.
“Enough for now,” said the SS noncom with the shears.
“Ja. Let’s find a fresh kike,” another Blackshirt replied.
Peggy didn’t speak a lot of German—her French was much better.

She understood them, though. Off they went, laughing and joking.
The worst of it was, they didn’t act like men who’d just done
something evil and cruel. As far as they were concerned, this was
what they’d come to Czechoslovakia to do, the same way she’d
come here to take the waters.
God help them, she thought. God help us all. But God didn’t seem
to be listening. Maybe He was out taking the waters somewhere
Himself, or maybe He was off playing golf in Florida. He could do
whatever He pleased. His Chosen People didn’t look to be so lucky.
Even after the SS men went away, Peggy’d needed all of her nerve
to go up to the poor Jew they’d abused. “Can I help you?” she’d
asked hesitantly—in French, thinking more German was the last
thing the man would want to hear then.
He’d straightened when she spoke to him. She remembered that,
and the way he’d reached up to touch the brim of his hat, only to
discover it wasn’t there. Where blood running down his face and
dripping from one ear didn’t, the missing hat made him grimace.
Sadly, he’d answered, “Madame, do you truly imagine anyone could
help me now?” His French was gutturally accented, but at least as
fluent as hers.
She hadn’t answered him. What could she have said? Yes would
have been a lie, no too bitter to bear. She’d turned away instead.
And then, poor devil, he’d tried to comfort her. “When you are of my
folk, Madame, you learn to expect such things now and again,” he’d
said.
Again, she hadn’t answered. If he was right, that only made things
worse. If he was wrong…But he wasn’t wrong, dammit. You didn’t
have to like Jews—and Peggy didn’t, not especially—to know they’d

been getting the shitty end of the stick for the past 2,000 years. Had
they ever got so much of it as the Nazis seemed to want to dish out,
though?
People here in this camp claimed the Luftwaffe made a point of
pounding Jewish districts in Prague and Brno and other Czech
cities. Others said that was a bunch of hooey—nothing but stale
propaganda. Peggy didn’t know for sure; she hadn’t been in any of
those places while German bombers flew overhead. But she had no
doubts at all about which way she’d bet.
One day, a uniformed German official—was there any other kind
these days?—assembled the interned neutrals and harangued
them in his language. Even though Peggy spoke some German,
she couldn’t follow word one. The big, beefy fellow had an accent
she’d never heard before and hoped she never heard again.
“He has to come from somewhere near the Swiss border,” a man
standing near Peggy said to his wife. Peggy had guessed they were
Belgians, but maybe they were from the French-speaking part of
Switzerland.
Then the official switched to French. He had a devil of an accent
there, too, but Peggy could understand him: he slowed down to
speak a language foreign to him. “Now that the fighting is over, we
are arranging transport to neutral destinations for you all. There will
be railroad service into Romania in the near future, as soon as lines
through Slovakia are repaired.”
Quite a few people looked happy: Romanians, Bulgarians,
Yugoslavs, Greeks. A lot of wealthy Balkans types came up to
Czechoslovakia for the waters. It was the kind of thing their parents
would have done in 1914. Some of those parents would have been
citizens of Austria-Hungary Even the ones who weren’t, even the

ones who hated it, would have been cultural satellites of the
Hapsburg empire. That ramshackle state was twenty years dead
now, carved up like a Christmas goose. But its influence lingered
even though it was gone.
The Nazi official started over one more time, in what he fondly
imagined to be English. Peggy raised her hand, then waved it.
“Question, please!” she called in French.
“Yes?” The German didn’t looked pleased at being interrupted.
“Suppose we don’t want to go to Romania?”
“It is being arranged that you should go there,” he replied, as if her
desires were as distant and unimportant as the canals of Mars.
“But I don’t want to.” Peggy never liked it when anybody tried to
arrange her life for her. One reason she loved her husband was
that he had sense enough to stay out of her way. She went on, “I’m
an American. I want to go up to Poland or Sweden or Norway, where
it’s easier to find a ship for the United States.”
“If the Führer’s government has arranged that you should go to
Romania, to Romania you will go.” The German official might have
said, Sunrise tomorrow is at half past seven. He would have
sounded no more certain about that.
Which only proved he’d never had anything to do with Peggy Druce.
“No,” she said.
Had he worn a monocle, it would have fallen out. His eyes opened
that wide. “Who do you think you are, to challenge the carefully
arranged”—he liked that word—“plans of the Reich?”
“I’m an American citizen,” Peggy said. St. Paul could have sounded

no prouder proclaiming that he was a citizen of Rome. If the
Germans didn’t worry about doughboys coming Over There—well,
Over Here—they’d forgotten about 1918.
Maybe Mr. Beefy had. “You are not in America now,” he reminded
her. “We are obliged to repatriate you as we can. We are not
obliged to be convenient for you.” By the way he said it, he would
drive fifty miles out of his way to be inconvenient for her.
“You won’t even let me buy a train ticket for somewhere I want to
go? You won’t even let me spend my own money?” Peggy had
trouble believing that. People always wanted you to spend your
money. That had been her experience for as long as she’d had
money to spend.
But the Nazi’s nasty smile said he was going to tell her no. It also
made Peggy give back an even nastier smile: the bastard had some
of the worst teeth she’d ever seen. “You will go where we want you
to go when we want you to go there. We will tell you how to go. This
is to prevent espionage, you understand. We are at war.”
“Certainement,” Peggy replied. “If I told you where to go and how to
get there, you would need to pack for a mighty warm climate. You
can count on that.”
The German official looked puzzled. So did her fellow internees.
None of the handful of other Americans seemed to speak French
well enough to understand what she’d just told him. The Europeans,
most of whom knew French at least as well as she did, didn’t get the
American idiom. Bound to be just as well.
Romania! She threw up her hands. If she’d wanted to visit Romania,
she would have gone there. Or she’d thought so, anyhow. Now she
looked to be on her way whether she wanted to go or not.

BACK IN THE USSR. SERGEI YAROSLAVSKY didn’t realize how
lucky he was to have got out of Czechoslovakia in one piece till he
found out how many aircrews and bombers hadn’t. The Nazis had
far better planes, and far more of them, than they’d shown in Spain.
Even trying to learn what had happened to the fellows you didn’t
see at the airstrip near Kamenets-Podolsk was risky. Ask too many
questions, or the wrong questions, or even the right questions of
the wrong people, and you’d end up in a camp. Over the past
couple of years, generals—marshals!—had disappeared or been
shot for treason after show trials. The NKVD wouldn’t blink at
gobbling up a junior officer.
The Fascists could kill you. So could your own side. With the
Fascists, it wasn’t personal. You were just an enemy. To your own
side, you were a traitor. They’d put you over a slow fire and make
you suffer.
Most of what Sergei knew about the missing crews, he knew
because of Anastas Mouradian. Sergei still didn’t like people from
the Caucasus for beans, but they had their uses. In a Soviet Union
dominated by Russians (and by Jews, Yaroslavsky added to
himself), the southern peoples had to stick together to survive,
much less get ahead. They had their own built-in underground, so
to speak.
And so the copilot knew to whom he could talk and how much he
could say. He had reasonable confidence what he said wouldn’t go
past the person he said it to. And Armenians and Georgians and
such folk were like Jews: they…knew things. You never could tell
how they knew, but they did.

One bomber had crash-landed in Poland. The pilot saved his crew,
though the Poles interned them. Had the story ended there, Sergei
would have been glad to hear it. If your plane had battle damage or
mechanical failure, you just hoped you could walk away from the
landing. But things took an ugly turn.
In a low voice, Mouradian said, “The families…” and shook his
head.
Sergei needed no more than that to understand what was going on.
“Camps?” he asked, dismally sure he knew the answer.
“Da.” Anastas Mouradian looked faintly pained that the pilot even
needed to say the word. To Russians, Armenians and Georgians
seemed sneaky, subtle, devious bastards. You never could trust
them. Till now, Sergei had never wondered how he might seem to
Anastas. Like a dim backwoods bumpkin? He wouldn’t have been
surprised.
He wasn’t surprised to hear the aircrew’s families had been seized,
either. If you didn’t come back to the Rodina—the motherland—the
NKVD would figure you didn’t want to. Battle damage? Mechanical
failure? The secret police wouldn’t give a rat’s ass about any of
that. They’d scent treason whether it was there or not. And
everybody knew treason was contagious. Whether the bomber crew
caught it from their families or spread it to them, the families would
have to be cauterized.
NKVD men got paid to think like that. Ordinary Soviet citizens had
to, if they wanted to stay…well, not safe—nobody was safe—but
somewhere close, anyhow.
“Bozhemoi,” Sergei muttered. “You’re sure?”
Mouradian’s dark, bushy eyebrows leapt reproachfully. “If I say

something happened, it happened.” His voice went hard and flat.
“Yob tvoyu mat’,” he added—literally, I fuck your mother. As always,
tone and emphasis were everything when you said something like
that. Said another way, it would have started a fight. But he meant
something more like I shit you not.
“All right, all right. I believe you,” Yaroslavsky said. “It just…gets to
you sometimes, you know?”
“Nichevo,” Anastas answered. Everybody in the USSR, Russian or
not, used and understood that word. What can you do? or It can’t
be helped fit too many Soviet scenarios, as it had in the days of the
Tsars. Somebody once said Russian peasants ran on cabbage,
vodka, and nichevo.
At a pinch, Sergei supposed you could do without cabbage.
As he had before, Mouradian looked around again. His voice
dropped again: “You don’t want to tell this to the Chimp. He used to
drink with the bombardier on the plane that went down.”
“He drank with everybody,” Sergei said. Sure as hell, Ivan Kuchkov
ran on vodka.
“Just keep quiet. He may find out about it anyway, but better he
doesn’t find out from you,” Anastas Mouradian said.
“Right.” Sergei nodded. If Ivan found out his drinking buddy was
interned and the man’s family off to the gulag, he’d want to break
something…or somebody. He’d get drunk, which wouldn’t make him
any cheerier. And he’d babble about where he got the news. All of
that could easily add up to trouble. Maybe changing the subject was
a good idea: “Hear anything about when we’ll start flying again?”
“Not supposed to be too long,” the copilot said. “But who knows

what that means?”
“Right,” Yaroslavsky repeated. Like old Russia, the new USSR
always ran late. Five-Year Plans were trying to drag the Soviet
Union into a consciousness of time like that in the West. Clocks
sprouted everywhere, like toadstools. But with a language where
the verb to be had no present tense, how far could the apparatchiks
go with their changes?
Sergei thanked the God in Whom he wasn’t supposed to believe
that that was somebody else’s worry. He just had to follow orders
and not think too much. He was sure he could manage that.
A corporal in the groundcrew came over to him. “Sir, Captain
Kuznetsov wants to see you right away.”
“I’m coming.” Yaroslavsky couldn’t suppress a nasty twinge of fear.
“Did he say why?” he asked. Was he bound for Siberia? Did
Kuznetsov get a command to take him out and shoot him?
Sometimes following your own orders and not thinking too much
wouldn’t save you. Sometimes nothing would.
But the corporal shook his head. “No, sir. Only that he wants to see
you.”
“I serve the Soviet Union!” Sergei hurried off toward the captain’s
tent. Anastas Mouradian nodded to him as he went. Something
glinted in the Armenian’s dark eyes. Sympathy? Anastas was no
fool. He knew all the things that could happen. He knew they could
happen to him, too. The corporal, by contrast, was too dumb and
too stolid ever to get in trouble.
When Sergei ducked into the tent, he was relieved to see no
uniformed strangers standing next to Captain Kuznetsov, who sat at
a rickety table doing paperwork by the light of a kerosene lamp.

Kuznetsov looked up and set down his pen. “Ah. Yaroslavsky.” His
tone could have meant anything—or nothing.
Sergei saluted. “Reporting as ordered, sir.” If he was going down,
he’d go down with style. Not that that would do him any goddamn
good, either.
“Da,” Kuznetsov said, again with nothing special in his voice. Then
he went on, “Make sure you and your airplane are ready to fly out
of here first thing tomorrow morning.”
“Yes, sir!” Sergei couldn’t keep the relief from his voice. An order
that was a real order! “Uh, sir…Where are we flying to?”
“To Drisa, northwest of Polotsk,” Captain Kuznetsov answered. “It’s
right near the Polish and Lithuanian borders—and it’s about as
close to East Prussia as we can get while we stay in the Rodina.”
“I see.” Yaroslavsky wondered if he did. “Will we be flying against
Germany again, then, sir?”
“We have no orders for that at the present time,” his superior said.
He didn’t go on to say whether he thought it was likely or unlikely.
Sergei didn’t presume to press him, either. If you gave an opinion
that turned out to be wrong, somebody would make you pay for it. If
you kept your mouth shut, no one could pin anything on you.
Along with the rest of the SB-2s in the squadron (except for one
grounded by bad hydraulics), Sergei’s flew out at first light the next
morning. Ivan Kuchkov was badly hung over. Yaroslavsky wouldn’t
have wanted to fly like that, not with the two big engines throbbing
and growling away. Nothing the bombardier could do about it,
though, not unless he wanted to try his luck with the stockade—or,
more likely, the NKVD. If Kuchkov complained, the engines’ thrum
kept anybody else from hearing him.

Russia scrolled along below the bomber: farmland and forest and
swamp, with here and there a town looking all but lost in the
vastness of the landscape. Puddles in the Pripet Marshes reflected
the gray sky. Mouradian minded the map and made sure the
bomber didn’t stray too far west and end up in Polish airspace.
Sergei wasn’t afraid of what the Poles would do to him. They flew
nothing close to the deadly German Messerschmitts. But what his
own superiors would do to him for screwing up didn’t bear thinking
about.
“Drisa’s in Byelorussia, yes?” Mouradian asked.
“Yes,” Sergei agreed.
The Armenian sighed. “They’ll talk like the Devil’s uncle, then.”
Russians didn’t have any trouble following Byelorussian. Russians
could follow Ukrainian, which differed more from their language. And
of course Byelorussians and Ukrainians had to understand Russian.
But Anastas Mouradian had learned it in school. He spoke well, and
understood standard Russian well. Its cousins, though, weren’t
open books to him, the way they were to Sergei.
North of the Pripet Marshes, patches of snow started showing up on
the ground. It would be colder here. Sergei suspected he would
spend a lot of time in his flight suit. Leather and fleece that could
keep out the cold at 8,000 meters could do the same against even
the Russian winter.
He landed the SB-2 on a dirt strip outside of Drisa—an
unprepossessing place if ever there was one. His teeth clicked
together when the plane touched down. The runway was anything
but smooth. He didn’t bite his tongue, though. And the SB-2 was
built to take it. As he brought the bomber to a stop, he wondered

how much it would have to take, and how soon.

Another gray, damp, chilly day in Münster. Sarah Goldman sat in the
rickety bleachers at a soccer pitch and watched her brother break
away from the back who was trying to guard him. Both teams were
made up of nothing but Jews. Saul was so much better than anyone
else on the field, it wasn’t even funny.
The goalkeeper ran out to try to cut down his angle. Saul got his toe
under the ball, lofted it just over the fellow’s luckless, reaching
hands, and watched it bounce once and roll into the net.
“Goal!” Sarah shouted exultantly. Her mother and father clapped
their hands. That made it 5-2 with only about ten minutes left in the
second half. Saul’s team had the game in the bag.
But he only shrugged, as if embarrassed at what he’d done. He
probably was. This was his second goal of the match, and he’d
assisted on two others. The soccer couldn’t be much fun when you
outclassed friends and foes alike. Saul might have made a

professional in another year or two. It didn’t seem he’d ever get the
chance now.
Sarah supposed she ought to count herself lucky the Jews got any
chance to play at all. Yes, these bleachers might fall down in a stiff
breeze. Yes, she was sitting on a blanket because she’d end up with
splinters in her tukhus if she didn’t. Yes, the pitch was bumpy and
looked as if it were mown by goats. This had to be the most
miserable place to play for kilometers around.
Which was, of course, the only reason the Jews got to use it. Sarah
pictured a plump, blond, uniformed athletic commissioner laughing
till his jowls wobbled as he gave the two Jewish teams permission to
play here. Maybe he thought a match here would be worse than no
match at all. Were the teams involved full of Aryans, he might have
been right.
Ever since 1933, though, Jews had had to take whatever scraps of
comfort and pleasure they could find. Even a soccer match on a
horrible excuse for a pitch was better than none. It gave people an
excuse to get out of the house, an excuse to get together and see
one another and gab.
Yes, a couple of policemen were also watching the game and the
little crowd in the stands. What could you do about that? Nothing, as
Sarah knew too well. If you were a Jew in the Reich, somebody was
going to keep an eye on you.
She leaned over to her father and asked, “What do they think we’re
going to do? Roll up the chalk lines and carry them home in our
handbags and pockets?”
Samuel Goldman shrugged. “Maybe they do. Maybe they think we
can turn the lines into bombs or something, and use them to blow
up NSDAP headquarters.”

up NSDAP headquarters.”
“Would you blow up Nazi headquarters if you could?” Sarah asked.
“Of course not!” Father’s reply was too loud and too quick. “The
National Socialists have done wonderful things for the Reich.
They’ve made Germany wake up.” Deutschland erwache! was a
favorite Nazi slogan.
As Father spoke, his eyes told Sarah she’d been foolish. After a
moment’s thought, she knew just how, too. Father couldn’t hope to
give her a straight answer, not where anyone else could hear him
talking. Yes, the only people in earshot were other Jews. But did
that mean they wouldn’t betray one of their own? Fat chance, Sarah
thought bitterly. If ratting on fellow Jews would give them a moment’s
advantage, plenty of people would do it in a heartbeat.
Sarah hoped she would never stoop to anything as vile as that. She
hoped so, yes, but she admitted to herself that she wasn’t sure.
Times kept getting harder and harder. If not for Father’s gentile
friends who gave him articles to write, she didn’t know what the
family would have done.
Mercifully, the match ended. The teams lined up and shook hands
with each other. Players tousled one another’s sweaty hair. The
goalkeeper on the other side mimed chipping the ball the way Saul
had, then threw up his hands in mock—or maybe not mock
—despair.
The sparse crowd came down onto the pitch. Practically everybody
there was related to one player or another. “You were great, Saul!”
Sarah made herself sound enthusiastic, even if she knew her
brother wouldn’t be.
And he wasn’t. “Big deal,” he said. “These guys try, but I feel like a

grown-up playing against kindergarten kids.” He sighed. “Any
soccer is better than none—I guess.” He didn’t sound sure; not
even close.
“If the Foresters would let you come back—” Sarah began.
Saul cut her off with a sharp, chopping motion of his right hand.
“The Foresters would. They’d take me back like that.” He snapped
his fingers. “But if the SS says no…What are you going to do?” His
wave took in the sorry excuse for a pitch, the fumbling opponents,
and the paltry crowd. “You’re going to play in matches like this—for
as long as they let you, anyhow.”
“Why would they stop you?” Sarah asked.
“Why?” Her brother snorted. “I’ll tell you why. They’re liable to
realize we’re having fun in spite of everything, that’s why. And if they
do—” Saul made that chopping motion again.
“Oh.” Sarah left it right there. Saul’s words had a horrible feeling of
probability to them. The Nazis ruined things for Jews just to be
ruining them. That was how they had fun. And since they had the
Gestapo and the ordinary police and the Wehrmacht on their side,
they could have fun any way they wanted.
One of Saul’s teammates called to him. The older man thumped the
hero of the match on the back and handed him a bottle of beer.
Saul swigged from it. He made a face. “Even the beer’s gone
downhill since the war started,” he said. “It tastes like…lousy beer.”
What did he almost say? Horse piss? Goebbels piss? Whatever it
was, it didn’t come out. As Father had driven home to them again
and again, you couldn’t get in trouble for what you didn’t say.
Nobody could inform on you for what you were thinking. That might
save your life.

Or it might not. If the Nazis decided to do something to the Jews, or
to a particular Jew, they’d just go ahead and do it. They didn’t need
any excuses, the way they would have in a country where laws
counted for more than the Führer’s will. On the other hand, if a Jew
was dumb enough to give them an excuse, they’d grab it in a
heartbeat.
Sarah often wondered what she would do if Hitler or Himmler or
Göring or Heydrich or one of those people came to Münster. If she
had a chance…If she had a rifle…If she knew how to use a rifle…If
pigs had wings…
Even if she did exactly what she dreamt of doing, what kind of
revenge would the Nazis take? Would more than three or four Jews
be left alive in the Reich a day after a Jewish girl shot somebody like
that? Odds were against it. Too bad. The whole folk were a hostage.
In small groups, people started walking off toward their houses. No
bus or trolley line ran close to this pitch—what a surprise! Buses
had almost disappeared since the war started anyhow; whatever
fuel Germany had went to the Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe and the
Kriegsmarine. The only private cars that still got gasoline belonged
to doctors.
Well, walking a couple of kilometers was supposed to be good for
you. Saul didn’t seem to fret about it. But Sarah was tired by the
time she got home. Put together more exercise than she was used
to and tight wartime rations—all the tighter because she was a Jew
—and she felt as if she were walking uphill both ways.
There wasn’t much hot water, either. Saul complained loudest about
that—after ninety minutes of running up and down the pitch, he
needed hot water most. Or he thought he did, anyhow. Staring at

his grass-and mud-stained soccer togs, Mother only sighed. Those
wouldn’t come clean in cold water, either.
Staring glumly at black bread and cabbage and potatoes on her
supper plate, Sarah asked, “What are we going to do?”
“If we get through this alive, we’re ahead of the game,” her father
said, eyeing his supper with similar distaste. Sarah started to cry.
She’d wanted reassurance, but all she’d got was something she had
no trouble seeing herself.

A RUNNER BROUGHT SERGEANT HIDEKI FUJITA’S squad the
news: “Radio Berlin says Russia bombed East Prussia last night,”
the man reported. He stumbled a little over Russia and Prussia, but
Fujita followed him. The sergeant had studied a map. East Prussia
was the part of Germany the Reds could reach most easily.
Fujita glanced west, toward the Halha River and the high ground on
the far side. He would have been happy had only Mongol troops
prowled there. But, without a doubt, Russians were peering at the
Japanese positions through field glasses and rangefinders. Were
they listening to some incomprehensible Soviet broadcast telling
them that, 10,000 kilometers off to the west, their vast country had
just given another punch in the European war?
If they were, what did they propose to do about it? Would they send
more men out to this distant frontier to strengthen their Mongolian
puppets? Or would they think the fight against Germany—which
was, after all, much closer to their heartland—counted for more
than this distant skirmish?
“Any intercepts?” Fujita asked the runner. The Russians were tough
bastards—at least for Westerners—but they had horrible radio

security. Half the time, they’d send in plain language what they
should have encoded.
But this time the lance corporal shook his head. “Not that I heard
about, anyhow,” he answered.
“All right,” Fujita said. “Any gossip about what we’ll do on account of
this news?”
“Not that I heard about, Sergeant-san,” the runner repeated.
“Too bad.” Fujita made himself shrug. “One way or another, we’ll
find out sooner or later.”
Whatever Japan did, the sergeant suspected it wouldn’t happen at
once. Fall and winter weren’t the best time for campaigning up here.
As if to prove as much, the wind swung around to blow out of the
west the next morning, and carried choking clouds of yellow-brown
dust from the Mongolian heartland with it.
It blew hard for three days. Dust from Mongolia blew all the way
down to Peking and beyond. So close to the source, the storm was
appalling. When the sky finally cleared, when the sun no longer
seemed to shine through billowing smoke, the whole landscape had
changed. Dunes had shifted. Some had grown, others disappeared.
Dust buried the scraggly patches of steppe grass.
Captain Hasegawa, the company commander, shook his head after
coming by to survey the outpost. “Can you imagine living your whole
life in country like this? Turn your back on it, and half of it blows
away.”
The mere thought was enough to make Sergeant Fujita shudder.
“Sir, as far as I’m concerned, the Mongols are welcome to it.” Then
he corrected himself before Hasegawa could: “Well, they’re

welcome to all of it that doesn’t belong to Manchukuo, anyhow.”
“Hai. To that much and not a centimeter more,” Captain Hasegawa
said. Fujita let out a small sigh of relief—he wasn’t in trouble,
anyhow. Hasegawa looked out over the altered countryside. “At
least the Russians will have as much trouble seeing what we’re up
to as we do with them.”
“Yes, sir.” Fujita didn’t care to argue, even if he wasn’t one hundred
percent convinced. Oh, the captain was right—the Russians
wouldn’t be able to operate as usual during dust storms, either. But
what about the Mongols themselves? The Japanese in this
miserable place were probably lucky the natives hadn’t sneaked
through the dust and slit all their throats.
“You heard the Russians are really going after the Germans?”
Captain Hasegawa asked.
“Oh, yes, sir,” Fujita said. “The runner got here the day before the
storm started.”
“All right,” the company commander said. “Well, you can bet we’ll
take advantage of that. We’d have to be idiots not to.”
And so? Officers are idiots all the time. Fujita didn’t say that.
Sergeants might take it for granted, but somebody with more gold
and less red on his collar tabs wouldn’t. Fujita rubbed at his eyes,
which still felt gritty. His teeth crunched every time he closed his
mouth. He found something safe: “Whatever they want us to do,
we’ll do it. You know you can count on that, sir.”
Of course we’ll do it. If we disobey the orders, they’ll kill us. And our
families back in the Home Islands will be disgraced. Sergeant Fujita
knew exactly how things worked. For common soldiers and
noncommissioned officers, the army was a cruel, harsh, brutal

place. Officers didn’t have it so bad—but they necessarily looked
the other way while noncoms kept privates in line.
Many Japanese soldiers began coming up toward the front a few
days later. Sergeant Fujita would rather have seen them move up
during the dust storm, too. Pointing in the direction of the high
ground on the other side of the Halha, he complained, “The
Russians can watch everything we do.”
“For now,” Captain Hasegawa said. “Once we get moving, we’ll take
their observation posts away from them, neh?”
“Yes, sir.” Fujita said the only thing he could. He wished he were as
confident as the company commander—and, presumably, the high
command. But the Japanese and the Russians had been banging
heads on the border between Manchukuo and Mongolia for a while
now. The Red Army had more airplanes, more armor, and more
artillery—and had had the better of the skirmishes. Why should
anything change now?
As if plucking that thought out of his head, Captain Hasegawa said,
“The round-eyed barbarians will worry more about the Germans
than they do about us. This is our neighborhood. They look towards
Europe. They can’t help it.”
Since Fujita had had pretty much the same notion—and since
Hasegawa was his superior—he couldn’t very well disagree. All he
could do was hope it was true…and hope his own side brought in
enough force to win once the serious fighting started.
Artillery did come forward along with the foot soldiers. So did sleek,
modern monoplane fighters. Sitting on the ground, they looked as if
they ought to sweep the Soviet biplanes from the sky.
Armored cars and a few tanks also rattled up to the front line. Fujita

was glad to see them, and wished he were seeing more of them.
This might be the back of beyond for the Russians, but they had
plenty of tanks here.
“Don’t worry about it,” Captain Hasegawa told him when he
cautiously expressed misgivings. “This isn’t the only place where
we’ll be facing off against the Russians. We’ll put our tanks where
we need them most.”
And where would that be? Fujita wondered. But a moment’s thought
gave him the answer. If Japanese armor would strike anywhere, it
would strike at the Trans-Siberian Railroad. Back before the RussoJapanese War, the Tsar had been able to ship troops down through
Manchuria. The Soviets couldn’t do that any more; Japan controlled
the railroads in what was now Manchukuo. But, just on the other
side of the border, the railroad was Stalin’s key to defending
Vladivostok and the rest of eastern Siberia. Break the line, take it
away from the Reds, and the port and the whole vast country would
fall into Japanese hands like a ripe persimmon.
The Russians weren’t blind. They could see that, too. They would
fight as hard as they could to protect the Trans-Siberian Railroad.
But the Russian heartland lay thousands of kilometers off to the
west. Japan lay right across the sea that bore her name. The Amur
separated Manchukuo from the USSR, the Yalu divided Chosen
—Korea, to old people—from Stalin’s ramshackle Asiatic empire.
Logistics, then, were all on Japan’s side.
So the big fight would be there, along the border between Japan’s
mainland possessions and Soviet Siberia. This Mongol business
was only a sideshow. It would never be anything but a sideshow
—that was how it looked to Sergeant Fujita, anyhow.
He sighed. “We’re stuck here, neh?”

“Yes, I think we are.” Captain Hasegawa sent him a shrewd look.
“Why? Would you rather be on the Amur?”
“Yes, sir, I would.” Fujita didn’t beat around the bush. “What
happens there really means something. This…This is nothing but a
bunch of crap. Please excuse me for saying so, sir, but it’s true.”
He waited for a reprimand, or maybe even a slap in the face. You
weren’t supposed to complain about your assignment. Oh, you
could grouse with your buddies. But to a superior you were
supposed to pretend everything was fine. Well, things weren’t fine.
And, dammit, the company commander asked. All Fujita did was tell
the truth. Of course, sometimes that was the most dangerous thing
you could do, even more dangerous than charging a Russian
machine-gun nest.
“We do need men here. We can’t let the Russians and Mongols
steal what’s ours,” Hasegawa said. “But I admit, I wish I weren’t one
of them, too.” He shrugged. “Somebody has to do it, though, and it
looks like we’re the ones.”
Sergeant Fujita sighed one more time: a martyr’s sigh. “Yes, sir.”

JOAQUIN DELGADILLO WATCHED ITALIAN TANKS clank toward the
front. The crews looked impressive in their black coveralls.
Delgadillo didn’t let the stylish uniforms fool him. The Italians looked
much less impressive in full retreat, and he’d seen that move more
often than he cared to remember.
Mussolini’s soldiers didn’t want to be in Spain. They cared nothing
for Marshal Sanjurjo’s war. And they fought like it, too. If the Reds
who fought for the Republic didn’t run away, the Italians would.

The Condor Legion, now…The Condor Legion was different.
Joaquin Delgadillo didn’t like Germans. He didn’t see how you could.
To him, as to any Spaniard with a working set of cojones, Germans
were technicians, not warriors. They made no bones about why
they’d come to Spain: to learn what they needed to know for the
upcoming European war. Now that war wasn’t upcoming. It was here.
But the armored forces and machine-gun units in the Condor
Legion had never got a name for cutting and running, the way the
Italians had. Maybe courage wasn’t what kept them in the field.
Maybe it was just professional self-respect. Whatever it was, you
had to admire it. This might not have been the Germans’ fight, but
they performed as if it were.
Now the Germans in Spain had the same enemies as the ones back
in Germany: Communists, freethinkers, republicans, liberals of
every stripe. And they, and the Italians, and Marshal Sanjurjo, were
doing everything they could to crush the enemy here before the aid
flooding in from France and England let the Red Republic seize the
initiative.
Those Italian tanks kept rattling forward. Vinaroz, on the eastern
coast, lay a few kilometers to the north. Sanjurjo’s men had already
taken the town once, when they cut the Republic in half. Now an
enemy drive down from Catalonia, one backed by French armor
and aircraft, had recaptured it.
“What do you think?” Delgadillo asked his sergeant. “Can we get it
back?”
Miguel Carrasquel shrugged. “That’s what our orders are,” he
answered, which meant, We’ll keep trying till we’re all dead, or till
the orders change—and don’t expect the orders to change.
Carrasquel had bad teeth and was missing half his left ear. His grin,

then, looked most unpleasant. “What’s the matter, Prettyboy? Don’t
want to get messed up?”
Joaquin didn’t think he was especially handsome. But the sergeant
called anybody who hadn’t been wounded Prettyboy. You didn’t
want to get mad about it. Carrasquel was a good man with a knife.
Machine-gun bullets spanged off the Italian tanks and tankettes.
The commanders in the impressive black coveralls ducked down
behind the shelter of their armor. One or two of them waited too
long, and got hit before they could. The armored fighting vehicles
clattered forward anyhow. Joaquin nodded to himself. He didn’t mind
people ducking when the enemy shot at them. He did it himself
—who didn’t? As long as you carried on regardless, you earned
your pay.
Tanks were magnets for machine-gun fire. He’d seen that before.
Fewer bullets fought the Nationalist foot soldiers who loped along
with the mechanical monsters. Since Joaquin was one of those
soldiers, he approved of that. One bullet hitting you was one too
many.
Most of the men up ahead didn’t wear uniforms at all: not what he
thought of as uniforms, anyhow. They had on overalls instead, as if
they were factory workers. That made them Catalan Communists or
anarchists. Up till the war started, they had been factory workers.
The ones still alive after two and a half years of fighting knew their
business as well as any other veterans.
Clang! That cry of metal against tortured metal wasn’t a machinegun bullet. That was an AP shell from a cannon striking home. Sure
as the devil, a tankette came to an abrupt halt. Smoke and then fire
poured from it. Ammunition inside started cooking off. Joaquin didn’t
think either Italian got out.

“Tanks!” Somebody pointed ahead. The man’s voice wasn’t
panicked, but it wasn’t far removed, either. More often than not, the
Nationalists had had tanks and the Republicans hadn’t. With aid
flooding over the Pyrenees from France, the miserable Reds were
getting more of their own.
These machines were French, all right. By the look of them, they’d
been around since the last war. But they had turrets and treads and
cannon and enough steel to keep out small-arms fire. If they weren’t
exactly swift…well, so what?
One of them fired at an Italian tank. Clang! There was that horrible
bell-like sound again. The Italian machine’s armor wasn’t thick
enough to hold out an armor-piercing round. Somebody got out of
an escape hatch in the turret before the tank brewed up. It didn’t do
him much good—a burst from a machine gun cut him down before
he’d run ten meters.
Tanks on both sides stopped to fire at foes, then got moving again
to make themselves harder to hit. The Italian tankettes kept on
moving and shooting. They mounted only machine guns, and
weren’t dangerous to real tanks. They could do horrible things to
infantry, though.
As the tanks slowed, so did the rest of the Nationalist advance.
Joaquin flopped onto his belly behind a pile of rubble that had been
a stone barn. Every so often, he rose up enough to fire. Then he
crawled somewhere else before squeezing off another round. No
sniper would draw an easy bead on him. Veterans learned things
like that. The guys who didn’t…didn’t get to be veterans.
Sergeant Carrasquel crouched behind a fence not far away.
Delgadillo waited for the sergeant to order him forward again. But
the squad leader stayed where he was, firing every now and then.

He kept his mouth shut. Maybe he’d decided the attack wouldn’t get
much farther no matter what.
Joaquin Delgadillo sure felt that way. The Republicans had been
tough even while outnumbered and outgunned. This push, plainly,
aimed to take back as much as possible from them while they still
were.
It also seemed designed to get a lot of Nationalist soldiers killed.
Mortar bombs started whispering down around Joaquin and
Sergeant Carrasquel. Both men dug like moles. Joaquin hated
mortars. The Republicans had been using a Russian model for a
long time. Now they also had French tubes, and those were just as
good or maybe even better.
Somebody yowled like a wildcat, which meant a jagged steel
fragment had bitten him. Joaquin hoped it was no one he knew. You
always hated to hear a buddy get it. That reminded you how easily
you might stop something yourself.
“Ave Maria,” Joaquin whispered. As he went through the Hail Mary in
Latin, his left hand found the rosary in his tunic pocket. Keep me
safe, he thought. Let Marshal Sanjurjo win, but please, God, keep
me safe.

THE NORTH SEA IN NOVEMBER was nowhere a skipper wanted to
go. It was even less pleasant in a U-boat than it would have been in
a larger surface warship. Lieutenant Julius Lemp guided U-30 north
and east. He had to get around the British Isles to take up his
assigned position in the mid-Atlantic.
He liked everything about his boat except the way it rolled and
pitched in the heavy seas. Type VII U-boats made everything that

had come before them seem like children’s toys by comparison.
They had outstanding range. They could make seventeen knots on
the surface and eight submerged, and could go eighteen hours at
four knots underwater.
During the last war, the British mined the northern reaches of the
North Sea, trying to bottle up the U-boats. With hundreds and
hundreds of kilometers between Scotland and Norway, they couldn’t
sew things up tight there the way they did in the Channel. But they
could make life difficult, and they did.
They were supposed to be trying the same thing this time around.
Lemp had orders to sink any minelayers he spotted. Odds against
spying any were long: it was a big ocean, and he couldn’t see very
much of it, even with the Zeiss binoculars hanging around his neck.
But his superiors were thorough. They wouldn’t have got those wide
gold stripes on their sleeves if they weren’t.
Gray clouds scudded low overhead, driven by a strong west wind. In
clear weather, Lemp would have scanned sky as well as sea with his
binoculars. One thing had changed from the last war: airplanes
were much more dangerous than they had been. They could carry
bigger bombs, and carry them farther. And they all had radio sets,
so they could guide enemy warships to a U-boat’s path.
In this weather, though, a plane would have a devil of a time
spotting the U-30. Lemp thought a pilot would have to be nuts even
to take off, but he also thought pilots were nuts. Maybe it evened
out.
About the most interesting thing he saw on his watch was a puffin
that landed on the conning tower for a moment. With its plump,
dignified body and the big beak in bright crayon colors, the bird
looked as if a talented but strange child had drawn it. It also looked

confused, as if wondering how this convenient little island had
popped up in the middle of the sea. Then it noticed Julius Lemp
—and then it was flying away again, as fast as it could.
“I don’t like puffin stew,” Lemp said. The wind blew his words away.
Chances were the puffin wouldn’t have believed him anyway. Birds
didn’t live to grow old by trusting people.
At 1400 on the dot, Ensign Klaus Hammerstein’s shoes clanged on
the iron rungs of the ladder leading up to the top of the conning
tower. “I relieve you, sir,” the youngster said formally, and then,
“Anything I need to know?”
“Don’t talk to puffins,” Lemp replied, deadpan.
Hammerstein’s left eyebrow—the sardonic one—rose a few
millimeters. “Hadn’t really planned to…sir.” He took a deep breath,
and his expression cleared. “Nice to get up here, isn’t it?”
“Don’t remind me. I’m going the other way.” With a sigh, Lemp
descended into the bowels of the U-30.
When the sun shone brightly, when the sky was blue, when the sea
was smooth, you could easily think that coming off watch and going
back into the iron coffin that let you do your job was like going from
heaven to hell. With winter on its way in the North Sea, the change
wasn’t that bad, but it sure wasn’t good.
Bowels…Julius Lemp wished he hadn’t thought of that particular
word, because it fit much too well. U-boats filled with every stench in
the world; they might have been a distillery for bad smells. High on
the list was the reek from the heads. Toilets that worked without
putting the boat at risk of flooding were something German
engineering was…almost up to. No U-boat had ever been lost
because of a malfunctioning head—which didn’t make the toilets a

nice place to be around.
Unwashed bodies, musty clothes, and stale food added to the reek.
U-boats carried enough drinking water. Water for washing was a
luxury they didn’t bother with. Seawater and saltwater soap were
supposed to make up the lack. As with the heads, theory ran
several lengths in front of performance.
Bilgewater added a swampy smell as old as the sea—as old as
boats, anyhow. When you first came down into it, the combination
was enough to knock you for a loop. After a while, you stopped
smelling it—your brain blanked it out. But when you’d been
breathing fresh salt air, the change was like getting a garbage can
thrown in your face.
The sailors looked as if they might have been demons from hell,
too. The orange light bulbs didn’t help. More to it than those,
though. A U-boat skipper couldn’t insist on spit and polish the way
officers in ordinary warships did. The men were too cramped
together here—and U-boat crewmen were commonly harder cases
than sailors in surface ships, too.
A lot of them started beards as soon as they left port. Shaving with
saltwater soap was no fun. Even if it were, these guys were a raffish
lot. They enjoyed flouting regulations. Lemp couldn’t very well ream
them out for it, not when he was sprouting strawberry-blond face
fungus himself.
Off-duty men looked up from a game of skat. Nobody jumped to his
feet and saluted. If you sprang to attention on a U-boat, you were
liable to coldcock yourself on an overhead pipe. In that, U-boats
were like panzers: being a shrimp helped.
He hadn’t been below long when a shout floated down from the

conning tower: “Ship ho! Ship off the starboard bow!”
That sent him scrambling up the ladder again. He wanted to see the
ship for himself. No—he needed to see it for himself. If it was a
warship, he would sink it if he could. No German surface units were
in these waters. But if it was a freighter…Life got complicated then.
Belgium and Holland, Norway and Denmark and Sweden were
neutrals. Sinking a freighter bound for one of them could land the
Reich in hot water. Freighters shaping a course for England,
though, were fair game.
Up into the fresh air again. “Where away, Klaus?” he asked.
“There, sir.” Hammerstein pointed. “A smoke smudge.”
“Ja.” Lemp saw it, too. “We’ll have to get closer, see what it is.” They
could do that. The U-30’s diesel engines gave off less smoke than
did ships burning fuel oil or coal. And the gray-painted U-boat sat
low in the water, making it hard to spot. Julius Lemp called down the
hatch: “Change course to 350. I say again—350.”
“Jawohl. Changing course to 350,” the helmsman answered, and
the U-30 swung almost due north.
Lemp and Hammerstein both raised their binoculars, waiting for the
ship to come up over the horizon. Lemp didn’t forget the rest of the
seascape and the sky. You could get caught with your pants down if
you concentrated too much on your prey. That was how you turned
into prey yourself. Every so often, when the skipper lowered his field
glasses for a moment, he looked over at Ensign Hammerstein. The
pup hadn’t forgotten to look other places besides dead ahead,
either. Good.
“That’s no freighter, sir,” Hammerstein said after a while.

“Damn right it isn’t,” Lemp agreed. The silhouette, while tiny, was
too sleek, too well raked, to haul anything so mundane as barley or
iron ore. Easier to mistake a thoroughbred for a cart horse than a
freighter for a…“Destroyer, I think, or maybe a minelayer.”
“I want one of those!” the ensign said. “The bastards are
dangerous.”
“Too right they are,” Lemp replied. Admirals sneered at mines—but
admirals didn’t have to face them. Sailors who did had a healthy
respect for them. Mines were worse than a nuisance—they were a
scourge. And they were an economical scourge, because they
murdered ships without endangering the murderers…most of the
time. But not today! Lemp set a hand on Hammerstein’s shoulder.
“Let’s go below.”
The U-30 stalked the enemy warship at periscope depth. That
slowed the approach, but no help for it. If the ship spotted the Uboat, she could get away—or fight back. In a surface action, the U30 was doomed. Her deck guns were for shooting up freighters and
shooting down airplanes, not for taking on anything with real
weaponry.
“It is a minelayer, by God!” Lemp said. The silhouette matched the
one in Jane’s Fighting Ships. How thoughtful of the English to help
destroy themselves. The enemy vessel went about her business
without the slightest suspicion the U-30 was anywhere in the
neighborhood. That was just how Lemp liked it. It might as well have
been a training run. He sneaked to within a kilometer.
At his orders, the torpedomen readied three fish in the forward
tubes. The enemy ship filled the periscope’s field of view. Fighter
pilots from Spain said you had to get close to make sure of a hit.
The same held true under the sea.

“First torpedo—los!” Lemp called. Clang! Whoosh! “Second torpedo
—los!” Clang! Whoosh “Third torpedo—los!” Clang! Whoosh!
Under two minutes to the target. The minelayer showed sudden,
urgent smoke—someone aboard her must have spotted the wakes.
But you couldn’t do much, not in that little bit of time. And Lemp had
aimed one of the torpedoes on the assumption that the enemy
vessel would speed up.
Boom! “Hit!” Lemp shouted exultantly. The U-30’s crew cheered.
Then a much bigger Boom! followed. The exploding torpedo must
have touched off the mines the enemy ship carried. The minelayer
went up in a fireball—and the U-boat might have been under the
worst depth-charge attack in the world. It staggered in the water.
Light bulbs blew from bow to stern, plunging the boat into darkness.
Several leaks started.
With matter-of-fact competence, the crew went to work setting
things to rights. Torches flashed on. Sailors began stopping the
leaks. Lemp ordered U-30 to the surface. If there were survivors,
he’d pick them up. He didn’t expect trouble, anyhow.
And he didn’t get any. Bodies floated in the chilly water. He saw no
British sailors still alive. With that stunning blast, he was hardly
surprised. A little disappointed, maybe, but not surprised. The
minelayer had already gone to the bottom.
“Resume our previous course,” he told the helmsman. “We’ll
celebrate properly when we’re clear.”
“Resuming previous course.” The petty officer grinned. Schnapps
was against regulations—which didn’t mean people wouldn’t get a
knock after a triumph like this.

These days, the British Expeditionary Force was mechanized. That
meant Staff Sergeant Alistair Walsh got to ride a lorry from Calais to
this piddlepot hole in the ground somewhere right next to the
Belgian border. Then he jumped down out of the lorry…and he was
back in the mud again. Twenty years unwound as if they had never
been.
If anything, this was worse than what he’d known in 1918. He’d
fought through the spring and summer then, and got wounded early
in fall. Guys who’d been through the mill talked about how miserable
trenches got when it was cold and wet. Guys who’d been through
the mill always talked. This time, they were right.
He squelched when he walked. So did everybody else. People
screamed “Keep your feet dry!” the same way they screamed
“Always wear a rubber!” Not too many people listened—and wasn’t
that a surprise? The first cases of trench foot meant rockets went
up from the people with red stripes on their caps.
Walsh remembered a trick he’d heard about in the last war. “Rub

your feet with Vaseline, thick as you can,” he told the men in his
company. “Do your damnedest to keep your socks dry, but
greasing’s better than nothing.”
Only one man came down with trench foot, and he didn’t follow
instructions. “Good job, Sergeant,” said Captain Ted Peters.
“Thank you, sir,” Walsh answered. He was old enough to be the
company commander’s father, but he would have had to start
mighty young. “Some of these buggers haven’t got the sense God
gave a Frenchman.”
“Or a Belgian.” Peters scratched at his skinny little mustache. Walsh
didn’t think much of the modern fashion. If he was going to grow hair
on his upper lip, he wanted a proper mustache, not one that looked
put on with a burnt match. But he couldn’t deny that the captain was
a clever bloke. Peters went on, “You know why we haven’t crossed
the border and taken up positions where we might do some good?”
“Belgians haven’t invited us in, like,” Walsh answered.
“That’s right. They’re neutral, don’t you know?” The way Captain
Peters rolled his eyes told what he thought of that. “They think
they’ll offend the Boches if they get ready to defend themselves.
Much good that kind of thing did them in 1914.”
Maybe he’d been born in 1914. Maybe not, too. Either way, he was
right. “The Germans jumped them then. They’ll jump them again.
Hitler’s a bigger liar than the damned Kaiser ever was,” Walsh said.
“Too bloody right he is,” Captain Peters agreed. “You can see that. I
can, too. So why can’t King Leopold?”
“Because he’s a bleeding idiot…sir?” Walsh suggested. “Like one of
those ostriches, with its head in the sand?”

“He’s got his head up his arse,” Peters said. Walsh goggled; he
hadn’t thought the captain talked like that. “Thinks the French are
as bad as the Germans. Thinks we are, for Christ’s sake.”
“What can you expect from a wog?” Walsh said. As far as he was
concerned, wogs started on the far side of the Channel. The
French were wogs on his side, which meant he cut them some
slack. The Belgians weren’t, and he didn’t.
He had genuine respect for the bastards in the field-gray uniforms
and the coal-scuttle helmets. The Germans fought hard, and in the
last war they’d fought as clean as anyone else. What more could
you want from the enemy?
Patiently, Captain Peters answered the question he’d meant as
rhetorical: “I would expect an ounce of sense. If the balloon goes up
—no, when it goes up—we’re going to have to rush forward to
reach the positions we should already have. So will the French.
That will give the Germans extra time to advance and consolidate,
time they simply shouldn’t have.”
“What can we do about it, sir?” Walsh said.
“Damn all,” the company commander replied, which was about what
the sergeant had expected. “Leopold won’t listen to reason.”
“Maybe something ought to happen to him—an accident, like,”
Walsh said. “Not cricket, I know, but…Got to be some Belgians what
can add two and two, right?”
“You’d think so. But if we try something like that and muck it up,
what happens then?” This time, Peters answered his own question:
“We throw Leopold into Hitler’s arms, that’s what. If the Belgians line
up with Germany, we’re buggered for fair.”

Sergeant Walsh only grunted. He didn’t worry about Belgian
soldiers. Who in his right mind would? But a Belgium leaning toward
Hitler gave the Germans a red carpet for invading France. As soon
as he called up a map in his mind, he saw as much. “We’d best not
muck it up, then,” he said.
Peters lit a cigarette. Then he offered Walsh the packet, which an
officer didn’t have to do. Walsh took a coffin nail and sketched a
salute. Peters’ cheeks hollowed as he sucked in smoke. “Don’t get
your hopes up for anything like that, Sergeant,” he said. “Not bloody
likely, no matter how much sense it makes. The Belgies like
Leopold, same as we like our King. That’s what he’s there for—to
be liked.”
“Edward’s gone,” Walsh pointed out.
Now Captain Peters grunted. “You like to argue, don’t you?” he
said, but a chuckle told the sergeant he wasn’t really angry. “If you
could arrange for Leopold to fall in love with a popsy…”
“Could I have a couple of months’ leave to set it up, sir?”
“Why would you need so bloody long?”
“Well, sir, I’ve got to try out the popsies, don’t I, to see which one
he’d like best,” Walsh answered innocently.
That won him a snort from the company commander. “Sorry, Walsh.”
He looked east, across the Belgian frontier. “I’m not at all sure we’ve
got two months.”

ONCE UPON A TIME, U.S. MARINES swaggered through the streets
of Peking. People got out of the way for them. They had to be

careful nowadays, though. They still counted for more than the
Chinese did. But when Japanese soldiers came through, the
leathernecks had to be the ones who stepped aside. Orders said
so.
Pete McGill hated the orders, even though he understood the need
for them. One Marine could wipe the floor with one Japanese
soldier. Four or five Marines could lick four or five Japanese
soldiers. The little men were plenty tough, but they were little.
And a platoon of Japanese soldiers could beat and stomp four or
five Marines if they found any excuse to do it. They had, once or
twice. U.S. military authorities protested when it happened. The
Japs ignored the protests. As far as they were concerned, Peking
was theirs now. All the other foreign troops stayed there on
sufferance.
So now the idea was not to give them any excuses. “Hell of a note,”
Corporal McGill complained. He and some of his buddies had just
come out of the Yü Hua T’ai—the Restaurant of Rich and Fine
Viands. He was full of shrimp and scallops, the specialties of the
house, or he would have complained more. But he was also full of
kao liang, which was brewed from millet and strong as the devil
(some people said the Chinese also threw in pigeon droppings to
give it extra body).
“Damn straight.” Herman Szulc knew what Pete was talking about.
The big Polack had taken aboard even more kao liang than he had.
Szulc got mean when he drank, too. “Ought to bust those little
cocksucking monkeys right in the chops, just to show ‘em they can’t
get away with shit like that.”
“Ain’t supposed to,” Pooch Puccinelli said. He always did exactly
what he was told, and worried about everything else later. That

made him a damn good Marine. Had the orders been to jump on the
Japs with both feet, he would have. Since they were to go easy, he
obeyed again—and he would do his damnedest to make sure
everybody else followed along.
Szulc scowled at him. “I don’t got no orders not to bust you in the
chops.”
“Well, you can try,” Pooch answered. Without orders, he didn’t back
away from anything or anybody.
“Cut the crap, both of you,” McGill said. He didn’t want to have to
break up a brawl between his pals. He didn’t want to get sucked into
one, either. “What do you say we go get our ashes hauled?”
“Now you’re talking!” Puccinelli was always ready for that. Herman
Szulc didn’t say no. What Marine would have? Peking was pussy
paradise. There were lots of whorehouses, they were cheap, most
of the girls were pretty, and all of them were versatile. The only
drawback was, it was mighty easy to come down venereal. Flunk a
shortarm inspection, and the Corps landed on you like a ton of
bricks.
With money in his pocket and kao liang in his veins, Pete wasn’t
inclined to worry about that—not now, anyway. Even a Marine
corporal was a rich man in Peking. He knew damn well the
Restaurant of Rich and Fine Viands had overcharged him and his
pals as much as the Chinamen thought they could get away with. He
didn’t care…too much. The chow was good, and it was still damn
cheap. Whorehouses worked the same way. You could get whatever
you wanted, and it wouldn’t cost you half of what you’d pay in
Honolulu or San Diego. The Chinese put down less? Well, so what?
The Marines came out of Hsi La Hutung—an alleyway wider than
McGill’s wingspan, but not by a whole lot—and out onto Morrison

McGill’s wingspan, but not by a whole lot—and out onto Morrison
Street. Somebody’d told McGill that the Chinese name for the street
was Main Street of the Well of the Prince’s Palace, but it was
Morrison Street to all the foreigners in Peking. Iron sheeting
covered the well these days, but people still shoved it out of the way
and drew up water every now and then. Some of the Royal Marines
said Morrison had been a writer for the Times of London, and he’d
lived at Number 98. Nowadays, an Italian firm occupied the building.
Chinese on foot, Chinese on bicycles, plump Chinese riding in
rickshaws pulled by gaunt Chinese, older Chinese women hobbling
along on what they called lotus feet, Chinese (inevitably) selling
things, Chinese spitting and blowing their noses…

Chinese scrambling out of the way…Chinese leaping from the street
onto the rickety sidewalks…Chinese bowing low…
“Oh, fuck,” Puccinelli said. “Here come those goddamn slant-eyed
mothers.”
Chinese were slant-eyed, too, but Pooch wasn’t talking about them.
Up Morrison Street came a long column of Japanese soldiers. They
marched in formation, a bayoneted rifle on each tough little man’s
right shoulder. When a noncom spotted a Chinaman who failed to
show proper respect, four Japs jumped out of the line, grabbed the
offender, and kicked him and beat him with rifle butts. They left him
groaning and bloody and hustled back into place.
“Nod to the slanty bastards,” McGill said. He met a Japanese
sergeant’s eye and nodded, equal to equal. The Jap gazed back.
His gaze showed nothing for a moment. But then he nodded back.
He’d won the exchange—Pete had acknowledged him first.
The other Marines also nodded to the Japanese troops. They got a
few nods in return. Most of the Japs just ignored them. Nobody gave
them a hard time. As far as Pete was concerned, that would do fine.
When the tail of the column got out of earshot, Szulc said, “Been a
lot of the little monkeys going through town lately.”
“Yeah.” McGill nodded. “I hear they’re mostly getting on trains and
heading north.”
“They gonna finally get off the pot with the Russians?” Szulc said.
“Talk about deserving each other…” No Marine in Peking felt
anything better than grudging respect for the Japanese, and Pete
had never run into a Polack who had anything good to say about
Russians.

“Who cares? That ain’t our worry any which way. We were gonna
get laid, remember?” Puccinelli kept his mind firmly on what
mattered—or in the gutter, depending on how you looked at things.
NUMBER 1 GOOD TIME, the joyhouse said in English. It had a
bigger sign in Chinese. Pete would have bet that was dirtier. The
Chinese had no idea what shame was, as far as he could see.
“Marines!” the madam exclaimed. Meal tickets! was what it sounded
like. Sure as hell, they would have to pay more for this than the
locals did, too. “Make you happy!” the middle-aged woman went on.
Make me rich, she probably meant. Her cut of the wages of sin
looked pretty nice. She wore brocaded silk. Gold gleamed around
her neck and on her fingers and ears; jewels sparkled in her hair.
“Show us the girls!” That was Szulc, who also didn’t believe in
dicking around when it came to dicking around.
“Yes, yes, yes!” The madam was all smiles. Pete McGill heard the
ching of a cash register in her agreement. Well, what the hell did
you expect when you went to a whorehouse? This gal had blond
sisters back in the States. He’d dealt with his share of them. All the
same, it did take a little of the edge off.
He got the edge back when he picked his girl. She reminded him of
a Siamese cat, except her eyes weren’t blue. He paid the madam
and took the girl upstairs.
His being large and hairy didn’t faze her. She wasn’t just in from the
countryside, then; she’d seen round-eyes before. She didn’t know
any English, though. Oh, well, McGill thought. He could show her
what he wanted. He could—and he did.
The way she gasped and squeezed him inside at the end made him

think he brought her off, too. Of course, whores were part
actresses. If they made the john think he was a prize stud, he’d shell
out more. And Pete did give her an extra dollar, saying, “Don’t tell
the old bitch downstairs.”
She hugged him and kissed him and made the fat silver coin
disappear even though she was naked. Pete didn’t see exactly
where it went. Into her lacquered hair? Or…? He shrugged. It wasn’t
his worry.
Szulc was sitting in the waiting room when he got down there.
Puccinelli took longer coming back. “Twice!” he said proudly.
“You went off in your pants the first time?” McGill gibed.
“Not likely!” Pooch said. “You shoulda heard that broad squeal!”
“Thank you! Thank you! Drink?” the madam said. Herman Szulc
looked ready, but Pete shook his head and steered his buddies out.
“You don’t wanna have any fun,” Szulc complained.
“I don’t wanna get drugged and rolled,” McGill answered. “I may be
dumb, but I ain’t that dumb. If I was a regular there, I might chance
it, but not when it’s my first time in the joint.”
“Let’s go some place where they do know us and drink there,”
Pooch said.
“Now you’re talking!” Szulc said. It sounded good to Pete, too.
When they got back to the barracks, they were drunk as lords. The
next morning, McGill repented of his sins. Coffee and aspirins
blunted down the whimwhams without stopping them.

Pete felt so rotten, he almost forgot about the long column of
Japanese troops he’d seen the night before. Almost, but not quite.
He reported to Captain Horner, his company commander.
Horner heard him out, then nodded. “Uh-huh,” the officer said
thoughtfully. “You think they were going to head north?”
“Well, I don’t know for sure, sir,” McGill replied. “If I was a betting
man, though, that’s how I’d lay my money.”
“If you were a betting man…” Horner snorted. “You’d bet on how
many raindrops landed in a pail in twenty minutes.” He had a
Tidewater accent thick enough to slice. A hell of a lot of Marines,
and especially Marine officers, had a drawl. And Captain Horner
knew him damn well.
“One good thing, sir,” McGill said. The captain raised a blond
eyebrow. Pete went on, “If the Japs are heading north like that, they
ain’t gonna jump on us right away.”
“You hope,” Horner said. Pete nodded. The company CO was right.
He sure as hell did hope.

INTERNED. OFFICIALLY, VACLAV JEZEK WAS classed as a
displaced person. It wasn’t quite the same as being a POW. The
Poles were treating all the Czechs who’d got over the border
—soldiers and civilians, men, women, and children—the same way.
Yeah, they were treating them all the same way, all right. They were
treating them all like dogs.
Barbed wire fenced off the Czechs’ encampment from the rest of
Poland. Poles with rifles and sandbagged machine-gun nests made

sure the Czechs didn’t come through the wire. The DPs lived under
canvas despite rain and cold. They ate Polish army rations. That
was what the Poles claimed, anyhow. If it was true, Vaclav pitied
Polish soldiers.
Most of the Polish guards treated the Czech men—and especially
the soldiers—like animals in the zoo. (Quite a few of them were
friendly to the Czech women—what a surprise! And some of the
women gave their all, too, for better food or more food or whatever
else they happened to need.)
A few of the guards turned out to be human beings in spite of being
Poles—that was how Jezek saw it, anyhow, though he wasn’t an
unbiased observer. He could talk to them in bits of Czech and Polish
and in (dammit!) German. “We don’t want you people here,” one of
the decent guards said. “You embarrass us.”
“Why?” Vaclav said. “All we did was get out alive after the fucking
Nazis went and jumped us.”
“But Poland and Germany are friends,” the Polish soldier said.
“That’s why we don’t want you here.”
“Friends with Germany? God help you!” Jezek said. “Is the pig
friends with the farmer? Till he’s a ham, he is.”
The Pole—his name was Leszek—pointed east. “Germany keeps
the Russians away. Better Hitler than Stalin any day.”
“Better anybody than Hitler,” Vaclav said stubbornly. “Anybody.
Better the Devil than Hitler.”
Leszek crossed himself. “Stalin is the Devil. He turns churches into
stables and brothels. And half the Reds who run Russia are kikes.
Hitler knows what to do about them, by God. We ought to give ours

what-for, too. If we don’t, they’ll steal the country out from under us.”
Vaclav didn’t care about Jews one way or the other. He just said, “If
you end up in bed with the Nazis, you’ll get it as bad as the Jews do.
”
“You’re only mad because the Germans beat you,” Leszek said.
“Sure. And Poland never lost a war,” the Czech retorted. Even if
Leszek wasn’t a bad guy, that reminder was more than he could
stomach. He stomped off. Vaclav wondered if he’d come back with
his buddies to do some real stomping. But Leszek didn’t, which only
proved he had an even temper.
A few days later, a Czech-speaking Polish officer addressed the
displaced persons. He used Czech words, all right, but he
pronounced them like a Pole: with the accent always on the next-tolast syllable, not at the beginning of a word, where to Czech ears it
belonged. “A Czechoslovak government-in-exile has been formed in
Paris,” he said. “Its leaders say they will care for anyone who comes
to them. I am looking for volunteers at the moment.”
Never volunteer. Any soldier knew that ancient basic rule. Vaclav’s
hand shot up all the same. Anything had to be better than this. And
what would the Poles do to Czech soldiers who didn’t volunteer?
Ship them back over the border into German hands? Then it would
be a POW cage for the rest of the war—if it wasn’t a bullet in the
back of the neck.
Several other men also raised their hands, and a few women as
well. The rest stood where they were without doing anything. The
Polish officer’s lips thinned. He must have expected a bigger
response. When he saw he wouldn’t get one, he said, “All right.
Take whatever you have and meet me by the east gate in fifteen
minutes.” He strode away, his polished boots gleaming.

minutes.” He strode away, his polished boots gleaming.
Vaclav didn’t need fifteen minutes to gather his belongings. The
Poles had relieved him of his rifle and ammunition and helmet and
entrenching tool. He’d eaten the iron rations he’d carried. About all
that was left in his pack were a blanket, a spare pair of socks, a
housewife for quick repairs—he’d never make a tailor—some
bandages, and his bayonet, which the Poles hadn’t wanted. It made
a perfectly good eating knife.
A couple of Czechs who hadn’t raised a hand joined the men and
women who had. They must have decided, as Vaclav had, that
anything beat this.
The Polish officer led a squad of riflemen. “Come with me,” he told
the Czechs. “Make sure you come with me. If you try to run off, I
promise you will never do another foolish thing again.”
Off they went, at a brisk military march. Some of the Czechs weren’t
young, and couldn’t keep up. Grudgingly, the Polish officer slowed
down for them. He might have laid on a truck or two. He might have,
but he hadn’t.
They marched for eight or ten kilometers. It didn’t faze Vaclav; he’d
done far worse with far more on his back. Other interned soldiers
also managed easily. But some of the civilians looked ready to fall
over dead by the time they got to a shabby little railroad depot
sitting there in the middle of nowhere.
Half an hour later, a train chugged up from out of the west. “Get
aboard,” the officer said.
“But—it’s going east!” one of the women complained.
“Ano.” The Pole nodded. He said that in perfectly proper Czech; in

his own language, yes was tak.
“Paris is that way!” The woman pointed in the direction from which
the train had come.
“So is Germany,” the officer reminded her. The woman’s face fell.
The Pole went on, “The train will take you to Romania. There are
supposed to be arrangements to transport you from there to
France. If there aren’t…” He shrugged. Vaclav had no trouble
understanding that. If there weren’t, it was the Romanians’ worry,
and the Czechs’. It wouldn’t be the Poles’, not any more.
He wasn’t the only one to figure that out. Three or four people
balked and refused to get on the train. The woman who thought
they would cross Germany to get to France was one of them. She
wasn’t bad-looking, but Vaclav felt better about boarding after she
didn’t want to. If someone stupid wanted to stay, leaving looked like
a better plan.
The conductor spoke no Czech, only Polish and German. Those
were enough. One car seemed reserved for the DPs. “No dining car
for you,” the conductor told them. “We bring you food.” His scowl
said they weren’t paying customers, so they didn’t deserve anything
good. Jezek sighed. He didn’t suppose they’d let him starve.
And they didn’t. Cabbage and potatoes with little bits of sausage
wasn’t his idea of a feast, but it wasn’t so bad as it might have been.
It was better than he’d got in the displaced persons’ camp.
Krakow. Tarnow. Przemysl. Lwow. Kolomyja. And then the Romanian
border. Polish and Czech were close cousins. Most Czechs and a lot
of Poles knew enough German to get by. Romanian was something
else again. The Romanian customs men who knew another
language spoke French. That must have made them very cultured.
It didn’t help Vaclav one damn bit.

It didn’t help Vaclav one damn bit.
An older man in his compartment translated for him—and for
several other people. “I told them who we are and why we’re going
through their country,” the Czech reported.
“What do they say?” Vaclav asked.
“They know about us. They know they’re supposed to let us in,” the
older man replied. “I don’t think they’re very happy about it, though.
They want to be rid of us.”
“Everybody does,” Vaclav said bitterly. The older man didn’t
contradict him. He wished the fellow would have.
Romanian stewards replaced the Poles. Romanian cooks must have
done the same thing, because the next meal the DPs got was a
bowl of cornmeal mush. “Mamaliga,” said the man who dished out
the food. “C’est bon.”
“He says it’s good,” said the Czech who spoke French.
He could say whatever he wanted. That didn’t make it true. The
mamaliga did fill Vaclav’s stomach, though; when he finished the
bowl, he felt as if he’d swallowed a medicine ball.
Vaclav could look out the window as the train rolled through
Romania. Neither he nor any other Czech was allowed to step out
onto the platform at stops, though. Romanian soldiers with rifles
made sure they stayed inside their car. Lenin could have been
sealed in no tighter when he crossed Germany to join the Russian
Revolution. “We’re in quarantine,” said the older man who spoke
French.
“How come? What did we do?” Vaclav said.

“We loved our country. We still do,” the other man answered. “The
Poles and Romanians don’t want to make Hitler angry—the
Romanians worry about Hungary, too, because most of the people
in northwestern Romania are Magyars. So they’ll get rid of us, and
they’ll try to pretend we’re not here while they’re doing it.”
He proved exactly right. Even when the train reached Constanta,
the port on the Black Sea, Vaclav and his fellow DPs had precious
little freedom. They were herded from their car to a waiting bus. No
one was allowed close enough to speak to them; they might really
have been diseased.
The corporal’s first glimpse of the sea left him underwhelmed. It was
flat and oily-looking. It didn’t smell especially good, either. And the
Greek freighter that would take them to France was a rust-streaked
scow.
“Italy’s in the war,” Vaclav said as he clumped up the gangplank.
“What if they bomb us?”
“Then we sink,” the older man answered with a veteran’s cynicism
—he must have fought in the World War. He went on, “But I don’t
think they will. Greece is neutral. The Italians want Albania. They
won’t make her neighbor angry by going after Greek ships.”
“You hope,” Vaclav said, showing off his own cynicism.
“Don’t you?” the other man returned. Vaclav could only nod.
Sailors shouted unintelligibly. The freighter’s engine groaned to life.
Coal smoke belched from her stacks. Longshoremen on the wharf
cast off mooring lines. The ship shuddered as she backed clear.
A couple of Romanian officials stood there watching. To make sure

none of the Czechs jumped overboard and tried to swim ashore?
Maybe they thought the DPs would be so stupid. France was worth
going to. Romania? Only a Romanian could want to live here.
Land receded. The ship rocked on the waves. The air smelled of
salt and, faintly, of garbage. Vaclav didn’t care. He was out of his
cage. He was going toward something. It might be only a bullet in
the ribs when he got back into action. He knew that. Next to God
only knew how long inside the displaced-persons camp, even a
bullet in the ribs didn’t look so bad.

LUDWIG ROTHE ATTACKED HIS PANZER II’S Maybach engine with
a wrench. As far as he was concerned, the engine could have been
stronger. Could have been, hell—should have been: 135
horsepower just wasn’t enough to shove nine tonnes of steel as fast
as the panzer ought to go. Trying to do the job made the engine
wear out faster than it would have otherwise.
Not far away, another panzer crew was working on a captured
Czech LT-35. That was a tonne and a half heavier than a Panzer II,
and had only a 120-horsepower motor. Its gun made it formidable,
though. Rothe had seen that in Czechoslovakia. He wished the
Germans could have taken the Skoda works undamaged instead of
bombing them into rubble. But then he shrugged inside his black
coveralls. What could you do?
Aschendorf was all the way on the other side of Germany from
Czechoslovakia. The Dutch frontier lay only a few kilometers to the
west. Camouflage netting hid both German and captured panzers
from the air. They’d moved into position at night, with only blackout
lights to keep them from running into one another or running off the
road.

Nobody’d told Ludwig what the High Command had in mind. But
nobody’d ever called Frau Rothe’s boy a Dummkopf, either. He
didn’t figure the panzers were massing on the border with Holland to
drive around looking at tulips.
He called over to the sergeant who commanded the LT-35: “Hey,
Willi! Got a butt on you?”
“Oh, I might.” Willi Maass patted his pockets and came up with a
pack. Ludwig ambled over. Willi gave him a cigarette and then a
light. He lit one himself a moment later. He was a big brown bear of
a man, dark and hairy, with some of a bear’s stubborn ferocity, too.
After he blew out smoke, he asked, “So when does the balloon go
up?”
“Whenever the Führer wants,” Ludwig answered. The cigarette was
crappy. He didn’t think it was all tobacco. Imports had gone down
the toilet since the war started. During the last war, England had
squeezed hard enough to make people starve. Things were
nowhere near so bad now. Not yet, anyway.
The papers were full of stories about how good the war bread was,
compared to what it was like the last time around. It was black and
chewy, but it did still taste as if it was mostly made from grain. If it
was a lot better than the last war’s version, that must have been
really dreadful.
“Well, sure,” Willi said. “But when’ll that be?”
Ludwig looked around. It was camouflage netting and dummy
buildings as far as the eye could see. “Can’t sit too long,” he said.
“We’ll start feeling like moles in holes if they leave us here for weeks
at a time. Besides, camouflage or no camouflage, pretty soon the
French and the English will figure out something’s going on. Or do

you think I’m wrong?”
“Not me,” the other sergeant said. “I think you hit the nail right on
the head. I’d just as soon get going, too. I feel like moss’ll start
growing on my panzer if we wait around much longer.”
“I’ll tell you something else makes me think we’re going to get rolling
pretty damn quick,” Ludwig said. Willi Maass made a questioning
noise. Rothe explained: “I saw Waffen-SS units coming in yesterday.
Those guys are like stormcrows—they don’t show up till something’s
about to pop.”
“Well, you’ve got that right,” Willi said.
They both smoked for a while and let it rest right there. You never
could tell who was listening. Ludwig didn’t know what to think about
the Waffen-SS. It looked like Himmler’s effort to horn in on the
Wehrmacht. Not many men in the army liked that idea. Rothe knew
damn well he didn’t. On the other hand, the guys with the SS runes
on their right collar tabs had fought like mad bastards in
Czechoslovakia. If there was trouble, they were nice to have
around.
“It’ll be interesting,” Maass offered.
“Interesting. Yeah.” Ludwig stubbed out his cigarette under his boot.
“I better get back to work.”
Willi Maass laughed. “Nice to know you’re eager about it.”
“Ah, fuck you—and your shitty cigarette,” Ludwig said. Laughing, he
and Maass both headed back to their panzers.
Captain Gerhard Elsner came by a few minutes later. He eyed the
exposed motor and Rothe’s grubby hands. “Can you be ready to

move tomorrow at 0600?” the company commander asked.
“Sir, I can be ready to move in twenty minutes,” Ludwig answered
proudly. “I’ve got ammo. I’ve got gas. My driver and radioman are
here. Let me slap the louvers down, button her up, and we go.”
“That’s what I want to hear,” Elsner said. He’d been a noncom in the
last war, and wore the Iron Cross Second Class. “Unless it rains or
snows between now and then, we’re going to give them what for.”
“At 0600? We’ll be there,” Ludwig promised. “It’ll still be dark, or
close.”
“No darker for us than for them,” Captain Elsner said. “We’ll be
ready. We’ll know where we’re going and what we’re up to. They
won’t.”
“Ja.” Ludwig hoped it would make a difference.
Everybody got a good supper: one more sign things would start any
minute. The panzer commander stuffed himself. After this, it would
be whatever he could get his hands on: iron rations and horsemeat
and whatever he could steal from houses and shops. He shrugged.
Holland was supposed to be rich. If he hadn’t starved in
Czechoslovakia, he wouldn’t over there, either.
Nobody’d bothered to tell him why Germany needed to invade its
smaller neighbor. He didn’t worry about it. Why should he? He was
just a sergeant. When the officers pointed him in some direction
and said Go, he went. An attack dog would have done the same
thing. That was what he was: the Führer’s attack dog.
He lay down to sleep by his panzer. So did Fritz Bittenfeld and Theo
Hossbach. But Fritz wasn’t all that interested in sleeping. He kept
going on about what Dutch women would be like, and Belgian

women, and French women.…
Theo didn’t say anything. He hardly ever did, except when he had
to. Fritz wouldn’t shut up, though. Finally, Ludwig said, “You can’t
screw them all.”
“I can try,” the driver said valiantly.
Ludwig laughed. Next thing he knew, Captain Elsner was shaking
him awake. What seemed like a million engines throbbed overhead:
the Luftwaffe, flying west to soften up whatever the Dutchmen had
set up to try to slow the attack.
He was gnawing on black bread and sausage when his panzer
rolled out—at 0600 on the dot. Artillery thundered all around him.
The noise was terrific. He wouldn’t have wanted to be a greenuniformed Dutch soldier with all that coming down on his head. No,
indeed. He was on the right side—the one giving the pounding, not
the poor sons of bitches taking it.

Two and a half weeks before Christmas. As Hans-Ulrich Rudel

scrambled into the pilot’s seat of his Ju-87, he was damn glad the
campaign in the West was finally getting started. His squadron
commander didn’t like him. If the major had had the chance, he
would have shipped Rudel off to operational reconnaissance
training. But not even an officer with an ice cube for a heart like the
squadron CO wanted to be a man short when the big fight started.
And so Hans-Ulrich, a milk drinker, a minister’s son, a new-minted
twenty-two-year-old second lieutenant, looked out through the
Stuka’s armored windshield. “You ready, Albert?” he asked the rear
gunner and radioman.
“You bet, Herr Leutnant.” Sergeant Albert Dieselhorst’s voice came
back tinnily through the speaking tube. Dieselhorst was at least ten
years older than Rudel. He drank all kinds of things, but milk wasn’t
any of them.
Groundcrew men in khaki overalls fitted a crank into the socket on
the port side of each Ju-87. They looked at their wristwatches.
Either they’d synchronized them or someone gave an order HansUlrich couldn’t hear through the thick glass and metal shielding the
cockpit. They all yanked the cranks at the same instant.
Hans-Ulrich stabbed the starter button with his forefinger at the
same time. Thanks to one or the other or both, the big twelvecylinder Junkers Jumo 211 engine thundered to life at once. It put
out 1,100 horsepower. The squadron flew brand-new Ju-87Bs,
which had almost twice the power of the older, slower A model a lot
of units were still using.
Fuel…good. Oil pressure…good. Rudel methodically went down the
list. He gave the groundcrew man a thumbs-up. The fellow grinned
and returned it. Hans-Ulrich looked around. All the props were
spinning.

Sergeant Dieselhorst said, “Everybody goes today, even the guys
who have to flap their arms to take off.”
“Ja,” Rudel said, laughing. He was damned if he would have let any
minor mechanical flaw ground him on this day of days.
One by one, the big monoplanes with the inverted gull wings taxied
down the dirt runway and took off. Finding west was simple: all they
had to do was fly away from the rising sun. Holland lay only a few
minutes away. Hans-Ulrich had a 250kg bomb under the Stuka’s
belly and a pair of 50kg bombs on each wing. The squadron was
supposed to go after concentrations of Dutch infantry and artillery.
He thought they could do that.
“Orange triangle,” he muttered to himself. That was the emblem
Dutch fighters used on fuselage and wings. A lot of them painted
the rudder orange, too. The Ju-87 wasn’t the fastest or most
graceful plane, especially when weighted down with almost half a
tonne of bombs. He had to hope the Me-109s would keep most of
the enemy aircraft away.
Boom! A black puff of smoke appeared in the sky below and in front
of his plane. The Stuka staggered in the air, like a car driving over a
fat pothole.
“They know we’re here,” Albert Dieselhorst said dryly.
“They only think they do,” Hans-Ulrich said. “We haven’t started
showing them yet.”
Looking down from 2,500 meters, he watched smoke rise from
artillery bursts. He could see panzers moving forward. They were
tiny, like tin toys. But when they fired their guns, fire belched out. No
tin toy could match that.

No Dutch panzers met the German machines. Either the Dutch
didn’t have them or didn’t know how to deploy them. Hans-Ulrich
wondered why not. Holland was a rich country. It hadn’t even had its
economy wrecked in the last war. Why wouldn’t it pony up the cash
to defend itself properly?
Weak. Decadent. Probably full of Jews, Rudel thought. Always
trying to do things on the cheap. I’ll bet they’re sorry now, when it’s
too late.
The Dutch did have some field guns—75s or 105s—close enough
to the frontier to help their infantry resist the German onslaught.
That was where the Stukas came in. The squadron leader put a
wing over and dove on the gun positions. One after another, the
rest of the Ju-87s followed.
Acceleration shoved Hans-Ulrich against the back of his armored
seat. He hoped Sergeant Dieselhorst was well strapped in—that
same acceleration would be trying to tear him out of his rear-facing
seat.
Hans-Ulrich spotted three or four gun pits close together. He
steered toward them as his altimeter unwound. You had to be
careful to pull up. In Spain, a whole flight of Stukas had smashed
into the ground because they didn’t start to come out of their dives
till too late.
There was an automatic gadget that was supposed to make you pull
up. Hans-Ulrich had quietly disconnected it. He wanted to stay in
control himself, not trust his life to a bunch of cams and cogs.
As he dove, the wind-driven sirens on his mainwheel legs
screamed. Even inside the cockpit, the noise was unearthly. During
training, he’d heard it from the ground. Coupled with the engine’s

roar, it sounded as if a pack of demons and the hounds of hell were
stooping on the target.
He watched the Dutch artillerymen scatter like ants from a kicked
anthill. They weren’t cowards, not in any ordinary sense of the word.
The poor bastards were just up against something they’d never
known, never imagined, before. Rudel had wanted to run, too, that
day on the training field.
And nobody had bombed him. He yanked the switch that loosed the
bombs, then pulled back on the stick for all he was worth. The
Stuka’s airframe groaned as it went from dive to climb, but the plane
was built to take it. His own vision went red for a few seconds. That
was the danger point. The dive bomber could pull more g’s than the
pilot could.
But color came back to the world. Clarity came back to Hans-Ulrich’s
thoughts. For a little while there, all he’d remembered was that he
had to hang on to the stick. He gathered himself. “You good back
there, Albert?”
“Hell of a roller coaster, Herr Leutnant,” Dieselhorst answered. “You
blew that battery to kingdom come, too. I saw the bombs go off.
Right on target.”
“Good. Good,” Rudel said. “I thought I aimed them right, but I’m
pulling up by the time they go off.”
“You’d better be,” Sergeant Dieselhorst said. They both laughed.
Why not? Laughing came easy when the war was going well.
And then tracers flamed past the cockpit. Dieselhorst’s machine gun
chattered. A Dutch Fokker fighter—like the Ju-87, a monoplane with
landing wheels that didn’t retract—zoomed past, much too close for
comfort. The enemy pilot sent Rudel an obscene gesture as the

Fokker flew off.
“Gott im Himmel!” Hans-Ulrich said. “Where the devil did he come
from?”
“Beats me,” the rear gunner answered. “I thought our fighter pilots
were supposed to keep that kind of Scheisse from happening.”
“Theory is wonderful,” Rudel said. Sergeant Dieselhorst laughed
again, but shakily.
The Stuka flew back toward the Reich for more fuel and more
bombs. Hans-Ulrich spotted a column of trucks and buses heading
east, toward the fighting. The trucks were painted the grayish green
of Dutch army uniforms. A convoy bringing troops and supplies to
the front—had to be.
Hans-Ulrich dove again, not so steeply this time. His thumb rested
on the firing button atop the stick. He had two forward-firing
machine guns mounted in his wings. The Ju-87 seemed to stagger
in the air as his bullets stitched through the convoy.
A bus ran into a truck. The bus caught fire. Another bus rolled off
the road and into a ditch. Soldiers bailed out of their vehicles and
ran like hell. It was almost like going after partridges with a shotgun.
Almost. Some of the Dutch soldiers didn’t run very far. They unslung their rifles and started shooting at the Stuka as it roared
away. Infantrymen didn’t have much of a chance against aircraft, but
no denying the balls on these guys. And damned if a bullet from
somewhere didn’t clang through the Stuka’s tail assembly. A few
meters farther forward…
My armor would have stopped it, Hans-Ulrich thought. That’s what
it’s there for. Reassuring to remember you had eight millimeters of

steel at your back, five millimeters under you, and four millimeters to
either side. It wouldn’t keep everything out, but it beat the hell out of
not having any.
Soldiers fired green flares. That was the German recognition signal.
They didn’t want their own Stukas shooting them up. Hans-Ulrich
waggled his wings to show he’d seen.
He bounced in on a dirt strip a few kilometers inside the German
border. Groundcrew men and armorers cared for the Stuka. HansUlrich rolled back the canopy so he could stand up and stretch.
“You’ve got a couple of bullet holes, sir,” a groundcrew man
reported.
“I know I got hit at least once,” Rudel answered. “Anything leaking?
All my gauges are good, and the controls answer.”
“No leaks,” the man assured him.
“Well, then, I’ll worry about it later,” he said. “Mach schnell, bitte.
We’ve got a war to fight, and no time to waste.”
Five minutes later, he was airborne again.

ONE OF THE THINGS ALISTAIR WALSH had forgotten about war
was what a bloody balls-up it made of traffic. Or maybe things had
been different in 1918. By the time he got to the front then, all the
civilians had run off. Either that or they’d got killed. Anyhow, they
weren’t around to get in the way.
Things were different now. The Dutch and the Belgians hadn’t
expected the Nazis to jump on them. Sergeant Walsh didn’t know
why they hadn’t—his opinion was that they were a pack of goddamn

fools—but they hadn’t. Now that the shells were bursting and the
bombs came whistling down, half of the locals decided they really
wanted to go to some place where things like that didn’t happen.
And so they did. Whatever small respect Walsh had acquired for the
Belgian army during the last go-round dissolved like his stomach
lining in the presence of cheap whiskey. He didn’t particularly expect
the Brussels Sprouts to fight. (He knew damn well the Germans
would fight, and hoped the French would, too. About all other
foreigners he remained deeply pessimistic.) But couldn’t they at
least act like traffic police?
On the evidence, no. Now that the balloon had gone up, the
Belgians weren’t threatening to shoot at anybody who crossed their
sacred border. The British Expeditionary Force, the French Seventh
Army to its left, and the French First Army to its right were moving
into Belgium to take up positions to throw back the Germans. They
should have done that sooner, but King Leopold kept saying no. So
they were doing it now.
Or they were trying to.
When lorries and tanks and long columns of khaki-clad men on foot
headed east, and when mad swarms of autos and horsecarts and
donkey carts and handcarts and terrified men, women, and children
on foot headed west, and when they all ran headlong into one
another…
Nobody went anywhere. The lorries and tanks tried to push forward.
Drivers screamed in English, which mostly didn’t help. Not many
Englishmen knew enough French to do them any good—if French
would have done them any good, which wasn’t obvious. If Belgian
troops had channeled the refugees down a few roads and left the
rest open for the soldiers who were trying to save their miserable

country for the second time in a generation…
Too much to hope for, plainly.
“We’re not going to make our stage line today, are we, sir?” Walsh
asked before the first day was very old.
“Too bloody right we’re not,” his company commander agreed.
Planes flew off toward the east. That, at least, was reassuring. Till
now, the RAF had left the Germans alone. The Luftwaffe had also
left the BEF alone, but Walsh didn’t think about what that meant. He
got his first lesson a little past noon.
The day was chilly, but only partly cloudy. The sun had risen late
and would set early. It hung low in the sky, a bit west of south. The
English soldiers were trying to fight their way through yet another
clot of refugees. These people were gabbling in Flemish, or
possibly Dutch. Whichever it was, it sounded enough like German to
raise Sergeant Walsh’s hackles.
“Don’t they know we’ve got to get up there so we can fight?” he
demanded of nobody in particular, or possibly of God.
His soldiers weren’t listening. They were too busy yelling and
swearing at the frightened people in front of them. As for God
…When Walsh heard the rumble in the sky, he thought at first it was
more RAF planes going over. The poor damn refugees knew better.
That sound scattered them faster than all the yelling and swearing
the British troops had done.
That timbre wasn’t quite the same as the one Walsh had heard
before. And those shark-nosed planes with the kinked wings had
never come out of British factories. They dove almost vertically, like
hawks after rabbits. And as they dove, they also screamed. The

sound alone was plenty to make the sergeant want to piss himself.
“Get down!” he screamed. “Hit the dirt! Get—!” He followed his own
order, just in the nick of time.
Blast picked him up and flung him around. He did piss himself then,
but realized it only later. A lorry caught by a bomb turned into a
fireball. Men and pieces of men flew through the air. A marching
boot thudded down six inches in front of Walsh’s nose. It still had a
foot in it. He stared, then retched. He’d seen such things twenty
years earlier, but he’d done his damnedest to block them out of his
mind ever since.
More bombs went off among the refugees and the marching troops.
Shrieks rang out through and even over the stunning crump!s of
explosives. Wounded soldiers screamed for medics and stretcherbearers. Wounded civilians simply screamed.
The nasty dive-bombers roared away toward the east, the direction
from which they’d come. Alistair Walsh was just getting to his feet
when more planes flew in from that direction. At first, he thought
they were RAF fighters returning from strikes against the Nazis
—their lines weren’t so aggressively unfamiliar as those of the
previous attackers. But then fire spurted from their wings and from
their propeller hubs. They were shooting at—shooting up—the
British column and the poor damned hapless refugees.
“Down!” Walsh yelled again, and fit action to word.
When a bullet struck flesh, it made a wet, slapping noise. He
remembered that from the last time around, however much he
wished he didn’t. German airplanes had strafed trenches in 1918. It
hadn’t seemed nearly so horrid or dangerous then. For one thing,
he’d been a fool of a kid twenty years earlier. For another, the
German air force, like the Kaiser’s army, had been on the ropes.

German air force, like the Kaiser’s army, had been on the ropes.
And, for one more, he wasn’t in a trench now.
More screaming engines made him grab his entrenching tool to see
what he could do about digging in. Then a few people started
cheering as if they’d lost their minds. Suspecting they had, he warily
looked up. British Hurricane fighters were mixing it up with the
bastards with the hooked crosses on their tails. Walsh started
cheering, too.
A Hurricane went into a flat spin and slammed into the ground,
maybe half a mile away. A black, greasy column of smoke marked
the pilot’s pyre. Then, trailing smoke and flames, one of the German
fighters crashed into a stand of trees even closer to where Walsh
lay.
He yelled like a man possessed. So the Germans could die. That
cloud of smoke, broader and lower than the one rising from the
Hurricane, was the first proof of it he’d seen in this war.
Another Hurricane, also smoking but not so badly, limped off to the
west, out of the fight. Sergeant Walsh hoped the pilot managed to
put it down safely, or at least to bail out if he couldn’t land it. To his
vast relief, the German fighters seemed to have had enough. Like
the dive-bombers before them, they flew back toward the Vaterland.
He tried standing up again. As he did, he noticed he wasn’t the only
bloke emerging from a half-dug scrape. The other chaps in khaki
weren’t so bloody stupid. If the buggers on the other side started
banging away at you, of course you’d do what you could to keep
from getting ventilated.
But the advancing column had stuck its dick in the meat grinder.
One tank lay on its side, blown off its tracks by a bomb that burst
right next to it. Several trucks burned. Others weren’t going

right next to it. Several trucks burned. Others weren’t going
anywhere soon, not with from one to four flat tires or with bullets
through the engine block…or with dead or wounded drivers. What
bombs and machine-gun bullets had done to the foot soldiers was
even worse. And as for that mob of refugees…
A woman who might have been pretty if she weren’t dirty and
exhausted and terrified screamed in Dutch or Flemish. She wasn’t
wounded—not as far as Walsh could see, anyhow. She was just half
crazy, maybe more than half, because of everything that had
happened to her.
Walsh had a devil of a time blaming her. A few days ago, she’d been
a shopkeeper’s wife or a secretary or something else safe and
comfortable. Then the roof fell in on her life—literally, odds were.
Now she had nothing but the clothes on her back and whatever was
in the cute little handbag she carried. How long before she’d start
selling herself for a chunk of black bread or a mess of fried
potatoes?
How many more just like her were there? Thousands, tens of
thousands, all over Holland and Belgium and Luxembourg and
eastern France. And their husbands, and their brats, and…“Oh,
bloody hell. Bloody hell,” Walsh muttered under his breath.
Still, civilians weren’t his worry, except when they got in the way and
kept him from getting to where he needed to be to do his job.
Sorting out his soldiers and keeping them moving damn well was.
Captain Ted Peters came over to him. The young officer looked as if
he’d just walked into a haymaker. This was his introduction to
combat, after all. Combat, meet Captain Peters. Peters, this is
combat. Walsh shook his head. He had to be punchy himself, or his
brain wouldn’t be whirling like that.

“Well, Sergeant, I’m afraid you’re the new platoon commander,”
Peters said. “Lieutenant Gunston stopped a large fragment of bomb
casing with his belly. Gutted him like a sucking pig.”
“Christ!” Walsh said.
“A bit of a rum go, I’m afraid,” Peters said, which would do for an
understatement till a bigger one came down the pike. He did his
best to ignore the ammunition cooking off in burning vehicles, the
cries of wounded men and women and kids and animals, and the
stenches of burning paint and burning rubber and burning flesh and
fear and shit.
When the company commander didn’t say anything more, Walsh
did: “I should say so! We’ve got ourselves all smashed up, and we
haven’t even set eyes on a goddamn German.”
“I did,” Captain Peters answered, not without pride. “One of those
dive-bombers was so low when he pulled up that I could see him
through the glass of his cockpit. And I got a good look at his rear
gunner. The bastard almost punctured me after the plane pulled out
of its dive.”
“What are we going to do when we have to fight them face to face,
sir?” Walsh asked. “How the devil can we, when it looks like they’ve
got more airplanes than we do?”
“We shot down one of their fighters, after all,” the officer said. “I’m
sure we’ll do better with practice, too.”
“Right…sir,” Sergeant Walsh said tightly. He wasn’t sure of any such
thing. England’s chosen method of fighting seemed to be stumbling
from one disaster to the next till she figured out how to beat the set
of foes who had been beating her. It worked the last time around

only because the USA stuck its oar in the water. Things were
moving faster now, much faster. Would—could—muddling through
work at all?
Captain Peters had no doubts. Or, if he did, he didn’t let them show,
which was the mark of a good officer. Walsh didn’t let the privates
and corporals he led see his doubts, either—or he hoped like hell
he didn’t, anyhow. “All we can do is go on,” Peters said. “We have to
clear these civilians out of the way and take up our assigned
positions. We’ll have the French and the Belgians fighting along
with us. The Boches will end up sorry they ever started this war
—you mark my words.”
“Right…sir,” Alistair Walsh said again. No, he didn’t believe a word
of it. But you also couldn’t let your superiors see your doubts. You
couldn’t even—or maybe you especially couldn’t—let yourself see
them.

SERGEANT LUDWIG ROTHE SPOTTED A TRUCK out somewhere
close to a kilometer away. He raised his field glasses to his eyes.
The last thing he wanted to do was shoot up his own side by
mistake. But the magnified image showed it was a French model,
and bound to be full of Dutchmen.
“Panzer halt!” he yelled into the speaking tube.
“Jawohl! Halting,” Fritz Bittenfeld answered. The Panzer II jerked to
a stop.
Rothe peered through the TZF4 sighting telescope. It was only two
and a half power—downright anemic after the binoculars. But it let
him draw a bead with the 20mm cannon. He wouldn’t have opened
up on enemy armor from farther out than 600 meters. The panzer’s

main armament wouldn’t penetrate serious protection from farther
out than that. It would chew up soft-skinned vehicles as far as it
could reach, though.
The trigger was on the elevating handwheel, to the left of the gun.
Ludwig fired a three-round burst. The Dutch truck stopped as if it
had run into a stone wall. Smoke poured out from under the hood.
Rothe fired another burst, which emptied the magazine. He slapped
in another ten-round clip. The other guys might—hell, they did—use
bigger rounds in their main armament, but he could shoot a lot
quicker than they could. Sometimes that made all the difference in
the world.
Sometimes it didn’t matter a pfennig’s worth. Not far away, another
Panzer II burned like billy-be-damned. It had stopped a 105mm shell
fired over open sights at point-blank range. None of the crew had
got out. That was no surprise—hitting a Panzer II with a 105 was like
swatting a mosquito with a table. The Dutch artillerymen who’d
fought the gun were dead now, which didn’t do that panzer crew one
goddamn bit of good.
“Can we get going again, Sergeant?” Fritz asked pointedly. A halted
panzer was a panzer waiting to stop something.
“Wait a second.” Ludwig looked through the TZF4 again. Yes, the
Dutch truck was definitely laid up. “Go ahead,” he said.
As soon as he gave permission, the panzer seemed to bound
forward. The flat Dutch plains made ideal panzer country. But the
buildings and trees up ahead made equally ideal places to hide
antitank guns. Even if the Dutch had taken a big punch at the start
of the fight, they were still in there swinging.
Ludwig felt a tap on the back of his left leg. He ducked down into the

turret. “Was ist los?” he asked the radio operator.
“Bridge up ahead,” Theo Hossbach answered. “We’ve got
paratroops holding it. The Dutchmen are giving them a hard time.”
“I bet they are,” Rothe said. They hadn’t been ready for soldiers
jumping out of Ju-52s and taking bridges and airports away from
them. Well, who would have been? Nobody in the last war fought
like that. Hell, in the last war even pilots didn’t wear parachutes. As
far as Ludwig was concerned, that meant everybody who’d got into
an airplane during the last war was out of his goddamn mind. The
panzer commander brought his mind back to the business at hand.
“Up ahead, huh? Which map square?”
“C-9,” Theo told him.
“C-9?” Ludwig repeated, and the radioman nodded. Rothe unfolded
the map so he could see where he was—or where he thought he
was, anyhow. Wrestling with the map inside the cramped turret
made him feel like a one-armed paper hanger with the hives. At last,
though, he got it open. “Well, Jesus Christ! We’re in C-10 now. Tell
‘em we’re on our way.”
“Will do.” Theo shouted into the microphone that connected the
panzer to the platoon, company, regiment, and division
commanders. Everybody could tell Ludwig what to do. Half the time,
everybody seemed to be trying to tell him at once. But all German
panzers came with radios, so they could work together. That hadn’t
been true of the Czechs. The Wehrmacht was using captured
Czech panzers—the more, the merrier. Before they went into
German service, technicians installed radio sets in the machines
that lacked them.
Machine-gun bullets clattered off the Panzer II’s steel flank. Ludwig
did some shouting of his own: to Fritz, through the speaking tube.

did some shouting of his own: to Fritz, through the speaking tube.
“Got you, Sergeant!” the driver yelled back. The panzer swung a
little south of west.
That damned Dutch machine gun kept banging away. Ludwig
wondered why. A Panzer II had less armor than it should have—he’d
seen as much. One hit with any kind of cannon shell and you
bought yourself a plot. But, by God, the beast did carry enough
steel to keep out machine-gun bullets. And every round the silly
Dutchmen wasted on the Panzer II was a round they weren’t
shooting at the foot soldiers they could really hurt.
Most of the time, Rothe would have stuck his head out so he could
see what was going on. Right this minute, that looked like a bad
idea. Yeah, just a little, he thought with a wry chuckle. He had four
vision ports in the turret: two on the left, one on the right, and one
at the back. The bullets were spanging off the left side of the turret,
so.…
There it was! The machine gun’s muzzle spat flame from the front of
an apple orchard. Ludwig traversed the turret. He fired back at the
enemy gun. The Dutch crew manning it had run for cover by the
time his weapons bore on it. They’d seen danger coming and got
out of there. That meant they’d harass somebody else pretty soon,
but he didn’t know what he could do about it.
“That’s got to be the bridge, Sergeant.” Fritz’s voice came back
through the speaking tube.
“It does?” With the turret swung to the left, Rothe couldn’t see much
of what the driver was talking about. He brought it back to face
straight ahead again. Sure enough, there was a bridge. And the
people around it were shooting at the people on it and right by it.
The soldiers hanging on to the bridge wore field-gray. The bastards

attacking them were in Dutch gray-green. With leaves off the trees
and grass going yellow, neither uniform offered a whole hell of a lot
of camouflage.
The Dutch soldiers were too busy trying to drive the paratroopers
off the bridge so they could blow it to pay much attention to
advancing panzers—several other machines had come with
Ludwig’s. One of them was a great honking Panzer III—a fifteenand-a-half-tonne monster with two machine guns and a 37mm
cannon that could fire a useful high-explosive shell.
It could, and it did. Three or four rounds from that cannon put two
Dutch guns out of action. “Gott im Himmel, I wish we had one of
those!” Ludwig knew he sounded jealous. He didn’t care. He wished
the Wehrmacht had more of the big panzers, too. They could do
things his lighter machine couldn’t—and they could take punishment
that would turn the Panzer II into scrap metal…or into a bonfire.
He opened up with his machine gun. The Dutch soldiers scattered.
They hadn’t looked for an attack from the rear. Well, too damn bad.
They also seemed less willing than the Czechs had been to hold in
place till they got killed. Say what you would about the Czechs, they
had balls.
Three or four He-123s swooped down on the Dutch troops. Next to
Ju-87s, the Henschel biplanes looked like last week’s—hell, last war’
s—news. That didn’t mean they couldn’t do the job. They shot up
the Dutchmen and dropped bombs on their heads. The bombs
weren’t big ones—Ju-87s could carry a lot more—but the Henschels
put them right on the money.
Ju-87s had sirens to make them sound even scarier than they were.
The He-123s didn’t. But, when they dove, they might have been
firing God’s machine guns. Ludwig had heard that just the right

engine RPMs on those babies could make them as demoralizing as
all get-out. A lot of what you heard was bullshit. Not this. He forgot
who’d told him, but the guy had the straight goods.
He stood up in the turret to get a better look around. A Dutchman
fired a couple of wild rifle shots at him. He gunned the enemy
soldier down with his MG34. Two more Dutch soldiers dropped their
weapons and raised their hands.
Ludwig almost killed them in cold blood. At the last second, he
caught himself. He pointed brusquely toward the rear. Keeping their
hands high over their heads, they stumbled off into captivity…if they
didn’t run into some other trigger-happy German soldier before
anybody took charge of them.
Not my worry, Rothe thought. He was glad he hadn’t squeezed the
trigger. They’d fought fair, and so had he. Sometimes, in the heat of
battle, you did things you wished you hadn’t later. This time, Ludwig
didn’t—quite.
His panzer stopped at the eastern end of the bridge. A paratrooper
waved to him. “Good to see you, by God,” the fellow called. “It was
getting a little hairy here.” His helmet fit his head more closely than
the standard Wehrmacht model. He wore a coverall over his tunic,
along with rubber knee and elbow pads.
And he wasn’t kidding. Several of his buddies lay sprawled or
twisted in death. A medic tended to a wounded trooper. Other
groaning men waited for whatever he could do for them.
“Can we cross the bridge?” Ludwig asked.
“Ja,” the paratrooper answered. “We pulled the wires on the
demolition charges before the Dutchmen could set them off. And
we’ve cleared the mines on the roadway and chucked them in the

river. I think we got ‘em all.”
“Thanks a bunch.” Ludwig wished the paratrooper hadn’t added the
last few words. The son of a bitch only laughed at him. He bent
down and shouted into the speaking tube: “Take us across, Fritz.”
“Will do,” the driver said. “What’s on the other side?”
“More Dutchmen with guns,” Ludwig told him. “What the hell do you
expect?”
“How about some gals with big tits?”
“Yeah, how about that?” Rothe said dryly. He wished he had a
control that would let him pour ice water on Fritz. The driver was the
horniest guy he’d ever run into. The worst part was, he did get laid
a lot. Ludwig knew that if he used a no-holds-barred approach like
that, all he’d get was his face slapped.
The Panzer II rumbled forward. Fritz did have the sense to take the
bridge slowly. If the paratroopers had missed a surprise or two, he’d
have a chance to stop or to go around it. Ludwig gave the roadway
a once-over, too. They didn’t blow up, so he and Fritz didn’t miss
anything important.
They went past not only dead German paratroopers but also quite a
few dead Dutchmen. Some of them were in what looked like police
uniforms. No, they hadn’t looked for soldiers to fall out of the sky so
far behind their front. These must have been second-, or maybe
third-, line defenders. Whoever they were, they’d fought hard. It
hadn’t done them any good, though.
As soon as Ludwig heard a machine gun rattle to malignant life, he
ducked down into the turret again. But the Dutch had put up a
better fight on the east side of the bridge than they did here. Maybe

losing it had broken their spirit. Or maybe they simply didn’t have
what they needed for a proper defense here.
A car with half a dozen Dutch officers screamed up the road toward
the bridge—and toward the panzer. “Aren’t you going to blast those
shitheads?” Fritz demanded.
“Let’s see what they do first,” Ludwig answered.
They stopped right in front of the panzer. One of the officers started
shouting at Ludwig in Dutch. He understood maybe one word in five.
He thought they were telling him to turn around and drive the Nazis
away. That was pretty goddamn funny.
“Sorry, friend,” he said. “We are the Nazis. And you’re prisoners, as
of now.”
He might not have known Dutch, but the Dutch officers understood
German. The looks on their faces when they realized that panzer
wasn’t theirs…“You should let us go,” said the one who’d yelled in
Dutch before—he spoke good German, too. “We made an honest
mistake.”
“In your dreams, pal,” Ludwig said sweetly. The panzer’s machine
gun and cannon were mighty persuasive.

“YOU! DERNEN!” ARNO BAATZ HAD a voice as effortlessly
penetrating as a dentist’s drill.
“Yes, Corporal?” Willi Dernen did his best to sound meek and mild.
He didn’t want trouble from a lousy Unteroffizier, not now, not when
they were about to give the poilus the big one right in the teeth.
Guys promoted to noncom went off to a special school for a while.

Willi didn’t know what went on there, but he figured it was where
they turned you into a son of a bitch if you weren’t one already.
Baatz glared at him, there in the gloom of earliest dawn. “Have you
got your full ammunition supply?”
“Yes, Corporal,” Willi repeated—truthfully. Only a dope didn’t bring
along as many rounds and as many rations as he could, and Frau
Dernen hadn’t raised any dopes.
Had he been lying, Baatz would have had to feel him up to prove it.
You still couldn’t see anything more than ten centimeters from the
end of your nose. That didn’t bother Willi. A Frenchman who could
see you was a Frenchman who could blow your brains out.
Muttering, the corporal stomped off to harass somebody else.
Beside Willi, Wolfgang Storch chuckled almost silently. “Awful Arno’s
on the rag early today, isn’t he?”
“What was that, Storch?” Baatz snapped. His ears stuck out like jug
handles. Maybe that was what made them so sharp.
“Nothing, Corporal,” Wolfgang said. Baatz went right on muttering,
but he didn’t come back. He might have heard, but he hadn’t
understood. Just like a corporal, Willi thought.
Before Willi could say that out loud and get a laugh from Storch,
hundreds—no, thousands—of German guns opened up.
Everywhere from the North Sea to the Swiss border, they hurled
death and devastation at the enemies of the Reich. Through the
thunder, Willi heard the steadier rumble of aircraft engines
overhead. Their takeoffs must have been timed so they’d cross the
border just when the artillery bombardment opened. Right now, the
damned Frenchies would be thinking hell had opened up on earth.
And they wouldn’t be so far wrong.

Lieutenant Neustadt blew his whistle. He looked so young, it almost
seemed a boy’s plaything when he did. But his voice, more bass
than baritone, gave that the lie: “Forward! Now we get to see
France for ourselves!”
The French had seen little bits of Germany. Willi aimed to do more
than that. He wanted to goose-step through Paris in a victory
parade. His great-grandfather had done it after the FrancoPrussian War. His father never stopped complaining that he hadn’t
got the chance. Willi wanted it.
There was the place just on the German side of the border where
the French troops had camped when he and Wolfgang spied on
them. There was the crossing point the Germans had boobytrapped when they pulled back after the real war against
Czechoslovakia started. Now Willi needed to look back over his
shoulder to see it. That meant, that had to mean, he was in France.
If you stood on the other guy’s soil, you were winning. The last time
around, the Allies never did drive Germany all the way out of France
and Belgium. Things fell apart on the home front before they could.
And here the Wehrmacht was again.
A rifle boomed up ahead. A French machine gun opened up, its fire
noticeably slower than a German MG-34’s. Somebody not too far
from Willi fell over and grabbed at his leg. He yelped and ki-yied like
a dog hit by a car. “Medic!” The shout went up from half a dozen
throats.
“Keep moving!” Arno Baatz yelled. “Even if they’ve mined the fields,
keep moving!”
Even if they’ve mined the fields? Willi thought. He suddenly didn’t
want to move at all. Corporal Baatz had a way of encouraging his

men, all right. Lieutenant Neustadt’s whistle shrilled. “We need to go
forward!” he called. “Victory lies ahead! Paris, too!” That made a
pretty good antidote to Baatz’s minefields.
French shells screamed in—not many, but enough to send men and
pieces of men flying. Willi’s father had talked about the goddamn
French 75s in the last war. Here they were again, and just as horrific
if you were on the receiving end.
In the last war, Germany couldn’t do much about them. Now Stukas
swooped down on the French batteries, underwing sirens wailing
like damned souls. Bombs going off were much louder than shells.
The French artillery quieted down in a hurry. Willi trotted past a gun
pit a few minutes later. He looked at what was left of the 75 and its
crew. Gulping, he wished he hadn’t.
More rifle fire came from behind a stone fence. The Landsers
moved to outflank the defenders even before Corporal Baatz
started yelling commands. Willi plopped down in a shell hole and
banged away at the poilus by the fence. After a few minutes, one of
them waved something white.
Neustadt shouted to them in French. Willi didn’t speak a word of it.
The French soldiers stood up with their hands high. In their long
greatcoats and crested helmets, they looked as if they’d come from
the last war. The lieutenant jerked his thumb toward the east.
Nodding, babbling with gratitude for not getting shot out of hand,
the poilus stumbled away into captivity.
“They’ll have watches. They’ll have cash,” Wolfgang said
discontentedly. “Now the rear-echelon assholes’ll clean ‘em out.”
“Don’t get your bowels in an uproar,” Willi said—he was less inclined
to grumble than his friend. “You think they’re the only froggies we’ll

catch?”
“Well…no,” Storch admitted. “But maybe they had extra-good stuff.
We’ll never find out.”
Up ahead, a Panzer I was burning. Something heavier than a
machine gun had hit the little panzer and knocked it out. One
crewman in black coveralls lay dead a few meters away. The other
—the driver—hadn’t made it all the way out. He was on fire, too.
Willi gulped again. The stink reminded him of a pork roast forgotten
in the oven.
But other panzers kept pushing forward. They shot up or ran over
French machine-gun nests. That made life a lot easier for the foot
soldiers who followed in their wake. Willi didn’t mind not facing
machine guns, not even a little bit.
More Frenchmen surrendered. As he’d predicted, Willi got himself a
small wad of francs and a watch with a case that looked like gold.
There were corpses to plunder, too, if you had the stomach for it.
Dead men and pieces of dead men…Willi was astonished at how
fast he got used to them or developed a knack for not thinking
about them. Definitely better not to wonder whether this crumpled
chunk of shredded meat had played the concertina or that one
always puked when he got plowed.
Some people didn’t care. He went past one body that had a finger
on the left hand neatly sliced off, presumably so the slicer could get
at a ring. Willi hoped he wouldn’t do anything like that. He also
hoped he wouldn’t end up a body lying there for someone else to
frisk.
It could happen. Not all the poilus were ready to give up. The
French fought from foxholes and trenches. They fought from behind
fences, and from farmhouses. They didn’t fight with the coordination

fences, and from farmhouses. They didn’t fight with the coordination
of the German war machine, but they fought. They reminded Willi of
a guy who got staggered in a barroom brawl but swung back
instead of falling over.
Why didn’t they fall over, dammit? Life would have been so much
simpler—to say nothing of easier—if they had.
More 75s screamed in. The Wehrmacht troops did some screaming
of their own. One of the first things you learned in training was to
flatten out when you got shelled. Willi tried to get flatter than a
hedgehog squashed on the Autobahn.
“The lieutenant’s down!” somebody yelled. Willi looked around
without raising his head. Sure as hell, there was Lieutenant
Neustadt, both hands clapped to his belly and a godawful shriek
coming out of his mouth. Stretcher-bearers ran up and lugged him
away. Willi swore under his breath. That didn’t look good.
“We have to keep going!” Sandwiched between Neustadt and
Corporal Baatz, Sergeant Lutz Pieck hadn’t shown much personality
up till now. All of a sudden, the platoon was his, personality or not.
Keep going they did—till they ran up against four French machine
guns with interlocking fields of fire. You couldn’t advance against
those, not unless you’d written your suicide note. Willi took his
entrenching tool and started digging a hole.
Sergeant Pieck sent a runner back. Before long, a mortar team
came up. The men started dropping bombs on the machine gun
nests. They silenced three of them. The soldiers stalked the fourth
and put it out of action with grenades. One machine gunner came
out with his hands up. Corporal Baatz shot him in the face. He fell
over and never twitched again. Willi knew he might have done the
same thing. You couldn’t use one of those murder mills and then

same thing. You couldn’t use one of those murder mills and then
expect to give up as if you’d got caught playing bridge.
Pieck looked as if he wanted to say something about it, but what
could he say? Only the Last Trump would bring the Frenchman
back to life. And Arno Baatz was a mean bastard who didn’t listen to
anybody. Pieck pointed west instead. “Forward!” he commanded,
and forward they went.

Luc Harcourt had thought he knew what war was all about. He’d
been in some skirmishes. He’d fired his rifle, and he’d come under
fire. Artillery had gone off not too far from him. He’d had to worry
about mines.
Now he discovered he’d been a virgin trying to figure out how to
play with himself. He’d played at war. So had the Germans. Well,
playtime was over. The bastards on the other side meant it. If he
wanted to go on breathing, he had to mean it, too.
Shells bursting all around him had announced the new
dispensation. This wasn’t just a little harassing fire. This was a

dispensation. This wasn’t just a little harassing fire. This was a
storm of steel, the kind of thing men his father’s age talked about.
The noise alone was enough to make you shriek—not only the
thunderous bursts, but also the horrible screams and wails of
fragments knifing through the air. Before long, the screams and
wails of the wounded added to the chaos.
And he had to deal with things his old man’d never needed to worry
about. Dive-bombers howled down out of the sky. If bursting artillery
shells were terrifying, bombs were ten times worse. Shells could
carry only so much explosive. Otherwise, they’d blow up before they
got out of the gun barrel. Artillerymen disliked such misfortunes.
The only limit to a bomb’s size, though, was whether a plane could
get off the ground carrying it.
German fighters strafed French positions as soon as the bombers
went away. Luc wondered where the devil the French fighters were.
He didn’t see any.
Before long, he realized he’d shat himself somewhere during the
bombardment. He tore off his drawers and threw them away. He
wondered if he would ever be able to face his buddies. Then he
wondered how many of them had fouled themselves, too.
He didn’t have long to worry about it. Somebody yelled, “Tanks!” If
that wasn’t panic in the other soldier’s voice…well, why not?
He’d never seen a German tank—or, for that matter, a French one
—in the earlier skirmishes. He’d never seen dive-bombers then,
either. He hadn’t missed the dive-bombers one bit. He didn’t miss
the tanks, either.
Better to hope they would miss him. Here they came, all right:
snorting black monsters spitting fire from the guns in their turrets.
German soldiers in field-gray loped along between them.

German soldiers in field-gray loped along between them.
A shell from a French field gun hit a German tank. It spun sideways
and stopped. Flame and greasy black smoke burst from it. A soldier
scrambled out of an escape hatch, his black coveralls on fire. A
burst of machine-gun fire cut him down before he could find
somewhere to hide.
But the rest of the tanks kept coming. The machine gun fired at one
of them. Bullets struck sparks from its armor, but that was all. Then
the tank fired at the French machine gun. It fell silent.
Luc drew a bead on one of the German foot soldiers. He fired. The
man went down. Dead? Wounded? Just scared shitless? (Luc knew
too well how easy that was.) He never found out.
He did realize he’d have to fall back if he wanted to stay alive. The
Nazis were going to overrun this forward position no matter what.
Back in the last war, he would have had trenches to retreat through.
They’d made positions kilometers deep. This one wasn’t. No one
had taken the war, or the Germans, seriously enough to set up
defenses in depth.
Oh, farther back, well out of artillery range, the Maginot Line was
there to make sure no German advance got too far. That might end
up making France happy. It didn’t do a goddamn thing for Luc.
Almost the first thing he saw when he scrambled out of the trench
and fell back to the southwest was somebody else’s wadded-up
underwear. Just for a minute, that made him feel much better. Then
a tank’s machine gun stitched up the grass all around his feet. None
of the bullets bit him, but he damn near—damn near—crapped
himself again.
“Over here!” Sergeant Demange shouted. “We can still hold them

off!”
Hold them off? Whatever the noncom was smoking, Luc didn’t think
it came in Gauloises or Gitanes. But staying with somebody who
had an idea about what to do next seemed better than running at
random. Luc trotted toward Demange, who seemed in charge of a
solid position anchored by a farmhouse.
“Jesus!” Luc said, huddling in the kitchen. None of the windows had
any glass in them. He didn’t know why bombs and shells hadn’t
flattened the farmhouse. Luck—had to be.
“Fuck Jesus,” Sergeant Demange said. “Fuck the Boches. Fuck
everybody, especially our dumbshit generals.”
“What did the generals do?” Luc asked, trying to catch his breath.
“Rien,” Demange snarled with savage scorn. “Not a goddamn
fucking thing. They let us sit here with our thumbs up our asses till
the Germans were ready to hit us. And now the Germans are. And
we’re ready, too—ready to take it on the chin.”
“We’ve got to fight hard for the sake of the international working
class.” That was Valentin Laclos, one of the several Communists in
the company.
Sergeant Demange withered him with a glare. “Fuck the
international working class. And fuck you, too, Laclos. If Stalin was
on Hitler’s side, you’d screech that we ought to lay down and open
our legs for the Boches. You can’t even fart till Moscow tells you it’s
okay.”
Luc admired the noncom’s seamless contempt for the world. Demange despised everything and everybody. Chances were he even
hated himself. If you had to ride herd on a bunch of snot-nosed

soldiers, how could you do anything else?
More German artillery started landing around the farmhouse. As
Luc had seen, the windows had already blown out, or rather, in;
broken glass glinted on the floor. A shell fragment struck a stone
wall and whined away.
“What do we do, Sergeant?” Luc asked.
“Fight, dammit,” Demange answered. “Not for the international
whatever the hell. Fight because they’ll kill you for sure if you don’t.”
Not necessarily, Luc thought. If he threw down his rifle and threw up
his hands, maybe he could sit out the rest of the war in a POW
camp. Plenty of Frenchmen had done it the last time around. They’d
had a thin time, though—literally. Black bread and turnips and
cabbage and not enough of any of them…The Germans
themselves were starving. They had precious little to spare for
prisoners.
And there was no guarantee that surrendering meant becoming a
POW. He’d heard French veterans talk about that. If you had the
time, if you had the men, maybe you’d take captives back for
interrogation. If you didn’t? It was their hard luck, that was all. He
had no reason to believe the Boches acted any differently. He’d
already seen you could kill somebody without hating him in the
least.
One of the other guys in the farmhouse looked out a window. “Our
side’s falling back again, Sergeant,” he reported.
Sergeant Demange muttered to himself. “We’d better do the same,”
he said unhappily. “If we get surrounded and cut off, we’re liable to
have to see if those Nazi cocksuckers’ll let us give up. I don’t like the
odds.”

His thoughts came uncomfortably close to Luc’s. Once the sergeant
made up his mind, he wasted no time. He divided the soldiers
crowding the farmhouse into two groups. One he sent out. The
other stayed behind in the strongpoint to give covering fire.
Luc got put in the second group. He couldn’t even complain,
because Sergeant Demange headed it. While their buddies got
away, they fired out the windows. A few bullets came back, but only
a few.
“Germans aren’t here in numbers. That’s something, anyhow,” Demange said, slapping a new clip onto his Fusil MAS36 and lighting a
fresh Gitane from the one that had burnt down almost to his lips. He
spat out the tiny butt and stuck the new smoke in his mouth. Then
he pointed to the west-facing doorway. “All right. Let’s get out of
here.”
They trotted away. Out in the open, Luc felt horribly naked. A shell
could slice him to dogmeat out here. Somebody yelled. He almost
shat himself one more time. Then he realized the shout came in
French, not German. His asshole unpuckered. His heart came down
out of his throat.
“Our guys,” Demange said laconically.
The soldier who’d shouted stood in a halfway decent trench line. He
and his pals had a couple of Hotchkiss machine guns and, better
yet, a 37mm antitank gun in a sandbagged revetment. The gun had
two rings painted on the barrel. Kill brags? Luc hoped so.
“As long as the dive-bombers don’t come, we’re fine,” somebody
said.
“Where are our dive-bombers?” Luc asked plaintively. Nobody

answered him.
That cannon did knock out a German tank at better than 300
meters. The machine guns settled the poor bastards who tried to
bail out of it. Even so, Luc wondered again where the French
panzers were. The next one he saw in this whole war would be the
first.
And he wondered if blasting the one tank would bring a storm of
vengeance down on everybody here. To his vast relief, it didn’t.
Night came early. That would slow down the Germans…he hoped.
After dark, a runner jumped down into the trench. The French
soldiers nearly killed him before they realized he was on their side.
He brought orders: fall back once more.
“Why?” Sergeant Demange growled. “We’ve got ‘em stopped here.”
“Yes, but they’ve broken through on both sides of us. If we don’t
retreat now, we won’t get the chance later,” the runner replied.
“Merde,” said the sergeant. Then he said something so foul, it made
shit sound like an endearment. And then he said something he must
have thought filthier yet: “All right, God damn it to hell and gone. We
will retreat.”

THE ENGINE THUNDERED TO LIFE. The big prop spun, then
blurred into invisibility. The Ju-87 throbbed. “Alles gut?” Sergeant
Dieselhorst shouted through the speaking tube.
“Alles gut, Albert,” Hans-Ulrich Rudel said after studying the gauges.
You couldn’t trust them with everything. The way the plane
sounded, the way it felt—those counted, too. They could warn of

trouble the gauges didn’t know about yet. But everything did seem
good this morning.
Groundcrew men pulled the chocks away from his wheels. A
sergeant waved that he was cleared to take off. He pulled back on
the stick. The dive-bomber sprang forward over the yellow, dying
grass. The field was almost as smooth as concrete. The Dutchmen
had done a devil of a job of keeping everything neat. Now Germany
could take advantage of it.
Up went the Stuka’s sharklike nose. Rudel climbed as fast as he
could. The sooner everybody got into formation, the sooner
everybody could go do his job.
“Target—Rotterdam.” The squadron commander’s voice crackled in
his earphones. “The Dutch there think they can go on eating
herring and drinking beer while the war stays at the front. They’ve
got the wrong idea, though. In this war, the front is everywhere.”
Hans-Ulrich grinned. “You hear that, Dieselhorst?”
“No, sir. What did he say?”
“‘In this war, the front is everywhere.’” The pilot quoted the
squadron CO with savage relish.
His number-two wasn’t so impressed. “Not everywhere. Do they
think the Tommies and the Ivans are going to bomb Berlin?”
“Don’t be silly,” Rudel said, though a tiny icicle of doubt slithered up
his back. The Czechs had, there just before they quit. But that was
only a last thumb of the nose, a defiant fleabite. It wasn’t as if they
did any real damage.
One Stuka had to pull out of the formation with engine trouble. The

rest droned on. The vibration filled every particle of Hans-Ulrich’s
being, everything from his skin to his teeth to his spine to his balls. It
wasn’t as much fun as getting laid, but it was as compelling.
Bf-109s loped along with the bombers to hold enemy fighters at bay.
Four days into the assault on Holland, the air opposition wasn’t what
it had been. The Dutch didn’t have many planes left, while English
and French fighters didn’t seem to be operating this far forward.
Hans-Ulrich didn’t miss them a bit. The Ju-87 was terrific at
smashing up ground targets. But even the Czech Avia biplanes had
shot down too many dive bombers. For faster, more heavily armed
fighters, Stukas were sitting ducks.
He could see where the front lay by the artillery bursts and by where
the smoke was rising. General Staff officers with red Lampassen
down the outside seams of their trousers scribed neat lines on
maps and imagined they knew what war was all about. Even up
here, buzzing along at 2,500 meters, Rudel could see and smell
what war was doing to Holland. Better to Holland than to the Reich,
he thought.
As soon as they crossed the front, Dutch AA opened up on them. All
the Stuka pilots started jinking without waiting for orders. A little
faster, a little slower, a little to the left or right, up a little, down a little
—anything to keep from giving the gunners an easy target. The
neat formation suffered. With luck, the planes wouldn’t.
But one of them, trailing smoke, turned back toward the east. That
didn’t look good. Hans-Ulrich hoped the pilot and rear gunner came
through all right. Next to that, getting the Ju-87 down in one piece
was small potatoes.
A near miss made his own bus stagger in the sky like a man missing
the last step on a flight of stairs. Shrapnel clanged against the left

the last step on a flight of stairs. Shrapnel clanged against the left
wing. Everything went on working. “Danke, Gott,” Rudel murmured.
His father the minister would have come up with a fancy prayer, but
that did the job.
“Alles gut?” Dieselhorst asked again.
“Alles gut,” Hans-Ulrich said firmly.
Holland wasn’t a big country. There lay Rotterdam, on both banks of
the New Maas. It was a big shipping town, with the most important
quays on the north side of the river. Most of the city, including the
central square, was on the north bank, too.
“There’s the square we’re supposed to hit,” the squadron leader
said. “Follow me down.” The underside of his wings flashed in the
sun as he aimed his Ju-87 at Rotterdam’s heart like an arrow. One
after another, the planes he led peeled off after him.
Acceleration shoved Hans-Ulrich against the back of his armored
seat. Facing the other way, Albert Dieselhorst experienced dives
very differently. He always thought the Stuka was trying to tear the
straps off him and pitch him out over his machine gun and through
the window behind him.
No antiaircraft fire here. The Dutch must not have thought Germany
would attack the towns. Didn’t they pay attention to what happened
in Czechoslovakia? If they didn’t, too bad for them.
Rudel yanked the bomb release lever. Suddenly, the Ju-87 was
lighter and more aerodynamic. He pulled back on the stick to come
out of the dive. The Stukas, he saw, weren’t the only planes working
Rotterdam over. High above them, Do-17s—Flying Pencils to friend
and foe alike—and He-111s sent bombs raining down on the port.
They couldn’t put them just where they wanted them, the way a Ju-

87 could. But all that high explosive was bound to blow somebody to
hell and gone.
“Alles gut?” Dieselhorst asked one more time. “Sure looks good,” he
added—he was the one who could see what the bombs had done.
“Couldn’t be better,” Hans-Ulrich answered, and flew back toward
the airstrip from which he’d taken off.

SERGEANT ALISTAIR WALSH WAS WHERE HE was supposed to
be: on the Dyle, in central Belgium. The whole BEF was on the line
of the Dyle—the whole BEF, less what the Germans had blown skyhigh. If what had happened to the rest of the force was anything like
what had happened to Walsh’s unit, the BEF was missing more than
it should have been.
One of the soldiers in Walsh’s platoon waved to him. “What’s up,
Puffin?” Walsh asked. Everybody hung that name on Charlie
Casper—he was short and round and had a big red nose.
He also had news: “Bloody goddamn Dutchmen just tossed in the
sponge.”
“Where’d you hear that?” Walsh demanded in angry disbelief.
“Bloody goddamn wireless.”
“But they can’t,” Walsh said, though he knew too well that they
could. He went on protesting: “They just started fighting—what?
—five days ago. We all just started five days ago.” Except for a few
useless rounds aimed at German planes, he had yet to fire a shot.
“And now they’ve bloody well stopped,” Puffin Casper said. “Bunch

of damn rotters. Said the Germans bombed the hell out of that
damn Rotter place, and they couldn’t take any more of that, so they
went belly-up.”
Something seemed to have gone missing there. Whatever Puffin
had heard, he hadn’t got it straight. But if the big news was right
—and Walsh had no reason to doubt it was—what difference did the
details make? Not bloody much, as Casper would have said.
Walsh looked north. “So they’ll hit us from that way and from the
east,” he said. “Just what we need.”
“Frenchies’ll help us,” Puffin said.
“Well, maybe.” Walsh didn’t argue, not right out loud. Casper was
only a kid. If he had confidence in the French army, more power to
him. He might even end up right. The French Seventh Army, which
was in place north of the BEF—on the far side of the Scheldt—was
supposed to be big and strong. Maybe it was. Or maybe the BEF
would have to go it alone. Back in 1918, British forces seemed to
have done that when the Kaiser’s army hit them with one haymaker
after another.
(That the French would have said the same about the British had
never come to Walsh’s notice. If it had, he would have called the
man bold—or rash—enough to give him such news a goddamn liar.)
Artillery rumbled, off to the east. Some of those were Belgian guns,
firing at the advancing Germans. And some of them were German,
making sure the bastards in field-gray kept on advancing. The
gunfire was getting louder, which meant it was getting closer to the
Dyle. Sooner or later—probably sooner—Walsh figured he would
make the Germans’ acquaintance again.
An officer came up to him. For a second, he thought the man was

British. Then he saw the funny rank badges. A Belgian, he realized.
Ordinary Belgian soldiers looked like Frenchmen, mostly because of
the Adrian helmets they wore. But officers had British-style uniforms.
“Where is your command post?” the Belgian asked in accented but
understandable English.
“Why do you want to know…sir?” The British sergeant knew he
sounded suspicious, but he couldn’t help himself. The Dutch had
just thrown in the towel. What if the bloody Belgies were about to do
the same thing? Their king hadn’t wanted to let any Allies in till the
very last instant—which was liable to be too late.
But this fellow said, “The better to arrange cooperation between
your forces and mine. You are a sergeant, is it not so?”
What do you think you’re doing, asking me questions? was what he
meant. Walsh didn’t think he could get in much trouble for slowing
up a wog, but he didn’t want to find out the hard way he was wrong.
He pointed north. “Go that way, oh, three hundred yards, and you’ll
see the regimental tent.”
“Yards?” The Belgian officer scratched his head.
“Yes, sir.” Alistair Walsh felt like scratching his, too. Then he figured
out what had to be wrong. Stupid foreigners with their idiot
measures. “Uh, three hundred meters.” Close enough.
The Belgian nodded. “Ah. Thank you.” Off he went, happy as a ram
in clover.
“What do you want to bet they’re the next ones out?” Puffin Casper
said dolefully.
“Wouldn’t be surprised,” Walsh agreed. “They’ll tear a nasty hole in

our lines if they do bugger off, though.”
“They’ll care a lot about that, they will,” Puffin said.
More Belgian soldiers came back over the Dyle. Some of them still
looked ready to fight. They were just blokes doing their jobs. Others
had done all the work they aimed to do for a while. They slipped
back toward the rear first chance they saw. Still others were walking
wounded. Some of them seemed angry. Others seemed weary and
in pain, as they no doubt were. Still others might have been
relieved. They’d fought, they’d got hurt, and they were still alive.
Nobody could expect them to do anything more.
Englishmen would have reacted the same way. The idea that
foreigners could act just like ordinary people never failed to surprise
Walsh.
And then, with the throb of airplane engines overhead, the only
foreigners he cared about were the Germans. He ran for the closest
trench and jumped in.
These weren’t dive-bombers, anyway. They stayed high overhead
and let their bombs rain down on the general area of their targets.
The whistles as the bombs fell weren’t quite so bad as the
screaming sirens on those vulture-winged diving bastards. They
sure as hell weren’t good, though.
When the bombs burst, it seemed as if a million of them were going
off at once. Blast threw Walsh around. Blast could kill all by itself
without fragments. It could tear lungs to shreds without leaving a
mark on a body. Walsh had already seen that. He wished he hadn’t
chosen this exact moment to remember it.
Engines of a different note made him look up. Fighters were tearing
into the bomber formations. He let out a whoop. Somebody else

sprawled in the trench said, “Blimey, there really is an RAF!” The
soldier sounded astonished.
Walsh didn’t blame him. He hadn’t seen many British planes himself.
But they were there now. Two broad-winged bombers tumbled out of
the air, wrapped in smoke and fire. Parachutes sprouted in the sky.
Walsh waited for the British pilots—he assumed they were his
countrymen, though they might have been French—to machine-gun
the descending German airmen. But they didn’t. He wondered why
not. Not sporting? Were he hanging helpless from a silk half-bubble,
he didn’t suppose he would have wanted a German blazing away at
him.
“Blimey!” the other soldier said again. “That bugger’s going to come
down right on our ‘eads, ‘e is.”
He didn’t quite. But he landed no more than fifty yards away. Walsh
aimed his rifle at him. “Give up right now, you fucking bastard!” he
bawled.
The German paid no attention to him. The fellow sprawled on the
ground, clutching his ankle and howling like a dog with its tail caught
under a rocking chair. The parachute flapped and billowed like a
live thing, threatening to drag him away.
“Easiest prisoner I ever took,” Walsh said. “If he hasn’t broken that,
I’m a Belgian myself.”
“But do you want to go out there and get ‘im?” the other British
soldier asked. “What if more bombers come over?”
“Urr,” said Walsh, who hadn’t thought of that. Letting the German
flyer’s countrymen blow him to pieces was a distinctly unattractive
notion. But so was listening to him.

When Walsh said so, the other man replied, “Then shoot ‘im. Or if
you don’t care to, I will.”
“No,” Walsh said. If he were lying there with a broken ankle, he
would want a German to take him prisoner. And he thought there
was a pretty good chance some German would. The bastards in
field-gray fought hard. They’d fought hard even when they knew the
game was up in 1918. They mostly fought fair, though. Of what army
could you say more?
That made up his mind for him. He scrambled out of his hole and
trotted toward the downed Luftwaffe man. The German saw his rifle
and held up his hands. He gabbled something in his own language.
If that wasn’t I give up!, Walsh really was a Belgian.
He pointed to the pistol on the flyer’s belt. “Throw that damn thing
away, and make it snappy!” he said.
“Ja! Ja!” Maybe the German understood a little English, even if he
didn’t seem to speak any. Or maybe the sergeant’s gestures made
sense to him. Walsh kept his finger on the trigger while the man
disarmed himself. If he turned out to be a fanatic, he’d be a dead
fanatic pretty damn quick. But he didn’t. He tossed the little
automatic—smaller and neater than the Enfield .38 revolver that
was the British standard in this war, to say nothing of the last goround’s man-killing brute of a Webley and Scott .455—into the
bushes.
“All right.” Walsh knelt beside him and pointed to the trench from
which he’d come. “I’m going to take you back there.” He got the
German’s arm around his shoulder. Grunting as he rose, he went
on, “This may hurt a bit.”
The airman hopped awkwardly on one leg. He tried not to let his
other foot touch the ground at all. Sure as the devil, that ankle was

other foot touch the ground at all. Sure as the devil, that ankle was
ruined. Well, he’d done worse to plenty of Dutchmen and Belgians
and Englishmen.
“Give me a hand with this bugger,” Walsh called. Unenthusiastically,
the other British soldier did.
Once in the hole, the flyer reached inside his coverall. He came
closer to dying than he probably realized. But he came out with
…“Zigaretten?” he said, proffering the packet.
“Thanks.” Walsh took one. So did the other soldier, who gave him a
light. They both took a drag. “Bloody hell!” Walsh said. “Tastes like
hay and barge scrapings.” If this was what the Germans were
smoking, no wonder the bastards acted mean.
He gave the Luftwaffe man a Navy Cut. People said they were
strong. God only knew they were cheap. But the new prisoner’s
eyes went wide when he puffed on it. “Danke schön! Sehr gut!” he
said. He reverently smoked it all the way down to the end. It
probably had more real tobacco in it than he usually got in a week.
Stretcher-bearers took him off to the rear. If he got more proper
cigarettes, odds were he was glad enough to go.

CHRISTMAS WAS RIGHT AROUND THE CORNER, but Peggy Druce
found Berlin a singularly joyless place. She supposed she should
count her blessings. If she weren’t from the neutral USA, she would
have been interned, not just inconvenienced. All the same…
So many shops were empty. Hardly any cars rolled down the street.
Even the trolleys operated on a wartime schedule, which meant you
took a long time to get anywhere. The city was blacked out at night.

As far as Peggy could tell, the whole damn country was blacked out
at night.
Maybe all of Europe was blacked out. Peggy tried to imagine Paris
dark at night. The picture didn’t want to form. The City of Light was
bound to be as shrouded as any other European capital. After what
the Germans did to Prague and Marianske Lazne and the rest of
Czechoslovakia, they wouldn’t leave Paris alone. She supposed it
was a genuine military target. But the idea of bombs falling on it
made her almost physically ill.
She walked past a restaurant not far from the hotel where they’d put
her up. She hadn’t the slightest desire to go inside. Like everyone
else in Germany, she had a ration card. Even in a restaurant, she
had to spend points on what she ate. Whatever she got, most of it
would be cabbage and potatoes and black bread. Fats of any sort
—butter, cheese, lard—were hard to come by. Milk and cod-liver oil
were reserved almost exclusively for children and nursing and
pregnant women.
A man with a white mustache walked past her. He tipped his hat as
he went by. His wool suit had seen better years, but he couldn’t do
much about that. The Germans had ration points for clothes, too. If
you bought a topcoat, that was about it for the year. Peggy didn’t
have all the clothes she wanted, either; most of what she’d brought
to Czechoslovakia was still there. Or, maybe more likely, it was on
some German woman’s back these days.
A team of horses drew an antiaircraft gun down the street. The
horses might have come straight out of the Civil War. The field-gray
uniforms on the soldiers were modern, though. As for the gun, it
might have appeared from the future. She didn’t think she’d ever
seen a piece of hardware that looked more lethal.

Newsboys held up papers full of headlines about German triumphs.
People walked past without buying. If the Berliners were enthusiastic
about the war, they hid it well.
“English and French air pirates bombard German towns!” a boy
shouted. “Many innocent women and children murdered! Read
about the latest enemy atrocities!”
Peggy almost stopped at the street corner to argue with him. Only
the thought that her husband would have told her she was crazy
made her keep her mouth shut. She admired Herb’s common
sense, most of the time without wanting to imitate it. And she’d seen
the fun the Nazis had knocking Czechoslovakia flat. If they were on
the receiving end for a change, if this wasn’t all just propaganda
and nonsense, boy, did they ever deserve it!
But the kid wasn’t to blame for that. He was only doing his job. The
ones who were to blame were Hitler and Goebbels and Göring and
Himmler, and she couldn’t very well tell them where to head in. If she
took it out on the newsboy, what would happen to her? Neutral or
not, American or not, she didn’t want a visit from the Gestapo.
Because she looked as shabby as everybody else, the Berliners
assumed she was a German, too. They’d nod and say, “Guten
Morgen.” She could manage that. She understood German
tolerably well, but she spoke French much better. When people
here expected much more than Good morning from her, she
stumbled badly.
She hated that. She also hated being so dowdy. She’d made a life
of standing out from the crowd. No one would ever have noticed her
if she didn’t make a point of getting noticed. If she disliked anything,
it was invisibility.

A few minutes later, ambling along on a day as gray and gloomy as
her mood, she found a way to get noticed. She walked past a place
whose window said ROTHSTEIN’S BUTCHER’S SHOP. It wasn’t
bigger or fancier or more run down than the shops to either side: a
secondhand bookstore to the left, a place that sold wickerwork
purses and baskets to the right. The wickerwork place was busy
—wicker, unlike leather, didn’t eat up ration points.
Rothstein’s, however, had a large sign taped in the window:
GERMAN PEOPLE! DON’T BUY FROM DIRTY JEWS!
Next thing Peggy knew, she was walking through the door. Maybe a
demon took hold of her. Only when the bell over the door jangled
did she realize what she’d done. And she’d been so proud of herself
for wanting to steer clear of the Gestapo! Well, so much for that.
Behind the counter, Rothstein looked astonished. “You aren’t one of
my regulars!” he blurted. “You aren’t even—” He stopped, but
Jewish hung in the air anyway.
“You’re right. I’m not. Give me a chicken leg, please.” Peggy had
enough German for that. She could boil the leg on the hot plate in
her room. It would make a better lunch—maybe lunch and supper
—than she was likely to get in the hotel restaurant or a café. Not
much good food left for civilians in Berlin.
Moving like a man in a dream, Rothstein weighed the leg. He was
unmistakably a Jew, with a long nose and dark, curly hair. “It comes
to 420 grams—almost a week’s ration for meat,” he said. “If you like,
I will bone it, so it costs you fewer points.”
“Bitte,” Peggy said.
Deftly, he did. “Now it is only 290 grams. I need coupons for so
much, and two Reichsmarks fifty.” As he spoke, he wrapped the

chicken in—what else?—butcher paper.
Sixty cents American money, more or less. That was a hell of a lot
for a leg. Peggy paid without blinking. She also handed over the
swastika-marked ration coupons. Those were part of the game, too.
Rothstein gave her a meticulously written receipt. “Danke schön,”
he told her. “You are very brave. You are also very foolish.”
“I hope not,” Peggy said. “Auf wiedersehen.” Till I see you again, it
meant literally. She wondered if she was brave enough—or foolish
enough—to come back.
She got out fast, but not fast enough. Somebody’d squealed on her.
Two blackshirts were trotting up the street toward Rothstein’s. “What
kind of Dummkopf do you think you are?” one of them roared. “How
dare you go into that damned Jew’s place?”
“Let me see your papers,” the other one yelled. “Immediately!”
“Sure.” Peggy took out her American passport and brandished it like
a priest turning a crucifix on a couple of vampires.
The SS men recoiled almost the way vampires would have, too.
“Oh,” one of them said disgustedly. “All right. We can’t give you
what you deserve for buying there. But we can make the Jew sorry
for selling to you.”
“And we will,” the other added, gloating anticipation in his voice.
“He didn’t know I was an American.” If Peggy sounded appalled, it
was because she was.
“He knew you weren’t one of his regular kikes. He’ll pay, all right.”
The SS men stormed into the butcher’s shop. A moment later,

Rothstein cried out in pain. Peggy burst into tears. Dammit, you
couldn’t win here.

People were saying the Maginot Line would save France. People
were saying it would have to save France. Luc Harcourt didn’t give
a damn about what people were saying. All he knew was, he was
getting sick of being marched backward and forward and inside out.
He’d been bombed and shelled and shot at in the retreat from the
German frontier. He’d been bombed in the encampment behind the
Maginot Line where raw reinforcements filled out the regiment.
Fortunately, those little billets-doux had fallen from planes flying
high above, not from the Boches’ nasty dive-bombers. They landed
all around the camp, but hardly any on it.
Now he and his surviving buddies and the strangers in their clean
uniforms who’d just joined them were moving up toward the front
again. This time, from what Sergeant Demange said, they’d end up
in southern Belgium. If we get there in one piece, Luc thought.

That wasn’t obvious. Hell, whether they’d get there at all wasn’t
obvious. They’d started out from the transit camp in trucks. Luc
hadn’t much cared for that—as if his opinion mattered a sou’s
worth. But if German planes shot up your truck, wouldn’t you roast
like a pork loin in the oven? Of course you would—and your meat
would end up smelling like burnt pork, too.
No German planes harried the trucks. That didn’t mean they carried
Luc and his comrades very far toward the front. German bombers
had done their worst to the roads leading north and east. If a truck
couldn’t get through, if it sank to the axles when it tried to use the
muddy fields instead of the cratered roads…
If all that happened—and it did—you got out and you damn well
walked. “Here we are, back in 1918,” Sergeant Demange said, the
cigarette in the corner of his mouth twitching as he talked.
“This isn’t so bad, Sarge,” Luc said. “Back then, you wore horizonblue. Now you’re in khaki.”
“Oh, shut up, smartass. Once they get muddy, all uniforms are the
same color,” Demange said. “The only thing you know about a guy
in clean new clothes is that he doesn’t come up to the front much,
so you can’t trust him.”
Ahead, the rumble of artillery got steadily louder. The Frenchmen
were heading its way—and it was heading theirs. And behind them
came a rumble of engines—something had got past the unholy
mess the Nazis had made of the roads. “Move to one side, damn
you!” someone yelled.
When Luc saw French tanks, he was only too glad to stand aside
and let them go by. The officer who’d shouted, a tall colonel with a
small mustache and a big nose, stood very straight in the cupola of
the lead machine. The French tanks were larger and had smoother

the lead machine. The French tanks were larger and had smoother
lines than the German machines Luc had already seen too closely.
By the determined look on the colonel’s face, he didn’t want to stop
till he got to Berlin.
“He’s a fishing pole, isn’t he?” Luc remarked.
“Two fishing poles,” Sergeant Demange answered. That was what
Luc thought he heard, anyway: deux galles. But Demange went on,
“Colonel de Gaulle knows more about tanks than anybody else on
our side, I think.”
“Is that who he is?” Luc had heard of de Gaulle, though he hadn’t
known him by sight. The tall officer did indeed advocate tanks so
tirelessly—and tiresomely—that he infuriated his superiors. “Did you
serve under him last time?”
“Nah. Wish I would have.” Sergeant Demange spat out a tiny butt
and ground it into the mud with his boot. He lit another Gitane, then
continued, “If I remember straight, he got wounded and captured
early on last time around, and sat out most of the war in a POW
camp.”
“Lucky stiff,” muttered somebody in back of Luc. He almost turned
around to find out who let his mouth run ahead of his brain like that.
A tiny bit louder, and Sergeant Demange would have heard it, in
which case God help whoever it was. On second thought, Luc didn’t
want to know. If he didn’t, the ferocious little sergeant couldn’t
squeeze it out of him.
The last tank growled past. None of the other commanders looked
to be within ten centimeters of Colonel de Gaulle. Maybe that was
just as well for them. They couldn’t have much room inside the
turret when they needed to duck down and fight.

Luc’s company stopped at a field kitchen as daylight leached from
the sky. A cook with a double chin—cooks never went hungry
—shoveled potatoes and cabbage and stewed pork into his mess
tin. He stared at his supper with resigned dismay. “Which side are
we on, anyway?”
“Funny guy,” the cook said. “I’ve only heard that one five times in
the past half-hour. You don’t want it, you can go hungry. You think I
give a rat’s ass?”
Luc prodded a pale piece of pork with a forefinger. “I thought that’s
what this was.” The cook swore at him in earnest then.
Washed down with vin extremely ordinaire, the stew wasn’t bad. Luc
smoked a cigarette, then wrapped himself in a blanket inside what
had been somebody’s house till a bomb blew out most of one wall.
His buddies had a makeshift brazier going: a bucket half full of hot
coals hung from a scrap-metal tripod so it didn’t set the floor on fire.
It gave off less heat than Luc wished it would, but it was better than
nothing.
He slept like a hibernating animal. Not only were nights endlessly
long, but he’d never been so worn in his life. Some of the guys in
his company fell asleep while they marched—and they kept going,
too. He envied them—he didn’t seem able to do that himself.
Some time in the middle of the night, a hard hand shook him awake.
He groped for his belt knife. Sergeant Demange’s low-voiced
chuckle stopped him. “Take it easy,” the noncom said. “If I wanted
you dead, you’d be holding a lily by now. But no. Go out and stand
watch for a couple of hours.”
“Do I have to?” Luc asked around a yawn.
“Damn right you do. Suppose German parachutists came down out

of the sky? What would we do without a warning?”
“At night?” Luc didn’t believe it. But the Fritzes had done all kinds of
nasty things with parachutists. Maybe they’d make a night attack
behind the French line. And no maybe about what Sergeant
Demange would do if Luc gave him any more lip. With a martyred
sigh, Luc got out of the blanket and put on his boots and his helmet.
He was already wearing everything else, including his greatcoat.
His breath smoked inside the battered house. It smoked more when
he stepped outside. The night was mostly clear. Stars glittered
frigidly in a sky blacker than dried blood. Carolers would have loved
a night like this. Right now, Luc would have bet nobody in Europe
loved anybody else.
The war hadn’t gone to bed. Off to the northeast, the thunder of
artillery went on. He could see flashes against the horizon. Ours or
theirs? he wondered. After a moment, he decided it was probably
both.
Just ahead lay towns whose names brought back thunderous
memories of the last war’s early days: Charleroi and, a little farther
east, Namur. The Germans were swarming this way again, like fieldgray ants towards an enticing picnic feast. They’d fallen short of
Paris the last time around. Either they would again or…
Luc didn’t want to think about or. He didn’t want to think about
anything. He wanted to go back to sleep, or to fall asleep out here.
Fear of the Boches didn’t hold him back. Fear of Sergeant
Demange did.
After what seemed like forever but probably wasn’t, another soldier
stumbled out of the house. “Go back to sleep,” he said. “I’ve got it.”
A moment later, he added, “Damn Sergeant Demange anyway,”

under his breath.
“Sure,” Luc said. He went back inside, wondering whether Demange
ever slept. On all the evidence, he seemed a piece of well-made
machinery rather than a man. Maybe he ran on cigarette smoke
and coffee.
Come to think of it, maybe I do, too. Luc found the blanket he’d so
sorrowfully abandoned. He took off boots and helmet and lay down
again. The blanket didn’t seem to do a thing to get him any warmer.
He wondered if he’d lie there till dawn finally came. Next thing he
knew, he was asleep.
“Wake up, you bum. You snore.”
“I do not,” Luc answered automatically, even before his eyes
opened. Twenty minutes later, with some kind of mush and strong
coffee inside him, he was marching again.
Refugees from Namur and Charleroi crowded the road. Some of
them cheered the soldiers in their odd Walloon French. Others
swore at them: “If we weren’t in the way between the Germans and
your damned country, they’d leave us alone!”
“As far as I’m concerned, Hitler’s welcome to Belgium,” Sergeant
Demange retorted. “And you cocksuckers deserve him, too. Now
get the hell out of our way before we open up on you!”
He would have done it. Not only that, he would have laughed while
he did it. The Belgians must have figured that out, because they
tumbled off the road with haste that would have been funny if this
were a film and not the ruination of their lives.
Then more Belgian soldiers started falling back past the oncoming
French. “You can have a taste of those bastards,” a Walloon said. A

couple of Flemings added something to that, but Luc didn’t know
what it was. If they hadn’t worn Belgian uniform, he would have shot
them. Their language sounded too goddamn much like German.
Charleroi had got the bejesus knocked out of it in the first war. Luc
supposed it must have been rebuilt since, but it had got pounded
again. Some of the wrecked buildings were still smoking. The Nazis
had just worked it over, then. Half a rag doll lay in the gutter. At
another time, it might have been poignant enough to move Luc to
tears. But he’d seen men who looked like that. He glanced at the
doll and marched on.
Out beyond Charleroi, some of Colonel de Gaulle’s tanks were firing
at the enemy. German shells landed around them. Without waiting
for orders, Luc yanked the entrenching tool off his belt and started
digging in. If Sergeant Demange didn’t like it, he’d say so. A look out
of the corner of Luc’s eyes told him the noncom was digging, too.
Nodding to himself, Luc made the dirt fly.

SOME FRENCH KING A LONG TIME ago said, “Paris is worth a
Mass.” Vaclav Jezek had learned that in history class. As far as he
was concerned, Paris was mostly a mess. By steamer from
Constanta to Marseille, dodging Italian subs and seaplanes. By train
from Marseille to Paris. By taxicab to the Czech embassy, which
served as headquarters for the government in exile.
By taxi again to a camp outside Paris. The camp held about a
regiment’s worth of Czechoslovakian soldiers: mostly Czechs, with a
sprinkling of antifascist Slovaks and Ruthenians. Hardly anyone had
his own weapon. The French wasted little time passing out rifles.
They were eager to get all their friends into the fight against Hitler’s
legions.

Next to none of them spoke any Czech, though. They did the same
thing as the Pole who’d interned Vaclav: they used German. It
worked—most Czechs knew at least some, and could translate for
the ones who didn’t. But speaking the enemy’s language with your
friends was humiliating and infuriating.
The Germans seemed to know where the camp was. Their bombers
visited it every so often. This wasn’t the first time Vaclav had had to
sprint for a trench—far from it. The bombers also visited Paris. On
the radio, the Germans claimed to be hitting only military targets.
That would have been funny if it didn’t make Jezek want to cry.
Three days before Christmas, his platoon jammed itself into a bus.
A generation earlier, buses had hauled French troops from Paris to
the war-saving Battle of the Marne. Some of the machines the
Czechoslovak regiment used looked to be of vintage close to 1914.
It was cold outside. It didn’t stay cold inside the bus for long, not
when it was full of twice as many men as it was supposed to carry.
Everybody lit a cigarette. Inside of seconds, the smoke made
Vaclav’s eyes sting. He didn’t care. He was smoking furiously
himself. Gauloises packed a heftier jolt than the miserable excuses
for tobacco he’d got since he was interned.
The driver, a middle-aged Frenchman, chain-smoked with his
passengers. A patch covered his left eye but didn’t hide all the
damage a bullet or shell fragment had done to his face. He seemed
to manage all right with one eye, at least as far as driving went.
Whatever springs the bus might have had once upon a time had
long since gone to the big coachwork shop in the sky. Vaclav felt
every pothole, every rock. “I wonder if we’ll have any kidneys left by
the time we get wherever we’re going,” he said to the soldier sitting
next to—half on top of—him.

“Why worry?” the other man replied. His dark, curly hair and hooked
nose said he was a Jew. Vaclav normally had little use for Jews, but
he supposed you could count on them to fight the Nazis. This fellow
went on, “If we’ve still got ‘em when we get there, the Germans’ll
blow ‘em out of us, right?”
Vaclav eyed him. Maybe you weren’t so smart if you supposed
something like that. “If you don’t think we can beat them, why did
you sign up for this?”
“You gotta try.” The Jewish soldier paused to light a Gitane. He
spoke Czech like a big-city man; if he wasn’t from Prague, Vaclav
didn’t know anything. After sucking in smoke, he added, “Damn
Poles don’t like Jews any better than the Germans do.”
“I guess not.” Vaclav hadn’t thought of that; it was nothing he’d ever
needed to worry about.
“So how about you, goy?” That wasn’t Czech or German, but Vaclav
had no trouble working out what it meant. “How come you’re here?
How come you aren’t yelling, ‘Heil Hitler!’?”
Who do you think you are, asking me questions like that? After a
moment, Vaclav tried to shrug. Inside the crowded bus, it wasn’t
easy. “Fuck Hitler,” he said simply.

“That’ll do.” The Jew nodded. “I’m David. Who the hell are you?”
“Vaclav.” Jezek laughed. “Like everybody else, almost.”
David started singing the Christmas song about Good King
Wenceslaus. He knew all the words. Vaclav must have looked
flabbergasted, because the Jew started to laugh. “I’ve been hearing
it ever since I was born,” David said. “Hell, I must have heard it while
I was still inside my mom. I’d better know it.”
“I guess.” Vaclav hadn’t thought about that, either. If you were a Jew,
you had your own stuff. But everybody else’s stuff had to land on
you, too, whether you wanted it or not. If that wasn’t weird, what
was?
After a few seconds, somebody else started singing about Good
King Wenceslaus. It was that season of the year. A moment later,
the Czech carol filled the bus like cigarette smoke. “Well, I see what
you mean,” Vaclav said.
David nodded again. “Bet your ass. It’s always like this.”
The driver didn’t speak any Czech. To him, the carol was just noise.
He didn’t need long to get sick of it. He yelled something in French.
Not enough of the Czech soldiers spoke enough French for it to do
any good. Then the driver screamed, “Shut up, you fucking
pigdogs!” auf Deutsch. Maybe he’d learned it in a prison camp or
something. That got people’s attention—maybe not in a good way,
but it did.
“Ah, your mother,” David said, first in Czech, then in Yiddish.
Vaclav realized things were starting to go wrong when a gendarme
—or maybe he was a military policeman—waved the bus onto a

detour. The new road was narrow and twisty. The driver started
swearing. So did the Czech soldiers as they slid from side to side.
Then the side road petered out—or maybe there was a crater up
ahead. “Heraus!” the driver said as the bus’ door wheezed open.
“What do we do now?” Vaclav asked.
“What else?” David said. “We walk.”
Walk they did. Vaclav had lost his conditioning after getting
interned. Tramping along with a forty-kilo pack on his back wasn’t
his idea of a good time. The road seemed uphill both ways. Despite
spatters of sleet, he soon started sweating. He threw down a
cigarette butt and heard it hiss to extinction in an icy puddle.
That sparked a thought: “They say smoking is bad for your wind.”
“Screw ‘em,” David replied. He had another cigarette in his mouth.
Airplane motors droned high overhead. Bombs whistled down out of
the clouds. They fell at random across the French countryside. The
low ceiling grounded the German Stukas. Vaclav didn’t miss them
—those bastards could put one right on top of an outhouse if they
saw you walk in there to take a crap.
His platoon, of course, wasn’t the only unit on the march. He
sometimes wondered if there was anybody in France who wasn’t.
They went past a bunch of Frenchmen who’d got hit by one of those
randomly falling bombs—a 250-kilo job, or maybe a 500. It wasn’t
pretty. If the swine that went through a meat-packing plant wore
uniforms, they would have looked a lot like this about halfway
through.
Czech medics did what they could to help their French counterparts.

You had to hope the French would have done the same for a Czech
outfit. The rest of the platoon went around the blood and the moans
and the shattered bodies. Vaclav didn’t look closely at them. He’d
already seen more death and devastation than he ever wanted to
remember.
And now you’re volunteering to be part of it again? he asked
himself. You could have sat tight in that internment camp. It wasn’t
exciting, but nobody was out to blow your balls off, either.
His shrug made the straps on that heavy pack dig into his
shoulders. Too late to worry about it now. He’d been bored in the
camp. Maybe he’d been stupid to leave. But if everybody sat tight, if
nobody tried to stop Hitler, wouldn’t the little bastard with the ugly
mustache end up telling the world what to do?
It looked that way to Vaclav. He glanced over at David, slogging
along beside him. David had his own reasons to hate the Nazis, all
right. Most of the time, Czech and Jew would have been wary
around each other. Not here. The Germans had brought them
together. A miracle of sorts, or maybe just proof of the old saying,
The enemy of my enemy is my friend.
Bombs turned a roadside meadow into a lunar landscape. Cattle lay
sprawled like soldiers. They weren’t bloated and stinking. Some of
them still moved and lowed piteously, so they’d gone down in this
latest bombardment. Part of the weight Vaclav carried was rations.
All the same…
“Fresh meat!” David got the words out before he could.
The platoon commander was a fresh-faced lieutenant named
Svabinsky. Maybe he could have kept the soldiers from running into
the field, maybe not. But he didn’t even try. “Beefsteaks!” he said
happily, and pulled the bayonet off his belt.

happily, and pulled the bayonet off his belt.
They weren’t exactly beefsteaks. No butcher worth half his pay
would have given them such a fancy name. They were chunks of
meat haggled off the carcasses by hungrily enthusiastic amateurs.
Toasted over a roaring fire, Vaclav’s had a charred crust and a
bloody interior. He didn’t care. The gobbet was big enough to make
his belly shut up. What else mattered in the field?
He rolled himself in a blanket and lay down by the fire. Lieutenant
Svabinsky made sure people fed it through the night. Some time in
the middle of the long, cold darkness, the blaring of car horns woke
Vaclav. People shouted in French and French-accented German
and even, once or twice, in Czech. Road damage might have
stopped the buses, but the French army had cobbled together this
swarm of automobiles to bring the Czechoslovakian soldiers up to
the front.
As Vaclav stumbled towards one of them—they showed no lights, of
course—he laughed through a yawn. The French were in a fix, the
same way his own country had been. But they were trying to muddle
through. He couldn’t imagine the efficient Germans coming up with a
mad arrangement like this.
He piled into a car. As soon as it was packed, the driver took off.
Vaclav hoped the fellow knew where he was going. He must have.
Even staying on the road couldn’t have been easy, but the
Frenchman did it. Vaclav dozed off again, jerking awake whenever
the car hit a pothole.
Somebody outside said something in a language that sounded like
German. Vaclav’s eyes flew open. Morning twilight let him see a
soldier in a French-looking uniform. What came out of the man’s
mouth still sounded like German. A Belgian, Vaclav realized. Are we

in Belgium already?
The soldier turned out to speak French, too. That helped the driver,
though not Vaclav. The Czech was glad to have a little light. The
road was worse than ever, and wound through rugged, heavily
wooded country. “What is this place?” Vaclav asked in German.
“They call it the Ardennes,” the driver answered in the same tongue.
“Why do they want us here?” Vaclav said. “You’d have to be crazy
to try and push an attack through terrain like this.”
With a magnificent Gallic shrug, the driver said, “With people like
the Germans, who can tell?” Somebody yelled and waved. The
Frenchman hit the brakes. The car—a battered old Citroën
—lurched to a stop. “You get out here.”
Getting out was harder than squeezing in had been. Vaclav
stretched and twisted to work the kinks out of his back. He wished
he had some coffee.
“Youse is the Czechs?” What the French officer spoke sounded
more like bad Polish than Czech, but Vaclav could—barely—follow
it. The Frenchman went on, “Come these ways—I will shove you into
positions.” He was trying, anyhow.
And maybe the Czechs did need to be shoved into positions.
Artillery growled up ahead. It wasn’t too close, but it was there.
Maybe the Germans were crazy. Or maybe this was a feint, with the
main force up in the north, the way it looked.
His shrug wasn’t so fancy as the driver’s but it would do. He didn’t
have to decide whether the Nazis were making a big push here or a
little one. All he had to do was go where people told him and shoot
at anybody and anything decked out in German field-gray.

He wasn’t the only Czech soldier yawning as a ragged column
formed. He figured he could just about manage what they needed
from him.

“STILLE NACHT! HEILIGE NACHT!” Hans-Ulrich Rudel sang, along
with the rest of the flyers and groundcrew men at the forward base
in Holland. They had a tree, brought west from Germany and
decorated with gingerbread men and candles and tinsel and
ornaments made from scrap metal by mechanics in between patch
jobs and other repairs on the Stukas.
Hans-Ulrich had heard that carol and all the others since before the
day he first knew what the words meant. With his father a
churchman, it couldn’t very well have been any different. But at his
father’s house, and at his father’s church, the songs hadn’t seemed
to mean so much. People sang them because they’d always sung
them, sang them without thinking about what the words really said.
Things were different here. You don’t know what life is worth till you
lay it on the line, Rudel thought. Everybody here knew this
Christmas might be his last. That made it count for ever so much
more than it had back in peacetime.
One of the other pilots raised a glass of schnapps. “Absent friends,”
he said, and knocked back the shot.
“Absent friends,” the Luftwaffe men chorused. Most of them had
something strong to hand, too.
Hans-Ulrich didn’t. A groundcrew man clucked at him. “Shouldn’t
drink toasts in water. It’s unlucky.”

“Not water,” Rudel replied with dignity. But his eggnog was
unfortified.
“Close enough. Too damn close.” The other pilot raised his glass
again. “And here’s to close enough and too damn close, as long as
the bastards miss.”
“Amen!” Hans-Ulrich drank to that, too, even if it was with plain
eggnog.
Off in the distance, guns boomed. The ceiling was too low to let
planes take off and land, but the war went on. One of the
groundcrew men, a graying, wrinkled fellow with only three fingers
on his left hand, said, “Wasn’t like this the first Christmas in the last
war.”
“I’ve heard about the truce, Franz,” Hans-Ulrich said. “Was it really
as big a thing as people say—our Landsers playing football with the
Tommies, and all that?”
“I know people who watched the games,” Franz answered. “I know
one guy who played. I didn’t see ‘em myself—my regiment was
opposite the Frenchmen. We didn’t play football with them. But we
did come up out of the trenches and meet in no-man’s-land,
damned if we didn’t. We traded cigarettes and rations and stuff you
could drink, and we all said what a bunch of assholes our officers
were.…No offense, sir.”
Everybody laughed. Rudel made sure his laughter was louder than
anyone else’s. You couldn’t let the men think you were a stuffed
shirt, even if you were—maybe especially if you were. Hans-Ulrich
knew he was, at least by most people’s standards.
He shrugged. He had his father’s stern Lutheran God, and he had
the Führer (whom he saw as God’s instrument on earth), and he

had his Stuka (which was his own instrument on earth). As long as
he had them, he didn’t need to worry about anything else.
Or so he thought, till bombs started walking toward the hut where he
and his countrymen were celebrating Christmas. The weather might
be lousy here, but it was good enough farther west to let planes
take off, and the English or French were paying a call.
They were bombing blind, of course, up there above the clouds. Let
it fall, and it’s bound to come down on somebody’s head. That had
to be what they were thinking, and they were right. The Luftwaffe
did the same thing when the weather was bad, as it so often was at
this season.
Hans-Ulrich didn’t want to be the first one running for a trench. He
also didn’t want to wait too long and go sky-high in case the
bombardiers got lucky. The line between courage and foolhardiness
could be a fine one.
Franz took the bull by the horns. “I’m never going to go up for the
goddamn Ritterkreuz,” he said, and dashed out the door.
Where one man went, others could follow without losing pride. A
zigzag trench ran only a few meters outside the hut for such
occasions as these. As Hans-Ulrich jumped down into it—his boots
squelched in mud—he tried to imagine winning the Knight’s Cross to
the Iron Cross himself. He’d got an Iron Cross Second Class a week
before: an early Christmas present, his CO called it. But you could
win an Iron Cross Second Class just by staying alive at the front for
a couple of weeks—oh, not quite, but it seemed that way.
Franz had the ribbon for one, no doubt from the last war. Back then,
the Iron Cross Second Class was almost the only medal an enlisted
man could win. Hitler had an Iron Cross First Class, which made him

an exceptional hero, because he’d never even reached sergeant.
And then Hans-Ulrich stopped worrying about Hitler’s Iron Cross or
anything else but living through the next few minutes. The enemy
planes up there were bombing blind, but they couldn’t have done
better on a sunny, clear summer’s day. They might not have done
so well, because high-altitude bombing was turning out to be one of
the big disappointments of the war. It was neither as accurate nor as
terrifying and intimidating as the experts had claimed it would be.
Which didn’t mean winding up on the wrong end of it was any fun.
Now Rudel got a taste of what he gave the foe. The earth shook
under him like a blancmange. The noise was impossible,
overwhelming. Blast did its best to tear his lungs out from the inside.
After the longest six or eight minutes of Hans-Ulrich’s life, the
bombers droned away. “Der Herr Gott im Himmel!” he said. Then he
said it again, louder, because he couldn’t hear himself the first time.
He stuck his head up and looked over the lip of the trench.
The hut still stood, but it leaned drunkenly Its windows were blown
out—or, more likely, in. Bomb craters turned the landscape into a
miniature Verdun. Something a few hundred meters away was
burning enthusiastically—a truck, Hans-Ulrich saw.
Sergeant Dieselhorst stuck his head up a few meters from HansUlrich. “I wouldn’t mind not doing that again,” the rear gunner
remarked, and then, apropos of nothing that presently surrounded
him, “Merry Christmas.”
“Merry Christmas,” Rudel echoed automatically. “Where were you?
You weren’t singing carols—I know that.”
“I should hope not,” the noncom said. “If you want to waste your
time that way, go ahead, but I was doing something more important:

I was sleeping, by God.” He pointed to some trees not far away. “I
was happy as a clam under there, but then the goddamn bombs
started coming down.”
He sounded irate in a particular way. Hans-Ulrich nodded, because
he felt that same indignation. When he went out and dropped a fat
one on a French truck column, that was business. But when the
sons of bitches on the other side tried to blow him to the moon, it
felt like dirty pool. How dare they do such a thing? Didn’t they know
the Führer and the Reich were going to win any which way? Why
were they working so hard in what was bound to be a forlorn hope?
And why were they coming so close to killing him? That was the real
question.
“I wonder if we’ve got any fighters up there,” somebody said. “If we
do, those Allied shitheads’ll be sorry in a hurry.”
Hans-Ulrich nodded. He’d listened to Me-109 pilots going on about
what sitting ducks British and French bombers were. They couldn’t
run, they couldn’t hide, and they couldn’t fight back. He would have
liked that better if his Stuka weren’t in the same boat. No matter how
scary it seemed to the troops on the ground, it couldn’t get out of its
own way. If the Messerschmitts didn’t keep enemy fighters away
from them, Ju-87s would tumble out of the sky as often as the
Western Allies’ bombers did.
“We ought to pay those damned sky pirates back,” someone else
said, lifting a phrase popular in German papers.
Dieselhorst’s snort put paid to that. In case it hadn’t, the sergeant
went on, “How? We can’t take off. Even if the weather didn’t stink,
some of that load came down on the airstrip. They’re going to have
to flatten it out again before we can use it. We might as well drink

and play skat, because we aren’t flying for a while.”
A sergeant feeling his oats could sound more authoritative than any
major ever hatched. Sergeants mysteriously, mystically knew things.
Officers could command, but they didn’t have that amazing
certainty.
“Anybody think more of those fuckers are coming?” asked a
ground-crew man in greasy, muddy coveralls. By his tone, he
wanted somebody like Dieselhorst to pat him on the head and say
something like, No, don’t worry about it. You’re safe now.
But no one said anything of the kind. Hans-Ulrich realized he
wouldn’t have minded some reassurance, either. When the silence
had stretched for a bit, the groundcrew man swore again. Maybe
that made him feel a little better, anyhow. Rudel didn’t usually grant
himself even that safety valve, though some of the close calls he’d
had on missions made him slip every now and then. He always felt
bad about it afterwards, but coming out with something ripe made
him feel better when he did it.
He climbed out of the trench and brushed mud and dirt off of
himself. “We might as well go back,” he said. “The best way to get
even with the enemy is to have a good time.”
When the Luftwaffe men went back inside their shelter, they found
that blast and wind had blown out most of the candles on the
Christmas tree. A pilot with a cigarette lighter got them going again.
He flicked the lighter closed and put it in his pocket. “God only
knows how long I’ll be able to get fuel for it,” he said. “Then it’s back
to matches—as long as we have matches.”
He wore an Iron Cross First Class. Nobody could accuse him of
being a coward or a defeatist…but he sounded like one. HansUlrich wanted to take him aside and talk some sense into him. But

Ulrich wanted to take him aside and talk some sense into him. But
when he tried to do that, the people he was talking to had a way of
getting angry instead of appreciating his advice. He didn’t like it,
which didn’t mean he hadn’t noticed it. He kept his mouth shut.
Caroling some more would have been nice, but nobody seemed to
want to. That made a certain amount of sense: if you were listening
for airplane engines, you didn’t want to be noisy yourself. Rudel
missed the music all the same.
Sergeant Dieselhorst had come in with the rest of them. He was
drinking schnapps. Soon enough, he was laughing and joking with
the rest of the men. Hans-Ulrich wished he could fit in so easily—or
at all.

Achilly wind whipped snow through the air almost horizontally. A
good coal stove heated the officers’ barracks outside of Drisa. All
the same, Anastas Mouradian shivered. “I’ll never be warm again,”
he said in his deliberate Russian. “Never, not till July and the five
minutes of summer they have here.”

Sergei Yaroslavsky and the other men in the barracks were all
Russians. They hooted at the effete southerner. They’d all seen
plenty of weather worse than this. “Hell, we could fly in this if we had
to,” Sergei said.
“And we might, too,” somebody else added. “Is it five o’clock yet?”
After a glance at his watch, Sergei said, “A couple of minutes till.”
“Good,” the other flyer said. “Turn on the radio. Let’s hear the news.
”
Mouradian was closest to the set. He clicked it on. It made scratchy,
flatulent noises as it warmed up. There were better radios
—Yaroslavsky had seen, and heard, that in Czechoslovakia. He
didn’t say anything about it. Things weren’t so bad as they had
been during the purges the year before, but a careless word could
still make you disappear.
Or you could disappear for no reason. Plenty of people had.
“Comrades! The news!” the announcer said. “In the West, the
capitalists and Fascists continue to murder one another.” He gave a
summary of the day’s fighting—or rather, the claims and
counterclaims about the day’s fighting, finishing, “Plainly, by the lies
and contradictions on display, neither side in this struggle of
reactionary decadence is to be believed.”
“May the Devil’s grandmother eat them all up,” another pilot said.
The sentiment was unexceptionable. The way the man put it wasn’t.
Russians talked about the Devil and his relations all the time. When
the Soviet Union was aggressively atheist, though…Such talk could
land you in trouble if someone who didn’t like you reported it.
Anything could land you in trouble. Sergei’d just been thinking

about that.
“In the Far East, Japanese imperialists continue to encroach on the
territory of the fraternal socialist Mongolian People’s Republic,” the
announcer said. “The Foreign Commissar, Comrade Litvinov, has
stated that such incursions cannot and will not be tolerated
indefinitely.”
“Wonder if that’s where we go next,” Mouradian said. Sergei had
wondered the same thing when he was ordered to fly their SB-2 out
of the Ukraine. But they’d ended up at the other end of the USSR
instead, about as far from the trouble in Mongolia as they could get.
And there might have been reasons for that, because the next
words out of the newsreader’s mouth were, “The semifascist SmiglyRidz regime in Poland has once more rejected the Soviet Union’s
just and equitable demands for an adjustment of the border in the
northeast. The Poles still cling to their ill-gotten and illegal gains
from the war they waged against the USSR in the early 1920s.”
Everybody leaned toward the radio. In portentous tones, the
announcer went on, “Comrade Stalin has spoken with grave
concern of the way the Polish regime mistreats the ethnic
Byelorussians in the area in question. How long the peace-loving
Soviet people can tolerate these continued provocations, only time
will tell.”
He went on to talk about the overfulfillment of the norms for the
current Five-Year Plan. Yaroslavsky listened to all that with half an
ear; it didn’t directly affect him. The other did. When Stalin said he
didn’t like the way somebody did something, that somebody was
commonly very sorry very soon. And hardly anything could make a
country sorrier faster than flight after flight of SB-2 bombers.

“I didn’t think we’d go,” Sergei said. “If the Poles yelled to the Nazis
for help, that would put German troops right on our border, and—”
He didn’t say and that wouldn’t be so good. Most of the men in the
barracks had served in Czechoslovakia. They knew what rough
customers the Hitlerites were.
Anastas Mouradian picked up where he left off: “If the Nazis get
bogged down against England and France, they’ll be too busy to do
anything about what goes on here.”
Several flyers nodded. Sergei was one of them; it looked that way to
him, too. He would have said it if his crewmate hadn’t. “Soldiers are
moving up toward the border. So…” The pilot who said that let his
voice trail off. He wasn’t a general, and he wasn’t a prophet. You
didn’t want to come out with anything that might be remembered too
well.
“We aren’t going to fly right this minute,” another officer said, and
produced a bottle of vodka. Despite what Sergei had said before,
he was obviously right. The bottle went round. Pretty soon, another
one followed it. One more after that and they wouldn’t have been
able to walk or see, let alone fly. The Red Air Force ran on vodka as
surely as it ran on aviation gasoline.
They got their orders the next day. Sergei still felt the drinking bout.
Like the other flyers Lieutenant Colonel Borisov summoned to his
office, he did his best not to show it. “We are going to liberate our
Byelorussian brethren from the yoke of the Polish semifascist
regime,” the squadron commander declared. “Marshal Smigly-Ridz
has refused to be reasonable and democratic, and so we must
persuade him.”
He’s refused to do what we want, and so we must pound the shit out
of him. Sergei had no trouble translating Communist jargon into

what went on in the real world. By the knowing grunts that came
from several other men, neither did anyone else.
“Red Army units will enter the territory to be liberated at 0700
tomorrow morning,” Borisov declared. His eyes were cat-green but
set on a slant; like so many Russians, he likely had some Tatar in
the woodpile. “Your assignment will be to strike at Polish troops, and
to bomb the rail junction at Glubookoje to prevent the Smigly-Ridz
regime from bringing up reinforcements. Questions?”
“What if the weather doesn’t let us fly, Comrade Lieutenant
Colonel?” Sergei asked.
“Then we will stay on the ground,” Borisov answered. “But our
superiors do not believe that is likely.”
What exactly did he mean there? Did higher-ups in the Red Army
and Red Air Force have reliable forecasts of good weather? Or
would the SB-2s take off no matter how rotten the weather was?
Yaroslavsky suspected the latter. With air-cooled engines, the
bombers wouldn’t freeze up the way they might with liquid cooling.
And they’d had skis installed instead of landing wheels, so they
could deal with snow pretty well. Even so…
Sergei suspected a plan somewhere said, Air support will be laid on
at such and such a time in such and such places with so many
bombers and so many escorting fighters. Bad weather? Plans like
that didn’t worry about such mundane details. Come what might, the
air support would be laid on.
“Other questions?” Borisov asked.
His tone said he didn’t really want any more, but Anastas Mouradian
raised his hand anyway. Frowning, Borisov nodded at him. “What do
we do if the Nazis come in on the Poles’ side, Comrade Lieutenant

Colonel?” Mouradian asked.
Several people inhaled sharply. That was a question with teeth, all
right. Borisov didn’t look happy. “The hope and expectation are that
this will not occur.”
“Yes, sir,” Mouradian said, and he waited.
The contest of wills was silent. The squadron commander didn’t
want to say anything else. Mouradian didn’t want to come right out
and ask, But what if it does? That silence stretched tighter and
tighter. Finally, it snapped. So did Borisov: “We are at war with
Germany. If German troops or aircraft operate against us, we are to
prosecute the war against them. Is that clear?”
“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir,” Mouradian said.
It was clear to Sergei, too. He didn’t like it. Poland and Romania had
been the USSR’s shield against Fascist Germany. If the Poles
scream for help to their Western neighbor, that shield was gone.
Stalin never would have made demands on Poland if the Germans
weren’t up to their eyebrows in war on their other frontier. But if they
weren’t quite up to their eyebrows…
Sergei had faced Messerschmitts and German antiaircraft guns in
Czechoslovakia. He didn’t relish doing it again. Of course, the next
time anyone set over him gave a damn about his opinion would be
the first.
Maybe the high command did know something. Sergei was sure
stranger things had happened, though he couldn’t think of one
offhand. The day was cold, but it was bright and sunny. The SB-2
was fueled up and bombed up and ready to go. Sergei and
Mouradian and Ivan Kuchkov climbed in.

Groundcrew men spun the bomber’s props. The engines roared to
life. Sergei ran his checks. All the instruments looked good. The SB2 slid down the snow airstrip. Sergei pulled back on the stick. The
nose went up. The airplane left the ground. Anastas Mouradian
cranked up the landing gear. The skis retracted almost as neatly as
wheels.
Snow down below made navigation a challenge. It would have been
harder yet if artillery bursts hadn’t shown the way. Tanks and
soldiers were swathed in white, but cast long shadows across the
even whiter snow. There was the border, and there were the Soviet
troops crossing it to liberate the fraternal, peace-loving people who
lived just to the west.
And there were the Polish oppressors: more soldiers in white with
shadows stretching over the snow. Antiaircraft guns opened up on
the SB-2s. After facing German fire, Sergei didn’t think much of this.
He saw a good concentration of troops and trucks ahead. There
was the railroad line, too. If he plastered the neighborhood, he
could do what Lieutenant Colonel Borisov wanted done. “Ready,
Ivan?” he bawled into the speaking tube.
“Ready, sir!” the noncom answered.
“Khorosho. Mouradian will tell you when to drop,” Sergei said.
Anastas was down in the bottom front of the SB-2’s glasshouse
cockpit, peering through the bombsight.
“Now!” he shouted, and the stick of bombs tumbled from the plane’s
belly. As always, the SB-2 immediately got peppier and more
maneuverable. Yaroslavsky took advantage of that by getting out of
there as fast as he could. He’d seen a couple of gull-winged PZL
fighters in the neighborhood. They weren’t supposed to be
anywhere near as dangerous as Me-109s, but any fighter was

anywhere near as dangerous as Me-109s, but any fighter was
dangerous if you happened to be a bomber.
Other SB-2s were also hitting that concentration. The Poles down
there had to be catching hell. Well, if they wouldn’t give the Soviet
Union what it was rightfully entitled to, this was what they got.
Back to the airstrip he flew. He found it, much to his relief. The skicarrying landing gear descended. Getting down was an adventure,
but at last the SB-2 slid to a stop. Groundcrew men wearing white
snow smocks over greatcoats rushed forward to refuel the plane
and bomb it up again. “How’d it go?” one of them called, his breath
smoking in the frosty air.
“Routine,” Sergei answered. “Just routine.”

“HAPPY NEW YEAR!” PEGGY DRUCE said as the clock struck
twelve. “It’s 1939. Oh, boy!” She raised a glass of what was
supposed to be scotch. The stuff tasted more like oven cleaner. In
wartime Berlin, you took what you could get and you were damn
glad you got anything.
A handful of other people sat drinking in the hotel restaurant. They
were split about fifty-fifty between neutrals stuck in Berlin and
Germans who felt like tying one on even if the world seemed to be
going to hell in a handbasket. Some of the Germans were civilians,
others in uniform. The other way to tell them apart was that the
military men were drinking harder.
The radio blared out war news. Everything was going well in the
West—if you believed the announcer, anyhow. “Soon a battle of
annihilation will sweep the French and English out of Belgium, which
they invaded with flagrant disregard for international law!” the fellow

declared. He had a high, shrill, unpleasant voice. Peggy thought so,
anyhow; it put her in mind of screechy chalk on a blackboard.
Then he started screaming about what the evil Communists in
Russia were doing to Poland. “It is a Jewish-Bolshevist conspiracy to
terrorize small nations!” he said.
What about Czechoslovakia? Peggy wondered. What about
Holland? What about Luxembourg? What about Belgium? Asking
questions like that was pointless here. Even if the Gestapo didn’t
haul you away and start pulling out your toenails, the Germans
wouldn’t get it. They thought anything they did was okay because
they did it. If the other guy did the same thing, he was a dirty, rotten
nogoodnik.
And then the newsman came out with something Peggy hadn’t
heard before: “Because of the magnitude of the unprovoked
invasion, Marshal Smigly-Ridz has asked the Führer for aid against
the Bolsheviks. Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop has stated that that
aid will be forthcoming. We are already at war with the Soviet Union.
Now we have the chance to teach the Reds and the Jews the lesson
they deserve.”
Peggy looked around. Nobody she could see looked excited about
teaching the Russians a lesson. One of the soldiers, a major old
enough to have fought in the last war, knocked back half a
tumbler’s worth of something, put his head on his folded arms, and
fell asleep at his table. The good-time girl who’d been with him
stalked away in disgust.
Another soldier stood up and raised a glass on high. “Here’s to the
two-front war!” he yelled.
His buddies dragged him down. They spoke in low, urgent voices.

He didn’t want to listen. When they couldn’t make him shut up, they
hauled him out into the cold, pitch-black blackout night. Peggy
wondered if it was already too late for him. Was somebody in there
taking notes? She wouldn’t have been surprised. People said there
was at least one informer in every crowd. Peggy didn’t always
believe what people said, but it seemed likely here.
Music started coming out of the radio. Saccharine-sweet, it was as
annoying as the newscaster. Jazz was one more thing the Nazis
wouldn’t put up with. Degenerate Negro music, they called it. No
matter what they called it, what they made themselves was sappy
and boring.
A naval officer came up to the table where Peggy was drinking by
herself. “May I join you?” he asked.
“Sure.” Peggy held up her left hand so the diamonds in her wedding
ring sparkled. “Don’t expect too much, that’s all.”
He smiled. His long, weathered face didn’t seem to have room for
amusement, but it turned out to. “Thank you for the warning. I may
need it less than you think, though.” He set down his drink and
showed off the thin gold band on the fourth finger of his own left
hand. “If I ask your name, will you think I am trying to seduce you?”
“Probably,” Peggy answered, which startled a laugh out of him. She
gave him her name even so, and asked his.
“I am Friedrich Reinberger—a Korvettenkapitän, as you see.” He
brushed the three gold stripes on one cuff with the other hand.
Then he switched languages: “Lieutenant commander, you would
say in English.”
“Okay.” Peggy was feeling ornery, so she asked, “Where’s your
wife, Lieutenant Commander?”

“In Dachau, not far from Munich, with the Kinder,” Reinberger
nodded. Peggy nodded—he sounded like a Bavarian. “I was called
here to report on…certain things when my destroyer came into port.
Maria, I think, believes yet I am at sea.”
He finished his drink and waved for another one. The blond girl who
came over to get his glass wore a black gown cut down to there in
front and even lower in back, and slit up to there down below.
Reinberger followed her with his eyes as she sashayed back to the
bar. He didn’t slobber or anything, but he did watch. Peggy couldn’t
very well blame him; it was a hell of a dress. If she were ten years
younger—hell, five years younger—she would have wanted it
herself.
The girl brought back a new drink. By then Peggy was ready for a
refill, too. That gave the German naval officer another chance to
eye the girl’s strut. He made the most of it. When Peggy got the
fresh drink, Reinberger raised his glass. “To 1939,” he said.
“To 1939,” Peggy echoed, and drank with him. If he’d said
something like to our victory in 1939, she wouldn’t have. She was
damned if she wanted to see the Nazis win. But toasting the year
was harmless enough.
“What is an American doing in Germany in the middle of a war?”
Reinberger asked.
Peggy looked him in the eye. She was tempted to spit in his eye, but
he didn’t seem like a bad guy. Still, she didn’t sugarcoat the truth: “I
was in Czechoslovakia when you people invaded it.”
“Oh.” He shrugged. “If the Czechs were more, ah, reasonable, it
might not have come to that. But they thought England and France
would save them, and so.…” Another shrug.

“Dachau.” Peggy wasn’t drunk, but she felt a buzz. Her wits worked
slower than she wished they did. It wasn’t a big city or anything, but
she’d heard of it before. How come? After a moment, she
remembered. “Dachau! Isn’t that where they—?” She didn’t know
how to go on.
“Yes, that is where they—” Korvettenkapitän Reinberger didn’t finish
it, either. He did say, “Every nation has in it people who are not
trusted by the government. We keep them there.”
From some of the whispers Peggy had heard, the SS did more to
people in Dachau than just keep them there. But she couldn’t prove
that. Probably the only way to prove it was to end up on the inside.
She had a magpie curiosity, but she didn’t want to know that badly.
“Where in the United States do you live?” Reinberger asked. It
wasn’t the smoothest change of subject Peggy had ever seen, but it
also could have been worse.
“Philadelphia,” she answered. Homesickness rose up inside her like
a great choking cloud. She had to look down at the tabletop and
blink several times while tears stung her eyes.
“I know something of the port—I visited before the last war, and
again three, no, four years ago now. But all I know of the city is that
it is large.”
“Third biggest in the country,” Peggy agreed, not without pride. And
we don’t lock people up there even if they aren’t trusted by the
government. And we never would, not unless they were niggers or
Japs or something.
The music on the radio got a little less syrupy than it had been. “Do
you care to dance?” Reinberger asked.

She gave him a crooked grin. “Sure you wouldn’t rather ask the bargirl? You’ve got a better chance with her.”
“I be not”—he shook his head—“I am not looking for that, not now.
How do I expect Maria to stay for me if I do not stay for her?”
A lot of Germans had trouble with Sauce for the goose is sauce for
the gander. Meeting one who didn’t made up Peggy’s mind for her.
“Okay,” she said.
He danced well enough. He stayed with the beat, and he led firmly. If
he lacked the inspiration, the sense of fun, that separated really
good dancers from people who were just all right—then he did, that
was all. He held Peggy tight without trying to mash himself against
her or grope her. He was…correct, a diplomat would have called it.
“Thank you,” she said when the music stopped. “That was nice.”
“Ja.” He nodded. “And thank you also.” As they went back to the
table, he added, “Much better than shooting up Russian ships in the
Baltic.”
“Well, gee! There’s a compliment!” Peggy exclaimed. Lieutenant
Commander Reinberger laughed. He waved for another drink.
Peggy nodded to show she wanted one, too. The barmaid in the
startling outfit fluttered her fingers to show she saw. Peggy asked,
“That’s what you were doing before you got leave? Shooting up
Russian ships?”
“Ja,” Reinberger said. “The Baltic in winter is perfectly filthy, too.
Storms, fog, waves, ice…and always maybe a U-boat waits to give
you a present. Anyone who enjoys combat a Dummkopf is.”
“Hitler did,” Peggy said incautiously. She wondered if she would find

out more about what went on in Dachau than she ever wanted to
know. Your big mouth, she told herself, not for the first time.
The barmaid came back with the fresh drinks then. She almost fell
out of that dress as she bent over to give Reinberger his. He
noticed. She wanted him to notice. But he didn’t do anything or say
anything about it. She looked annoyed as she walked away.
“From everything I know, the Führer is braver than most men,”
Reinberger said. That was the straight Nazi line. From everything
Peggy’d heard, it also happened to be true, which was
discouraging.
“Did the Russians shoot back?” she asked.
“They tried. Wallowing freighters with popguns have not much
chance against warships,” Reinberger answered. “They are brave
enough themselves, no matter what the radio says.” So he didn’t
think much of Dr. Goebbels’ endless propaganda barrage. That was
interesting. “No matter how brave you are, though, you must have
the tools to do the job.”
No sooner were the words out of his mouth than air-raid sirens
started wailing. The headwaiter shouted, “The basement is our
bomb shelter. Everyone go to the basement at once.”
“Have the English and French begun to bomb Berlin, then?”
Reinberger asked as people headed for the door.
“Not even once, not since I’ve been here,” Peggy answered. “Do
you suppose it’s the Russians?”
The German naval officer looked almost comically surprised. “I
never dreamt they could,” he answered, starting down the stairs.
“Not impossible, I suppose, but it didn’t once cross my mind.”

Somewhere not far away, bombs crump!ed outside. Peggy knew
that hateful, terrifying sound much too well.
Even though it was New Year’s Eve—no, New Year’s Day now
—some people hadn’t gone dancing into 1939. Grumpy, sleepylooking men in bathrobes over pajamas and women in housecoats
over nightgowns joined the more alert crowd from the party. A
mustachioed man who spoke German with a Bela Lugosi accent
said, “They told me this could not happen.” Whoever they were,
more bomb bursts said they didn’t know what they were talking
about.
A woman added, “Göring said you could call him Meyer if the enemy
ever bombed Berlin.”
Crump! Crump! Boom! As far as Peggy could see, the fat Luftwaffe
boss had just saddled himself with a Jewish-sounding name. As far
as she could see, he deserved it. He deserved worse, but he wasn’t
likely to get it. People didn’t get what they deserved often enough.
Boom! That one sounded as if it came down right on top of the
hotel. The lights in the cellar flickered and went out. People
screamed on notes ranging from bass to shrill soprano. The
Germans and their friends sounded an awful lot like the
international crowd at Marianske Lazne. When you dropped bombs
on them, people were all pretty much alike. Peggy would have been
perfectly happy never to have learned that lesson.
Everyone cheered when, after about half a minute, the lights came
on again. A few minutes later, sirens shrilled the all-clear. “Happy
New Year,” Lieutenant Commander Reinberger said dryly.
“Hey, we’re alive,” Peggy answered. “Anybody wants to know what I
think, that makes it happy enough.”

WHEN JOAQUIN DELGADILLO JOINED THE Nationalist army in
Spain, he didn’t do it to meet General Sanjurjo. He did it because he
couldn’t stand the Spanish Republic. He probably would have done
it even if someone as dull and cautious as General Franco
commanded his side.
That didn’t mean he wasn’t delighted to get a glimpse of Sanjurjo.
The story was that the general’s airplane had almost crashed
coming from Portugal to Spain when the revolt against the Republic
broke out. People said Sanjurjo didn’t want to leave all his fancy
clothes behind. So what if they would have weighed down the
plane? A real man, a real Spaniard, didn’t worry about things like
that.
Still, Joaquin was willing to admit it was probably good that the pilot
had worried about them. The youngster had seen too many men on
both sides throw away their lives for no good reason. The
Republicans were bastards, but no denying they were brave
bastards. And his own side didn’t put up with cowards, not even for
a minute.
Now General Sanjurjo stood on a low swell of ground and pointed
south. He wasn’t any too impressive to look at. He was old and short
and squat and dumpy. But he had a good voice. And he had some
of the same gifts Germans said Hitler did: while he was talking, you
believed him.
“More than two hundred years ago, Britain stole part of our
fatherland from us,” Sanjurjo said. “Ever since, Gibraltar has been a
thorn in Spain’s side. Now it is full of Communists and fellow
travelers, people who ran away there so they wouldn’t get what was
coming to them.”

General Sanjurjo laughed a very unpleasant laugh. “Well, they’re
going to get it whether they want it or not. And you, soldados de
España, you’re going to give it to them. Will you stop before you
reach complete victory?”
“No!” Joaquin shouted with everyone else in the detachment.
“Will you teach England a lesson the likes of which she hasn’t had
for hundreds of years?”
“Yes!” the men yelled.
“With Italy and Germany and God on our side, can anyone hold us
back?”
“No!” Joaquin shouted once more.
“Then strike!” General Sanjurjo cried. “Strike hard for Spain!”
As if on cue—and it probably was—Spanish guns opened up on
Gibraltar’s border defenses. Motors thrummed overhead as
German and Italian bombers flew off to pound what the British
insisted was one of their crown colonies.
Down inside Gibraltar, antiaircraft guns filled the air with puffs of
black smoke. Other guns fired back at the Spanish artillery. How
many ships did the Royal Navy have inside the harbor? They were
vulnerable to air attack—no doubt about it. But they could put out
impressive firepower till the bombers silenced them.
Joaquin knew what shells screaming in meant. He didn’t wait for
orders before he hit the dirt and started digging. The British shells
landed several hundred meters away, but why take chances? He
wasn’t the only guy who started scraping a foxhole out of the hard,
grayish-brown ground, either. Anyone who’d ever seen any action

knew what to do.
“Come on! Get up! Get moving!” Sergeant Carrasquel shouted.
Plenty of people did, without even thinking. A good sergeant was
one you feared worse than enemy fire. Joaquin stayed right where
he was. Then Carrasquel kicked him in the ass. “You, too,
Delgadillo? You think the Pope gave you a dispensation?”
However much Joaquin wished his Holiness would do exactly that,
he couldn’t very well claim it was true. Running all hunched over
—as if that did a peseta’s worth of good—he hurried toward the
border. Along with Spaniards in mustard-yellow khaki, he also saw
other troops wearing gray uniforms.
Germans! Maybe they were from the Condor Legion, the force of
“volunteers” doing what they could for the Spanish Nationalists. Or
maybe they were Wehrmacht regulars. The Nazis and the
Nationalists had the same enemies these days, after all. Putting
Gibraltar out of action would hurt England all over the
Mediterranean.
But that wasn’t why seeing those big, fair men in field-gray so
heartened Joaquin Delgadillo—and, no doubt, most of the other
Nationalist troopers who recognized them. Spaniards on both sides
were amateurs at war. The honest ones on both sides knew and
admitted as much. Left to their own devices, they probably would
have made a hash of the attack on Gibraltar. The British, whatever
else you could say about them, weren’t amateurs.
And neither were the Germans. If they were involved in this, it would
go the way it was supposed to. That didn’t mean Joaquin couldn’t
get blown to cat’s-meat. He knew as much. But he could hope he
wouldn’t get blown to cat’s-meat for no reason at all, the way he
might with only Spaniards running the show.

Shells made freight-train noises overhead. Some of the trains
sounded enormous. And some of the shells, when they burst, were
enormous. The ground shook under Joaquin’s feet. Great gouts of
earth fountained skyward. And not just of earth: he saw a man, legs
pumping as if he were still running, rise fifty or a hundred meters
into the air and then plunge earthward again.
“Naval guns!” somebody shouted, as if explaining a thing somehow
made it less fearful.
Did the British have battleships tied up at Gibraltar? Were the guns
now firing on the advancing Spaniards and Germans designed to
fight off battleships trying to batter their way into the harbor?
Joaquin neither knew nor cared. He knew only that, whether
designed for the job or not, those guns were terrifyingly good at
murdering infantrymen.
Up ahead, machine guns started their deadly chatter. Joaquin dove
for cover and started digging in again. If you wanted to stay alive in
the vicinity of machine guns, you had to do that. Artillery was
supposed to have taken out the British murder mills. Joaquin
laughed bitterly. They told you that before every attack. They lied
every goddamn time. And you were supposed to go on believing
them? Sure you were!
Rumble of engines, rattle of tracks…The Condor Legion and the
Italians had tanks. These were German machines, even if they
carried Spanish markings. Good, Joaquin thought. The Germans
handled their tanks as if they were fighting for their own country.
The Italians handled theirs as if they’d been given a job they didn’t
want to do. The least sign of trouble and they found an excuse for
not going forward.
Clang…Boom! That was the sound of an antitank round

slaughtering a tank. Joaquin raised his head a few centimeters.
Sure as hell, one of the German machines was ablaze, sending up
orange flames and a tall column of greasy black smoke. If God was
kind, the British round had killed the men in the tank right away. If
He wasn’t, they’d burned like a roast when the slut who was
supposed to be watching it got drunk and forgot it was on the fire.
Another tank hit a mine. This one didn’t catch fire, but it did throw a
track, slewing sideways and stopping in a horribly vulnerable
position. If the attack suppressed the guns that could reach it, the
men inside might yet live. Joaquin liked those odds…about as little
as he liked his own.
“Forward!” an officer shouted. His whistle squealed. Delgadillo
looked around again. He didn’t see the man giving the orders. If the
bastard didn’t have the guts to stand up himself, who would stand
up for him?
Then Sergeant Carrasquel rasped, “Come on, you lazy puto! You
think I’m going to do this all by myself?”
He ran forward. The British machine guns didn’t cut him down right
away. Joaquin knew why, too: only the good died young. Joaquin
thought of himself as good. But he knew the sergeant wouldn’t
agree. He also knew Carrasquel would hound him if alive and haunt
him if dead. So he got up and loped after the noncom.
Crack! Crack! Any bullet you heard like that came much too close to
your one and only irreplaceable carcass. When you heard a bunch
of them, you were mighty damn lucky if you didn’t get ventilated.
Tanks were good for taking out machine-gun nests, even the
concrete positions the British had built near the border. Gibraltar
wasn’t very big. If you could get past the frontier defenses, you
could go ahead and overrun the place…couldn’t you?

could go ahead and overrun the place…couldn’t you?
Down by the harbor, or maybe in it, something blew up with a fullthroated roar that staggered Joaquin. Maybe it was an ammunition
dump, or maybe a cruiser. Whatever it was, it wouldn’t trouble the
Spaniards any more.
More guns poured deadly fire down on them. Joaquin hit the dirt
again. He didn’t care if Sergeant Carrasquel pitched a fit. What kind
of defenses did England have here, anyway? A cannon or machine
gun on every square centimeter of ground, and more buried to pop
up and spew death? He wouldn’t have been surprised. This had to
be more than General Sanjurjo expected.
Stukas peeled off one by one and bombed enemy positions. One of
the dive-bombers didn’t rise into the sky again. It added its funeral
pyre to the rest of the stinking, choking smoke in the air. Nobody
was using gas, but sometimes it hardly seemed to matter.
Someone not far from Joaquin started shrieking for his mother. That
only made him dig harder. More bullets snarled past him. The
English seemed to have all the ammunition in the world. As he dug,
he realized he had yet to see his first British soldier.

Alistair Walsh was alive and breathing and somewhere in France.
He heartily approved of the first two. The last wasn’t so good. He
couldn’t remember just when the BEF got driven back over the
border. They gabbled away in French in the western part of
Belgium, so he couldn’t tell by any shift in language. But this was
France, all right, and the Germans were still doing their damnedest
to break through.
They hadn’t managed yet. Walsh remembered the black days in the
spring and early summer of 1918, when whole British regiments
—Christ, divisions!—got swallowed up in the Kaiser’s last offensive.
This was worse. Then storm troops with submachine guns had
spearheaded the German attacks. They were right bastards, but
they went at the speed of shank’s mare, like everybody else in the
Great War.
Nowadays, the Nazis had tanks. They sliced through infantry like a
hot knife through lard. The BEF and the French had tanks, too.
Officers swore on a stack of Bibles—and swore profanely—that they
had as many tanks as the Germans, maybe more. They sounded as
if they knew what they were talking about. But whether they did or
not, they never seemed to have enough of them at the places were
it counted.
And so the bastards in field-gray—funny how the mere sight of that
color, and the beetling shape of that helmet, could put your wind up
—kept carving slices out of the Allies, forcing them to retreat if they
didn’t want to get cut off and surrounded. The Nazis made it over

the Dyle in rubber boats. Machine guns knocked out the first boats,
but German tanks and antiaircraft guns on the far side of the river
silenced the machine guns. As soon as the Germans won a
bridgehead, they ran pontoon bridges over the Dyle and got their
tanks across. Things went downhill from there.
“Hey, Puffin!” Walsh said. “Got a fag on you?”
“Sure, Sergeant.” Puffin Casper looked like hell. His greatcoat was
filthy and torn. His tin hat sat at an anything but jaunty angle on his
head. He hadn’t shaved since God only knew when, and he hadn’t
bathed since a while before that. Walsh couldn’t very well gig him
—he was no lovelier, and no cleaner, himself. And he’d smoked his
last cigarette an hour earlier.
He took a couple from the packet Puffin held out. “Thanks,” he said,
and cupped his hands in front of his mouth to get one lit in spite of
the cold, nasty wind. It wasn’t raining right this minute, and it wasn’t
snowing, either. Dirty gray clouds clotted the sky. Before long, it
would be doing one or the other. Or maybe it would split the
difference with sleet, which was worse than rain or snow.
Somebody not far away started cussing. The vile words held no
special heat, as they might have if the swearer had mashed his
thumb with a spanner. No, his fury was cold and disgusted. Walsh
knew what that meant: he’d just heard bad news. If everyone
around him was lucky, he’d found out his fiancée was having it on
with the corner greengrocer. If not…
“What’s buggered up now?” Walsh asked. Knowing was better than
not knowing—he supposed.
“Bloody Belgies have packed it in,” came the reply. “King Leopold’s
asking Hitler for an armistice.”

“What? They can’t do that!” Under other circumstances, the outrage
in Walsh’s voice would have set him laughing. True, the Allies had
agreements not to seek separate peaces. But it wasn’t as if the
Dutch hadn’t already done it. And it wasn’t as if everybody didn’t
already know Leopold was a weak reed and halfway toward liking
the Germans, either.
All the same, the news was a jolt. A corner of Belgium had stayed
free all through the last war. The Belgian army had stayed in the
field all through the last war, too. Now the whole country was
spreading its legs for the Germans after three weeks.
“I know they can’t,” said the soldier with the news. “Sods are doing it
anyway. And wherever they’re holding the line, the Nazis can pour
right on through.”
“Christ!” Walsh hadn’t thought of that. “Sweet suffering Jesus
Christ!” Sweet suffering Jesus Christ had had a birthday not long
before, not that anyone let it get in the way of the serious business
of slaughter. Walsh found a real question to ask: “What are we
doing about it?”
“Chamberlain’s deplored it, the wireless said,” the other soldier
answered.
“Oh, that’ll set Adolf’s mustache quivering, that will. Deplored it, has
he? Bleeding hell!” Walsh could have gone on for some time, but
what was the point? Chamberlain had survived two votes of
confidence since the war broke out, by a diminishing margin. One
more might sink him. That wouldn’t have broken Walsh’s heart. He
also feared it wouldn’t have much effect on the way the BEF was
fighting.
A British machine gun up ahead started barking. A moment later,

another joined in. “Oh, bleeding hell,” Walsh muttered again. He’d
hoped things would stay quiet for a while. The weather was bad
enough to have made any push in the last war bog down in mud
and slush. But there were many more paved roads for wheels to
use now, while tracks could force a way where even men on foot
had trouble going.
To his glad surprise, he heard engines coming up from the
southwest. “Matildas!” somebody yelled. The British tanks waltzed
up to the line a few minutes later. Waltz was about all they could do;
they made eight miles an hour on roads, and were slower off. They
had thick armor—German antitank shells mostly bounced off of
them. But they carried only a single rifle-caliber machine gun. Walsh
would have wished for French machines that had some hope of
keeping up with German panzers…and of knocking them out in a
stand-up fight.
Still and all, any tanks were better than none. If panzers came after
you and you couldn’t hope to fight them, what choice did you have
but to fall back? Walsh waved to the tank commanders, who rode
head and shoulders out of their cramped turrets. “Give ‘em hell!” he
shouted.
“That’s what we’re here for,” a tank commander answered in elegant
Oxbridgian tones. Walsh’s own accent was decidedly below the salt.
After mixing with men of every class in the last war and since, he
could make sense of all kinds of accents, from Received
Pronunciation to Cockney to broad Yorkshire to Scots burr. They
reminded him the whole country was in the fight.
The Matilda’s rattled forward. Walsh dug his foxhole deeper and
wider, and built up the earthwork in front of it. He also looked
around to decide where he’d go if he had to get out in a hurry. You
didn’t want to have to worry about that at the last minute. He who

hesitated then was lost.
A cannon barked—one of the Germans’ 37mm antitank guns. They
were small and light enough to keep up with advancing troops. A
split second later, the shell whanged off a Matilda. The British tank’s
machine gun never hesitated. Walsh grinned. Sure as hell, Matildas
were tough old gals.
But then a bigger gun boomed. This time, the noise of the impact
was Whang! Blam! That Matilda brewed up. So did another one a
moment later. Hitler’s boys had an 88mm antiaircraft gun. In their
thoroughness, they’d also seen fit to stock it with armor-piercing
ammunition. Walsh didn’t think a tank in the world could keep out an
88mm shell.
Puffin knew that report for what it was, too. “Bad luck they’ve got an
88 here,” he said.
“Too fucking right it is,” Walsh agreed. He wondered if the German
monster had taken out the tank commander with the posh accent.
He hoped not, for whatever that was worth.
Another Matilda went up in flames. The rest of them started pulling
back. They couldn’t even escape in a hurry. Whang! Blam! Another
gout of flame, another column of smoke—another pyre.
And here came the German infantry. They loped forward in loose
order, diving for cover whenever somebody fired at them. They shot
back from their bellies. They had machine guns. Their air-cooled
models were lighter and easier to lug along than most of the
weapons the British used.
“Panzers!” The shout rang out from half a dozen throats at once.
The German machines were a hell of a lot faster than the poor

Matildas. Most of their commanders also drove standing up in the
turret. Walsh drew a bead on one. He pressed the trigger. The rifle
bucked against his shoulder. The German threw up his hands, then
slumped over sideways. It was a Panzer I—if the commander was
wounded or dead, the driver couldn’t man the guns. (Well, he could,
but then he couldn’t drive.) The machine turned around almost in its
own length and got out of there.
Others came on. So did the foot soldiers they shepherded. Bullets
thudded into the mud in front of Walsh. None got through. All the
same, the neighborhood wasn’t healthy any more.
Walsh scrambled out of his hole and ran for the stone fence he’d
spotted not far away. Out in the open, he felt worse than naked—he
felt like a snail with its shell pulled off. Bullets cracked past him and
stitched the mud near his feet.
With a gasp not far from a wail, he threw himself down behind the
fence. Then he popped up and fired at the Germans. Four men
threw themselves flat because of one bullet. They were out in the
open, too, and knew how vulnerable they were. Walsh shot at one
of them. The man twisted, grabbing his leg.
“Sorry, pal,” Walsh said. Most of the time, you didn’t see the enemy
you hit. Here he’d done it twice in a few minutes. Instead of making
him proud, it just made him hope the Germans wouldn’t do the same
thing to him.

HUDDLING IN A SLIT TRENCH with half-frozen mud on the bottom
wasn’t what Hans-Ulrich Rudel had had in mind when the war
started. That didn’t mean he wasn’t doing it. His squadron’s latest
airstrip lay a few kilometers west of Oostende, on the Strait of
Dover. You could damn near spit from Belgium to England here.

Dover. You could damn near spit from Belgium to England here.
And you could damn near spit from England to Belgium. The RAF
had come over every night since Belgium threw in the towel. Night
bombing wasn’t very accurate, but you didn’t want to stay in your
nice, cozy sleeping bag when the bombs whistled down. A couple of
intrepid souls had tried it. One of them was in the hospital, the other
dead.
Fragments from a big one that hit much too close whined past
overhead. “Those miserable pigdogs!” Hans-Ulrich said around a
yawn. He was amazed at how little sleep he could get by with. “We
ought to bomb them for a change, keep them up all night.”
“How do you know we aren’t?” somebody else said. There in the
chilly darkness, Rudel couldn’t tell who it was.
“We’d hear about it on the radio if we were,” he answered. “They
wouldn’t keep something like that quiet—they’d brag about it.”
“Er hat Recht,” another Luftwaffe man said. The rest of the
shivering Germans must have thought Hans-Ulrich was right, too,
because nobody contradicted him. The Reich boasted about what it
did to its enemies. And why not? They deserved what they got for
presuming to oppose it.
“And here, we really could do it,” Hans-Ulrich said musingly. He’d
spent the war plastering positions on the Continent. That needed
doing, of course, but if the English thought they could send
bombers out from their island without getting any attention in return
they had to be out of their minds.
Another big bomb burst nearby. The English were either good or
lucky. “It’ll be a mess come morning,” someone said dolefully.

That proved all too true. The runways were cratered. One Ju-87
was a write-off in spite of the revetments in which the bombers hid.
Another had taken enough damage to keep it out of the air for a
while. A snorting steamroller and a pick-and-shovel crew started
setting the strip to rights. Hans-Ulrich fumed. The day was bright
and clear—perfect flying weather, no matter how cold it was—but
here he sat, stuck on the ground.
Damn the English anyway!
Without the steamroller, setting things straight would have taken
even longer than it did. Three days went by before the strip was
flyable again. The British bombers came over by night twice more,
but their aim wasn’t so good. The airstrip came away unscathed.
When the fourth morning also promised good weather, the
squadron commander summoned his pilots and said, “Wir fahren
gegen England.” He paused for a moment, then went on, “No, I’m
not throwing a song title at you. We are going to go against
England.” He eyed Rudel. “Maybe someone from the High
Command was in the trench with you a few nights ago, because I
got the order yesterday.”
“Yes, sir,” Hans-Ulrich said. He hoped the tune from “Wir fahren
gegen England” wouldn’t get stuck in his head. It was catchy.
“There are airfields near Ramsgate,” Major Bleyle continued. “We
are to hit them and the aircraft that use them. The English need to
learn they can’t play these games with us. And with our Stukas, we
can put our bombs where they do the most good.”
The pilots nodded. A dive-bomber was ever so much more precise
than some machine flying five kilometers up in the middle of the
night. On the other hand, a bomber five kilometers up was almost
impossible to find and even harder to shoot down once found. A Ju-

impossible to find and even harder to shoot down once found. A Ju87, by contrast, was a low-flying, lumbering brute. The only way to
make it more visible would be to paint it bright red.
“Will we have escorts?” Hans-Ulrich asked.
“Ja,” Bleyle said. “We’ll have some 109s with us. They should hold
off the English fighters.” Hans-Ulrich nodded, satisfied. The
Messerschmitts had done the job on the Continent. Why wouldn’t
they over England, too?
An hour and a half later, he was in the air. Sergeant Dieselhorst sat
in the rear-facing seat behind him. If the 109s failed, the sergeant’s
machine gun could help keep the RAF away.
As usual, the 109s put Hans-Ulrich in mind of sharks. They were
made for one purpose and one only: to go out and kill things. Their
leader waggled his wings at the Ju-87s. The Messerschmitts formed
up around the dive-bombers. They droned on toward the English
coast, plainly visible through the Stuka’s armor-glass windshield.
A short flight: less than half an hour, even cruising. Rudel watched
his instruments. Everything was green. The maintenance men did a
hell of a job. His thoughts leaped ahead to what needed doing when
he reached the target.
He could see Ramsgate not far ahead. The airstrips the Stukas
were supposed to hit lay a little west and south of the town. The
German air fleet would swing in that direction, and…
And British fighters jumped them. Hurricanes with red-white-andblue roundels mixed it up with the Messerschmitts. The Luftwaffe
had already seen that Hurricanes were at least as good as anything
the French flew. Were they as good as 109s? If they weren’t, they
came unpleasantly close.

While some of them engaged the German fighters, others bored in
on the Ju-87s. One dive-bomber after another fell out of the sky.
Hoarse shouts of fear and alarm dinned in Hans-Ulrich’s earphones.
So did the shrieks of the dying. “Mother!” someone wailed. “I’m
burning, Mother!” Rudel switched frequencies in a hurry. It didn’t
help much.
Sergeant Dieselhorst fired at something. A couple of bullets had hit
Hans-Ulrich’s Stuka, but only a couple. He feared that was nothing
but luck.
He also feared the Germans had made a mistake with this attack.
On the Continent, bombing targets close to their own lines, they
could generally count on an advantage in numbers. Damaged
planes didn’t have far to go to get back to friendly territory. Here,
the deep blue sea lay between the raiders and friends. Only it
wasn’t blue. It was grayish green, and looked cold.
“Drop your bombs anywhere!” The squadron commander’s voice
cut through the din on the radio. “Drop them and get away! This is
too hot for us!”
Hans-Ulrich wouldn’t have argued with that. He pulled the bombrelease lever. Ramsgate lay below. If hundreds of kilos of explosives
came down on civilians’ heads instead of on the airstrip for which
they were intended—well, too bad. Wasn’t it the RAF’s fault for
interfering with the planned operation?
A British fighter flew right in front of him: a biplane, a Gloster
Gladiator. It looked outdated, but the Czech Avias had proved even
planes like that could be dangerous. He fired at it. The Gladiator, far
more agile than his Stuka, spun away when the pilot saw his tracers.
Even though Rudel mashed the throttle against the instrument

panel, he knew he wasn’t home free—nowhere near. A Hurricane
could still catch him from behind. For that matter, so could a
Gladiator. The Ju-87 was built for muscle, not for speed. He’d never
felt the lack so much before.
“Anything on our tail, Albert?” he called through the speaking tube.
“Not right now, thank God,” Dieselhorst answered, which also
summed up the way Hans-Ulrich felt.
He looked around for more Stukas and for Messerschmitts. Of
course they wouldn’t go back in the neat formation they’d used to
approach England. They’d be all over the sky. All the same, he saw
far fewer German planes than he should have. When fighters came
after them in swarms, Ju-87s were alarmingly vulnerable.
The 109s had held their own against the Hurricanes. He was sure
they’d more than held their own against the Gladiators. Even that
came with a price, though. If a Hurricane fighter bailed out of a shotup fighter, he landed among friends. He could fly again as soon as
he got another plane. A Messerschmitt pilot who bailed out over
England was out of the war for good even if he came down unhurt.
There was the Belgian coast ahead. The RAF seemed content to
have broken things up on their own ground. They weren’t pursuing
hard. Hans-Ulrich eased back on the throttle. He’d never dreamt he
could be so proud of nothing more than making it home from a
mission in one piece.

AIR-RAID SIRENS WOKE SARAH GOLDMAN out of a sound sleep.
She needed a moment, or more than a moment, to realize what they
were. Münster had tested them a few times before the war started,
and a few more afterwards. But the luminous hands on the clock by

her bed said it was two in the morning. Only a maniac would test the
sirens at a time like this.
Sarah didn’t doubt that a lot of the Nazis running Münster were
maniacs. But they weren’t the kind of maniacs who’d do something
like this. Which meant…
Ice ran through her when she realized what it meant. This wasn’t a
drill. This was a real air raid!
She threw off the covers, which made her realize how cold it was
inside the house. Throwing a robe over her flannel nightgown, she
ran for the stairs.
She bumped into somebody in the dark. The grunt made her realize
it was her brother. “Where do we go, Saul? What do we do?”
“Find someplace low, I guess,” he answered. “What else can we do?
We’re Jews. We can’t go to any of the regular shelters—they won’t
let us in.”
Somehow, Sarah had forgotten that. She couldn’t imagine why. It
wasn’t as if regulations didn’t spell it out. The Aryans in charge of
things in the Reich made no bones about how they felt. If they
saved their own kind and watched Jews get blown to ground round,
they would go out and have a beer afterwards to celebrate.
Sarah didn’t think all the goyim in Münster felt that way. Life would
have been impossible in that case. It wasn’t now—it was just difficult.
As she hurried down the stairs, she realized she might have to
change her mind about that. If a bomb hit them and they weren’t in
a proper shelter, life would be impossible.
“Come on!” Saul said. “Under the dining-room table!”

“Will it hold up if the house comes down on it?” Sarah asked
doubtfully.
“No, but it’s the best chance we’ve got,” he said. She decided he
was right.
Their mother and father crowded under there with them. Samuel
and Hanna Goldman took the outside places. When Saul tried to
protest, his father spoke two harsh words: “Shut up!” The gentle
classical scholar never talked like that. The front-line soldier of half
a lifetime ago might have, though. And Saul did shut up, which
would do for a miracle till a bigger one came along.
Airplane engines droned overhead. Antiaircraft guns began to
thunder. “Will they shoot them down?” Sarah said.
“They’ll try,” her father answered: not a vote of confidence.
Through the roar of the guns, Sarah heard other noises—high,
shrill, swelling whistles. The flat, harsh crump!s that followed made
the guns seem whispers beside them. The windows rattled. The
whole house shook. Is this what an earthquake feels like? she
wondered. But how could she tell? She’d never been in an
earthquake.
“We need to put masking-tape squares on our windows,” Samuel
Goldman said, his voice eerily calm.
“Will that keep them from breaking?” Hanna asked.
“No. But it will help keep them from spraying glass all over the inside
of the house if something comes down close to us—I hope,” he
said.
After what might have been twenty minutes or twenty years, the

bombs stopped falling. The airplane engines went away. The guns
kept banging for several minutes more. Shrapnel pattered down on
the roof like hail. At last, silence fell.
“Well, that wasn’t too bad,” Sarah said. She was so glad to be alive,
so glad it was over, she straightened up too fast and banged her
head on the bottom of the table. That was the only hurt any of the
Goldmans took.
“It wasn’t too good, either,” her father said. “I don’t remember any
raids that bad in the last war.”
“Neither do I,” her mother said.
A siren screamed—that was a fire engine, heading somewhere. The
Goldmans made their slow, careful way to the front door and looked
out. Münster was black as a tomb…except for two or three orange
glows on the skyline, one of them only a few blocks away. By the
sound, the fire engine was going there. It couldn’t go very fast, not
unless it wanted to plow into something.
“This is terrible,” Sarah said. “The enemy never did anything like
this before. Why would they start now?”
Saul nudged her. “The enemy is running Germany,” he whispered.
“So why did you try to join the Wehrmacht, then?” she whispered
back. He turned away without answering. She knew what the answer
was: her brother and her father still wanted to be Germans, but the
Nazis wouldn’t let them.
If her father heard the whispers, he didn’t show it. “Let’s go back to
bed,” he said. “We might as well try, anyhow. We can’t do anything
else here.”

“Except thank God we came through in one piece,” her mother said.
Her father didn’t answer. He’d always been less religious than her
mother—and even Sarah wondered whether God had His eyes on
the Jews in Germany these days. She went upstairs doubting she’d
be able to fall asleep again. But she did.
She came down to breakfast: black bread and ersatz coffee that
tasted like and probably was burnt barley. Her father was reading
the newspaper. AIR PIRATES SLAUGHTER INNOCENT CIVILIANS!
the headline screamed.
“The British claim it’s retaliation for something our planes did over
there,” her father said. “Dr. Goebbels says that’s a bunch of filthy
lies, of course.”
“Of course,” Sarah echoed. In both what they said and how they
said it, they sounded perfectly loyal. A message got passed even
so. Just for a moment, Samuel Goldman’s eyes glinted behind his
spectacles. Then he raised the newspaper, hiding his face.
Sarah felt herself smiling. She was still cold. She’d just discovered
she was in danger of getting blasted off the face of the earth. In
spite of everything, though, she was happy. She wondered why.

LUDWIG ROTHE SWORE AS HE guddled around, deep in the
bowels of his Panzer II’s engine. “Hold that flashlight higher, Theo,”
he said. “I can’t see what the hell I’m doing here.”
“Carburetor again, Sergeant?” Hossbach asked, moving the
flashlight not quite enough.
“No, it’s the damn fuel pump. I’m sure of it. We’ve boiled the carb

out so often, we could boil coffee in it.” If Rothe sounded disgusted,
it was only because he was. “Damned engine still keeps missing. I’m
going to fix that pump or steal a new one somewhere or go back to
the Maybach works and bend a wrench on somebody’s head.”
“Sounds good to me, Sergeant,” Fritz Bittenfeld said. After pausing
to light a cigarette, the driver went on, “Why the devil can’t they
make an engine that does what it’s supposed to, for God’s sake?”
Part of the reason was overstrain. The engine only put out 135
horsepower. That wasn’t much when it was trying to haul nine
tonnes around. Rothe was not inclined to feel charitable, especially
not right after he cut his hand on a sharp metal edge in the engine
compartment. “Why? I’ll tell you why. Because they’re back there
and safe, that’s why,” he snarled. “They don’t have to worry about
what happens when things go wrong. We do. Hold that goddamn
light higher, Theo!”
“Sorry,” Theo said, and still didn’t move the light enough. He made a
good radioman. Radio waves suited him—they were out there in the
ether, and you couldn’t see them. When it came to things more
closely connected to planet earth, he wasn’t so great.
Somehow, Ludwig got the fuel pump out anyway. Six or eight
panzers had halted here, somewhere near the border between
Belgium and France. Their crews worked on them, aided by a
couple of mechanics. A few hundred meters away, two batteries of
105s sent death and destruction across kilometers toward the
British and French troops battling to slow the Germans down.
As he tore the fuel pump apart, he wished his panzer could carry a
gun like the ones artillerymen used. A gun like that and you’d have
yourself a land dreadnought. The 20mm on the Panzer II was a
doorknocker by comparison, and not much of a door-knocker at

that. Even Panzer IIIs carried only a 37mm piece—and they were
still rare birds.
Enemy panzers didn’t have much more. Some of the French
machines mounted 47mm guns. But the French and the British
didn’t seem to know how to make a fist. They used their panzers in
penny packets. Individually, their machines were at least a match for
anything the Reich made. But if Germany had swarms of panzers at
the Schwerpunkt and the enemy didn’t, the German drive would go
forward. And so matters had proved up till now. Would the Low
Countries have fallen in less than a month otherwise?
Foot soldiers came forward through the little motor park. At first,
Ludwig paid little attention. Then his eyes snapped from the legend
on their cuff bands—Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler—to the SS runes on
their collar tabs. Here was something out of the ordinary! He’d
heard that some SS men were going to the front alongside
Wehrmacht troops, but he’d never seen any before. And wasn’t the
LAH…?
These fellows, all of them big and fair, carried submachine guns and
looked either nervous or extremely alert. They were almost out of
artillery range of the enemy, so Rothe thought they were being silly
…till he saw the middle-aged man in their midst.
He kicked Theo in the ankle. “Achtung!” he hissed, and stiffened to
attention himself.
“Are you out of your mind?” the radioman said—nobody paid
attention to parade-ground formalities in the field.
“Achtung!” Ludwig repeated. He jerked his chin toward the gaggle of
SS men and their charge.
Hossbach’s eyes followed that gesture. At attention or not, Rothe

almost burst out laughing at the way they nearly bugged out of
Theo’s head. Fritz was gaping, too. Well, hell—who wouldn’t?
Hitler came over to the Panzer II. Automatically, Ludwig saluted. The
other crewmen echoed the gesture a beat later. The Führer
returned the salutes. “Is everything all right here?” he asked. Up
close, his voice was even more resonant, even larger than life, than
it was over a microphone in a stadium or on the radio.
“Y-Yes, sir,” Ludwig managed. “Just routine repairs. We’ll be at ‘em
again soon.” He felt dizzy, half drunk. Talking to Adolf Hitler! He
would remember this day for the rest of his life, even if he lived to
112. (Having seen what happened to front-line fighters here and in
Czechoslovakia, he knew how unlikely that was. He knew, but he
didn’t dwell on it. He tried not to, anyhow.)
“Your fuel pump giving you trouble?” the Führer asked.
Theo’s eyes bugged out all over again. Ludwig Rothe’s did the
same thing this time. “How the devil did you know that, sir?” he
blurted.
One of the big SS men guarding Hitler growled like an angry
Rottweiler. But the Führer only chuckled. “I get reports. I read them.
I remember them,” he answered. “That’s the most common failing on
the Panzer II. I have had a few things to say to the Maybach people
about it. An improved model is now in production.”
“Good. Very good.” Ludwig wondered what had happened to the
people responsible for the current piece of junk. Maybe he was
better off not knowing.
“We will use it to go on to victory,” Hitler continued. A lock of hair
flopped down over his forehead. He brushed it back with a gesture
so automatic, he must have used it thousands of times. “We will!” he

insisted. “Victory may be coming a little more slowly than some of
the poison dwarfs back in Berlin believe, but it is no less sure on
account of that.”
Several of the LAH bodyguards growled this time. Wehrmacht men
called the Waffen-SS asphalt soldiers, but Ludwig wouldn’t have
wanted to mess with any of these guys. “I’m sure of it, mein Führer,”
he said, not because that was the thing to say but because he
really believed it.
Maybe Hitler sensed as much. Or maybe, once the Führer got
rolling, he was no easier to stop than a river. “Victory is sure!” he
thundered, as he might have on the radio. “And the mad mongrels
and traitors who tried to stop the Reich from gaining it have got
what they deserved. Oh, yes! That they have!” His eyes blazed.
The only trouble was, Ludwig didn’t know what he was talking about.
“Sir?” the sergeant said.
One of the Leibstandarte men murmured warningly The fellow wore
what would have been a major’s shoulder straps if he were in the
Wehrmacht, but the SS had its own weird set of ranks. Major or
whatever the hell he was, the Führer ignored him. “Some of those
pigdogs—fancy aristocrats and even a few military men, I’m sorry to
say—thought they could run the country better than I am doing it.
Well, the ones who are left alive are seeing how they like the
arrangements at Dachau.”
“Mein Führer—” the SS officer said urgently.
“Ja, Jens, ja.” Hitler sounded—indulgent? He turned back to the
panzer crew. “Do not gossip about this, bitte. We have not said
anything in the papers or on the radio. We do not want the enemy
to know there is even so much as a mustard seed’s worth of

dissension in the Reich. You are good fellows—I can see that. I’m
sure you won’t blab.”
“Of course not, mein Führer,” Ludwig said quickly. Fritz and Theo
also stammered out reassurances. Rothe had never imagined he
would end up knowing a state secret. By the way that officer was
looking at him, the Waffen-SS man thought he would be better off
dead.
“That’s what I thought,” Hitler said. He caught the officer’s eye
again. “Don’t give them any trouble—you hear me? They said
they’d keep quiet, and I expect they meant it. Unless you’re sure
—and I mean sure—they didn’t, leave them alone.”
“Jawohl, mein Führer,” the LAH man said. The look he gave Rothe
and the other panzer men shouted that he still wanted to dispose of
them. But he didn’t look as if he had the nerve to go against Hitler’s
direct order. Who in his right mind would?
“All right.” Hitler nodded to Ludwig, then to his driver and radioman.
“I hope you stay safe, my friends. I know it’s warm work, but it needs
doing. Fight hard!” He nodded again, then stumped away, his
retinue all around him.
“Der Herr Gott im Himmel!” Fritz whispered.
“Somebody pinch me. I think I’m dreaming,” Theo said, also in a low
voice. That amounted to about the same thing.
“He’s…something.” Ludwig heard the awe in his own voice. He tried
to imagine why anyone would move against the Führer. True, the
war wasn’t won yet, but Germany was still moving forward, and a lot
faster than she had the last time around. What was wrong with that?
Plainly, the traitors had paid for their folly. Dachau…Rothe’s shiver

had nothing to do with the weather. If half what he’d heard was true,
the plotters who’d got killed outright might have been the lucky
ones.

Luc Harcourt was alive. That was all he knew, all he cared about.
He’d seen more war than he ever wanted to meet. He’d smelled
blood and pus and death and his own shit in his pants. Nobody’d
ever ragged him about that. He knew damn well he wasn’t the only
one.
This ruined barn was a good place to grab a cigarette. What was
left of the walls kept a German sniper from drawing a bead on him
and punching his ticket. He sucked in harsh smoke, held it as long
as he could, and finally let it out again.
“Man,” he said, and paused for another drag. “I never wanted a
smoke this much when I was a civilian.”
“Not even after a fuck?” Sergeant Demange had a cigarette
between his lips, too, but then he always did.

“Not even then,” Luc said. “Then I like it. Yeah, sure—but of course.
But there’s a difference between liking a smoke and really needing
one, you know what I mean? When the bastards are trying to kill
you, a cigarette’s all you’ve got.”
“Well, not quite,” Demange shook his canteen so it sloshed. “What
do you have in here?”
“Pinard,” Luc answered. The cheap, nasty red wine was
nonregulation, but it was also less likely than water from God knew
where to give you the runs. You couldn’t very well get lit on a liter of
pinard, either. “How about you, Sergeant? What do you have?”
“Calvados,” Demange said proudly. “That’ll put hair on your balls,
by God.”
“Boy, will it ever,” Luc said. The apple brandy of northern France
was liquid dynamite. He hoped the sergeant would offer to share,
but Demange didn’t. Demange was for Demange, first, last, and
always. Luc didn’t resent it the way he might have from someone
more hypocritical about it.
Paul Renouvin said, “Calvados? C’est rien.” He didn’t look like a
college man any more. He was as scrawny and filthy and ragged
and unshaven as any of the other soldiers in the barn.
But he still knew how to get under Demange’s skin. The sergeant
jerked as if all of his lice had bitten him at once. “Nothing, is it,
asshole? Well, what the devil have you got that’s better? Whatever
it is, it better be good, or I’ll whale the living shit out of you.”
Renouvin was ten centimeters taller and a good bit heavier. Luc
would have bet on Demange every time.
Paul caressed his canteen as if it were a beautiful woman’s bare tit.
“Me? I’ve got scotch,” he murmured.

“Why, you lying prick!” Demange said. “Scotch, my left one! Where
would a no-account cocksucker like you get scotch?”
“Off a dead Tommy officer,” Renouvin answered calmly. “Good stuff,
too.”
“Tell me another one. You think I was born yesterday? You think I
fell off the turnip truck?” The sergeant pointed to the canteen. “Give
me a taste of that. Right now, too. If it isn’t scotch, I’ll tear your ears
off and shove ‘em down your throat.”
“But what if it is?” Renouvin asked.
Rage made Demange reckless. “If it is—fat chance!—you can have
all my applejack.”
“You heard him, boys,” Paul said. Luc and the other poilus nodded.
Why not? This was the best sport they’d had in a while. Luc forgot
about the cold and the dirt and the fear. He forgot about the battery
of 75s banging away not far from the barn, even if they were liable
to bring German artillery down on everybody’s head before too
long. He watched Renouvin open the canteen and pour a little of
the contents into the screw-on cap. With elaborate ceremony,
Renouvin passed the cap to Demange. “Here you go, Sergeant.
Salut.”
“If you’re trying to get me to drink piss, you’ll fucking die—I promise
you that,” Demange said suspiciously. He sniffed at the cap before
he drank from it. Luc watched his face, but those ratlike features
gave nothing away. Like a man moving in a dream, the sergeant
sipped.
He didn’t say anything for more than a minute. He just sat there
motionless, even the perpetual cigarette in the corner of his mouth

forgotten. Then, without any particular rancor, he said, “You son of
a bitch.” He flipped the cap to Renouvin, who put it back on the
canteen. And Demange handed him his own canteen. “Here. Choke
on it.”
“We’ll all choke on it—and then on the scotch. How’s that?” Paul
said. He swigged from the Calvados, then passed it along.
Luc thought that was mighty smart—not university-smart, maybe,
but soldier-smart for sure. A man who had both scotch and
applejack was a man who made his buddies jealous. A man who
shared them made friends for life—or at least till one of the other
guys got his hands on something nice.
Two big knocks of good, strong booze. Shelter from the winter
weather. A soldier’s life could be simple sometimes. A few tiny
pleasures, and everything seemed wonderful.
The next morning, replacements came up to the front. Luc eyed
them with mingled suspicion and contempt. They were too pale, too
neat, too plump. They carried too much equipment. Their uniforms
weren’t dirty and torn. Their noncoms hardly knew how to swear.
“Poor darlings!” someone jeered. “Someone forgot to lock the
nursery, and look where they ended up.”
A shell burst half a kilometer away. Some of the new fish flinched.
That made Luc want to start laughing. “They have to come closer
than that to hurt you,” he said. “Don’t worry—they will.”
A lieutenant as young and unweathered as his troops pointed an
angry finger at him. “Where is your superior, soldier?” he snapped.
“I guess I’m him…sir,” Sergeant Demange said, the usual Gitane
bobbing in the corner of his mouth as he spoke. “What do you

need?”
He was grimy and unshaven. He looked as if he’d killed better men
than that baby lieutenant—and he had. The officer had the rank,
but Demange had the presence. Luc watched the lieutenant’s
bravado leak out through the soles of his boots. “Tell that man to be
more respectful,” he managed, but his voice lacked conviction.
“Sure,” Demange said, and then, to Luc, “Be more respectful, you
hear?”
“Sorry, Sergeant.” Luc went along with the charade.
“There you go, sir,” Demange said to the lieutenant. “You happy
now?”
Plainly, the lieutenant wasn’t. Just as plainly, being unhappy
wouldn’t do him one goddamn bit of good. Demange’s attitude and
graying stubble said he’d fought in the first war, while the lieutenant
hadn’t done much fighting in this one yet. His tongue slid across the
hairline mustache that darkened the skin just above his upper lip,
but he didn’t say anything more. He just kept on walking.
More German shells came in. Maybe the Boches were probing for
that battery of 75s. Whatever they were doing, those rising screams
in the air said this salvo was trouble. “Hit the dirt!” Luc yelled. He
was already flat by the time the words came out. Several other
veterans shouted the same thing—also from their bellies.
Bam! He felt as if a squad of Paris flics were beating on him with
their nightsticks. Blast picked him up and slammed him back down
again. “Oof!” he said—he came down on a rock that would bruise
his belly and just missed knocking the wind out of him. Jagged
fragments whined overhead. Several of them spanged off the barn’s
stone wall. One drew a bloody line across the back of Luc’s hand.

What he said then was worse than Oof!
More shells landed a couple of hundred meters away, and then
more farther off still. Luc opened and closed his hands a couple of
times. All his fingers worked—no tendons cut. Only a scratch, as
these things went. It still hurt like blazes, though.
Cautiously, he raised his head. When he did, he forgot about his
own little wound. One or two of the German shells had come down
right by—maybe even among—the raw troops. They didn’t know
anything about flattening out. You could scream at them, but they
needed a few seconds to get what you were saying and a few more
to figure out what they should do.
All of which added up to a few fatal seconds too long.
Some of the soldiers were still standing. More were on the ground
now—men and pieces of men. The air was thick with the stink of
blood, as it might have been after explosions in a slaughterhouse.
This wasn’t quite that. This was explosions that produced a
slaughterhouse.
A soldier stared stupidly at the spouting stump of his arm. Not three
meters from him, the kid lieutenant stood there with his face white
and twisted into a rictus of horror. “Merde,” Luc muttered. He
scrambled to his feet and ran over to the maimed kid. A leather
bootlace did duty for a tourniquet. The spout became a tiny trickle.
And the soldier came out of shock and started to shriek. Luc dug
the morphine syrette out of the fellow’s wound kit and jabbed him
with it. The drug hit hard and fast. The soldier’s eyes closed and he
passed out. Luc thought he would live if he hadn’t bled too much.
Unlike most battlefield wounds, the amputation was almost as neat
as if a surgeon had done it.

The poor lieutenant still hadn’t unfrozen. Some of his men were
helping the veterans help their buddies, but he stood rooted to the
spot. “You all right, sir?” Luc heard the rough sympathy in his own
voice. This wasn’t the first freeze-up he’d seen. It was a bad one,
though. He tried again, louder this time: “You all right?”
“I—” The officer shook himself like a dog coming out of cold water.
Then, violently, he crossed himself. And then he bent over and was
sick. Spitting and coughing, he choked out, “I regret to say I am not
all right at all.”
“Well, this is pretty bad.” Luc held out his canteen. “Here. Rinse
your mouth. Get rid of the taste.”
“Merci.” The lieutenant did. As he handed the canteen back to Luc,
he suddenly looked horrified and took off for the closest bushes at
a dead run.
“He just realize he shat himself?” Sergeant Demange asked dryly.
“That’s my guess,” Luc said.
“He’s not the first. He won’t be the last, either,” Demange said. “I’ve
done it in both wars, Christ knows. You?”
“Oui.” If the sergeant hadn’t admitted it, Luc wouldn’t have, either.
But since he had…Luc knew that was a big brotherhood, sure as
hell. It probably included more than half the people who’d ever
come under machine-gun or artillery fire. More than half the people
who’d ever been up to the front, in other words. “War’s a bitch.”
“And a poxed bitch to boot,” Demange agreed. Luc found himself
nodding.
• • •

SNOW FLEW AS NEAR HORIZONTALLY as made no difference.
The wind howled out of the north. Anastas Mouradian looked out
the window of the flimsy hut by the airstrip and shuddered. “I wish I
were back in Armenia,” he said in his accented Russian. “We have
civilized weather down there.”
Another officer swigged from a bottle of vodka and then set it down.
They weren’t going to fly today—why not drink? “Shit, this isn’t so
bad.”
That was too much for Sergei Yaroslavsky “The Devil’s
grandmother, it’s not! Bozhemoi, man! Where d’you come from?”
“Strelka-Chunya,” the other man answered.
“Where the hell is that?”
“About a thousand kilometers north of Irkutsk.”
“A thousand kilometers…north of Irkutsk?” Sergei echoed. Then he
said, “Bozehmoi!” again. Irkutsk lay next to Lake Baikal, in the heart
of Siberia. Go north from there and you’d just get colder. He hadn’t
imagined such a thing was possible, which only went to show your
imagination reached so far and no further. He made as if to doff his
fur cap. “All right, pal. If you come from there, this isn’t so bad—for
you.”
“But why would anybody want to go there in the first place?”
Mouradian asked. That struck Sergei as a damn good question,
too.
And the Siberian flyer—his name was Bogdan Koroteyev—had an
answer for it: “My people are trappers. If you’re going to do that,

you have to go where the animals live.”
Through the roaring wind, Sergei heard, or thought he heard, a low
rumble in the distance. “Is that guns?” he asked.
“Or bombs going off.” The Siberian had put away enough vodka so
he didn’t much care. “Damn Poles are stubborn bastards.” He
shoved the bottle across the rickety table. “Want a slug?”
“Sure.” Sergei poured some liquid fire down his throat. “Damn
Poles.”
Things in northeastern Poland weren’t going as well as they might
have. The radio and the newspapers didn’t say that, but anyone
with a gram of sense could read between the lines. The Red Army
kept attacking the same places over and over again. Every attack
sounded like a victory. If they were victories, though, why weren’t
the glorious and peace-loving soldiers of the Soviet Union
advancing instead of spinning their wheels?
Not that wheels wanted to spin in weather like this. Supplies moved
forward on sledges—when they moved forward at all. Bombers and
fighters had long since traded conventional landing gear for ski
undercarriages. Men wore skis or snowshoes whenever they went
outside.
One of the flyers wound up a phonograph and put on a record. It
was Debussy. Sergei relaxed. Nobody listened to Chopin or Mozart
or Beethoven any more. Nobody dared. Listening to music by a
composer from a country at war with the USSR might be enough to
make the NKVD question your loyalty. Who could say for sure why
people disappeared? Who wanted to take a chance and find out?
But Debussy, a Frenchman, was safe enough.
More explosions, these not so distant. The windows in the hut

rattled. “Those are bombs,” Mouradian said. “The weather
somewhere off to the west is good enough to let airplanes get up.”
“Fuck ‘em,” Koroteyev said. “They’re trying to rattle our cage, that’s
all. They can’t find anything to hit, so they drop things anywhere
and hope they’ll do some good. Fat chance!” He belched and lit a
cigarette.
“Even when you can see it, hitting what you aim at isn’t easy,”
Sergei said.
“Turn on the radio, somebody,” Mouradian said. “It’s just about time
for the news.”
The flyer closest to the set clicked on the knob. The dial lit up. Half
a minute later—once the tubes warmed up—music started blaring
out of the speaker. It wasn’t quite the top of the hour. The march
wasn’t to Sergei’s taste, but you could put up with anything for a
couple of minutes.
“Here is the news,” the announcer said.
“Moo,” Koroteyev added irreverently. Chuckles ran through the hut.
The announcer’s accent said he came from the middle reaches of
the Volga: he turned a lot of a sounds into o’s. It really did make him
sound as if he ought to be out in a field chewing his cud.
But what he had to say grabbed everybody’s attention: “Spreading
their vicious campaign of terror ever more widely, the reactionary
Polish junta under the thuggish leadership of Marshal Smigly-Ridz
bombed both Minsk and Zhitomir yesterday. Casualties are reported
heavy, because neither city was prepared for such treachery and
murder. Numbers of innocent schoolchildren are among the slain.”
One of the pilots swore violently. He spoke Russian with a Ukrainian

accent, so that some of his g’s turned into h’s. Sergei wondered if
he was from Zhitomir or had family there.
“General Secretary Stalin has vowed vengeance against the evil
Polish regime,” the announcer went on. “Our bombers have
targeted Warsaw for retaliation.”
Our bombers taking off from where? Sergei wondered. He would
have bet piles of rubles that nobody could fly from anywhere near
Minsk. Maybe things were better farther south, down toward the
Ukraine. He supposed they must have been, or the Poles couldn’t
have struck at it. In this blizzard, they must have been bombing by
dead reckoning—and damned lucky to boot—to hit Minsk at all.
Then the man reading the news said, “Observers in Minsk report
that some of the planes striking the capital of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic were German Heinkels and Dorniers. And
so we see that the Hitlerites are indeed supporting their semifascist
stooges in Warsaw. They too shall suffer the righteous wrath of the
workers and people of the Soviet Union.”
Several flyers sitting around the table nodded. Sergei started to do
the same thing. Then he caught himself. How the devil could
observers in Minsk identify the bombers overhead? Minsk wasn’t far
from here. It had to be as socked in as this miserable airstrip was.
Sergei opened his mouth to say something about that. Before he
could, Anastas Mouradian caught his eye. Ever so slightly—Sergei
didn’t think any of the other flyers noticed it—his copilot shook his
head.
The newsman continued, giving more reports of the Poles’ atrocities
and then going on to talk about the war news from Western Europe.
Sergei ended up keeping quiet. Mouradian was bound to be right. If
the authorities told lies and you pointed it out, who would get in

the authorities told lies and you pointed it out, who would get in
trouble? The authorities? Or you?
Asking the question was the same as answering it.
Did the rest of the flyers see that the newsman was full of crap when
he talked about Minsk? Or didn’t they even notice? Were they so
used to believing everything they heard on the radio that they
couldn’t do anything else?
Then something else occurred to Sergei. He grabbed the vodka
bottle and took a good swig from it. But not even vodka could drown
the subversive thought. If that newsman was lying about the
weather in Minsk, what else was he lying about? Had the Poles
really bombed the city at all? Had the Germans joined them? How
much of what he said about the war in the West was true?
Was anything he said true? Anything at all?
How could you know? How could you even begin to guess? Oh,
some things were bound to be true, because what point would there
be to lying about them? But others? Had the top ranks of the Soviet
military really been as full of traitors and wreckers as the recent
purges left people believing? If they hadn’t…
Even with the fresh slug of vodka coursing through him on top of
everything else he’d drunk, Sergei recognized a dangerous thought
when he tripped over one. You couldn’t say anything like that, not
unless you wanted to find out exactly what kind of weather Siberia
had.
Or would they just shoot you if they realized you realized they didn’t
always tell the truth? He wouldn’t have been surprised. What could
be more dangerous to the people who ran things?

Anastas watched him from across the table. Did the Armenian know
what he was thinking? Did Mouradian think the same things, too?
Then Sergei stopped worrying about himself, because the Russian
newsman went on, “Since German planes were used in the terror
bombings of peaceful Soviet cities, justice demands that we also
retaliate against the Fascist Hitlerite swine. This being so, Red Air
Force bombers have struck at the Prussian city of Königsberg.
Damage to the enemies of the people is reported to be extremely
heavy. They richly deserve the devastation visited upon them!”
“Bozhemoi,” whispered somebody down the table from Sergei. It
sounded too reverent to be conventional cursing. Nobody
reprimanded the flyer, though—not after that news!
No matter what Sergei had been thinking, he didn’t doubt this for a
moment. The USSR wouldn’t claim to have bombed Germany if it
hadn’t really done it. And if the USSR bombed Germany…In that
case, the war against Hitler had just gone from the back burner to
the front.
Maybe those were Heinkels and Dorniers up there, inaccurately
bombing the airstrip. Maybe Germans in field-gray would join Poles
in greenish brown (although the Poles, like the Soviets, had the
sense to wear white camouflage smocks in the wintertime). Maybe
Hitler and Smigly-Ridz would show the world what the USSR already
knew: they’d been in bed with each other all along.
A different announcer exhorted his listeners to buy war bonds. “Help
make farmers and workers safe from the threat of Fascism!” he
boomed. “Subscribe to the latest war bond program!”
Sergei already bought war bonds. So did everyone else in the Red
Air Force and Army and Navy. Contributions came out of their pay
before they ever set eyes on it. Losing the money didn’t hurt nearly

so much that way as it would have if Sergei’d had to dig into his own
pockets.
“As long as the Nazis stay busy in the West, we’ll do fine against
them,” Koroteyev said.
Several men nodded. Sergei was one of them. Then Anastas
Mouradian said, “Sure we will—just like we did in the last war.”
Silence slammed down around the table. Germany had been busy
against France and England and Belgium in 1914—everybody knew
that. And everybody also knew the Kaiser’s armies had smashed
the Tsar’s again and again. If not for one disaster after another on
the front, the Revolution might never have started, much less
succeeded.
The Siberian looked at Anastas. “One of these days, you’ll open
your mouth so wide, you’ll fall right in.”
“No doubt, Comrade,” Mouradian replied. “If it can happen to the
whole country, why can’t it happen to me?”
That only brought more silence. People stared at the Armenian,
then quickly looked away. They might have been gaping at a car
wreck. “How much have you drunk?” Sergei asked. Sometimes you
could get out of trouble by blaming it all on the vodka. He’d done
that himself a time or three.
His copilot gave the question his usual serious—if not sober
—consideration. “Either too much or not enough,” Mouradian said
at last. “And it’s not too much, so.…” He grabbed the vodka bottle,
raised it, and tilted his head back.
Sergei reached out and grabbed it away from him. “To each
according to his needs,” he said, and got rid of what was left. With

the air of a man performing a conjuring trick, the Siberian produced
another bottle. Loud applause greeted it. The drinking went on.
With any luck at all, by this time tomorrow nobody would remember
what one mouthy Armenian was going on about.
• • •

SOME OF THE MEN IN Hideki Fujita’s squad were from Hokkaido.
The northern island was notorious for winter weather that blew
straight down from Siberia. Fujita had been through some rotten
winters himself before they shipped him off to the border between
Manchukuo and Mongolia.
Or he thought he had, anyhow.
Now he had to admit that what he’d known about winter was about
the same as what an eleven-year-old knew about love. The kid
could imagine he understood what was what. And a jackass could
suppose it was a nightingale, too. That didn’t make it sound like one
when it opened its mouth, though.
Fujita wore a fur cap—the earflaps, at the moment, down. He wore a
thick, heavily lined, fur-collared greatcoat. It was double-breasted,
to make it harder for drafts to sneak in. He had stout gray felt
mittens and knee-high felt boots with leather uppers. He had on two
pairs of wool socks and two pairs of long woolen underwear.
He was freezing his ass off just the same. You had to go out on
patrol, freezing or not. If you didn’t, the Russians or the Mongols
would make you sorry. The Russians were used to cold weather
—like what Hokkaido got, this stuff blew down from Siberia. The

Mongols were used to it, too. And the Mongols were as sneaky, and
as dangerous, as so many poisonous snakes. They could slither
through openings where you didn’t think there were any.
Sergeant Fujita looked at his watch. If it hadn’t frozen and quit
moving, he still had more than an hour out here before his relief
came. “Zakennayo!” he muttered. That felt like forever.
At last, though, a superior private named Suzuki found him out in
the middle of the blowing snow. Suzuki wore as much winter gear as
Fujita, and a white camouflage smock on top of it all. He looked
miserably cold just the same. But, cold or not, he said the magic
words: “I relieve you, Sergeant.”
“Good,” Fujita said. The howling wind grabbed the world and tried to
swirl it away. “What’s going on back at the camp?”
“Somebody from regimental headquarters is there,” Suzuki said.
“Oh, yeah?” Automatic suspicion filled Fujita’s voice. Like any
veteran noncom, he distrusted any break with routine. He had his
reasons, too. “What does the guy want? Are we going to have to try
and attack the Mongols and the Russians again? They’ve got more
tanks and better artillery than we do. And they hold the high
ground.”
None of that would matter a sen’s worth if the powers that be in
Mukden or in Tokyo decided to send the guys at the pointy end of
the bayonet into action once more. Fujita knew it only too well. And
Superior Private Suzuki only shrugged. “I can’t tell you anything
about that, Sergeant,” he answered. “The guy got there just when I
was starting out here.”
“I’d better go find out, then,” Fujita said. “Try to stay warm. If you
want to build up a wall of snow to keep the wind from blowing

straight through you, nobody will say boo.”
“Maybe I will,” Suzuki said. “It’s pretty bad.”
“Is it ever!” Fujita headed back toward the tents that housed his
company. Halfway there, he tried to get a cigarette going. He soon
gave it up as a bad job. He had plenty of practice lighting up in a
strong wind, but this one defeated him.
Getting under canvas did let him light a match. He gratefully sucked
in smoke. Then he said, “Suzuki was going on that somebody from
regimental HQ showed up here.”
“That’s right, Sergeant-san,” one of the privates in the tent said.
“People say we’re pulling out of here.”
“What, the company?” Fujita asked. “I won’t be sorry—I’ll say that.
We’ve been bumping noses with the Mongols and the Russians too
damn long.”
“Not just the company—the whole regiment. Maybe everybody on
this whole front,” the private answered. “That’s what people are
saying, anyhow.” The disclaimer let him off the hook in case the
rumors he dished out proved nothing but a bunch of moonshine.
“The regiment? The whole front?” That was so much more than
Sergeant Fujita had expected, he needed a minute to take it all in.
“If we leave, where do we go next? Back to Japan?” If you’re going
to wish, wish for the moon, he thought.
“I’m very sorry, Sergeant-san, but I don’t know.” The private
—Nakayama, his name was—sounded not only sorry but
apprehensive. Privates got knocked around when sergeants wanted
to know things and they didn’t have the answers handy.

Had Fujita been in a bad mood, he might have hit Nakayama a
couple of times to make himself feel better. But the sheer scope of
what was going on left him more awed than angry. And walloping a
private because of rumors wasn’t exactly fair—which wouldn’t have
stopped Fujita if he really felt like doing it.
“I’m sure the captain will tell me in the morning,” he said.
“Yes, Sergeant-san. Of course he will,” Nakayama said quickly. He
and the other privates in the tent let out almost identical sighs of
relief. Sergeant Fujita affected not to notice them. He’d been a
private himself once upon a time. He remembered what looking up
at a sergeant-ogre was like. Discipline would suffer if this bunch of
conscripts realized that, though. In the gloom, none of them could
see him smile.
Sure enough, Captain Hasegawa summoned Fujita and the
company’s other senior noncoms first thing in the morning. Without
preamble, the company commander said, “We are leaving the
Mongolian frontier region and redeploying to eastern Manchukuo.”
“Where will the redeployment take us, sir?” Sergeant Fujita asked. If
it was to Mukden—the capital—or Harbin or some other big city, that
wasn’t so bad. It was a lot better than staying stuck on the edge of
Mongolia. And what isn’t? Fujita thought. Unfortunately, that had an
answer. If the regiment got shipped up to the Amur frontier with
Russia, it just traded one miserable spot for another.
“I’m afraid I don’t know the answer to that,” the company
commander said. “No one has told me, not yet. Even if I did know, I
wouldn’t tell you till we were well away from the border. The same
reason applies in both cases: security. We don’t want to take the
chance that the Mongols or the Russians would seize you and
squeeze you. No matter how honorable you wanted to be, you might

not manage to kill yourself in time.”
“I understand, sir. Please excuse my stupidity.” Fujita bowed his
head in embarrassment not far from shame.
Captain Hasegawa didn’t come down on him as hard as he
expected. “It’s all right, Sergeant,” the officer said. “The courier who
brought me the news also had to explain the facts of life to me, you
might say. Make sure you have your men ready to move out when I
give the word, that’s all.”
“Yes, sir. I will, sir. Thank you, sir.” Fujita bowed again, this time
gratefully. The company commander hadn’t made him lose face
—had, in fact, gone out of his way to let Fujita keep it. You had to
repay that kind of consideration with loyalty.

The order to abandon the position they’d defended for so long
came that afternoon. Retreat often meant a loss of face, too. Not for
Fujita, not this time: he was only obeying the orders he got from his
superiors. But wouldn’t Japan itself be embarrassed if it abandoned
land to which it had asserted a claim?
“They’ll probably say it was Manchukuo’s claim, not ours,” Superior
Private Hayashi predicted as the company marched through the
drifted snow toward regimental headquarters. “That way, we aren’t
responsible for it.”
“Makes sense,” Fujita said. Having an educated man in the squad
came in handy now and then. Of course, without Japan there would
have been no such country as Manchukuo. But that didn’t have
much to do with anything. Blaming the hapless Chinese and
Manchus was much easier than blaming the mother country. And if
the Emperor of Manchukuo didn’t like it, too bad.
Trucks waited at the headquarters. Seeing them made Sergeant
Fujita realize how serious Japan was about getting its men away
from this stretch of the border. Japan wasn’t a motorized country like
Germany or the United States. It had to save its vehicles for really
important things. If getting out of western Manchuria was this
important…
Away rumbled the trucks, north and a little east. “Hailar,” Fujita said
even before his own machine set out. “We’ve got to be going to
Hailar.” That miserable Mongolian town was one of the two railheads
closest to the disputed areas. The other, Arshaan, lay to the
southeast.
Maps showed roads across this endless steppe. They were at best
dirt tracks. At this time of year, with snow deep on the ground,
whether you were on the road was often a matter of opinion. The

truck carrying Fujita and his squad rumbled past another one that
had overturned. Maybe the driver had tried to corner too fast.
Maybe he’d run into a ditch. He would end up in trouble any which
way.
Much the biggest and most modern building in Hailar was the
railway depot. A few natives in sheepskin coats stared at the trucks
that could go almost anywhere far faster than any horse ever
foaled. What did they think, watching the modern world roll through
their ancient town? Actually, what they thought hardly mattered. The
modern world was here whether they liked it or not.
A train that would go east stopped at the depot—stopped a little
past it, in fact, because snow and ice on the rails meant the brakes
didn’t grab as well as they would have most of the time. Some
soldiers were already aboard, and had come this far west before
starting east again. Fujita’s unit left the cars packed as tight as
tinned fish—the only way the Army seemed to know how to travel.
Well, the sergeant thought, we won’t be cold any more. Each car
had its own stove. And so many men stuffed the cars, the stoves
might prove afterthoughts. Body heat would be plenty to keep
everybody warm.
Slowly, the train started to roll again. Fujita still didn’t know where he
was going. He shrugged—being a sergeant, he had room to do
that. What difference did it make. He’d get there whether he knew or
not. Then he’d do…whatever needed doing.

Chaim Weinberg shivered in a trench. The war on the Ebro seemed
to have frozen solid. The whole Spanish Civil War seemed to have
frozen solid. The Soviet Union wasn’t sending aid to the Republic
any more—Stalin was using the planes and tanks and guns himself.
After the broader war broke out, a surge of aid had come from
France and England, who’d ignored the Republican cause before.
Now, with the Low Countries conquered and France herself
invaded, they were ignoring it again.
The only good news was, Hitler and Mussolini were also ignoring
General Sanjurjo’s Spanish Fascists. With the Royal Navy and the
French actually paying attention to the Mediterranean, the
reactionaries would have had a devil of a time getting anything
through anyway.
And so both sides were running on momentum, using—and using
up—what they’d had before the great powers forgot about them.
Before long, one side or the other would run out. The side that still
had something would win—unless seeing their proxies in trouble
prodded rich sponsors into action again.
Meanwhile…Meanwhile, Weinberg lit a cigarette. It was a Gitane,
part of the bounty that had flowed in from France. It was a damn
sight better than native Spanish smokes, which tasted of straw and
lots of other things besides tobacco. Chaim still longed for an
American cigarette. With a Lucky or a Chesterfield, you didn’t feel

as if you’d swallowed a welder’s torch every time you inhaled.
He smoked the Gitane down to a tiny butt, then stuck that in a
leather pouch he wore on his belt next to his wound dressing. He’d
got used to saving dog-ends when tobacco was even scarcer than it
was now. Wrap half a dozen of them and you had yourself another
cigarette. He would never have stooped so low in the States, but
things were different here.
Nobody’d been trying to kill him in the States, for instance. He’d
made a crude periscope: two hand-sized chunks from a broken
mirror mounted on opposite ends of a stick. (Seven years of bad
luck? Getting shot was bad luck. He hadn’t broken this mirror
himself, but he would have without even blinking if he’d needed to.)
He stuck it up over the lip of the trench to see what the enemy was
up to.
Smoke rose here and there from the Fascists’ trenches. Nobody
was shelling them; the artillery on both sides stayed quiet. But cold
struck impartially. There were fires in the International Brigades’
position, too.
A khaki-clad Fascist soldier came head and shoulders out of his
hole for a moment. He wasn’t a sniper—he was dumping a honey
bucket. One good thing about the cold: no flies right now. The
Spaniard ducked down again before a Republican sharpshooter
could fire at him.
Chaim didn’t think it was sporting to shoot a man who was easing
himself or getting rid of slops. But bastards on both sides had rifles
with telescopic sights. They thought they weren’t earning their pay if
they didn’t use them. And so, every now and then, men got shot at
their most defenseless.

Not far away, Mike Carroll was cleaning his rifle. The French had
used Lebels by the million in the last war. They’d been oldfashioned then, and they were obsolete now…which didn’t mean
you still couldn’t kill people with them. How many different kinds of
rifles, how many different kinds of ammunition, did the Republicans
use? Too goddamn many—Chaim knew that.
Carroll paused. “Spot anything interesting?” he asked.
“Sure,” Weinberg answered. “Naked blond broad taking a sun-bath
out in front of the Fascist line. Big tits, pretty face—what more could
you want? Natural blonde, too. Either that or she peroxides her
bush.”
The other American started to put down the rifle and grab for the
periscope. Just too late, he caught himself. “Fuck you, you lying
asshole,” he said. “You had me going.”
“Yeah, well, she’s a hell of a lot better than what’s really there.”
Weinberg told him about the guy with the bucket.
“Whole war’s full of shit,” Carroll said. “Sanjurjo’s guys, you
…Everything. And nobody gives a shit about us.”
“You just notice?” Chaim lit another Gitane. Mike Carroll looked like
a puppy hoping for table scraps. Chaim handed him the pack. He
took one with a nod of thanks and lit it with a Zippo. He fueled the
lighter with kerosene—regular lighter fluid was impossible to come
by on either side of the line here.
“Maybe we ought to go up to France,” Carroll said moodily. “More
Fascists—worse Fascists—to kill there.”
“Good luck,” Chaim said. Mike winced. He had about as much
chance of getting up to France without authorization as he did of

sprouting wings and flying there. Political officers behind the
International Brigades’ lines checked everybody’s papers. If you
didn’t have orders to pull you out, you were in trouble.
Even if you got past the commissars, plenty of other Republican
officials in towns and on trains would want to know where you were
going and who said you were supposed to go there. If they didn’t
like your answers, they would either shoot you or chuck you into a
Spanish jail. Not many things were worse than front-line combat, but
a Spanish jail was one of them.
“All of a sudden, the States don’t look so bad, you know?” Mike said
with a grin that was supposed to mean he was half kidding, anyway.
“Maybe they’ll let you repatriate,” Chaim said. Sometimes the
Internationals wanted nothing but willing fighters. Sometimes they
figured you had to be willing or you wouldn’t have volunteered. It all
depended on the officer, on how the fighting was going
—sometimes, people said, on the phases of the moon.
“Ah, fuck it,” Mike said: the usual comment of every line soldier in
every war since the beginning of time. “I’m just blowing off steam,
you know what I mean?”
“Sure,” Chaim said. And he did, too. It wasn’t as if he’d never pissed
and moaned since he got here. “All I wish is, people would
remember us. We were a big deal till the rest of Europe blew up.
Who gives a shit about Spain now? Stalin’s forgotten all about it.”
That was a dangerous thing to say; the International Brigades toed
Moscow’s line. But a love of truth was part of what had led Chaim to
Spain. He wouldn’t give it up even here.
Mike Carroll had a tobacco pouch on his belt, too. He stuck the
remains of the Gitane into it. “Well, so has Hitler,” he answered.
“That’s not so bad.”

“That’s not so bad.”
“You know who remembers?” Chaim said. He waited till Carroll
raised a questioning eyebrow. “Us and the Spaniards, that’s who.
It’s not just fucking politics and games and shit for us. It really
matters. Do you want that fat prick over there”—Chaim pointed
toward the Fascists’ lines—“running this whole goddamn country?”
He’d never talked that way in New York City. Back home, he’d
always had the feeling his mother was listening and would wash his
mouth out with soap. But everybody swore on the battlefield. By
now, Chaim could cuss in English, Yiddish, Spanish, Catalan,
German, French, and Russian. Talk without swear words seemed as
bland as food without salt and pepper.
“If I wanted that, I’d be over there myself,” Mike Carroll said. The
Italians and Germans who fought on Sanjurjo’s side had no choice.
But for them, only a handful of foreigners—mostly English and
Irishmen—had joined the enemy. Men from all over the world
opposed the Fascists. If that didn’t say something…
Before Chaim could decide what would be true if that didn’t say
something, a rifle bullet cracked between him and Carroll. Both of
them hit the dirt. “We’ve been standing up and waving our arms too
damn much,” Mike said ruefully. “They got a sniper to take a shot at
us.”
“Yeah.” Chaim hadn’t quite pissed himself, but he’d come mighty
close. Well, so had the bullet. “Good thing he’s a shitty sniper.” A
good marksman would have hit one of them. Maybe this guy
couldn’t decide which one to aim at.
“Spaniards.” Mike Carroll’s shrug punctuated that—but didn’t
expose him to any more rifle fire. “They’re brave as all get-out—the
guys on both sides. But…” His voice trailed away.

guys on both sides. But…” His voice trailed away.
Chaim knew what he was talking about. “Yeah. But,” he said, making
the word sound like a complete sentence. It might as well have
been. Spaniards didn’t keep proper lookout. They didn’t like digging
trenches. They didn’t bother cleaning their weapons unless
somebody screamed at them—and a lot of the time not then, either.
Their logistics were a joke. Food and ammunition came to the front
when they felt like it. That was how things looked, anyhow. Their
hospitals were almost as bad as their jails.
But they were brave. Point them at an objective and they’d take it or
die trying. Tell them they had to hold a strongpoint and it was ¡No
pasaran! You were embarrassed to falter or fall back, because you
knew they wouldn’t. If only they would pull themselves together…
“Don’t hold your breath,” Mike said when Chaim suggested that.
Then the other American asked, “Do you think we can nail that
sniper?”
There was a serious suggestion. “Worth a try,” Chaim said. “He’ll
make this whole stretch of trench dangerous unless we do get rid of
him. How do you want to work it?”
“We ought to call a sharpshooter of our own,” Carroll said. Chaim
gave him the horse laugh. Republican snipers were few, far
between, and none too good. The other American’s ears turned
red. “Okay, okay. Which of us do you think is a better shot?”
“I am,” Chaim answered without false modesty. “Let me find a
position where I can look out without getting drilled. Then you hold
up a cap on a stick, and I’ll see what I can see.”
“I’ll do it. Wave when you’re ready,” Mike said.

“Yeah.” Chaim worked his way fifty yards down the trench. Some
bushes—brown and leafless in the winter cold—offered cover there.
Cautiously, he peered out through them. Nobody fired at him. He
brought his rifle up over the top and rested it on the dirt. Then,
carefully keeping his hand below the level of the parapet, he
signaled to his buddy.
Up went the cap. A shot rang out. Mike not only jerked the cap down
but also let out a scream. Chaim saw where the sniper fired from,
but the Fascist ducked away before he could plug him. Now…Was
the maricón dumb enough to shoot from the same position twice in
a row? Everybody knew you shouldn’t, but some boys did anyhow.
Only one way to find out…
“Move a little and pop up again,” Chaim called, as softly as he
could.
Mike did. He even put the cap on the stick sideways this time, so it
would look different. Chaim peered down his rifle barrel. He had the
range, he had windage.…
He had a target. Yeah, the guy on the other side was greedy and
stupid, all right. He showed one shoulder and his head, and that
was all Chaim needed. He pressed the trigger, not too hard. Red
mist exploded from the enemy sniper as he slumped back into his
trench.
“You get him?” Carroll asked.
“Uh-huh. Don’t have to worry about that for a while, anyway.” Chaim
might have been talking about delousing or killing a rat. He’d got rid
of a nuisance—that was all. Well, now the nuisance wouldn’t get rid
of him. Nothing else counted. He lit another Gitane.

IT WAS A FINE, BRIGHT MORNING in western Belgium—colder than
an outhouse in East Prussia in February, but sunny and clear. The
sun came up a little earlier than it had a month earlier, at the end of
December. Chances were spring would get here eventually: no time
real soon, but eventually.
Breath smoking in the chilly sunrise air, Hans-Ulrich Rudel walked to
the squadron commander’s hut to see what was up. Something
would be. He was sure of that. This time of year, days with decent
flying weather were too few and far between to waste.
Other Stuka pilots nodded to him. He nodded back. He didn’t have a
lot of buddies here. Not likely a milk drinker would, not when most of
the flyers preferred brandy and loose women. But he kept going out
and doing his job and coming back. That won him respect, if no
great liking.
Cigarette smoke blued the air inside the hut. Hans-Ulrich didn’t like
that, either, but complaining was hopeless. He tried not to breathe
deeply.
“We’re going to bomb England again,” Major Bleyle announced.
That got everyone’s attention, as he must have known it would. He
went on, “They’ve been hitting our cities—miserable air pirates.
What can we do but pay them back? We will strike at Dover and
Folkestone and Canterbury, just on the other side of the Channel.
Questions?”
Hands flew up, Rudel’s among them. The squadron commander
pointed to somebody else—he didn’t much like Hans-Ulrich, either.
But the other pilot said about what Rudel would have: “How are we
going to come back in one piece? Stukas are sitting ducks for
English fighters.”

“We’ll have an escort,” Bleyle said.
“We had an escort the last time, too,” the pilot pointed out. “Some of
the enemy planes kept the 109s busy, and the rest came after us.”
“We’ll have a better escort this time,” the squadron commander
answered. “Not just 109s, but 110s, too.”
The pilots all paused thoughtfully. Bf-110s were brand new. If half
what people said was so, they were formidable, no doubt about it.
The big, two-engined fighters mounted two 20mm cannon and four
machine guns in the nose, plus another, rear-facing machine gun
on a mount like the one in the Stuka. If all that firepower hit an
enemy aircraft, the poor devil would go down.
“And there’ll be Heinkels and Dorniers overhead,” Major Bleyle
added. “The enemy won’t be able to concentrate on us the way he
did before. We’re going to knock eastern England flat. Let’s see
how they like it.”
One by one, the Stuka pilots nodded. Most of them had seen
enough to know war wasn’t always as easy as they wished it would
be. They’d signed up to take whatever happened, the bad along
with the good. Hans-Ulrich suspected things would turn out to be
harder than the squadron CO made them sound. By the thoughtful
looks on the other men’s faces, so did they. But if the people set
over you told you to try, what else could you do?
He took the word to Sergeant Dieselhorst. The gunner and
radioman shrugged. “Oh, well,” he said. “Maybe she’ll have engine
trouble. We can hope, anyway.”
“It won’t be that bad,” Rudel said.
“No, I suppose not…sir.” Dieselhorst spoiled it by adding, “It’ll be

worse.”
The Stuka had no engine trouble. Some groundcrew man’s head
would have rolled if it did. The mechanics and armorers gassed it
up and bombed it up. It roared down the runway and lumbered into
the air with the others.
Bf-109s and 110s took station around the dive-bombers. The 110s
—Zerstörers, they called them: destroyers—certainly looked
formidable. With all that firepower in the nose, they packed a mean
punch. Idly, Hans-Ulrich wondered how maneuverable they were. He
laughed. His own Ju-87 dodged like a rock.
There was the North Sea. There ahead lay England. The popular
song dinned in his head. He was going up against England. If the
enemy bombed the Reich, the Luftwaffe would repay blood with
blood, murder with murder.
He saw ships—boats—whatever they were—on the sea. Did they
belong to the Kriegsmarine or the Royal Navy? Were they radioing
a warning to the English mainland now? Was that how the RAF had
been so quick to attack the Stukas the last time they raided
southeastern England? Rudel shrugged. Not his worry, though he
did think he’d mention it if he happened to remember after he got
back to Belgium.
If I get back to Belgium. He did his best to stifle that thought. You
didn’t want to go into battle with your head full of doubts and
worries. He was no more eager to go into this battle than any of his
squadron mates. The Ju-87 was terrific when it enjoyed air
superiority. When it didn’t…
Several 109s seemed to leap out ahead of the pack. Following their
path with his eyes, Hans-Ulrich spied another plane out ahead of
the oncoming German air armada. Tracers from the Messerschmitts

the oncoming German air armada. Tracers from the Messerschmitts
blazed toward the stranger, which dove and spun down toward the
ocean. It wasn’t a fighter. They charged after it and sent it smoking
into the water.
Someone in the squadron voiced on the radio what Hans-Ulrich was
thinking: “Now—did he get word out before we shot him down?”
“We’ll find out,” somebody else said in sepulchral tones.
And they did. English fighter planes rose to meet them: biplane
Gladiators, monoplane Hurricanes, and a handful of new, sleek
Spitfires. The RAF fighters bored in on the Luftwaffe bombers. They
wanted no more to do with the escorts than they had to. The 109s
and 110s couldn’t hurt their country. Bombers could.
What was going on higher in the sky, where the Heinkels and
Dorniers had escorts of their own? Rudel couldn’t check. He was
too busy trying to stay alive. Even a Gladiator could be dangerous.
Sergeant Dieselhorst fired a burst. “Get anything?” Hans-Ulrich
asked.
“Nah,” the rear gunner answered. “He’ll bother somebody else,
though.” That suited the pilot fine.
Cannon fire from a nearby Me-110 knocked down a Hurricane. A
moment later, another Hurricane bored in on the two-engined
German fighter. That combat didn’t last long. The Hurricane easily
outturned the 110, got on its tail, shot it up, and shot it down.
Hans-Ulrich saw he was over some kind of city. He thought it was
Dover, but it might have been Folkestone or any other English port.
It lay by the sea—he could tell that much. And he could tell it was
time to unload the frightfulness he’d brought across the ocean. He

yanked the bomb-release lever. The Stuka suddenly felt lighter and
nimbler.
“Now we get the devil out of here?” Dieselhorst’s voice came brassy
through the speaking tube.
“Now we get out of here,” Hans-Ulrich agreed. No point in lingering.
The Stuka sure wasn’t agile enough to dogfight against a British
fighter.
A broad-winged He-111, afire from the nose back, plunged into the
North Sea just off the coast from the town that was probably Dover.
An enormous cloud of steam and smoke rose: a couple of thousand
kilos’ worth of bombs going off when the Spade hit. Hans-Ulrich
hadn’t seen any parachutes. Four men dead, then.
“You know what happens next, don’t you?” Dieselhorst said.
“What’s that?” Rudel asked. He looked every which way. He didn’t
see any Indians, which was what Luftwaffe pilots called enemy
planes. That let him ease back on the throttle a little. The Continent
loomed ahead. He’d probably make it to the airstrip.
“They come over tonight or tomorrow night and bomb the crap out
of some of our towns,” Dieselhorst said. “Where does it end? With
our last two guys coming out of the ruins and going after their last
guy with a club?”
“That’s not for us to worry about. That’s for the Führer.” But HansUlrich couldn’t leave it there. “As long as we’ve got two guys and
they’ve got one, as long as our two get their one, we win. And we’re
going to. Right?”
“Oh, yes, sir,” the gunner answered. Nobody could or wanted to
imagine Germany losing two wars in a row. Losing one had been

bad enough.
But when Hans-Ulrich put down at the Belgian airstrip, he waited
and waited, hoping against hope that more Stukas would come
home safe. A few had returned before him. A few more straggled in
afterwards. But so many were lost over England or the North Sea.
…The squadron would need a new CO, among other
reinforcements. Hans-Ulrich hoped the Reich would have two men
with clubs coming out of the ruins, not just one.

EVERY NIGHT, THE PANZERS IN Sergeant Ludwig Rothe’s platoon
reassembled—or they tried to, anyhow. By now, Rothe’s crew was
the most experienced one left in the platoon. Neither he nor his
driver nor his radioman had got badly hurt. Given how thin-skinned
Panzer IIs were, that was something close to miraculous.
Rothe had commanded the platoon on and off on the drive across
the Low Countries and into France. Lieutenants and their panzers
were no more invulnerable to flying shells than anybody else. But
the platoon had an officer in charge of it again: a second lieutenant
named Maximilian Priller.
He was dark and curly-haired. He had a whipped-cream-in-yourcoffee, strudel-on-the-side Viennese accent. Before the Anschluss,
he’d served in the Austrian Army. Like a lot of German soldiers,
Rothe looked down his nose at Austrians as fighting men. He had
nothing bad to say about Lieutenant Priller, though. No matter how
Priller talked, he knew what to do with panzers.
“Our next stop is Coucy-le-Château.” Priller pointed the place out
on a map he unfolded on his knees. His German sounded funny in
Ludwig’s ears, but he spoke fluent French. “Well, not our next stop
—where we go through next. It’s only about five kilometers ahead.

—where we go through next. It’s only about five kilometers ahead.
We ought to drive the enemy out by the middle of the morning.
Questions, anybody?”
“Do we soften them up with artillery first, or do we break through
with the panzers?” another sergeant asked.
“With the panzers. That way, we’ve got surprise working for us.”
Priller cocked an eyebrow. “We see who gets the surprise—us or
them.”
The four sergeants who commanded the other panzers in the
platoon all chuckled, Ludwig among them. It was laugh or scream,
one. Maybe the French troops in front of the Germans would panic
and flee. On the other hand, maybe they’d be waiting with panzers
of their own, minefields, antitank guns: all the things that made life
in the panzer force so…interesting.
“We’ve bent them back a long way,” Max Priller said. “If we break
through here, we drive the sword into their heart. We want them all
disordered. Then we can race them to Paris. Better than even
money we win.”
“Paris…” Ludwig and a couple of the other sergeants said together.
Back in the Middle Ages, knights went on quests for the Holy Grail.
In the twentieth century, Paris was the Holy Grail for Germany. The
Kaiser’s army had come so close. Armchair generals kept talking
about von Kluck’s turn. If he hadn’t made it, or if the Russians
hadn’t caused so much trouble off in the East…
Russia was making trouble again. The Wehrmacht had done well
here, or Ludwig thought it had. In a month, it had knocked Holland,
Belgium, and Luxembourg out of the fight. The radio said German
bombers were giving England hell to pay back the British terror
raids on German cities. Maybe this attack would have gone

raids on German cities. Maybe this attack would have gone
smoother in better weather. Only God could know something like
that, though.
“Tell your men,” Priller said. “We go at 0600.”
It would still be dark. Somebody’d get a surprise, all right. Well, what
could you do? Rothe went back to his panzer. Fritz was toasting
some bacon he’d liberated from a farmhouse. Theo was swapping
tubes in and out of the radio, trying to figure out which one was bad.
Fritz looked up from the little cookfire. “It’s going to be bad,” he said.
“I can see it on your face. How bad is it?”
“We hit the town up ahead at 0600,” Ludwig answered bluntly.
Theo paused with a tube in each hand. He looked down at them,
muttering; Rothe guessed he was remembering which one he’d just
pulled and which was about to go in. Fritz stared up from the sizzling
slab of bacon. “Fuck,” he said.
“I know,” Ludwig said. “What can you do, though?” He pointed to the
bacon. “Is that done? Let me have some if it is.”
Off in the distance, some guns opened up. French 75s, Ludwig
thought, recognizing the reports. The damned things dated back to
before the turn of the century. They’d been the great workhorses of
the French artillery during the last war; Ludwig’s father swore
whenever he talked about them. They could fire obscenely fast.
This time around, German 105s outranged them. That did you no
good if you ended up on the wrong end of things, though.
These shells came down a good distance away. Fritz cut the bacon
into three pieces. “Well, maybe we’ll surprise them,” he said. “They
don’t seem to know where we’re at.…Here you go, Sergeant.”

“Danke.” Ludwig blew on his share, then took a bite. It tasted about
the same as bacon would have back home. He might have had it
boiled there, but he might not, too. He gulped. “Yeah, maybe we
will,” he said, and bit into the bacon again.
Theo stared at the orange glow inside the tube he’d just swapped
in. “That does it,” he said. “Now we’ll be able to hear all the stupid
orders we’ll get from the shitheads back of the lines—and from
Lieutenant Priller, too.” His faith in those set over him had, well,
limits. Ludwig suspected Theo didn’t have much use for him, either.
He also suspected—no, he was sure—he wouldn’t lose any sleep
about it.
The French 75s quieted down. Had somebody given them a target,
or were they shooting at some jumpy officer’s imagination? Ludwig
laughed. He had no use for French higher-ups. Why did he think
the men who ran the Wehrmacht had a better handle on what they
were doing?
Because we’re in France, and the damned Frenchmen aren’t in
Germany, he answered himself. And maybe that meant something
and maybe it didn’t. They’d all find out some time not long after
0600.
He slept by the Panzer II. So did the driver and the radioman. If
shelling came close, they could dive under the panzer. The treads
and the armored body would keep out anything this side of a direct
hit.
Lieutenant Priller came along at half past four to make sure they
were alert and ready to go. “We can do it,” he said. “We’re going to
do it, too.”
“Have we got any coffee?” Ludwig asked plaintively. And damned if

they didn’t. It wasn’t the ersatz that came with army rations, mixed
with burnt barley and chicory. It came from the real bean, no doubt
taken from the French. It was dark and mean and strong. Ludwig
dumped sugar into it so he could choke it down. Sure as hell, it
pried his eyelids open.
As they had in the runup to the strike against Czechoslovakia,
engineers had set out white tapes here to guide the panzers
forward without showing a light. Rothe cupped a hand behind his
ear, trying to hear if the French up ahead had any idea they were
coming. He couldn’t tell. Fritz had the engine throttled back, but its
low rumble still drowned out the little sounds he was looking for.
Nobody was shooting at the Germans as they moved up to the start
line, anyhow.
Ludwig glanced down at the radium-glowing dial on his watch. 0530.
A couple of hours later, he checked again. 0550. He laughed at
himself. Time stretched like a rubber band when you were waiting
for the balloon to go up.
When it did go up, it went all at once. One second, quiet above the
engine noise. The next, German artillery crashed behind the
panzers. German machine guns stuttered to life, spitting fire to
either side. “Let’s go!” Rothe yelled through the din. The engine
grew deeper and louder. It had to work like a bastard to shove all
that armored weight around.
A couple of French Hotchkiss machine guns returned fire, but not
for long. The panzers and assault teams with submachine guns and
grenades silenced them. Standing head and shoulders out of the
turret, Ludwig whooped. The last thing he wanted was tracers
probing toward him.
The Germans had jumped off just before earliest dawn. As day

broke, the French landscape seemed to stretch out ever farther
before them. Rothe fired a few machine-gun bursts at soldiers in
khaki. If they were here, they were bound to be enemies. He was at
the spearpoint of the field-gray forces pressing down from the
northeast.
Bam! A French antitank gun belched flame. The 37mm round
missed the Panzer II. A good thing—a hit would have turned it into
blazing scrap metal. Rothe almost shit himself even so.
More to the point, he traversed the turret and fired several short
bursts at the gun. Seeing bullets spark off its steel shielding, he
gave it a few rounds from the 20mm cannon. Those got through.
French artillerymen tumbled like ninepins. “There you go!” Fritz
shouted. Theo, tending to his radio in the bowels of the Panzer II,
couldn’t see a damned thing.
But one stubborn Frenchman fired the gun again. The 37mm shot
snarled past, a few meters over Ludwig’s head. He shot back with
the panzer’s main armament. And he gave an order you didn’t hear
every day in armored warfare: “Charge! Run that gun down!”
“Jawohl!” Fritz said. The Panzer II’s engine snarled. The stubborn
French soldier was still alive behind the riddled shield, trying to
serve the gun by himself. Seeing the panzer bearing down on him,
he finally turned and fled. Ludwig shot him in the back with the
machine gun. A guy like that was too dangerous to leave alive.
Crunch! The panzer clattered over the antitank gun. For a nasty
moment, Ludwig feared the panzer would flip over, but it didn’t.
When he looked back over his shoulder, he saw the new kink in the
gun’s barrel. Nobody would use that one against the Reich any
more, which was the point.

Here and there, infantrymen with rifles fired at the panzers, trying to
pick off their commanders. Every once in a while, they managed to
do it, too. But the panzers had a whole slew of advantages. They
were on the move. Their commanders could duck behind armor.
And they carried a machine gun and a light cannon against a boltaction rifle.
Staying on the move was the biggest edge. Even if you didn’t take
out an infantryman, you left him behind in a matter of seconds.
Sooner or later, your own foot soldiers could deal with him. In the
meanwhile, the panzers charged ahead, flowing around enemy hell
in the rear.
But Coucy-le-Château was too big and too strong to go around.
Some of the soldiers Ludwig shot at in the outskirts wore lighter
khaki and steel derbies in place of darker uniforms and domed
helms with vestigial crests. Englishmen! They didn’t like machinegun bursts any better than the French (or Ludwig, come to that).
A machine gun chattered from the middle of an apple orchard. The
gun moved. Ludwig realized it was mounted on some sort of tank.
He gulped, wondering if the enemy machine’s cannon was taking
dead aim at his panzer. Not nearly enough steel separated him from
the slings and arrows of outrageous gunners.
But he realized little by little that the other panzer didn’t carry a
cannon. All it had was that machine gun—it might as well have been
a German Panzer I.
It waddled out of the apple grove. It didn’t seem able to do anything
but waddle—a man running fast would have had no trouble
outdistancing it. He fired three quick rounds from the 20mm gun.
Two of them hit the turret, but they didn’t come close to punching
through. The Matilda might be slow. It might have a laughable

armament—even a Panzer I sported a pair of machine guns, not a
singleton. But it was damned hard to wreck.
It was if you tried to kill the crew, anyway. If you crippled it, though
…Ludwig fired the 20mm at the Matilda’s tracks and road wheels.
Before long, the ungainly thing slewed sideways and stopped.
Ludwig’s panzer clanked past it. Now it was nothing but a wellarmored machine-gun position. The infantry could deal with that.
Medieval-looking ramparts surrounded Coucy-le-Château. The
hilltop château that gave the town its name had had chunks bitten
out of it, probably in the last war. Mortar bombs from the château
started falling among the German panzers. Half wrecked or not, the
place had poilus or Tommies in it.
“Theo!” Ludwig said. “Let the artillery know they’re firing from the
ruin.”
“Right,” the radioman answered, which might have meant anything.
He—or somebody—must have done it, because 105s started
knocking more pieces off the château. Then a flight of Stukas
screamed down on it. Their bombs did what guns could only dream
about. The enemy mortars fell silent.
More Stukas worked over Coucy-le-Château. One of them got shot
down and crashed into the town, turning itself into a bomb. The rest
roared away. The onslaught stunned the defenders. With narrow,
winding streets, Coucy-le-Château might have been a nasty place
to try to take. But some of the garrison fled west and south, while
the rest couldn’t surrender fast enough.
Breakthrough? Ludwig didn’t know, but he had hopes.

January. The North Atlantic. A U-boat. The combination was not
made in heaven, as Lieutenant Julius Lemp knew only too well.
Oh, he could take the U-30 down below periscope depth, and she’d
escape the fearsome waves topside. The only trouble was, down
below periscope depth she’d be about as useful to the war effort as
if she were a five-year-old’s toy in a Berlin bathtub.
A five-year-old splashing around couldn’t whip up a worse storm in
that tiny tub than God was kicking up out here on the broad ocean.
One ten-meter wave after another rolled down on the U-30.
Because she was so much smaller and had so much less freeboard
than a surface warship, it was like taking one soggy right to the chin
after another.
Lemp tied himself to the rail atop the conning tower so an extra-big
wave wouldn’t sweep him out to sea. He wore oilskins, of course. He
knew he’d get soaked anyhow. This way, it would take a little longer,
though.
He wondered why he’d bothered bringing the binoculars with him.
So much spray and stray water splashed the lenses, he might as

well have peered through a couple of full beer steins. You had to try
all the same. Why else did they send you out in filthy weather like
this?
Another wave smashed over the bow. It splashed past the 88mm
deck gun and crashed into the conning tower. Lemp got himself a
faceful of ocean. “Fuck,” he said, spitting salt water. He would have
made a bigger fuss had it been the first time, or even the fifth.
He looked at the binoculars. They were good and wet now.
Ironically, that might make them easier to look through than when
they’d just been spray-splashed. He raised them to his eyes and
swept the horizon with a hunter’s intent patience.
He or one of the other watchstanders did this as long as there was
enough daylight to see by. At night, he did take the boat down
twenty-five or thirty meters so the men could cook a little and could
rest without getting pitched out of their cramped bunks and
hammocks.
Something glided past him on the wind: a petrel, on the prowl for
fish, not ships. Stormy weather didn’t bother the bird. Lemp wished
he could say the same.
The U-boat’s bow sank down into a trough. That meant the following
wave would be worse than usual. And it was. If not for the fastening
—and for his holding on to the rail for dear life—it would have swept
him into the Atlantic. Would he have drowned before he froze? That
was the only question there.
He wanted to ride on top of a crest, not get buried by one.
Eventually, the U-30 did. That gave him those extra ten meters from
which to look around. He didn’t expect to see anything but the
scudding gray clouds that had kept him company ever since leaving

Germany. His watch would be up pretty soon. Then he could
descend into the U-boat’s crowded, stinking pressure hull, dry off,
and change into his other, slightly less soaked, uniform.
When you didn’t expect to see something, you probably wouldn’t,
even if it was there. Lemp almost missed the smoke trail to the
northwest. His hands were smarter than his head. They snapped
back of themselves and gave him another look at it. Without even
noticing he’d done it, he stopped shivering. He stopped caring he
was wet clean through.
He pulled out the plug on the speaking tube that let him talk to the
helmsman and the engine room. “Change course to 310,” he
ordered. “All ahead full.”
Hollow and brassy, the answer came back: “Changing course to
310, skipper. You found something?”
“I sure did,” Lemp said as the diesels’ building throb told him their
crew had got the command, too. “Now we have to see what it is and
whether we can run it down.”
He thought they had a decent chance. Not many freighters could
match the U-30’s surface speed. And he could get mighty close
before the ship spotted his exhaust: diesel fuel burned much
cleaner than heavy oil, to say nothing of coal. The U-boat’s low,
sharkish silhouette shouldn’t be easy to pick up, either.
The other side of the coin was, he couldn’t make seventeen knots in
seas like this. Now that the U-30 had turned away from taking the
swells bow-on, she got slapped in the port side instead. British
corvettes—U-boat hunters—were said to roll on wet grass. The U30 was doing the same thing. As long as she straightened up every
time, Lemp couldn’t complain.

His stomach could, and did. He was a good sailor, but he seldom
faced a challenge like this. He gulped, hoping lunch would stay
down. If he was going to sink that ship, he had to get ahead of her
before submerging to wait for her to reach him where he lay in wait.
A U-boat’s greatest weakness was that it was slower submerged
than its quarry was on the surface.
He ordered another course change, swinging closer to due north.
The ship was making a very respectable turn of speed. In turn, that
argued she was big and important: a ship England particularly
wouldn’t want to see lost.
When the U-boat rose to the crest of another wave, Lemp got a
good look at the enemy vessel. He whistled softly, though he
couldn’t even hear himself through the howling wind. She had to be
15,000 tons if she was a gram!
“A Q-ship,” he muttered under his breath. In the last war, England
had put disguised guns on several merchantmen. They looked like
ordinary freighters…till an unwary U-boat skipper approached them
on the surface, confident of an easy kill. Several such skippers had
paid with their boats—and with their lives. Lemp shook his head.
“Not me, by God! Not me.”
The enemy wasn’t zigzagging. She didn’t know he was around, then.
Good, he thought, imagining what 15cm guns could do to his hull.
And the U-30 was overhauling her. He smiled wolfishly Yes, she’d
get a nasty surprise before long.
He went below. No time to change now. After the hunt would have to
do. He’d kept his sausage and noodles down on the conning tower.
He almost lost them for a second time leaving the cold, pure ocean
air for the stinks and smokes of the pressure hull. His eyes also
needed a moment to adjust from gray daylight to the dim orange

lamps the U-boat used.
“Take her down to periscope depth, Peter,” he said.
“Periscope depth. Aye aye, skipper,” the helmsman said. Dive
warnings hooted. Air hissed out of buoyancy tanks; water gurgled in
to take its place. The U-30 could dive like an otter when she had to.
The crew practiced all the time. If a destroyer or an airplane came
after you, you had to disappear in a hurry or you’d disappear
forever.
Lemp raised the periscope. The instrument wasn’t perfect. It got out
of alignment, and the upper lens took even more splashes and
spray than his binoculars did. But the periscope didn’t need to be
perfect this time. Here came the merchant cruiser, fat and happy as
if she had the world by the tail.
“Course 190. All ahead one third,” Lemp ordered, and the batteries
that powered the U-30 underwater sent her toward her prey.
The target was making about ten knots. The torpedoes could do
better than thirty. If the range was down to…he peered through the
periscope again…900 meters, he needed to launch…now!
“Fire one!” he snapped, and then, “Fire two!” and then, “Fire three!
”
Wham!…Whoosh! One after another, the fish leaped away from the
U-boat. “All three gone, skipper,” the torpedomen reported.
“Ja,” Lemp agreed absently. In these waves, he couldn’t watch the
wakes as well as he would have liked. On the other hand, the
merchant cruiser would have a harder time seeing them coming,
too.

At the very last moment, she started to turn away. The very last
moment proved much too late. The first torpedo caught her up near
the bow. The dull Boom! filled the U-30. The soldiers whooped and
cheered. Somebody pounded Lemp on the back. Discipline on a
submarine wasn’t the same as it was on a surface ship—nowhere
close. The skipper kept his eyes on the periscope, so he never
knew who it was.
A few seconds later, another, bigger, Boom! echoed through the
water. The second torpedo hit the enemy ship just aft of amidships.
“That does it.” Lemp spoke with quiet satisfaction. “We broke her
back. She’s going down fast.”
He waited for the impact of the third torpedo, but it didn’t come. That
one must have missed. He was annoyed. He hated to miss. But the
two hits were plenty to sink the merchant cruiser. And that, after all,
was the point of the exercise. He wouldn’t be too hard on himself.
A lot of boats out. A lot of heads bobbing in the water as the ship
slid under. The survivors wouldn’t last long, not in seas like this.
Lemp wondered if he’d sunk a troopship bringing soldiers from
Canada to England. That would be an even stronger blow against
the enemy than he’d thought he struck.
He also wondered if she’d got out an SOS. If destroyers, say, were
hurrying this way on a rescue mission, he didn’t want to hang
around any longer than he had to. “Surface,” he said. “Let’s
skedaddle. We’ve done our job here.”

PEGGY DRUCE FINALLY HAD HER bags packed. In a couple of
hours, she would head for the train station. The train would take her
out of Germany and into neutral Denmark. In Copenhagen, she
would get on a lovely American liner, the Athenia. Before too long,

would get on a lovely American liner, the Athenia. Before too long,
she’d be in New York. Two hours by train from Philadelphia. A million
billion miles from a Europe that had lost its mind.
Somebody knocked on the door.
A hotel flunky, she thought. As soon as she saw the uniform, she
realized the man wasn’t from the hotel. It wasn’t a military uniform,
but civilians in the Third Reich liked playing dress-up, too. This guy,
unless she was wrong, came from the Foreign Ministry.
And this guy, unless she was very, very wrong, was Trouble. With a
capital T.
“You are Miss, uh, Margaret Druce?” he asked in pretty good
English.
“Missus,” Peggy corrected automatically. Just as automatically, she
flashed her ring.
“Please to excuse me. And please to let me introduce myself. I am
Konrad Hoppe, of the Sub-bureau for the Supervision of Interned
Neutrals.” He didn’t click his heels, but he gave her a stiff little bow,
something you’d never see in the States. As he straightened, he
went on, “You were formerly scheduled to leave Germany today and
to return to America in the near future.”
Amazing how something as simple as an adverb could be scarier
than the bombs that had rained down on Berlin at New Year’s.
“What do you mean, formerly?” Peggy demanded, doing her
goddamnedest not to show how frightened she was.
“Ah.” Herr Hoppe nodded, more to himself than to her. “Then you
will not have heard any news this morning.”

“What’s that got to do with anything? Don’t play riddles, if you don’t
mind. If you’ve got something to say, come out and say it, already.”
“Very well, Mrs. Druce.” This time, Hoppe got it right. And, this time,
he really did click his heels. “I regret that I must be the one to inform
you that the Athenia went down in the North Atlantic yesterday,
bound for Copenhagen from New York City. Loss of life is reported
to be heavy.”
“Went down.” Numbly, Peggy entered the words. They sounded
innocuous, almost antiseptic. Little by little, her wits started working.
“What do you mean, ‘went down’? Went down how? Did a U-boat
torpedo her?” That was the likeliest way she could think of for a ship
to go down in the middle of the North Atlantic in wartime. “They can’t
do that! She’s a neutral! She’s an American!”
They could do that. They could do anything they damn well
pleased. Sometimes, as an American herself, she had trouble
remembering that in spite of all the horrors she’d seen. Maybe that
made her a fool. Maybe it left her one of the last sane people on
this poor, benighted continent.
Konrad Hoppe, dutiful employee of the Sub-bureau for the
Supervision of Interned Neutrals, looked pained. “So the BBC
claims. But this is one more lie from a nation of liars. The
government of the Reich has denied any involvement in the sinking
of the Athenia. If it was not an accident, the British torpedoed or
bombed it themselves, to stir up hatred against Germany in
America.”
“That’s the nuttiest thing I ever heard in my life!” Peggy exclaimed.
“It is not,” Hoppe insisted. “For the British, it would make perfect
sense. But why would the Reich sink an American ocean liner? Do
you not think we learned our lessons on the folly of this in the last

you not think we learned our lessons on the folly of this in the last
war?”
Peggy opened her mouth. Then she closed it again. She didn’t
know what to say. She couldn’t imagine England doing anything so
filthy. But she also had trouble believing Hitler wanted to antagonize
the USA. Wouldn’t he be cutting his own throat if he did? He might
be nuts, but he wasn’t stupid. He wasn’t that stupid, anyhow, or
Peggy didn’t think so.
“Maybe your guy just made a mistake,” she said after a few seconds
of thought. “Have you ever crossed the Atlantic in January? I have,
and it’s rough seas and nasty weather all the way.”
“Our submarine captains do not make such errors,” the Foreign
Ministry official said stiffly. “It is impossible. And if you find the
Atlantic in January so unappetizing, why did you book passage on
the Athenia?”
To get the hell out of your stinking country. But if Peggy said
something like that, some guys who wore different uniforms—those
of the SS, say—were liable to have some sharp questions for her.
Or pointed ones. Or hot ones. “To get away from the war,” she did
say, a couple of heartbeats slower than she might have.
“I am afraid this is not possible for you at the moment,” Hoppe said.
“Can’t I go to Denmark anyway?” Peggy yelped. The lights were on
in neutral Denmark. Denmark had never heard of rationing, except
as something other people suffered. Much more to the point,
Denmark was a civilized country. Once upon a time, Peggy would
have said the same thing about Germany. No more. No more.
“I am very sorry.” Konrad Hoppe didn’t sound sorry. If anything, he
sounded coldly amused. He got to tell foreigners no, and the

Foreign Ministry paid him to do it. If that wasn’t heaven for the nasty
little man, Peggy would have been amazed. A small, chilly smile on
his lips, Hoppe went on, “That also for you is not possible.”
“How come?” She wouldn’t give up without a fight. “I’ve got the train
ticket. I’ve got the Danish visa. Why can’t I use ‘em?”
“It is not the policy of the Reich to permit departures unless the
return journey to the foreigner’s home may be completed without
delay,” Hoppe droned.
“Why the—dickens not?” She wanted to say something hotter than
that, but feared it would do her more harm than good.
“I am not obligated to discuss the Reich’s policies with those
affected by them. I am obliged only to communicate them to you,”
Hoppe said primly.
Fuck you, Charlie. Peggy didn’t say that, either. A few years earlier,
she would have. Maybe she was finally growing up. She rolled her
eyes. She didn’t think Herb would believe it. That made her roll them
again. God only knew when—or if—she’d see her husband again.
She tried a different tack: “Okay, you’re not obligated. Could you do
it because you want to, or because it’d be a civilized kind of thing to
do?”
Yes, she’d throw that in Hoppe’s face. And his sallow cheeks did
turn red. Russians got ticked off if you called them uncultured.
Germans were almost as bad. A lot of them had an inferiority
complex about France and England. And, oddly, that had got worse
since Hitler took over. It was as if the Nazis were uneasily aware of
what a bunch of bastards they were, and embarrassed when
somebody called them on it.

“I believe…” Hoppe’s voice trailed away. A little muscle under one
eye twitched, the only visible sign of what had to be a struggle
inside him. Human being against Nazi functionary? Peggy knew
which way she would have bet. But she would have lost, because
the Foreign Ministry official went on, “I believe it is to keep people
from blaming the Reich for disrupted schedules when those are not
of our making.”
Who sank the Athenia? Peggy wondered again. But Hoppe would
only deny it one more time if she threw it in his face. If Goebbels
was saying the British had done it, that was Holy Writ inside the
Third Reich. Hoppe probably believed it himself, even if it seemed
like obvious horse manure to Peggy.
“Well, suppose I sign a pledge that says I won’t be offended?”
Peggy proposed. “If I badmouth you in the papers or anything, you
can haul it out and tell people what a liar I am.”
He shook his head. “No. That is not good. You would claim you
signed the document under duress. We have experience with
others who prove ungrateful after going beyond our borders.”
And why do you suppose that is? Peggy knew goddamn well why it
was. Konrad Hoppe seemed not to have the faintest idea. That he
didn’t—that so many like him didn’t—was one measure of modernday Germany’s damnation.
“I really wouldn’t,” Peggy said. Honest! Cross my heart and hope to
die! She would have promised anything and done damn near
anything to escape the Reich. If he’d propositioned her, she
wouldn’t have loosened his teeth for him. She wouldn’t have come
across, but still.…
“I am sorry. I have not the discretion to permit this.” Now Hoppe did
sound as if he might mean it, anyhow.

sound as if he might mean it, anyhow.
“Who does?” Peggy asked. “Ribbentrop?”
“Herr von Ribbentrop may have the authority.” Konrad Hoppe
stressed the aristocratic von, which the Nazi Foreign Minister, as
Peggy understood it, had bought. “He may, I say.”
“He’s the head of the Foreign Ministry, right?” Peggy said. “If he
doesn’t, who does, for crying out loud?”
“Above the Foreign Minister—above everyone—is always the
Führer.” Hoppe pointed out the obvious.
“Oh, my aching back!” Peggy burst out. “How am I supposed to get
Hitler to pay attention to my case? There’s a war on.”
“I am afraid I can offer on that score no suggestions,” the Nazi
bureaucrat answered. “If you will excuse me…” He bowed once
more and walked out without waiting to see whether Peggy would
excuse him or not.
She thought about getting on the train for Denmark even if the
Foreign Ministry said she couldn’t. She not only thought about it,
she headed for the station.
She presented her ticket. Then she had to present her passport.
The conductor—he wasn’t quite a conductor, but a more prominent
kind of official, with a uniform a U.S. major general would have
envied—checked her name against a list. As soon as he did that,
she knew her goose was cooked. Damn Teutonic thoroughness
anyway!
His Toploftiness looked up from the sheet of paper. “I am sorry, but
for you travel is verboten,” he said.

“It’s not fair! It’s not right!” she squawked.
The railroad official shrugged. “I am sorry. I can about that nothing
do. I do not the orders give. I only carry them out.”
“Right,” Peggy said tightly. “What am I supposed to do now?”
“Go back to your hotel,” the man replied. “Wait for German victory. It
will soon come. Then, I have no doubt, you will be able where you
please to travel. Although, since you are here in the Reich at this
world-historical time, why would you anywhere else care to go?”
Peggy could have told him. She came that close—that close—to
doing it. In the end, she held her tongue. Yeah, maybe she really
and truly was growing up. Or maybe—and more likely—the Gestapo
could scare the bejesus out of an immature person, too.

VACLAV JEZEK LOVED HIS NEW antitank rifle. The damn thing was
long and heavy. It kicked like a mule. The round it fired was as big
as his thumb. Despite that, it wouldn’t penetrate all the armor on a
first-rate German panzer. But against side or rear panels, it had a
good chance of punching through. Then it would do something
nasty to the men inside the metal monster, or maybe to the engine.
He didn’t like the way he’d got his hands on the antitank rifle. The
Frenchman who had lugged it around lost the top of his head to a
bullet or shell fragment. He wasn’t pretty when Vaclav found him.
He’d bled all over the weapon, too. Now, though, you could hardly
see the stains.
Somebody moved in the bushes a few hundred meters ahead.
Jezek swung the rifle in that direction. It shot nice and flat out to a

kilometer and more. What you could see, you could hit, and what
you could hit.…Using the antitank rifle against a mere soldier was
like killing a flea by dropping a house on it. Vaclav didn’t care. He
wanted Germans dead, and he wasn’t fussy about how they got that
way.
Czechs and Frenchmen and a few Englishmen were all intermingled
here. They shouldn’t have been, but the latest German drive had
thrown the defenders in the Ardennes into confusion. Jezek had
seen that in Czechoslovakia, to his sorrow. After a panzer thrust
pierced the line you were trying to hold, you had to scramble like a
madman to piece together a new one farther back. And the
Germans were still pushing forward, and shelling you, and bombing
you.…
“Anybody have more clips for the antitank rifle?” he called in Czech.
He could have said the same thing in German, but it probably would
have got him shot. He didn’t speak French or English.
But one of the French noncoms assigned as liaison to the Czechs
translated for Vaclav. The man’s Czech was none too good, but he
spoke French fine. And a couple of soldiers coughed up the fat clips
Vaclav needed.
“Thanks,” he said as he stowed them in a sack on his belt—they
were too big for standard ammunition pouches.
“Any time, pal. I bet I’ve hated the Nazis longer than you have,” the
sergeant said. He had a slight guttural accent, curly auburn hair,
and a formidable plow of a nose.
Another Jew. They’re fucking everywhere, Jezek thought. The guy
named David was back of the lines with a bullet through his leg right
now. He’d get better. Whether the line would wasn’t so obvious.

“I wouldn’t be surprised,” Vaclav said aloud. This fellow wouldn’t
duck out of the fight the way the damned Slovaks did, anyhow.
German 105s started tearing up the landscape a few hundred
meters off to the south. Nobody in Vaclav’s bunch even flinched.
That wasn’t close enough to worry about. The noncom said, “Maybe
there’ll be some cows down, and we can get ourselves fresh beef.”
“Or pork.” The words came out of Vaclav’s mouth before he thought
about them.
He didn’t faze the noncom in French uniform. “I’ve eaten it,” the guy
said. “Beats the crap out of going hungry.”
“Yeah, well, what doesn’t?” Jezek replied.
They never got the chance to see if the Germans had done some
worthwhile butchery for a change. Stukas screamed down from a
treacherously clear sky. “Down!” Several soldiers yelled the same
thing at the same time. Vaclav and the Jewish sergeant were two of
them. They both fit action to word. Vaclav was already tearing at the
muddy ground with his entrenching tool when the first bombs hit
nearby.
Blast jumped on him with hobnailed boots. Fragments of bomb
casing screeched malevolently through the air. He kept on
impersonating a mole. Stukas came in bigger waves than this.
Sure as hell, more of them wailed down on him and his buddies.
He’d heard they had sirens mounted on their landing gear to make
them sound even scarier than they would have otherwise. As far as
he was concerned, that was overdoing it. The damn things were
scary enough anyhow.
The sergeant lay on his back, firing up at them with his rifle. That

took guts, but it was bound to be a waste of ammo. How could you
hit something that was going 500 kilometers an hour?
People were shrieking and wailing in a godawful Babel of
languages. Medics ran here and there, slapping on bandages and
lugging wounded soldiers away on stretchers. The medics wore Red
Cross armbands and smocks. Some of them had painted Red
Crosses in white circles on either side of their helmets. Every so
often, they got shot anyway. German medics wore the same kind of
outfits. Vaclav had never aimed at one of them on purpose. Still, he
was sure they stopped bullets, too.
A French officer shouted something. It might as well have been in
Japanese for all the sense it made to Vaclav. The redheaded Jew
—just like Judas, Jezek thought—translated: “We’ve got to get back
over the Semoy. They’re going to blow the bridges pretty soon, he
says, to help stop the Germans.”
“They think that will?” Vaclav didn’t believe it for a minute. The Nazis
were too good with pontoon bridges and rubber boats and
parachutists and what have you.
“That’s what he says.” After a moment, the sergeant added, “Do you
want to get stuck here?”
“Well—no,” Vaclav admitted—the only answer that question could
have.
A crackle of machine-gun fire made him hit the dirt again. Here
came an obsolete but nasty little Panzer I, spitting bullets from both
guns in the turret. No French tanks anywhere close by, of course.
They were like policemen—never around when you needed them.
But a Panzer I wasn’t so goddamn tough. Vaclav had heard they
were originally intended as nothing more than training vehicles.

They got thrown into combat when Hitler jumped Czechoslovakia.
Even their frontal armor was only thirteen millimeters thick. That
kept out small-arms fire. Anything more…
He worked the bolt and chambered a round. He wasn’t shooting at a
Stuka; the little German tank made a fine target. The tank
commander, who was also the gunner, sat right between the
machine guns. As always, the antitank rifle kicked like a son of a
bitch. He’d have a nasty bruise on his shoulder. He didn’t care,
though, not when the Panzer I’s machine guns suddenly fell silent.
“Good shot!” the Jewish sergeant yelled. The tank drove on, but so
what? The driver couldn’t shoot while he was driving.
And the Allied soldiers on this side of the Semoy couldn’t stop the
Nazis. Vaclav thanked God no German bombers struck while he was
tramping over the bridge. He would have thanked God a lot more
had He done worse to the enemy sooner. In a world where you
didn’t get many big favors, you needed to be properly grateful for
the small ones.

“COME ON! THIS WAY!” THE engineer called in a low, urgent voice.
Willi Dernen assumed he was an engineer, anyhow. It was the
middle of the night, and as black as the Jew Süss’ heart outside.
The man went on, “The pontoon bridge is right here. It has rope
rails, so hang on to those. And so help me God, you assholes, we’ll
drown the first fucking Dummkopf who lights a cigarette before he’s
half a kilometer away from it!”
Who would be that stupid? Willi wondered. But the question
answered itself. A Dummkopf would, that was who. Like every other
outfit in the world, the Wehrmacht had its share and then some. A

jerk who decided he needed a smoke right now would damn well
light up, and so what if he gave the game away to some watching
Frenchman?
Willi’s feet thudded on planks. He reached out and found the rope.
It guided him across the Semoy. The bridge swayed under his
weight and that of his comrades, almost as if he were on the deck of
a boat.
“You heard the man,” Corporal Baatz said loudly. “No smoking!”
The engineer spoke in a deadly whisper: “Whoever you are, bigmouth, shut the fuck up!”
Snickers ran through Baatz’s squad. One of them was Willi’s. He
was only an ordinary Landser; he didn’t have the rank to tell Awful
Arno where to head in. The engineer sure did—or acted as if he
did, which was every bit as good. Baatz didn’t let out another peep,
even to protest.
Somebody up ahead said, “Careful. You’re coming to the end of the
bridge.” Maybe fifteen seconds later, he said it again, and then
again, to let the troops gauge where he was. Willi almost tripped
anyhow, when the planking gave way to mud.
“Second platoon, form up on me!” That was Lieutenant Georg
Gross, who’d taken Neustadt’s place after the former platoon
commander bought his plot. Gross seemed like a pretty good guy,
even if he didn’t ride herd on Arno Baatz hard enough to suit Willi.
To an officer, Baatz probably looked like a pretty good noncom.
That only showed officers weren’t as smart as they thought they
were.
Somebody stepped on Willi’s foot. “Ouch!” he said—quietly. “Watch
it,” he added.

“Sorry,” the other soldier said, and then, “Willi?”
“Wolfgang?” Willi chuckled. “Well, that’s one way to find each other
in the dark.”
“Listen to me, men,” Lieutenant Gross said. “Listen to me, dammit!
The objective is Charleville-Mézières, southwest of here.” The way
he pronounced the town’s name said he spoke French, as Neustadt
had before him. Much good it had done the other platoon leader.
Gross went on, “We’ve got about ten kilometers of marching to do
before we get there, maybe twelve. We’ll go through the Bois des
Hazelles—the Hazelwood—for part of the way. It should give us
some cover.”
“Depends,” Wolfgang Storch muttered. “How many goddamn
Frenchies are in it now?”
“Questions?” Gross asked. Nobody said anything loud enough for
him to hear it. Wolfgang’s question was a good one, but the
lieutenant wouldn’t be able to answer it. They’d have to find out: the
hard way, odds were.
Southwest…Willi looked up into the sky, but clouds covered it and
told him nothing. He hoped it didn’t start to snow while they were
marching. That would be all they needed, wouldn’t it?
Willi might not know southwest from artichokes, but a soft click and
a slight rasp said Lieutenant Gross was opening his pocket
compass. “This way,” he said confidently. “Follow me.”
Like the fellow at the end of the pontoon bridge, he spoke up every
so often to let his men know where he was. Willi tramped along,
trying not to think. He wished he were back in Breslau and home in
bed, or even wrapped in a blanket in some shell hole. It was cold,

and getting colder. Marching warmed, but only so much.
Some people did light up once they got far enough away from the
bridge. The smell of harsh French tobacco filled the frosty air.
Almost everybody smoked looted Gauloises or Gitanes in
preference to the Junos and Privats and other German brands that
came up along with the rations. The cigarettes the Wehrmacht got
were supposed to be better than what civilians smoked back home.
That only went to show better wasn’t the same as good.
Ten or twelve kilometers. A couple of easy hours in the daylight. In
black night, feeling his way along, stumbling or falling every so
often, getting thwacked by branches that he couldn’t see in the
Hazelwood, Willi didn’t have much fun. He also didn’t go very fast.
Neither did anyone else.
And there were Frenchmen in the Bois des Hazelles. Willi and his
pals had to be coming to the end of it—the sky was starting to go
from black to charcoal gray in the southeast—when someone called
out, “Qui va?”
“Un ami,” Lieutenant Gross said. Ami meant friend; Willi had picked
that up from surrendering Frenchmen. Now—would it do the trick?
It didn’t. The poilu gave forth with a fresh challenge, one Willi didn’t
get. Maybe he wanted a password. Whatever he wanted, Gross
didn’t have it. The shooting started a moment later.
The froggies, damn them, had a machine gun right there. It spat fire
in the darkness. Tracers stabbed out at the oncoming Germans.
They were scary as hell. Willi flopped down on his belly and crawled
forward like a slug. He didn’t want to get a centimeter higher off the
ground than he had to.
As he crawled, he realized that those tracers weren’t doing the guys

at the Hotchkiss gun any favors. Every time the machine gunners
opened up, they guided their enemies toward them. And it wasn’t
really light enough for them to see what they were aiming at. So…
Willi yanked the fuse cord on a potato-masher grenade. He flung it
toward the machine gunners, who had no idea he was there. But
the grenade hit a branch or something, because it didn’t burst
where he wanted it to. The Frenchmen serving the gun yelled, but
they didn’t scream. He froze. If they spotted him, he was sausage
meat—and it was getting lighter.
Something off to one side distracted them. They turned the
Hotchkiss in that direction and started banging away. They nailed
somebody, too. That shriek sounded bad. But, while they were busy
over there, Willi slithered behind a—hazel?—tree.
He pulled another grenade off his belt. He threw this one sidearm:
not the way they taught you in basic, but he wanted to keep it low so
it didn’t bounce off anything. Then he flattened out again. If this one
didn’t do the job, though, he had the bad feeling flattening out
wouldn’t be enough to save his young ass.
Bang! He got screams this time. Then it was forward, as fast as he
could scramble. He had no idea how badly hurt the Frenchmen
were. He had to finish them before they or their buddies got that
machine gun going again.
They were down. They were thrashing, not worried about the
Hotchkiss at all. He shot them to make sure they didn’t worry about
anything else again. He was putting a fresh clip on his Mauser when
a shape loomed up out of the morning twilight. He started to give it
the bayonet, but checked himself when he recognized the familiar
shape of a Stahlhelm.

With a dry chuckle, Corporal Baatz said, “I would’ve plugged you
before you could drive that home.”
“Let’s go after the Frenchmen,” Willi answered, and left it right
there. He didn’t think Baatz could have got him if he’d followed
through, and he was half sorry he hadn’t. Maybe more than half
sorry.
More machine guns—and poilus with rifles, grenades, mortars, and
all the other usual nastiness—crowded the Hazelwood. Methodically,
the Germans cleaned them out and pressed on toward CharlevilleMézières. Panzers drew tracks across the snow on the flat, open
country south and east of the woods. Pillars of smoke rising to the
cloudy sky marked the pyres of a couple that would go no farther.
But the runners were the ones that mattered. The French tried to
make a stand in front of the town. Cannon and machine-gun fire
from the German army sent them tumbling back in retreat.
Willi looked around. There was Wolfgang. His bayonet had blood on
it—not Arno Baatz’s, but somebody’s, all right. “Where’s the
lieutenant?” Willi asked him.
“Down. I bet he loses his arm,” Wolfgang answered. “The fucking
Hotchkiss got him just before somebody did for it.”
“That was me,” Willi said.
“Yeah? Well, it needed doing.” Storch paused to light up. Then he
said, “Sergeant Pieck caught one right through the foot, too. That
means Awful Arno’s got a section—maybe the platoon, till they give
us a new officer.”
“Jesus Christ! I knew I should have stuck him!” Willi explained how
he’d almost bayoneted Baatz by the French machine gun. His
buddy was good for even more reasons why he should have than

he’d thought of for himself. Willi pulled a pack of Gauloises out of
his pocket, but the familiar winged helmet shielded no more
cigarettes. “Let me bum a butt off you.”
“What a useless creature you are! First you didn’t scrag the
corporal, and now you steal my smokes.” Wolfgang gave him his
own pack. Willi did have a match. He got the cigarette going. The
two Landsers tramped on.

THE POLES HAD A GOOD medium bomber. The PZL P-37 could
carry more than twice the bomb load of a Tupolev SB-2. Fortunately
for the Red Army and Air Force, the Poles didn’t have a hell of a lot
of them. Whenever the enemy found a chance, he did his best to
strike at the airstrips the Red Air Force used.
Sergei Yaroslavsky took those raids for granted. The Poles made
them at high altitude, and they got out of Soviet airspace in a hurry.
An occasional bomb gave the groundcrew some work to do
repairing a runway. More often than not, the bombs missed by
hundreds of meters or even by kilometers. Nothing to get excited
about.
Then things changed. Sergei was barely awake when antiaircraft
guns around the airstrip started banging away at sunrise. He
tumbled out of his cot, wondering if the gunners had the galloping
jimjams.
They didn’t. Bombs crashed down on the runways and on the
bombers near them. Not all the bombers were in revetments, the
way they should have been. It hadn’t seemed worth the trouble.
“Those aren’t Elks!” somebody yelled—that was the P-37’s
nickname. “Those are motherfucking Stukas!”

“Bozhemoi!” Yaroslavsky shouted. A bombardier said something
electric about the way the Devil’s grandmother had buggered up the
antiaircraft guns. Satan and his relatives might be as out of fashion
as God, but people hadn’t forgotten about them, either.
Sergei threw himself flat in the snow. That was all he could do now.
One after another, the Fascist dive-bombers stooped on the airstrip
like falcons after pigeons.
Pigeons could at least try to get away. To mix the metaphor, the
bombers on the ground were sitting ducks. And, while the pilots of
those Ju-87s might be goddamn Nazi bastards, they were also more
than competent professionals. One after another, they released
their bombs, fired a burst from their forward machine guns, pulled
out of their dives, and zoomed off to the northwest. They might
almost have performed an aerial ballet.
The Germans had a word for that kind of ballet (they would): a
Totentanz, a dance of death. Here, they were dishing it out. The
Soviets had no choice but to take it.
Machine-gun bullets thudded into the snowbank, much too close to
Sergei. Little white powdery puffs shot up into the air at the impacts.
If a round hit him, a little red fountain might join the white. He
burrowed into the drift. Burrowing wouldn’t do him a kopek’s worth of
good, but he did it anyway. Fear and instinct drove harder than
reason.
Not all the explosions came from German bombs. The SB-2s had
been gassed up and bombed up. Before long, they would have
taken off and punished the semifascist Poles. Well, behind the
semifascist Poles loomed the Fascist Germans. And, no matter how
virtuous the Soviets might be, they were getting hammered this

morning.
Ever so cautiously, Sergei stuck up his head. The Stukas were
gone, which didn’t make the airstrip a safe place. An SB-2 a couple
of hundred meters away was burning like the inside of a blast
furnace. Ammunition for the plane’s guns cooked off with a cheerful
popping noise, spraying bullets every which way. And then one of
the bombs—or maybe all of the bombs—blew.
What had been a fire turned into a fireball. Stunned, half deafened,
Sergei burrowed into the snow again. Something large and hot
smashed down well behind him—the explosion had thrown it a long,
long way. He could tell it was hot because even his afflicted ears
made out the hiss of steam coming off it as the snow put it out.
Another Tupolev bomber blew up, not quite so spectacularly—or
maybe it was just farther away. Several more were on fire. One
hadn’t burned, but was broken in half behind the bomb bay. Intact
SB-2s were the exception, not the rule. Whatever punishment the
Poles were going to get would have to come from some other
airstrip today.
Sergei made himself stand up. He looked around to see what he
could do that might help. Other dazed survivors were also emerging
from the snow like hares coming out of their burrows. Steaming
patches here and there marked big chunks of wreckage.
And bloody patches here and there marked dead and wounded
men. What looked like a chunk of aileron had decapitated the best
mechanic at the airstrip. Sergei swore, but nobody could do
anything for that poor son of a bitch now. The fellows who thrashed
and writhed still had hope. Some of them did, anyhow.
Stooping beside a groundcrew man who groaned as he clutched a
shattered ankle, Sergei wondered what kind of hope the man had. If

shattered ankle, Sergei wondered what kind of hope the man had. If
he didn’t bleed to death or die of gangrene or septicemia, he’d
survive. The bomber pilot was no doctor, but he didn’t see how the
groundcrew man would keep that foot. What kind of life did a cripple
have?
You should have wondered about that sooner, he thought. But pilots
seldom got crippled. If anything went wrong in the air, or if your
plane got shot down, you were likely to buy the whole plot, not part
of one. Nobody in the USSR bought or sold or owned land, but
Soviet flyers talked the same way as their Western counterparts.
After doing what he could to bandage the groundcrew man and
telling a few reassuring lies, Sergei looked northwest once more:
after the long-gone Stukas. In Czechoslovakia, he’d seen the
Germans were good. Now he saw how good they could be with the
advantage of surprise. How smart were we to get into a war with
people like this? he wondered.

Samuel Goldman passed several sheets of closely written paper to

the visitor. “Here you are, Friedrich,” he said, his tone an odd
mixture of cringing and pride. “Everything that can be known about
Xenophanes is here.”
Sarah Goldman listened from the kitchen as her father and the
other professor of ancient history talked. Friedrich Lauterbach had
studied under her father. He still felt kindly toward him—this article
for Pauly-Wissowa was a case in point. When it saw print, it would
go under Lauterbach’s name: he, after all, was an Aryan. But he
paid Samuel Goldman for the work, and the family badly needed the
money.
Now he said, “Thank you very much. I will type it myself tonight, so
no secretary finds out about our…arrangement.”
“Whatever you need to be safe,” Sarah’s father said. “Take a look
at it now, if you care to. I have been very thorough.” He was proud
of that, too. Yes, he really might as well have been a German
—except the damned Germans wouldn’t let him.
“I’m sure it’s fine, Samuel. Who knows your work better than I do,
after all?” Lauterbach paused for a moment. “Here—let me give you
this.” As he always did, he sounded embarrassed about having to
do business this way.
Another pause followed, a longer one. Sarah had to strain to hear
her father’s next words, for his voice dropped almost to a whisper:
“But this is too much. This is much too much, twice as much as I
could have expected for—”
“I’m giving you what I can,” Lauterbach said. “There won’t be any
more, I’m afraid, not from me. I got my call-up papers yesterday.
That’s why I have to do my typing in a hurry.”
“Oh,” Samuel Goldman said, and then, “Stay safe. I would be with

you if I could.”
“You did what you had to do the last time around,” the younger man
said. “I know that—you could hardly walk when I studied with you.”
“That isn’t what’s keeping me out now,” Sarah’s father said
pointedly.
“And I know that,” Lauterbach answered. “I think it’s…unfortunate.
But what can I do about it? I am only one man, and not a very brave
one.”
“As long as you don’t tell the Tommies and the poilus, they won’t
know,” Sarah’s father said with a wry chuckle. “If I could fool them,
so can you. You’ll do fine. I’m sure of it.”
“That makes one of us,” Lauterbach said with a dry laugh of his
own. “I’d better go, I’m afraid.”
“True,” Sarah’s father agreed. “If they can prove you’re friends with
a Jew, that may be more dangerous than going up to the front.”
“If things were different…” Lauterbach sighed. “But they aren’t, and
they aren’t likely to be. Still, you’ve got a pretty daughter.” Three or
four footsteps took him to the door. It closed behind him.
He was, Sarah remembered, single. Did he mean…? She shrugged.
What he meant didn’t matter, because things weren’t different, and
they sure weren’t likely to be. He was dead right about that.
She went out into the front room. Her father stood there, holding the
banknotes with the eagles and swastikas. Even the money
proclaimed that things weren’t going to be different. Samuel
Goldman looked up. “You were listening?” he asked.

“Ja.” Sarah nodded. “Wasn’t I supposed to?”
“It’s all right.” He grimaced. “I don’t know what we’ll do for cash when
this runs out, though.”
“Isn’t there anyone else who will let you write for him?” Sarah asked.
“Maybe.” Her father looked—and sounded—dubious. “The others
have always been more nervous about it than Friedrich…and who
can blame them?” His mouth twisted. “They never paid as well,
either. But we do what we can, not what we want to, eh?”
“Ja,” Sarah said again. What else was there to say? She did her
best to find something: “Saul brings in a little money.”
“As a laborer.” It wasn’t quite as if her father said, As a pimp, but it
was close. He went on, “He has a brain. He should use it. He should
have the chance to use it. Or he should be a soldier. He’d make a
better one than Friedrich Lauterbach, and you can bet on that.”
“He doesn’t mind so much. Honest, Papa, he doesn’t.” Sarah knew
she was right about that. Her big brother had always exulted in his
strength on the soccer pitch. Working with his body instead of his
brain didn’t humiliate him the way it would have their father.
“Why God decided to give me a water buffalo for a son, only He
knows,” Samuel Goldman said, and let it go at that.
The other worry was that, even though the Goldmans had money,
they couldn’t buy much. Nobody in wartime Germany could buy a
great deal, but Jews suffered worse than ordinary Germans. They
could buy only from shops run by their fellow Jews, and those shops
always had less to sell than others. Food got worse and worse.
Sarah’s mother was a good cook, but disguise could go only so far.

Noodles flavored with nasty cheese didn’t make much of a supper.
Sarah picked at hers. So did her father. Saul shoveled in everything
in front of him and looked around to see what else he could get.
“You can have mine if you want,” Sarah said. “I’m not really hungry.”
The last part of that wasn’t true, but she didn’t feel like eating the
mess in front of her.
“Thanks!” Saul said. As Sarah passed him her plate, her mother
gave her a dirty look. Hanna Goldman wanted everybody to eat a
lot all the time. Maybe the noodles and cheese could have been
worse, but they could have been a lot better, too. As far as Sarah
was concerned, Saul was welcome to them if he wanted them so
much.
And he did. By the way he glanced up after he made them
disappear, he could have put away another couple of helpings. But
there were no more. He sighed and said, “The coffee will be ersatz,
won’t it?”
“Aber natürlich,” Mother answered. “Burnt barley, with a little chicory
if we’re lucky.”
“Some luck,” Father said.
“Oh, well.” Saul shrugged his broad shoulders. “The Army isn’t
getting much better?”
“How do you know that?” Samuel Goldman always looked for
evidence. In better times, Sarah had admired that. Now she
wondered whether it made any difference at all. Evidence? What did
the Nazis care about that? But they had the guns and the goons.
With those, they made evidence of their own.
What could you do if you’d lived by reason your whole life long but

reason suddenly didn’t count any more? Could you do anything at
all, or were you just supposed to lie down and die?
That was what the Nazis wanted German Jews to do. That the Nazis
wanted it was the best reason not to do it, as far as Sarah was
concerned. She wished her family had got out of Germany while
escape was still possible. But her father clung too fiercely to his
Germanness to see the need. He could see it now. Easy enough,
when it was too late.
Instead of explaining how he knew, Saul said, “Maybe the British will
send planes over tonight.”
“How can you sound so cheerful about it?” Sarah asked him.
“They’re liable to blow us up.” With Jews having to shelter in their
homes, enemy bombers were more likely to blow them up than
anybody else.
Her brother only shrugged again. “They haven’t yet. And the more
Nazis they send to the Devil, the better I’ll like it. If I had a gun…”
“Saul,” Samuel Goldman said sharply. “That will be enough of that.”
“Should I turn the other cheek?” Saul retorted. “I don’t see what for.
I’m no Christian. They keep reminding me of that, in case I’m not
smart enough to figure it out for myself.”
“They’re no Christians, either,” Father said. “Pagans. Barbarians.”
He looked disgusted. “And they’re proud of it, too.” A Roman noble
talking about wandering Ostrogoths could have packed no more
scorn into his voice.
He would have silenced Sarah. Saul still felt like locking horns.
“What about the German Christians?” he said. “Their preachers
wear Nazi uniforms. Even the Catholics have swastikas in their

churches. The students at their universities give the Nazi salute.”
His right arm shot out.
“They can call themselves whatever they want. The name is not the
thing,” Father insisted. “Trying to make you believe it is—that’s only
one more lie.”
“Maybe so,” Saul said. “But we both tried to join the Wehrmacht
anyway, didn’t we? And if they’d only let us, we’d be braying ‘Heil
Hitler!’ like all the other donkeys in the Reich, wouldn’t we?”
Samuel Goldman opened his mouth, then closed it again. At last, he
said, “I have no answer for that, because we would. If they’d let us
be Germans, Germans we would have been. Since they make us
into something else…” He left the table sooner than he might have.
No one else had much to say after that, either.
British bombers didn’t visit Münster. They didn’t drop anything close
by, either. Especially in nighttime quiet, the sound of bombs going
off carried a long, long way.
Saul went off to work early the next morning. Father looked lost,
bewildered. He had nothing to do—nothing that would yield a
Reichsmark, anyway. He started to fill his pipe, then thought better
of it. The tobacco ration was miserably small. What he got smelled
like burning overshoes, too.
Sarah went out shopping with her mother. When she was small, she
remembered, she’d really enjoyed that. When she was small, they
could walk into any shop in Münster and buy whatever they wanted.
Shopkeepers fawned on them, as they fawned on any other
customers.
Everything changed after the Nazis took over. Brownshirts stuck big

signs—GERMANS! DON’T BUY FROM JEWS!—on the windows of
Jewish-owned stores. And Jews were no longer welcome in shops
run by Aryans. Some of the German shopkeepers seemed
embarrassed about it. They did what they had to do to get along, no
more. Others, though…Others gloated. Those were the scary ones.
Only a handful of shops Jews could go into were left now. The war’d
just made things worse—not only for Jews, but for everybody. And
the British air raids added to the burden of fear. The people across
the street—Aryans—never stopped complaining about how their
favorite bakery was gone. “Like someone yanked a tooth. It’s not
there any more,” Frau Breisach would grumble.
She didn’t know when she was well off. Of course she doesn’t
—she’s an Aryan, Sarah thought. The one bakery in Münster that
Jews could still use was way over on the far side of town. It wasn’t
open very often, and didn’t have much when it was. But when the
choice lay between not much and nothing at all…you went over to
the far side of town.
They had a little wire basket with wheels. Sarah pulled it along
behind her. It felt like nothing now. On the way back, it would be
heavier. She hoped it would, anyhow. Sometimes the bakery didn’t
open, or it was sold out, or…I won’t think about any of that, Sarah
told herself fiercely.
A gang of laborers was repairing a bomb crater in the middle of the
street. And there was Saul, as deft with a shovel as Father was with
Greek irregular verbs. He turned the Nazi slogan on its head: he
drew joy through strength.
The gang overseer was a wizened little man in his forties. The left
sleeve of his shirt was pinned-up and empty. Maimed in the war,
Sarah thought. Maimed in the last war, she amended. How many

would get maimed in this one? Too many—that seemed sure.
Maimed or not, he carried a swagger stick in his right hand. He also
had a foul mouth, and didn’t care if women heard him use it. “Work
harder, you lazy prick!” he yelled, and lightly swatted a laborer on
the behind.
“Ja, ja,” the fellow muttered, and went on working the same way he
had before.
That didn’t make the overseer any happier. “And you, too, you
fucking kike!” he bellowed. When he hit Saul in the back with the
swagger stick, it was no tap. The whack echoed like a gunshot.
Sarah thought it would have knocked her over.
It barely staggered her big brother. Saul Goldman responded with
what had to be instinct, as he might have on the soccer pitch. He’d
been hit. He had a weapon in his hands. He used it. The flat of the
shovel blade crashed into the side of the overseer’s head.
The man went down as if he’d stopped an artillery shell. His skull
was all caved in and bloody. Sarah and her mother let out identical
shrieks of horror—anyone could see that the overseer would never
get up again.
Saul stared at the man he’d killed. He stared at his mother and his
sister—all that in maybe a second and a half. Then he threw down
the gore-spattered shovel. It clattered on the cobbles. He turned
and ran as if a million demons were at his heels.
“After him!” one of the other laborers shouted. Chasing a Jew was
more fun than fixing a bomb crater any day of the week. The gang
pounded after Saul, some of them still brandishing their spades.
Sarah and her mother looked at each other, each mirroring the

other’s anguish. As if on cue, they both burst into tears.

A FRENCH PRIVATE FIRST CLASS wore a little brown hash mark
on his sleeve to distinguish him from an ordinary private. Luc
Harcourt was less than delighted when the indestructible Sergeant
Demange told him he’d been promoted. “I’d’ve had more fun getting
the clap,” he said.
Demange’s Gitane twitched as he chuckled. “Think of it as
congratulations for living this long,” he said.
Luc did. Suddenly, being a private first class looked a lot better. He
said so, adding, “After all the shit I’ve gone through to get this, I’ll be
a general by the time the war finally ends.”
“France is in trouble, yes. I hope to Christ France isn’t in that much
trouble,” Demange said.
“Kiss my ass,” Luc said. The sergeant only laughed. Luc had
earned the right to swear at him. He did remember that he had to
pick his spots with care.
“Anyway, sew that stupid thing on,” Sergeant Demange told him.
“You could be leading a squad at five minutes’ notice. Hell, a couple
of lucky German shell bursts and you could be leading a platoon.”
He wasn’t kidding. Luc had seen how fast casualties could chew a
unit to pieces. He and Demange were two of not very many men
who’d been with the company since before the German blow fell on
the Low Countries. The rest were replacements, or replacements of
replacements, or sometimes.…
Luc didn’t want to command a squad, much less a platoon. All he

wanted to do was hunker down tight, live through the war, and get
on with his life. Not that anyone from Sergeant Demange on up
cared what he wanted, of course.
“See? I told you France was in trouble,” the veteran underofficer
said. “And you will be, too, if you don’t get cracking.”
“Right.” Luc knew better than to argue. Somewhere in his pack he
had a little housewife with needle and thread. He dug it out and
sewed on the hash mark. He would never put a seamstress out of
business. He’d sewn up a couple of rips in his uniform. His stitches
were large and dark and ugly, like the ones that held together the
pieces of the Frankenstein monster in the American film.
French 75s threw shells at the Germans on the other side of the
Aisne. Luc’s company was dug in a couple of kilometers west of
Soissons. The town had taken a beating in the Franco-Prussian
War and again in the Great War. Now it was catching hell one more
time. Luc had come through it on the way to this position. Bombs
and shells had wrecked the cathedral; bits of thirteenth-century
stained glass lay shattered in the streets. A priest stood by the ruins
with tears running down his face. Luc had no tears left for people,
let alone things.
Machine guns started stuttering up by the river. French or German?
Luc wondered, cocking his head to one side to hear better. Both, he
thought. That wasn’t so good.
Sergeant Demange must have decided the same thing. “Are those
shitheads trying to force a crossing?” he growled. “They’d better not
get over, that’s all I’ve got to say.”
“Let’s move!” Luc grabbed his rifle. He liked the idea of Germans on
the south bank of the Aisne no better than Demange.

As they hurried up toward the riverbank, they gathered as many
other soldiers as they could. Damned if that hash mark on Luc’s
sleeve didn’t make ordinary privates follow him without arguing or
asking a lot of questions. I could get used to this, he thought.
There was smoke on the river: not the ordinary war smoke of
burning houses and vehicles, but a thick chemical haze the
Germans used to mask what they were doing on the other side. Out
of the smoke came black rubber boats paddled by field-gray
soldiers in coal-scuttle helmets. Sure as the devil, the Boches were
trying to get over.
French machine guns stammered out death again. A German
dropped his paddle and slumped down in his raft. Then another one
got hit, and another. The raft slewed sideways. It was probably
leaking, too. German machine guns across the Aisne shot back,
trying to silence the French fire. They put out more rounds per
minute than the ones the French used, but they couldn’t knock
them out of action.
Luc flopped down behind some bushes and started shooting at the
Germans in their rafts. It wasn’t fair—they couldn’t shoot back. That
bothered him till a couple of machine-gun bullets cracked past
maybe half a meter above his head. They cured any chivalrous
notions he might have had.
Two or three rubber rafts actually made it to the south bank of the
Aisne. The unhurt Germans in them jumped up and tried to set up
some kind of bridgehead. With all that French firepower
concentrated on them, they never had a chance. Inside of a few
minutes, they were all dead or wounded.
“Assholes’ll have to do better than that,” Sergeant Demange said, a
fresh cigarette in his mouth and a fresh clip on his rifle.

“What else have they got behind that smoke?” Luc asked.
“We’ll know in a few minutes,” Demange answered, sending up
smoke signals of his own. “Looks like it’s blowing away.” He and Luc
and the rest of the French defenders waited. Then he said one
thing more: “Fuck me.”
The Germans had lined up a couple of dozen tanks—Panzer IIs and
captured Czech machines—on the north bank of the Aisne. Their
cannon all pointed toward the French positions across the river
from them. To Luc’s frightened eyes, it seemed as if every single
one of those cannon pointed straight at him.
Every single one of them seemed to open up at the same time, too,
pouring shells and more machine-gun bullets down on the French
defenders. Luc hugged the ground. His rifle was useless against
those steel monsters. The machine gunners fired back at the
German armor. He watched tracers fly across the Aisne and
ricochets harmlessly spark off the tanks’ armored carapaces.
One by one, the French machine guns fell silent. Luc didn’t think
the gunners were lying low, waiting to massacre the next wave of
German rubber boats. He thought they were dead. Those cannon
weren’t all pointing at him after all. They were pointing at the guns
that could do the German assault troops the most harm.
That second wave of boats splashed into the river even while the
cannonading went on. The Boches hadn’t silenced everything on
the south bank: here and there, riflemen and even a machine gun
or two opened up on the soldiers who paddled like men possessed.
But now the French didn’t have enough firepower to keep the
rubber boats from beaching on the near bank. Luc raised up a little
to shoot at the men leaping out of the boats. As soon as he did, a

machine gun from one of the tanks on the far bank started banging
away at him. He had to flatten out again if he wanted to stay alive.
Some of the German assault troops carried submachine guns with
big drum magazines. French doctrine scorned submachine guns.
They fired pistol ammunition, and they were worthless out past a
couple of hundred meters. Inside that range, though, they were
uncommonly murderous. They threw around a hell of a lot of lead.
Even if they didn’t get you, they made you stay down so you
couldn’t shoot back.
And the damned Boches had brought along real machine guns, too.
Hearing that malevolent crackle at such close range made Luc’s
asshole pucker. He had to bear down tight on his bladder to keep
from wetting himself.
“Back!” Sergeant Demange’s raspy voice penetrated the din.
“We’ve got to get out of here, form a line somewhere else!”
“How?” Luc asked, which seemed to him the very best of good
questions.
Even through the rattle of the German machine guns, he heard the
underofficer laugh. “Carefully, sonny, carefully, unless you aim to
get your dick shot off.”
Even thinking of that made Luc want to clutch at himself. He crawled
away from the riverbank, doing his best to keep the bushes
between himself and the Boches. Only a few random bullets came
his way. The Germans didn’t seem to know he was there: news
good enough to make an atheist thank God.
He flopped down again behind the crest of a small swell of ground
that shielded him from the enemy. Sergeant Demange lay a few
meters away, still puffing on a cigarette butt. “What do we do?” Luc

said. “How do we throw them back into the river?”
“If we can bring a lot of tanks forward in a hurry, that might turn the
trick.” Demange stubbed out the cigarette in the dirt. “But what are
the odds, eh?”
Luc mournfully considered them. “Not good,” he said. “The
Germans always have plenty of tanks where they need them the
most. How come we can’t do the same thing?”
“Because their High Command doesn’t fight with its head up its ass,”
Demange answered. He rose up to shoot at somebody heading upslope toward them. A wild scream said he’d hit what he aimed at,
too. Chambering a new round, he went on, “They know it’s the
twentieth century, damn them. How come we don’t have any divebombers plastering the shit out of them right now?”
Having cowered under more Stukas than he cared to remember,
Luc said, “I don’t know, and I wish I did. How come we don’t?”
“If we were fighting the Kaiser’s army, we’d wallop the snot out of it,”
Demange replied. “It’s the curse of winning—you get ready to do
the same damn thing over again. The Germans lost, so they figured
they’d better try something new. Now we’re on the receiving end.”
“Lucky us,” Luc said in hollow tones. Ever so cautiously, he too
peered back the way he’d come. The lines on that dark helmet
moving through dead grass were unmistakable. He fired. The Boche
scrambled for cover. Luc fired again. The German went down with a
howl. He wasn’t dead, but he wasn’t dangerous any more, either.
That would do.
“Good job,” Demange said. “But we won’t stop them all by
ourselves. I wonder if anybody will, this side of Paris.”

PEKING IN SUMMER WAS HOT and dusty. During the winter, it was
colder than a witch’s tit. How cold was that? Marines who’d been in
Chicago said it was that cold. Pete McGill could compare it to his
native New York City. He’d known some cold weather there, but
Peking bottomed out worse.
And Peking would have felt cold even if it were in the nineties. As
long as the Marines stayed close to the American legation, they
were okay. But if they strayed very far into the city, Japanese
soldiers were much too likely to whale the crap out of them.
Like any other Marine, McGill was convinced he was a better
fighting man than some little, scrawny, buck-toothed, bowlegged
Jap. He was convinced he could take two or three Japs, come to
that. But when the odds got steeper still, even John Henry the SteelDriving Man would have found himself in deep water.
The odds did get steeper, too. Peking was crawling with Japs these
days. Some of them kept order in the city. The Japanese way to
keep order was to shoot first and not ask questions later. Since
Nationalist and Communist guerrillas and freelance bandits all
afflicted Peking and the surrounding area, that Wild Wild East style
had its points.
But even more Japanese soldiers were getting leave in Peking and
then climbing onto trains and heading out of town. Pete would have
liked it if the bastards never came back, but that was bound to be
too much to hope for. They weren’t going back to Japan—at least,
they weren’t heading southeast toward Tangku or Tsingtao, the
ports from which they sailed for home.
No, most of them were going northeast on some of the new lines
their people had built: up into Manchukuo. That made McGill gloat.

their people had built: up into Manchukuo. That made McGill gloat.
“I wouldn’t have believed it,” he said one day in the NCOs’ club, “but
the sorry sons of bitches are heading somewhere colder’n this.”
“Serves ‘em right, sure as hell,” another corporal agreed.
Pete emptied his glass. “Hey, Danny!” he called. “Bring me another
beer, chop-chop!”
“Right, boss,” the Chinese bartender said. The beer came from
Tsingtao. It was pretty damn good. The Germans had run the place
before the Great War, and they’d built a brewery there. Hitler was a
bastard, yeah, but the squareheads knew what was what with beer.
The brewery was under new management these days, of course,
but some of the old magic remained.
When the beer came, Pete tipped Danny a nickel. To a Chinaman, a
nickel was a big deal. Danny bowed almost double. He folded one
palm over the other fist, which was what the Chinese did instead of
saluting.
A sergeant named Larry Koenig came and sat down with Pete. He
ordered a beer, too. Danny brought it over to him. Koenig lit a
cigarette and offered Pete the pack—he was a good guy. “Thanks,”
McGill said. He took one and leaned close for a light.
Raising his mug, Koenig said, “Mud in your eye.”
“Same to you.” Pete answered the salute with one of his own. They
both drank. After sucking foam off his upper lip, Pete lifted his mug
again and said, “Here’s to all the Japs getting the hell out of Peking.
”
“Hey, I’ll drink to that, but you’ll be bluer’n your dress uniform if you
hold your breath and wait for it to happen,” Koenig said.

“Yeah, I know. It’d be nice, though, wouldn’t it?” Pete said. “They
sure are moving a lot of guys through here—moving a lot of guys
out of here.”
“They’ll keep Peking garrisoned, though, you bet. Hell, I would in
their shoes.” Koenig looked at his mug in mild surprise, as if
wondering how it had emptied without his noticing. He waved to
Danny for a refill. As he waited, he went on, “They hang on here,
what are the Chinese gonna do about it? Not much, not so I can
see.”
“Yeah, man, yeah. Looks the same way to me,” Pete said. With
Peking in their hands, the Japanese could spill south and west all
over the place. They’d done that for a while after overrunning the
place. Now the flow was going in the other direction. “What do they
need so many troops up in Manchukuo for?”
“Beats me.” Koenig paused while Danny set the beer on the table in
front of him. A lot of Marines didn’t like to talk with Chinamen
hovering around them. Pete didn’t know whether Danny was a spy
or not. He didn’t much care, either. He didn’t know enough himself to
make what he said worth anything to anybody. But if the sergeant
wanted to be tight-assed about it, he could. After Danny hustled
back behind the bar to build somebody a highball, Koenig resumed:
“Gotta be the Russians. I’ve figured it every different way I could,
and that’s what it comes out to every goddamn time.”
“You really think so?” Pete said. “That’d be one hell of a scrap.”
“Damn Russians have shit closer to home than Siberia to worry
about,” Koenig said. “If it was me, I wouldn’t have started fucking
with the Polacks when they knew that was liable to bring Hitler down
on their necks.”

“Yeah, old Adolf’s bad news, all right,” Pete agreed. “Me, I wonder
how much the Russians really do know these days. They’ve been
killing off generals like it’s going out of style.”
“Maybe we ought to try that. I don’t know about the Corps, but it’d
sure as hell work wonders for the Army and the Navy,” Koenig said.
Pete snorted. Then he giggled. Then he guffawed. He wasn’t sure it
was a good idea, but he was damn sure it was funny. “I can see the
FBI guys coming up to their desks. ‘You—come with us!’ And out
they’d go, and—bang!”
“Plenty of ‘em nobody’d miss,” Koenig said.
“Ain’t it the truth!” Pete nodded. “And you know what else? I bet
there hasn’t been an army since Julius Caesar’s day where the
noncoms didn’t think it’d go better if some officers got it in the neck.”
“Most of the time we’d be right, too.” Like any sergeant worth his
salt, Koenig was sure he knew better than the guys set over him.
Since Pete McGill felt the same way, he didn’t argue. Koenig waved
for a fresh beer before continuing, “So if the Japs and the Reds
bang heads, which way do you bet? My money’s on the white men.”
“Yeah, everybody said the same thing about the time you were
born, too, and look how that turned out,” McGill said. Anybody who
came to Peking got his nose rubbed in that lesson. You couldn’t
come here without paying attention to what had happened in the
Russo-Japanese War.
Sergeant Koenig turned red. He waited till Danny gave him his new
seidel, then said, “You think the little yellow bastards can take ‘em?”
He paid no more attention to the barman than Pete would have.
“I dunno. They’ve sure got more combat experience than the

Russians do. Hell, they’ve got more combat experience than just
about anybody,” McGill answered. “And it’s way past the back of
beyond for the Russians, and they’re fighting somewhere else, and
their army’s fucked up. So yeah, I guess maybe I figure the Japs’ll
win.”
“I got a sawbuck says you’re full of it,” Koenig declared.
As far as Pete was concerned, the problems with the Marine Corps
started with sergeants, not officers. That attitude would probably
change the day he got his own third stripe, but he had it now. Taking
a sergeant down a peg would be a pleasure—and so would winning
ten bucks. “You’re on,” he said.
Koenig stuck out his hand. Pete took it. The clasp turned into a trial
of strength that ended up a push. They both opened and closed
their hands several times after they let go.
Pete started to laugh. “What’s so funny?” Sergeant Koenig asked.
“We just made a bet on who’s gonna win a war that hasn’t started
yet,” McGill answered. “How dumb will we look if it turns out the
Japs’re up to something else instead?”
“Dumb enough, I guess,” Koenig said. “What? You never looked
dumb before?”
“Not the past ten minutes, anyway,” Pete said, which drew a laugh
from the other noncom. He went on, “I tell you, I wish the Japs would
get the hell out of Peking and stay out. Town was a lot more fun
when the Chinamen were still hanging on to it.”
“You got that right.” Koenig nodded in what might have been
approval. “See? You ain’t as dumb as you look.”

“Heh! I’m not as dumb as you look, either,” Pete retorted. They were
off duty. He could sass a sergeant if he felt like it. And he did—it
wasn’t a pleasure he got often enough.
“Wise guy,” Koenig said, and then something in Chinese that
sounded like a cat with its tail caught under a rocking chair. Behind
the bar, Danny jumped a foot.
“Wow! What’s that mean?” Pete asked, impressed in spite of
himself.
“Can’t tell you,” Koenig answered. “If I said it in English, you’d have
to try and murder me.”
“Give it to me again,” Pete urged. “Sounds like it’s worth knowing.”
Koenig repeated it. Pete tried to echo him. He got the tones wrong
the first couple of times. He could hear that, but he had trouble
fixing it. Danny held his head in his hands. Pete finally said it the
right way, which made the bartender even more unhappy.
“What’s it mean, Danny?” Pete called. Danny wouldn’t tell him,
either. That made him like his new toy even better.

When Alistair Walsh saw a road sign saying how many kilometers it
was to Paris, he knew things weren’t in good shape. The whole
point to the war was keeping the Nazis away from Paris, the same
as it had been with the Kaiser’s army the last time around.
They’d done it the last time—done it twice, in fact, in 1914 and then
again in 1918. He wasn’t so sure they could now. The BEF stumbled
back and stumbled back. People were starting to talk about the
Miracle on the Marne in 1914. Well, they were getting too damn
close to the Marne again, and they sure could use another miracle.
He yawned. What he could use was sleep. One of the things
nobody talked about was how wearing modern war was. You were
fighting or you were marching or they were shelling you or bombing
you or you were trying to promote something to eat. What you
weren’t doing was resting.
He wasn’t the only one frazzled almost to death. Even though
February remained chilly, exhausted soldiers curled up like animals
by the side of the road. Some slept in greatcoats, some wrapped in
blankets, some as they were regardless of the cold. You had to look
closely to see their chests rising and falling to make sure they
weren’t corpses.
Exhausted civilians also slept by the roadside, singly and in family
groups. They hadn’t done any shooting; other than that, they had
as much right to be weary as the soldiers. One poor woman must
have been a restless sleeper. She’d kicked off her blanket and
thrashed around so her legs and backside were out in the biting
breeze. Walsh got an eyeful as he trudged along.
One of the Tommies with him chuckled. “What we’re fighting for,

right?” the fellow said.
“I’ve seen plenty worse,” Walsh allowed. “If I lay down beside her,
though, I bet I’d cork off before I could try getting her knickers down.
”
“Blimey! Me, too.” The other soldier’s face split in an enormous
yawn. “Don’t know how I put one foot in front of the other any more.”
Behind them, German artillery thundered to life. Walsh jerked a
thumb over his shoulder. “That’s how.”
“Too right it is. Got a fag on you, Sarge?”
Walsh listened for screams in the air that would warn of incoming
shells aimed their way. Hearing none, he reached into a tunic
pocket and pulled out a packet of Gitanes. “Here. Got these off a
dead Frenchman. Nasty things, but better than nothing.”
“I’d smoke whatever you’ve got and thank you for it. I’m plumb out,
and I’m all—” The Tommy held out his arm in front of him and made
his hand tremble.
“Know what you mean. I’ve run dry myself a couple of times.” Walsh
proffered the French cigarettes. “Take two or three, then.”
“I’d be much obliged, if you don’t mind.” The soldier stuck one in his
mouth and stashed the other two in a breast pocket of his grimy
battledress. He struck a match and inhaled. “Cor!” he said in tones
of deep respect. “Like smoking a bleeding blowtorch, ain’t it?”
Walsh had also lit a Gitane. After blowing out smoke, he coughed
like a man in the last stages of consumption. “What’s that you say?”
he inquired.

The other soldier laughed. He took a second, more cautious, drag.
“Damn froggies like ‘em this way, don’t they?”
“I expect so. They’d make ‘em different if they didn’t,” Walsh said.

“Fuck.” The Tommy shook his head. “We ought to be on Adolf’s
side.”
“Bugger that, mate,” Walsh said. “Germans shot me once, and it’s
not for lack of trying they haven’t done it again. Yeah, the French
are a bad lot, but those bastards in field-gray are worse.”
“Take an even strain, Sergeant. I was only joking, like.” But then the
soldier added, “They make damn good soldiers, though.”
“They make damn good dead soldiers,” Walsh said. He also had a
healthy regard for German military talent. He’d never met an English
soldier who’d fought the squareheads who didn’t. To him, that only
made Germans more dangerous. It didn’t mean he wanted to switch
sides. He pointed to the town ahead. “Is that Senlis?” He probably
butchered the pronunciation, but he didn’t care.
“I think so.” The soldier to whom he’d given a smoke also seemed
glad to change the subject.
At its core, Senlis had what looked like really ancient walls with
towers. The spires of a cathedral poked up from inside them. Walsh
remembered that the Germans had burned the town and shot the
mayor and several leading citizens in 1914. The damage had been
made good in the quarter-century since. All the same, he didn’t want
to fight alongside people who did things like that.
He also wasn’t eager to fight against them. Willing, yes, but not
eager. They were too bloody good at what they did.
In front of those old, old walls—would they go back to Roman days?
—an English captain with half a company’s worth of men was
nabbing stragglers. “You and you!” he called to Walsh and the
Tommy to whom he’d given some Gitanes. “You think we can hold

this town, eh?”
The other soldier didn’t say anything. It wasn’t quite what the
Articles of War called mute insolence, but it wasn’t far removed,
either. Sergeant Walsh said, “We can try, sir.” He didn’t agree with
the officer, but he did admit the possibility.
That was plenty. “Fall in with me, then, the both of you,” the captain
said. “If the Hun tries to take this place, we’ll give him what he
deserves and send him off with his tail between his legs, what?”
How many years had it been since Walsh heard anybody call
Germans Huns? More than he could remember. The captain was
about his age, so he’d probably done time here in the last war.
Most of the civilians had cleared out of Senlis, which meant they
were causing traffic headaches somewhere south and west of here.
Soldiers could pick and choose the empty houses they tried to
defend. Walsh went through his, but didn’t find anything worth
eating or drinking. Too bad, he thought.
He had three privates with him. They were all Yorkshire farm boys,
and spoke with an accent he had to work to follow. His might have
sounded just as strange to them, but that was their lookout. They
understood him well enough to keep watch at all the windows—and
to give him a tin of M & V. He felt better after wolfing down the meatand-vegetable stew.
Senlis got a couple of hours’ respite before the Germans turned
their attention to it. Then artillery walked up to the town. Walsh
crouched down with the three privates: they were Jim and Jock and,
improbably, Alonzo. The house they’d taken over was made of
stone. It would stop fragments unless it was unlucky enough to take
a direct hit.

“Where’s our guns?” Alonzo complained. Goons, it came out when
he said it. However it came out, it was a damn good question. The
Germans always seemed to put their guns where they needed
them. The Allies…sometimes did.
Stukas screamed down out of the sky, one after another. Crouching
huddled under the kitchen table, Walsh cursed the vulture-winged
monsters and their sirens. He also cursed the RAF, both for not
shooting them down and for not having anything like them.
Several windows in the French house were already broken. The
ones that weren’t blew in now, leaving small snowdrifts of glass
spears on the floor. Walsh swore some more, resignedly. Sure as
hell, he’d end up cutting his hand or his leg on them.
Somebody was yelling for a medic. Somebody else was screaming
for his mother. One of the Yorkshire lads crossed himself. Alistair
Walsh was no Catholic, but he understood the gesture. Nobody but
a desperately hurt man made noises like that.
Before long, the screaming stopped. Walsh hoped the wounded
man got morphine. More likely, the poor bugger passed out or just
died. “Up, lads,” the sergeant told the privates. “I expect we’ll have
company before long.”
“Won’t get no clotted cream from me,” Jock said, chambering a
round in his Enfield with a snick! of the bolt.
Sure enough, here came the Germans. They moved up in little
stuttering runs from one bit of cover to the next. Some of them had
leaves and branches fixed to their helmets with bands cut from old
inner tubes. No, no one could say they weren’t skilled at their
murderous trade.
A Bren gun opened up a couple of houses away from Walsh’s. He

liked the British army’s new light machine gun a lot. It really was light
—you could pick it up and shoot from the hip if you had to. And it
was air-cooled: no need to worry about pouring water (or, that
failing, piss) into the metal cooling jacket around the barrel. Best of
all, it worked reliably. What more could you want?
It made the Germans hit the deck. They started shooting at the
house where it lurked. When they did, the muzzle flashes from their
Mausers gave the British infantrymen good targets. Walsh fired and
reloaded, then ducked down and crawled to another window to fire
again.
Something bit him through the knee of his battledress. “Bloody
glass,” he muttered.
The Bren gun barked again. German medics in Red Cross smocks
ran up to recover casualties. Walsh didn’t shoot at them. Fair was
fair. The Germans mostly didn’t shoot at British medics.
A lull followed. The Germans seemed surprised anyone was fighting
hard to save Senlis. Since Walsh had been surprised when the
captain made a fight for the place, how could he blame them?
“What happens now, Sergeant?” Alonzo asked.
“They could shell us some more. They could call in the Stukas
again, or the tanks,” Walsh said. None of the three Yorkshiremen
seemed to want to hear that. Walsh went on, “Or they could decide
we’re a tough nut and try to go around us instead of pushing
through.”
“That’d be good,” Alonzo said. Jack and Jock both nodded. After a
moment, so did Alistair Walsh.

AFTER SARAH GOLDMAN’S FATHER TIED his necktie every
morning, he pinned his Iron Cross Second Class onto the breast
pocket of his jacket. Samuel Goldman wanted to remind the Nazi
thugs and Gestapo goons who came to scream at him that he’d
done his duty for the Vaterland in the last war and would have done
it again this time if only they’d let him.
Maybe the Eisenkreuz did some good. The Goldmans remained in
their home. The Nazis hadn’t hauled the rest of them off to Dachau
or Buchenwald even if Saul had killed a member of the Master
Race.
The Nazis hadn’t caught Sarah’s big brother, either. Saul had fled
the labor gang…and, after that, he might have fallen off the face of
the earth. Sarah had no idea what he’d done. Whatever it was, she
admired it tremendously. The policemen with the swastika armbands
also had no idea what he’d done. It drove them crazy.
“No, sir,” Samuel Goldman told a foul-mouthed Gestapo officer. “He
has not telephoned us. You would know if he had, nicht wahr? You
must be tapping our telephone line.”
“You bet your scrawny ass we are, Jew,” the secret policeman said.
“But he could be talking to some other lousy kike who’s passing you
coded messages.”
“It is not so, sir.” Sarah’s father kept his temper better than she
dreamt of being able to do. Maybe he had a deeper understanding
of what was at stake in this game. Or maybe he was just blessed
with a disposition more even than hers.
“Ought to take you all out and give you a noodle,” the officer
growled.

“I beg your pardon?” Somehow, Samuel Goldman still managed to
keep the dignity a professor of ancient history and classics should
have.
The Gestapo officer jumped up and walked around behind him. He
put the tip of his outthrust index finger against the back of Samuel
Goldman’s neck. “Bang!” he said, and then, “A noodle.”
“I see,” Sarah’s father replied, as coolly as if the man had explained
how a new phonograph operated.
“Think you’ve got nerve, do you?” the Gestapo man growled. “You
know what happens to assholes with nerve? They scream as loud
as anybody else once we get to work on ‘em. Maybe louder, on
account of we don’t fuckin’ like tough guys.”
Sarah and her mother listened from the kitchen, doing their best to
keep quiet so they didn’t remind the goon they were there. Her
mother’s face went pale as skimmed milk. Sarah’s own face was
probably the same color, but she couldn’t see herself.
Out in the front room, her father stayed calm. “Nerve? Not a bit of
it,” he answered. “It’s slang we didn’t use in the trenches, that’s all.
You’ll know that’s true—you’re the right age.”
“Ja, ja,” the officer said impatiently. “You were in France. I fought in
the East, against the Russians.”
“Ach so,” Samuel Goldman said. “Well, that was no fun, either. I had
two friends who went to the Eastern Front and didn’t come back.”
“Kaupisch and Briesen,” the Gestapo man said. It wasn’t a question
—he knew. Sarah asked her mother with her eyes how the officer
knew something like that. Hanna Goldman shrugged helplessly.

“That’s right,” Sarah’s father said, his voice soft and sad.
“Both Aryans,” the officer said. “Not good Aryans, or they wouldn’t
have made friends with a goddamn sheeny. Besides, I’m not here to
talk about them. I’m here to talk about your stinking, murdering turd
of a son.”
If he’d said anything like that to Sarah, she thought she would have
tried to brain him with an ashtray. Her father only sighed and said, “I
don’t know any more than you do. I probably know less than you do,
because you’ve been chasing him ever since the tragedy took
place.”
“Why shouldn’t we just kill you or take you off to a camp because of
what that little cocksucker did?” the Gestapo man snarled.
Had he seen Saul? Sarah had her doubts. He wouldn’t have called
him little if he had. Saul was one meter eighty-eight centimeters tall;
he weighed ninety kilos. You could say a lot of things about him, but
not little, not if you wanted to stay within shouting distance of the
truth.
As if the Gestapo cared! Or had to care.
Samuel Goldman sighed. “Because we had nothing to do with
anything Saul may have done?” he suggested. Saul had done it, all
right. Sarah would never forget the sound that shovel blade made
smashing into the side of the work-gang boss’ head. Saul had had
plenty of provocation, but he’d done it.
The Gestapo man snorted. “You aren’t even citizens of the Reich,
only residents. I can do whatever I want with you. To you.”
“Yes, sir. I know you can,” Father said mournfully. “You asked why
you shouldn’t. I gave you the best answer I could.”

“Are you playing games with me, Jewboy?” demanded the officer in
the black uniform with the shiny metal buttons.
Sarah would have killed him for that, too, if she could. Her father
didn’t even flinch. “Games? No, sir,” he replied. “All I’m doing is the
best I can for my family and me. Wouldn’t you do the same in my
place?”
“Like you’d catch me in a kike’s place! Fat chance!” the Gestapo
man said. Sarah might have guessed he’d have no fellow-feeling. If
you did, how could you do a job like his? Then he added, “If you
see him, if you hear anything from him, you are to report it to us
immediately. If you don’t, you’ll pay for it. Understand me?”
“Yes, sir,” Samuel Goldman said. “I understand.”
The Gestapo man stormed into the kitchen. “You’re in there
listening!” he yelled. “Think I don’t know? You understand me, too?”
He glared at them till they both nodded, too. Then he stomped out
of the house. He might have suddenly remembered he had other
Jews in Münster to terrorize. Chances were he did.
“As if we’d really tell on Saul!” Sarah exclaimed as soon as he
slammed the door. “I don’t think so!”
“But we will,” her father said. She stared at him, wondering if her
ears were working right. He nodded. “Ja. We will.”
“But—why? How?” That wasn’t Sarah. It was her mother, who
sounded as bewildered as she felt.
“I’ll tell you why.” And Samuel Goldman did: “They’re liable to cook
something up and send it to us, that’s why. Then, if we don’t report
it, they can arrest us for protecting a fugitive. So chances are we

have to play the game by their rules—and we have to hope Saul
has the good sense to know we might be under this kind of
pressure.”
Sarah was sure Saul would. Her father sounded anything but. She
knew why, too. Devoted to the life of the mind, Samuel Goldman had
never known what to make of his big, muscular son. Saul hadn’t
done badly in school, but it wasn’t what he cared about. Father had
to wonder whether somebody like that had any brains at all.
“Saul will do fine.” Mother had confidence in him, too, which made
Sarah feel better. Hanna Goldman went on, “And if they didn’t catch
him right away, they’ll have a harder time of it now. Harder and
harder the longer he stays free.”
“I hope so,” Father said, but, again, he sounded far from certain.
This time, Sarah was inclined to agree with him, however little she
wanted to. Germany was a land that ran on forms and papers. Food
was rationed. So was clothing. Everyone had an identity card and
had to show it a dozen times a day. How could a Jew on the run not
get caught in the spiderweb of officialdom and bureaucracy? Sarah
couldn’t imagine.
But so far Saul hadn’t. And if he hadn’t so far, maybe he could keep
on doing whatever he was doing and stay free. Maybe. Sarah could
hope so, anyhow. She could even pray, and she did, though she
didn’t think she was very good at it. Maybe God valued sincerity
over style. She could hope that was true, too—and she did.

A FEW KILOMETERS UP AHEAD lay a railway-junction town called
Hirson. Willi Dernen did his best not to care. Northeastern France
had winters almost as beastly as the ones he’d grown up with in

eastern Germany. Willi was holed up in a village called Watigny,
east of the place that mattered to the fellows with the fancy shoulder
straps.
One of these days, they’d order him to go forward. And he would.
He wasn’t thrilled about it, but he would. What they’d do to him if he
didn’t was certain, and dreadful. What the Frenchmen would do to
him after he did might not be so bad. If he was lucky.
For the moment, even the generals could see that advancing
through waist-deep snowdrifts was asking to get your dick shot off.
German guns pounded Hirson. The French replied, but not many
shells came down on Watigny. There were German batteries north
and south of the village, but none close by.
About half the people who’d lived here fled before the Wehrmacht
arrived. Not all those houses were vacant. French refugees from
farther north and east—to say nothing of Belgians and even
Dutchmen—squatted in some of them. The Germans took the rest.
Before long, they’d probably throw out the squatters, too. For the
time being, the officers in charge of security were still sorting out
who was who.
People from the older generation remembered the last time soldiers
in Feldgrau came through these parts. Some of them were among
the folks who’d run away. Others seemed gruffly tolerant of the
occupiers. Their attitude said this was nothing new to them. They’d
done it once, and they could do it again.
By order of the divisional commander, the local tavern stayed open.
The exchange rate was pegged at ten francs to the mark. That
made even privates like Willi rich men—or as rich as they could be
in a place like Watigny, where getting by was as much as anyone
could hope for.

The tavern still had beer and wine, as well as brandy that came in
china crocks and was probably homemade. It got you crocked, all
right. Willi had found that out by experience. It also left you with a
mother of a hangover. Strong French coffee and strong German
aspirins blunted a Katzenjammer, though.
Willi and Wolfgang Storch slogged through the snow toward the
oasis. Orders were that no German soldier could go in alone.
Nobody’d got knocked over the head here. Maybe it had happened
somewhere else. Or maybe the High Command was scared of its
own shadow. That was how it looked to Willi.
He opened the door. Both he and Wolfgang hurried inside. Then he
closed the door again to block the cold wind whining through the
streets.
It was gloomy inside, but the fire gave some warmth. Frenchmen sat
at a couple of tables, drinking, smoking, murmuring in the language
Willi didn’t speak. Corporal Baatz and a couple of other noncoms
occupied another. They didn’t try to keep their voices down—they
were the winners, after all.
Winners or not, Willi wanted nothing to do with them. A glance from
Wolfgang said he didn’t, either. They walked past the underofficers
and up to the bar. The man behind it was big, broad-shouldered,
and fair. He looked much more like a German than a Frenchman.
But a photo on the wall behind him showed him in the uniform of a
French soldier in the last war. The patch he wore over one eye
didn’t hide all the scarring around the socket. It did explain why he
hadn’t got mobilized this time around.
“Guten Tag, Claude,” Willi said, more respectfully than not.
“Guten Tag,” the tapman answered. After he got wounded, he’d

spent two years in a POW camp. He’d picked up some German
there, and hadn’t forgotten all of it. Other people of his generation
had learned it from the Kaiser’s soldiers who’d occupied the area.
They still knew bits and pieces, too. “What you want, eh?” Claude
went on.
“Beer, bitte,” Willi said.
“Brandy for me, please,” Wolfgang added. They both laid money
—German money—on the zinc bar.
Claude sighed, but he took it. What choice did he have? “Go and
sit,” he said, pointing to an empty table—shrewdly, the one farthest
from where Baatz and his buddies were. “Michelle, she bring.”
“Now you’re talking!” Wolfgang radiated enthusiasm…or something
related to it, anyhow. A grin also stretched across Willi’s face.
Claude’s daughter was about their age. Like her father, she was
large and solid and fair. On her, it looked good.
She came out from a back room. Claude gave her the drinks. She
carried them over to the soldiers. “Thank you, dear,” Willi said auf
Deutsch. He trotted out one of his handful of recently acquired
French words: “Merci.”
“Pas de quoi,” she answered gravely, and went away. As far as
anybody knew, she didn’t sleep with soldiers. Everybody thought
that was too damn bad.
Arno Baatz waved his mug. “Fill me up over here!” he called.
Claude brought a pitcher of beer to his table and poured the mug
full. That didn’t satisfy Baatz. “How come those no-account lugs get
the pretty girl and I get you?” he demanded.
Claude’s one eye skewered him like a lepidopterist’s collecting pin.

“Because they is—are—polite,” the tapman answered, and he
walked back to the bar.
“What? I’m not?” Corporal Baatz yelled, beer-fueled outrage making
him even shriller than usual. “You take that back!”
“Nein,” Claude said with dignity.
Baatz jumped to his feet. “I’ll show you, then, you stinking pigdog!
Come fight like a man!”
Claude turned around and took one step back toward him: giving
himself room to maneuver. Baatz rushed him. Willi wanted to avert
his eyes. He couldn’t stand the Unteroffizier, but no denying he was
a rough man in a rough trade. He gave Claude one that should
have dented a Panzer II. The barman blinked his good eye. Then
he swung. His fist caught Arno Baatz right on the button with a noise
like a cleaver smacking into a frozen side of beef. Baatz went
straight over backwards. The back of his head smacked the stone
floor. He didn’t move. He didn’t even twitch.
“Holy Jesus!” Willi said. “Did you kill him?”
Claude took the question seriously. He felt for the noncom’s pulse.
“He lives,” he said laconically, and dropped Baatz’s wrist. It fell back
limply. Baatz might be alive, but he sure wasn’t connected to the
real world. The tapman looked to the other Germans at the
corporal’s table. “He hit me first. Please take him away. He is no
more welcome here.”
They didn’t argue with him. Nobody in his right mind would have
argued with Claude then—not without a Schmeisser in his hands,
anyhow. Arno Baatz was as boneless as an octopus as they
dragged him out of the tavern.

One of the Frenchmen drinking there sent up smoke signals from
his pipe. He said something in his own language. Claude shrugged
a massive shrug, as if to say, Well, what can you do? Willi guessed
the customer had warned him he would get in trouble.
“We’ll say he started it,” Willi volunteered.
“It’s the truth,” Wolfgang agreed.
“Danke,” Claude said. “For official business, this is good. For not
official business…” He spread his hands and let his voice trail away.
Willi understood that. If Arno Baatz and his friends—assuming he
had any, which struck the biased Willi as improbable—decided to
come back with weapons, what would the officers set over them do
about it? Anything? Even if they did, how much would that help
Claude after the fact?
“Maybe we’ll go forward again soon. Blizzards can’t last forever—I
don’t think,” Wolfgang said. “Then Awful Arno will be out of your hair.
”
“Ja. Maybe,” Claude said. It was the first time Willi had heard him
even slightly enthusiastic about the prospect of a German advance.
He was a Frenchmen. The Germans had maimed him in the last
war. You couldn’t blame him for not wishing them well. But you also
couldn’t blame him for wanting Corporal Baatz the hell out of
Watigny, even if that meant the Wehrmacht went forward.
The tapman ducked into the back room for a little while, then came
out again. A couple of minutes later, so did Michelle. She brought
Willi a beer and Wolfgang a brandy they hadn’t ordered. When they
tried to pay for them, she wouldn’t take their money.
“Merci. Merci,” Willi said. It didn’t seem enough, but it was the best

he could do.
They finished the free drinks and left. After they got outside and
closed the door behind them again, Wolfgang said, “If she really
wanted to thank us, she could have taken us into that back room
while Papa looked the other way.”
“She’s not that kind of girl,” Willi said.
“Yeah. Ain’t it a shame?” Wolfgang’s breath smoked even though he
didn’t have a cigarette in his mouth. After a couple of steps, he
brightened. “Could be worse, you know? Old Arno sure got his.”
“Boy, did he ever!” Willi agreed enthusiastically. They walked on
through the snow, toward the house where they were quartered.

FRENCH VILLAGERS STARED FEARFULLY AT Vaclav Jezek and
the rest of the Czechs in his outfit. Vaclav knew why, too. Their
uniforms weren’t quite the right color, their helmets were the wrong
shape, and they spoke some funny foreign language. To people
who didn’t know any better, that was plenty to turn them into
Germans.
And, just to make things worse, they were coming from the east. If
they were Germans, they would have smashed all the defenders
ahead of them, but you couldn’t expect civilians to think of things
like that.
One of the locals came out with something. Vaclav had picked up a
handful of French words, but not nearly enough to let him follow.
“What did he say?” he asked the guy along as an interpreter.
Benjamin Halévy looked even less happy than he had before he

heard the Frenchman’s news. The Jewish sergeant pointed north
and west. “Old geezer claims the Germans are already over there.”
“Shit,” Vaclav said. If that was true, they were in danger of getting
cut off and surrounded. If…“Does he know his ass from a hole in
the ground?”
He eyed the Frenchman. The guy was around fifty, and had some
ugly scars on his jaw and left cheek. Maybe those weren’t war
wounds, but they sure looked like them. If this fellow had gone
through the mill before, he wouldn’t see a cow and imagine it was a
German armored division.
Halévy went back and forth with him. After a last “Merci,” the
sergeant returned to Czech: “Sure sounds like he does. They
pushed through the woods over there. This guy says he saw a
couple of armored cars, but no tanks.”
“Bad enough,” Vaclav muttered. Several of his countrymen nodded.
He went on, “Where are our tanks? Where are our armored cars?”
Nobody answered him. The Germans always seemed to have armor
when they broke through. They used their armor to break through.
The French scattered it up and down the line, which meant they
never had enough where they needed it most. That was one reason
they were falling back and the Nazis moving up.
Halévy gave Vaclav a crooked grin. “Hey, pal, that’s why you’ve got
your antitank rifle, right?”
Vaclav told him where he could put the antitank rifle. Halévy would
have walked very straight if he’d tried. You could get your behind in
a sling for telling off a noncom, but Vaclav’s behind was already in a
sling because he was up at the front, so what did he care?
He would have expected a Jew to get stuffy about that kind of thing,

maybe to threaten him with official regulations. But Sergeant Halévy
just laughed and said something about his mother and troopships.
From another guy, or under different circumstances, Vaclav would
have tried to rearrange his face. He laughed now, too. They’d been
through it together. They’d earned the right to zing each other.
“Seriously, we ought to head up that way,” Halévy said. “If your rifle
can take out those cars, it’ll do us some good.”
Vaclav was no more enthusiastic about putting his dick on the
chopping block than any other soldier in his right mind would have
been. But he could see the need. “I’ll try it,” he said.
“Attaboy,” Halévy told him. He clapped another Czech soldier on the
back. “Dominik, take point.”
“Right, Sergeant.” Dominik didn’t sound thrilled, but he never did.
He was little and skinny and nervous as a cat in a room full of
Rottweilers—all of which made him a goddamn good point man. He
carried a captured German submachine gun. If he ran into trouble,
he could spray a lot of lead at it.
“Let’s go,” the sergeant said. He moved right behind Dominik. He
didn’t believe in staying away from trouble. None of the people who
said Jews were a bunch of cowards had seen him in action. David
had stayed right up there with everybody else, too, till he stopped
one. And they both hated Nazis even more than Vaclav did, which
he wouldn’t have believed if he hadn’t seen it with his own eyes.
“Bonne chance,” called the Frenchman who’d warned them about
Germans. Luck, that meant, or something like it. Vaclav waved to
the guy without looking back.
Trees and bushes and rocks. The western part of the Ardennes was
as wild and rugged as anything in Czechoslovakia. Vaclav would

have bet the Germans couldn’t get any armor through here, but he
would have lost if he had. He’d already escaped from tanks in these
parts: Panzer Is and IIs, and also some captured Czech T-35s.
Those infuriated him. Yes, everybody grabbed whatever he could
get his hands on—his own antitank rifle and Dominik’s machine
pistol showed as much. But seeing Czech tanks fight against Czech
soldiers made him want to cry.
Dominik waved urgently. Vaclav dove behind the closest bush. He
didn’t know what was up ahead, and he didn’t want to find out the
hard way. Sergeant Halévy twiddled fingers at him. Ever so
cautiously, Vaclav slithered forward. He swore under his breath
every time a knee or an elbow broke a twig.
Then he froze—German voices up ahead. The breeze swung, and
he got a whiff of cigarette smoke. “God in heaven, I’m tired,” one of
the Fritzes said. “I could sleep for a month.”
“Just a little going on, Klaus.” If those dry tones didn’t come from a
sergeant, Vaclav would eat his boots.
“Ja,” Klaus said, and then, “What the hell was that?”
That was Vaclav’s antitank rifle scraping through some dry bushes.
The goddamn thing was more than a meter and a half long—almost
as long as he was tall. It wasn’t just heavy; it was also unwieldy as
all get-out. Jezek froze.
“I didn’t hear anything,” the noncom said.
“I sure thought I did,” Klaus replied.
“Want to check it out?”
“Nah. I just want to sit here and grab a smoke.”

“Sounds good to me. Let me bum one off you,” the sergeant said.
Even more warily than before, Vaclav crawled forward. He spotted
an armored car between a couple of chestnuts. Hoping the noise
wouldn’t give him away, he chambered a round. The Germans didn’t
have kittens, so he got away with it. A couple of those long, fat
rounds through the engine compartment and that armored car
wouldn’t go anywhere for a while.
He waggled the fingers on his left hand to let Sergeant Halévy know
he was in position. The rest of the Czechs opened up on the
Germans. His noise covered by theirs, he punched one through the
armored car’s thin steel side and into the engine.
He was about to shoot at it again when a German with a
submachine gun popped up out of nowhere. Vaclav shot him
instead. A round designed to pierce armor did horrible things to
flesh. It seemed to blow out half the German’s insides. The poor
bastard fell over with a grunt and never stirred after that. It was over
fast for him, anyhow.
Shoulder aching—even with muzzle brake and padded stock, the
antitank rifle kicked harder than a kangaroo—Vaclav reloaded. Here
came the other armored car. He fired at where the driver would sit,
once, twice. The car slid to the left and slammed into a tree.
That seemed to take the vinegar out of these Germans. They either
ran off or gave up. “Good job!” Sergeant Halévy called to Vaclav.
“Don’t you wish it was this easy all the goddamn time?”
“Jesus!” Vaclav exclaimed. “I’m just glad it was this easy once.”
Halévy laughed, for all the world as if he were joking.

LIEUTENANT JULIUS LEMP STOOD AT stiff attention. When a rear
admiral reamed you out, you had to stand there and take it and
pretend it didn’t hurt. The process was a lot like picking up dueling
scars, except you had no sword of your own.
“You thick-skinned idiot!” Karl Dönitz didn’t raise his voice, which
only made things worse. “Did you want to drag the United States
into this war?”
“No, sir,” Lemp replied woodenly He stared straight at a spot three
centimeters in front of Dönitz’s nose.
The round-faced chief of U-boat operations was not a man who
stood out in a crowd. Dönitz was supposed to be a pretty good guy,
too. He had a reputation for sticking up for his captains. But nobody
would stick up for you when you screwed up the way Lemp had.
“U-boats brought the Americans in the last time,” Dönitz said. “We
try not to make the same mistakes twice, you know.” He waited.
“Yes, sir.” Again, something mechanical might have spoken through
Lemp.
“I’ve had to calm down Goebbels and von Ribbentrop and the
Führer,” Dönitz said. “They all wanted your scalp.” He waited.
What am I supposed to say now? Lemp wondered. He tried, “I’m
honored, sir.” In a way, he was. If the Propaganda Minister and the
Foreign Minister and Hitler himself noticed you, you’d done
something out of the ordinary, no doubt about it.
Rear Admiral Dönitz’s pale eyes grew cold as the seas off
Greenland. “I wouldn’t be, if I were you,” he said, and his voice was
as icy as his face. “Dr. Goebbels had to put together a whole
propaganda campaign to shift the blame away from us. Now there’s

some doubt about who sank the Athenia—but not among us, eh?”
“No, sir. I did it, all right.” Lemp still didn’t change expression. Yeah,
sometimes you had to stand there and take it. This was one of
those times.
“I’d run you out of my office if you told me anything else,” Dönitz
said. “If you screw up like this again, I won’t be able to help you. Do
you understand that?”
“Yes, sir.” Men who served on U-boats weren’t normally long on
military discipline. This was one of those occasions where formality
was mandatory, though. You took your abuse by the numbers.
“A notation about your error will go into your service jacket,” Dönitz
said, which meant Lemp would be a long time seeing another
promotion.
“Yes, sir,” Lemp said one more time. He couldn’t get into more
trouble as long as he kept saying that, and he was in plenty already.
“Next time we send you out, for God’s sake try not to sink anything
flying the Stars and Stripes,” Dönitz said.
“I will, sir,” Lemp replied. But he couldn’t help adding, “You are going
to send me out again?”
“Yes, yes.” The commander of the Kriegsmarine’s U-boat forces
sounded impatient. “You’ve proved you can hit what you aim at. We
need that in our skippers. I have to dress you down, because you
aimed at the wrong ship. I have my orders, too, you understand.”
Did that mean he’d been going through the motions before? It sure
sounded that way to Lemp. If he had, he could take his act on
stage. He’d make more money with it than he ever could in a naval

career. “I see,” the U-boat skipper said cautiously—one more
phrase that stayed pretty safe.
Dönitz looked altogether different when he smiled. “All right, then,”
he said. “Dismissed. And you can tell your crew we won’t send them
to a camp.”
Lemp saluted. “Yes, sir. I’ll do that. Some of them have been worried
about it.” Some of them had been scared shitless. You didn’t want to
say that to a rear admiral, though. Lemp didn’t like the idea of living
in a place where making an honest mistake could land you in this
much trouble. But, no matter what else the Vaterland was, it was the
Vaterland.
“Go on, go on.” Dönitz had spent all the time with him he was going
to. Stacks of papers smothered the admiral’s desk. It wasn’t as if he
had nothing else going on.
After one more salute, Lemp made his escape. He was glad he’d
worn his greatcoat. Germany had enough coal to keep furnaces
going and heat buildings, but Wilhelmshaven was bloody cold
outside. Screeching gulls wheeled overhead. The air smelled of the
sea and, more faintly, of fuel oil—familiar odors to a U-boat skipper.
Dönitz’s office wasn’t far from the harbor, and from the seaside
barracks that housed U-boat crewmen when they came in to port.
Lemp made for the two-story red-brick building with dormer windows
where the sailors from the U-30 were staying. A sailor wearing a
Stahlhelm and carrying a rifle stood guard outside. He saluted
Lemp. The skipper and his crew weren’t quite under arrest—but
they weren’t quite not under arrest, either.
Returning the salute, Lemp said, “You can relax, Jochen. I think
they’ll give you some other duty soon.”

“I wouldn’t mind,” Jochen said.
Lemp walked on in. The sailors crowded the wardroom, smoking
and playing cards and reading newspapers. It wasn’t nearly so
crowded as the long steel tube of the U-30 would have been,
though. Everything stopped when the men saw Lemp. They
searched his face as anxiously as they would have searched the
horizon when Royal Navy destroyers were in the neighborhood.
“It’s over,” Lemp said. “The admiral read me the riot act, but they’ll
let us put to sea again.”
The sailors cheered. They stamped their feet. A couple of them
whistled shrilly. Only later did Lemp wonder why. As long as they
stayed in harbor, they were safe. Any time they went hunting, they
laid their lives on the line. And they were glad to do it. If that wasn’t
madness…
Of course it was. He had a case of the same disease. So did the
British sailors who tried to bring merchantmen into their harbors,
and the other sailors who set out to sink U-boats. So did the
soldiers in German Feldgrau, and so did the bastards in assorted
shades of khaki who tried their best to stop the Wehrmacht.
Without that kind of madness, you couldn’t have a war. Julius Lemp
took it for granted. So did men far more important than he.
“What did Dönitz say?” asked a machinist’s mate.
“That we were bad boys for sinking an American liner. That we could
have got the Reich into all kinds of trouble. But we didn’t,” Lemp
answered. “He also said he needed people who could shoot
straight.”
More cheers rose. These were so loud and raucous, Jochen stuck

his nose into the wardroom to see what was going on. Nobody told
him. Miffed, he slouched back outside. The soldiers started clapping
and stomping again.
“We’ll go out there and do some more straight shooting,” Lemp
said. The men shouted agreement. They were good fellows, all right
—and crazy the same way he was.

For more than two years, the war in Spain had electrified the world.
Everybody could see it foretold what would happen when Fascism
squared off against Marxism. Both sides threw what they could into
the struggle. Italian troops, German planes, Russian tanks…Most of
the bodies, on both sides, stayed Spanish.
Not all. Chaim Weinberg wouldn’t have left New York City without a
strong feeling that something had to be done to stop Fascism
before it exploded all over Europe. He wasn’t the only one: the
International Brigades were proof of that. Outnumbered and
outgunned, the Republic remained a going concern despite
everything Marshal Sanjurjo could do to crush it.

And then, when the Internationals were about to get pulled from the
line, the big war did break out in Europe. Spain’s fight was suddenly
Britain and France’s fight, too. Matériel flooded south across the
Pyrenees as the French border opened up. It seemed too good to
be true.
It was. As soon as Hitler turned his troops on the Low Countries and
France rather than Czechoslovakia, the flood didn’t go back to
being a trickle. It dried up altogether. Everything the French could
make, they shipped northeast to shoot at the Boches.
Germany and Italy had already pretty much forgotten about Spain.
With the French and English navies in the war, the Fascists had a
much harder time getting through than they’d had before. And they
needed their toys to use against the Western democracies.
So Spain went from being the cockpit of world attention to the war
that everybody forgot. Everybody, that is, except the poor, sorry
bastards still stuck fighting it.
Lately, Sanjurjo’s men on an outpost a few hundred meters away
had found themselves a new weapon: a loudspeaker system. It
crackled to life now: “Come over to the winning side!” a Spaniard
shouted, and the loudspeaker gave him something close to the
voice of God. “Come over to us, and we’ll feed you what we eat
ourselves. It’s lovely chicken stew tonight! Don’t miss it!”
“Ha!” Chaim said, and turned to Mike Carroll. “You know how to
make Sanjurjo’s chicken stew?”
“First, you steal a chicken,” Carroll answered wearily. “That’s an old
one. Got a smoke?”
“Yeah.” Chaim gave him a Gauloise.

“Lovely chicken stew!” the Nationalist boomed again.
“Thanks. Tastes like shit, but thanks.” Carroll puffed happily. Chaim
agreed with him—the French tobacco did taste like shit. But
Gauloises and Gitanes were better than no cigarettes at all—and
better than roll-your-owns made from other people’s (and your own)
butts.
“Chicken stew—with dumplings!”
“Lying cocksucker,” Chaim said without much rancor. Every so often,
guys from the other side deserted. From what they said, the
Nationalists were just as hungry, just as miserable, as the
Republicans.
“Maybe their officers have chicken stew,” Carroll said.
“Now you’re talking,” Chaim said. Republican officers ate and lived
no better than the men they led. It was an article of faith on this side
that the enemy’s officers exploited their soldiers—they were fighting
for class distinctions, after all. Some of what the deserters said
supported that: some, but not all. The Republicans mostly
discounted anything that disagreed with what they’d thought before.
“Wonderful chicken stew! All you can eat!”
Somebody in the Republican lines fired at the loudspeaker. If you
were hungry and cold and miserable, talk of food could drive you
nuts. And you had to be nuts to shoot like that. At long range, with
the crappy rifles and cheap ammo most Republicans carried, how
likely were you to hit what you aimed at? Even if you did, what kind
of damage could you do? And besides…
Chaim pulled his entrenching tool off his belt. It was very well made;
he’d taken it off a dead Italian. He started digging. “That stupid

asshole’s gonna bring some hate down on our heads.”
“Tell me about it.” Carroll’s entrenching tool consisted of some scrap
iron a smith had beaten flat and then bolted to a stick. But it moved
dirt, too. He deepened his foxhole and added dirt to the parapet in
front of it and the parados behind.
Sure as hell, the shot woke up the Nationalist artillery. Sanjurjo’s
men had more guns and better guns than the Republicans. Hitler
and Mussolini had been lavish in supplying their Spanish friends till
they got distracted. Nobody on the Republican side had ever been
lavish with anything, not till the Czech fight started and not for long
enough then.
Fragments wined and snarled overhead. Chaim dug like a mole,
trying to make what vets of the last war called a bombproof. He
should have done that a long time ago. He knew as much, but
nobody liked to dig without need. Now the need was here.
Mike Carroll made dirt fly, too. They both stopped about the same
time. Somebody not far away had been wounded, and was making a
godawful racket. “I’d better go get him,” Chaim said, though he
could think of few things he wanted to do less. As if to convince
himself, he added, “God knows I’d want somebody to pick me up if I
got hit.”
“Yeah.” Carroll also scrambled out of his hole, even if he’d just
improved it. Not being by himself above ground made Chaim a little
less lonely. It also made him wonder if he’d have to try to make
pickup for two. Well, if he stopped something himself, somebody
was out there to make pickup on him.
He scuttled along like a pair of ragged claws—some damn poem
picking the exact wrong moment to bounce around in his head. Like
a snake would have been closer, because his belly hugged the

a snake would have been closer, because his belly hugged the
ground every second. Off to his left, Mike also looked flattened by a
steamroller.
To add to the joy, a couple of Nationalists started shooting at them
with rifles. Luckily, none of the rounds came close. Spaniards,
whether Nationalists or Republicans, made piss-poor riflemen.
Chaim didn’t know why that was true, but it sure seemed to be. The
bullets got close enough to scare him cracking past, but no closer
than that.
He crawled past some trench a shell hit had caved in and flopped
down into the earthwork beyond with a sigh of relief. Mike Carroll
made it, too. There lay the wounded guy, trying to clutch his chest
and his leg at the same time and howling like a banshee. Two other
men from the International Brigades were nothing but raw meat and
blood—no blaming them for not helping their buddy, because
nobody could ever help them again.
“Fuck,” Carroll said hoarsely. “See who it is?”
Chaim hadn’t noticed—one injured fighter sounded much like
another, no matter which language he’d grown up speaking. Now he
took a look. “Fuck,” he echoed. “It’s Milt.”
Milton Wolff—El Lobo to the Spaniards on both sides—had led the
Abraham Lincoln Battalion since Robert Merriman was lost the
spring before. He’d kept them in the line no matter what Sanjurjo’s
goons threw at them. He wasn’t just their heart; he was also a big
part of their backbone.
And he was badly hurt. Fragments had shredded his left calf and
thigh and laid open the left side of his chest. “Jesus,” Chaim
muttered. His stomach tried to turn over. He wouldn’t let it.

“What do we do?” Carroll sounded as lost and horrified as Chaim
felt. If you saw your father like that…“What can we do?”
“Try and patch him up. Try and get him back to the docs. Maybe
they can pour some blood into him,” Chaim answered. Republican
doctors could do more with transfusions than just about anybody.
That was one of the few places where the Republic worked well—if
the crack mobile unit was anywhere within a few kilometers, anyhow.
They used their wound dressings. They used strips of cloth from
their uniforms and from those of the dead men, who didn’t care any
more. One of the corpses had a miraculously unbroken syringe in a
belt pouch. Chaim jabbed Wolff with it—it was the only painkiller he
was likely to get.
Wolff was a big man—six-two, easy—which only made things worse.
Manhandling him over to a communications trench that went back
was no fun for Chaim or Mike Carroll or the wounded Abe Lincoln
officer. Hauling him across bare, broken ground and praying the
snipers didn’t get lucky would have been even worse…Chaim
supposed.
They were heading back instead of sideways when Wolff stopped
screaming and asked, “Will I die?” He sounded amazingly calm. The
morphine must have hit him all at once.
“I don’t think so, Milt,” Chaim answered, and hoped he wasn’t lying.
“We’ll get you patched up.”
“You bet,” Mike agreed.
A Red Cross flag flew over an aid tent. In his bad Spanish, Chaim
asked, “Is the blood truck close?”
“¿Quién sabe?” a harried-looking male nurse answered. He

sounded like a fruit, but that was the least of Chaim’s worries. And
he did gasp when he found out who the wounded Abe Lincoln was.
“¿El Lobo? ¡Madre de Dios!” He crossed himself.
By the way people went dashing out of the aid tent, Chaim got the
idea they’d track down the blood truck as fast as they could. He
wondered whether they would have done the same if he came in
wounded. Actually, he didn’t wonder: he knew damn well they
wouldn’t.
And he had a hard time getting pissed off about it. He was just a
soldado. He had his uses, but their were plenty more like him. Milton
Wolff was El Lobo. If he stayed out of action long, the Lincolns
wouldn’t be the same. And, while the rest of the world might have
forgotten the Spanish Civil War, it remained brutally real to the
people who went on fighting it.

HANS-ULRICH RUDEL WAS GETTING SICK of huddling in muddy
slit trenches. This one was in western Belgium. It was two in the
morning, and British bombers were overhead again. By the roar of
their engines, they weren’t very far overhead, either. RAF Whitleys
and Hampdens couldn’t fly very high no matter how much their pilots
might wish they could.
And, at night, it hardly mattered. Luftwaffe night fighters found
enemy planes more by luck than any other way. When German
bombers struck England under cover of darkness, the RAF’s night
fighters had the same problem.
Bombs whistled down. Some of them landed close enough for the
bursts to make Rudel’s ears hurt. Blast could do horrible things to
you even when fragments and flame didn’t. He buried his face
against the trench wall. He’d come out looking like the end man in a

against the trench wall. He’d come out looking like the end man in a
minstrel show, but he didn’t care. As long as he came out.
More explosions, and the rending crash of something metal going to
smithereens all at once. “Goddamn flying suitcases!” somebody a
couple of meters away said.
“Ja!” Hans-Ulrich nodded, smelling mold and damp. Hampdens were
a lot like Luftwaffe bombers, though more slab-sided than any of
them—hence the nickname. Whitleys were bigger, slower, and
clumsier, but carried more bombs. They could take a lot of
punishment…and needed to, because they got it. Rudel wouldn’t
have wanted to fly one in the daytime. The British had tried that, but
not for long.
Well, the Luftwaffe wasn’t sending Stukas over England any more,
either. Some things cost more than they were worth. Even biplane
Gladiators were dangerous to the German dive-bombers. As for
Hurricanes and the newer Spitfires…!
The real trouble was, Hurricanes and Spitfires chewed up Bf-110s
almost as easily as they mulched Stukas. Bf-109s held their own
against the top RAF fighters, but they had short range and couldn’t
linger long over England. And, when they had to escort the 110s as
well as the bombers, they couldn’t mix it up with the enemy the way
they should.
From everything Rudel had heard, nobody in the Luftwaffe higherups had dreamt the 110 would show such weaknesses. War gave all
kinds of surprises—including the nasty ones.
A few more bombs fell. Then things eased off; the drone of enemy
engines faded in the west. Hans-Ulrich spat to get the taste of loam
out of his mouth. “Well,” he said brightly, “that was fun.”

Several people in the trench told him what he could do with his fun.
Somebody who knew his classics quoted Goethe’s Götz von
Berlichen: “Du kannst mich mal am Arsch lechen.” Even if it was
poetry, Lick my ass got the point across.
He climbed out of the trench. Something was burning: a Stuka in a
half-blasted revetment. The orange flames sent a dim, flickering
light across the airstrip. “Got to put that out,” a flyer said. “If the
damned Englishmen see it, they’re liable to come back.”
Groundcrew men started playing a hose in the Ju-87. That would
take a while to do any good. Gasoline and oil liked to keep burning.
And the ammo in the Stuka’s machine guns started cooking off. The
popping seemed absurdly cheerful. “Hope none of those rounds
hits anybody,” Hans-Ulrich said.
“Jesus Maria!” somebody said—a Catholic, by the oath. “That’d be
all we need.”
Somebody else was exhausted, relentlessly pragmatic, or both:
“Only thing I hope is, I can get back to sleep.”
“Amen!” the Catholic said. Sure enough, he sounded like a
Bavarian.
The burning dive-bomber gave just enough light to let Hans-Ulrich
have an easy time going back to his tent. He lay down on the cot
—and then remembered his face was muddy. If he hadn’t been a
minister’s son, he might have quoted Götz von Berlichen himself.
Being one, he knew that thinking the words was as bad as saying
them. He sometimes swore in the heat of action, but never in cold
blood—and he always regretted it afterwards.
When he got up and came out the next morning, the fellow in the
next tent greeted him with, “Who’s the nigger?”

“Funny, Manfred. Fun-ny,” Hans-Ulrich said. “You should take it to
the movies.”
“Go drink some milk, preacher’s son,” Manfred jeered. “You’ll feel
better.”
Hans-Ulrich’s hands balled into fists. He took a step toward the
other flyer. “Enough, both of you,” a more senior officer said. “Do
you want to get tossed in the clink? Save that Scheisse for the
enemy, hear me?”
Reluctantly, Manfred nodded. Even more reluctantly, so did HansUlrich. He was sick of being the white crow in the squadron. He
couldn’t even say that: somebody would have told him he was the
white crow because he drank so much milk.
If he’d changed his ways and drunk schnapps, everybody would
have liked him. The notion didn’t cross his mind.
Other people razzed him about his dirty face, but not so viciously as
Manfred had. Some other pilots and rear gunners had also got
muddy, though none quite so muddy as Rudel. While they ate, a
grunting bulldozer repaired damage to the airstrip.
German bombers—Spades and Flying Pencils—droned past
overhead, bound for England. Bf-109s would protect the Heinkels
and Dorniers from RAF fighters, and they could protect themselves
better than Stukas. All the same, Hans-Ulrich wondered how much
longer the Luftwaffe would go over the enemy island by day.
Nighttime bombing was less accurate, but also much less expensive.
He wasn’t sorry not to cross the North Sea again. He counted
himself lucky to have made it back the times he’d tried it. Maybe the
twin-engine bombers would have better luck. Maybe.

His own mission lay to the southwest. The French were bringing
matériel up from Paris to the front that still shielded their capital
from the Wehrmacht’s onslaught. If the Luftwaffe could smash up
those trucks and trains, enemy troops would get less of what they
needed to keep up the fight.
“Ready?” he asked Sergeant Dieselhorst.
The man in the rear seat looked at him. “Nah. I’ll bug out as soon as
we get airborne.”
Rudel’s ears heated. “Me and my big mouth. Let’s go get ‘em.”
“Now you’re talking,” Dieselhorst said.
Bombed up, gassed up, their Stuka rumbled down the runway.
Hans-Ulrich pulled back on the stick. The Stuka’s nose lifted. The
plane would never be pretty. Though the design was fairly new,
plenty of aircraft looked more modern: the nonretractable landing
gear made the Ju-87 seem older than it was. But the beast got the
job done. Next to that, what were looks?
A few black puffs of smoke appeared in the sky as the Stuka
squadron crossed over the front line, but only a few. This wasn’t the
kind of barrage that would have greeted the Germans over England
— nowhere close. The French didn’t seem as serious about the war
as the British. But they hadn’t rolled belly-up yet, either. We just
have to keep thumping them till they do, Hans-Ulrich thought.
Was that river glittering in the sun the Marne? Hans-Ulrich thought
so: the farthest the Kaiser’s armies reached in the last war. The
Wehrmacht was almost there, too, though it had started rolling in
dead of winter and had to take out Holland as well as Belgium.

Silver sausages gleamed above Paris: barrage balloons. The
English used them over their towns, too. They didn’t keep places
from getting bombed. They did keep dive-bombers from stooping on
targets. Hans-Ulrich shuddered, imagining what would happen if he
tore off the Stuka’s wing against a mooring cable. He’d feel like an
idiot…but not for long.
Well, he didn’t have to worry about that, anyhow—not yet. The
squadron’s targets lay in front of Paris. Captain Mehler’s voice filled
his earphones. “I think that’s what we want down below,” the new
squadron leader said. “Let’s hit ‘em.”
“Here we go,” Hans-Ulrich said into the speaking tube, warning
Sergeant Dieselhorst.
“Jawohl,” the gunner and radioman said. “I was listening, too.”
Hans-Ulrich tipped the Ju-87 over into a dive. Acceleration slammed
him back in his seat. It would be trying to tear Dieselhorst out of his.
Hans-Ulrich had never heard of a rear gunner’s straps and harness
failing—a good thing, too. That wasn’t pretty to think about.
Down below, the highway swelled. Yes, that was a truck convoy. As
the shriek from the Stukas’ sirens mounted, soldiers started bailing
out and running like ants. Too late, fools. Too late.
Everything had a red tinge. Rudel was right on the edge of blacking
out. He pulled the bomb-release lever, then yanked back on the
stick as hard as he could to bring the Stuka out of its deadly plunge.
Behind him, the poilus would just have discovered hell on earth.
“You all right?” Sergeant Dieselhorst’s voice said he wasn’t sure
about himself, let alone Rudel.
“I—think so.” Hans-Ulrich made himself nod. As they usually did

after a steep dive, his thoughts needed a few seconds to come
back to normal. He muzzily recalled the Stukas in Spain that had
crashed before the Luftwaffe installed that gadget to pull out of
dives if pilots didn’t.
He fought for altitude. He’d got up to 2,500 meters when
Dieselhorst’s machine gun started chattering. “Dodge!” the gunner
yelled. “French fighter!”
Hans-Ulrich threw the big, clumsy Ju-87 around the sky in ways the
manufacturer never intended. An open-cockpit Dewoitine
monoplane zoomed past—obsolescent, but flying. A 109 could have
hacked it out of the air with the greatest of ease. It still outclassed a
Stuka, though.
Here it came for another pass. Hans-Ulrich saw the skeleton with a
harrow painted on its dark green flank. The machine guns firing
through the Grim Reaper’s propeller disk blazed. Rudel jinked again
—right into the stream of bullets.
His engine coughed and quit and started smoking. A round punched
through both sides of the cockpit in front of him before he had time
to blink. “We’ve got to get out!” he yelled to Dieselhorst, praying the
sergeant would answer.
“I was hoping you’d be here to tell me that,” Dieselhorst said.
“Sounds good to me. Are we still inside French territory, or did we
make it back to our own lines?”
“Only one way to find out.” Rudel eyed the gauges. “Don’t waste
time, either—we’re losing altitude.”
He yanked back on the canopy. The Stuka’s glasshouse had two
movable parts: one for the pilot, the other for the gunner-radioman.
Hans-Ulrich hoped the bullet that almost nailed him hadn’t messed

up the track along which his part slid. He breathed a sigh of relief
when it retracted smoothly enough.
Wind tore at him. It didn’t want to let him get out. He fought his way
clear of the cockpit. A quick glance told him Sergeant Dieselhorst
was already gone. Rudel threw himself into space.
He missed smashing himself against the Stuka’s upthrust tail: the
first risk every pilot bailing out took. Then he counted down from ten
and yanked the ripcord. Wham! The blow he took when the chute
opened made him gray out for a second, the same as dive-bombing
would have done. He came to faster than he would have pulling out
of a dive, though.
He looked around. There was another canopy, below him and to the
left. Dieselhorst hadn’t hit the tail, either. Good.
Back in the last war, pilots hadn’t worn parachutes. The powers that
be thought having them would turn men into cowards. Soldiers had
gone into that war without steel helmets, too. They’d learned better
there sooner than they had with chutes.
The Luftwaffe model still left something to be desired. Hans-Ulrich
dropped faster than he would have liked—but not nearly so fast as
if the chute hadn’t opened! He couldn’t steer very well, either.
He bent his legs and tried to relax as the ground rushed up at him.
He sprained an ankle anyway, but didn’t think he broke it. He used
his belt knife to cut away the canopy before it dragged him into
some trees. He couldn’t see where Sergeant Dieselhorst had come
down.
“Hold it right there, shithead, or you’re fucking dead meat!”
somebody yelled. Hans-Ulrich needed a moment to realize he
understood the obscenity-laced command. It was in German. He’d

landed among friends.
Happily, he raised his hands. “I’m a Stuka pilot!” he shouted back.
“My number two’s around here somewhere.”
Three men in field-gray cautiously emerged from those trees. “Get
under cover, you Dummkopf” one of them said. “There’s Frenchies
only a few hundred meters from here.”
Hans-Ulrich tried to stand. His ankle didn’t want to let him. “My
leg—” he said.
One of the soldiers had a machine pistol. He covered the other two,
who were riflemen. They trotted forward and each got one of
Rudel’s arms over his shoulder. “We’ll take you to an aid station,”
one of them said. They lugged him back to the woods.

A KNOCK ON THE DOOR. Up till now, Sarah Goldman hadn’t known
something so ordinary could be so terrifying. The ordinary police
thumped. The Gestapo pounded. She could guess who was there
from the different knocks, and she proved right most of the time. If
only proving right would have done her the least bit of good!
This knock didn’t seem quite so frightening. So Sarah told herself,
anyway, as she went to the door. Maybe she was trying to find hope
whether it was really there or not. She braced herself to face some
scowling SS man all in black.
But no. “Oh! Frau Breisach!” she exclaimed in glad surprise. Even if
Wilhelmina Breisach liked to grumble about every little thing, the
people across the street had always got on well with the Goldmans
till the Nazis started making things tough on Jews. And, naturally, no
one from the neighborhood seemed eager to stop by after Saul did

…what he did. Better to pretend you didn’t have any idea who those
people were than to have to explain why you wanted anything to do
with them. So Sarah hesitated before asking, “Won’t you come in?”
“No, thank you. Please excuse me, but I’d better not.” Frau Breisach
shook her head. She was a plump, reasonably pretty blond a few
years younger than Sarah’s mother. Now she thrust an envelope
into Sarah’s hand. “This was addressed to us, but I think it may be
for you.” She didn’t wait for any answer from Sarah, but scurried
away as if hoping no one had seen her come. She probably was
hoping exactly that, too.
“Thank you,” Sarah said, but she was talking to Frau Breisach’s
back.
She closed the door, scratching her head. “What was that all about?
” her father asked.
“I don’t know.” Then Sarah looked down at the envelope, and she
did. Ice and fire rippled through her, fractions of a heartbeat apart.
She recognized the handwriting on the address. “I think maybe
you’d better have a look at this. Mother, you, too.”
Samuel and Hanna Goldman came out to see why she was fussing.
Without a word, she handed her father the envelope. Behind his
glasses, his eyes widened. So did those of Sarah’s mother. Neither
of them said much. They didn’t know the Gestapo had put
microphones in their house, but they also didn’t know it hadn’t. In
Adolf Hitler’s Germany in 1939, they didn’t want to take any foolish
chances.
Sarah’s father took the letter out of the envelope. Sarah and her
mother crowded close to read it with him. Hello, Uncle, Aunt, and
Cousin Elisabeth, it said. Just a note to let you know basic training
is going well. Don’t listen to the rubbish you hear from some people.

is going well. Don’t listen to the rubbish you hear from some people.
We get plenty to eat. The work is hard and we are often tired, but
this is no Strength through Joy cruise. We are getting ready for war.
I may end up in panzers. The drill sergeants say I have the knack
for them. I hope so. They hurt the Reich’s enemies more than
anything else does, I think. I must go now—more drills. Stay well.
Heil Hitler! The scrawled signature was Adalbert.
Sarah and her father and mother all eyed one another. That was
Saul’s handwriting. “How in the world did he—?” Sarah began, and
left it right there.
“He must have got some identity papers,” Samuel Goldman
whispered. “And when he did…” The professor’s chuckle was most
unprofessorial. “Well, who would guess to look for him there?”
When Sarah thought of it like that, she started to laugh. The Nazis
wouldn’t believe Saul had joined the Wehrmacht, even if he and
Father both tried to do it right after the war broke out. To the thugs
who ruled Germany, Jews were nothing but a pack of cowards. And
so, chances were, they’d go on combing through the sad, shabby
civilian world, simply because they couldn’t imagine a Jew would
deliberately expose himself to danger.
Mother plucked the letter and the envelope from Father’s fingers.
She carried the papers off to the fireplace in the front room. No
matter what the Gestapo said, they weren’t going to report this. No,
indeed! Jews got only cheap, smoky brown coal for their heating
and cooking needs, and precious little of that. The fire on the grate
was more a token gesture than anything else. Even so, the
envelope and letter flamed for a moment, then curled to gray ash.
“There.” Mother sounded pleased with herself. “That’s taken care
of, anyhow.”

“So it is.” Father nodded. “I wonder how he managed to…” His voice
trailed away again.
Several pictures formed in Sarah’s mind. Maybe one of the fellows
on Saul’s football club had connections and got him papers. Maybe,
after he fled Münster, he went drinking with somebody named
Adalbert and stole the identity documents he needed. Or maybe he
ran into this Adalbert walking along a country road and knocked him
over the head.
That would make Saul a real criminal, not just somebody who’d
snapped because a gang boss wouldn’t treat him like a human
being. The thought should have horrified Sarah. Somehow, it didn’t.
Her brother never would have done anything like that if the Nazis
hadn’t pushed him over the line. Never.
“I hope he’ll be all right,” Mother said worriedly. “You can tell he’s
not an ordinary German, after all.”
Father followed that faster than Sarah did. “Jews aren’t the only
ones who get circumcised,” he said. “Sometimes it’s medically
necessary. What I wonder is how Frau Breisach knew that letter was
really for us.”
“Somebody must have recognized the handwriting.” Sarah had no
trouble figuring that out. “Saul used to go over there all the time to
help the Breisach kids with their homework—back when you could
without getting into too much trouble, I mean. I think he was sweet
on Hildegarde Breisach for a while, but…” She didn’t go on.
“Yes. But,” her father said heavily. “I wouldn’t have minded
intermarriage very much. The all-wise, all-knowing, and all-powerful
State”—you could hear the stress he gave the word—“is a different
story. And Hildegarde would have been insane to take the chance.”

“If the State really were all-wise and all-powerful, Frau Breisach
would have taken Saul’s letter straight to the Gestapo,” Mother said.
“Some people still remember what human decency means.”
“Never mind human decency. The Breisachs know us,” Father said.
“That counts for more, I’d say. I wouldn’t bet a pfenning that they’d
help some strange Jew. But we’ve lived across the street from them
since the last war. We aren’t strangers—we’re neighbors. People
first, Jews second, you might say. All over Germany, gentiles are
probably going, ‘Well, I don’t have a good word to say about most
Jews, but Abraham down the street? He’s all right.’”
“I wonder how much good it will do,” Sarah said.
“Some, anyhow.” Father nodded toward the now anonymous ashes
in the fireplace. “And I’m jealous of your brother.”
“For heaven’s sake, why?” Mother got that out before Sarah could.
“He made it into the Wehrmacht,” Father answered. “I fought for
Germany before. I would have done it again. I am a German,
dammit, whether the Nazis want to let me be one or not.”
“Isn’t getting shot once enough for Germany?” Mother asked
pointedly.
“If I hadn’t, the goons would have treated us even worse than they
did,” Father said. “Hitler says Jews haven’t got any guts—but he
can’t say that about front-line soldiers from the last war. So we have
it better than most Jews—not good, but better.”
“Oh, joy,” Sarah said in a hollow voice. “If this is better, I don’t want
worse.”
Father nodded solemnly. “You’d better not. The difference between

bad and worse is much bigger than the difference between good
and better. So when you think about the difference between better
and worse…”
He sounded like someone who knew what he was talking about.
Chances were he did. What had life in the trenches been like?
Sarah had read All Quiet on the Western Front—who hadn’t? She’d
seen the movie, too. But her father had really gone through all
those things, and maybe more besides. It was probably like the
difference between reading about kissing and kissing, only more so.
Mother started to laugh. “What’s funny?” Sarah asked. She sure
didn’t see anything.
Still in a low voice to foil the microphones that might not be there at
all, her mother answered, “Our only son’s just gone into the
Wehrmacht. And I’m happy! Happy! He has a better chance of
staying safe there than he would if he were still running around the
countryside somewhere.”
Sarah laughed, too. When you put it that way, it was funny. Her
father put things in perspective, the way he usually did: “If you have
to go that far for a laugh, you’ve got more tsuris than you need.”
He hardly ever dropped a Yiddish word into his German. It would
have made him seem less German, more openly Jewish. It might
even have made him seem that way to himself. Sarah stared at him
now. She understood tsuris, of course—understood what the word
meant and, these days, also understood the thing.
“We do have more tsuris than we need,” Mother said. Neither Sarah
nor Samuel Goldman tried to tell her she was wrong.
It could have been worse, though. If the Gestapo caught up with
Saul after he clouted that work boss…What would they have done

to him? Whatever it was, Sarah made herself think about something
else.
“Do you suppose the British bombers will come over tonight?” she
said. That was something else, all right, but not a better something
else.
“Let them.” Her father sounded almost gay. “Bombs don’t care if
we’re Jews. Bombs can fall on Gestapo headquarters, too…alevai.”
Two Yiddish words from him in two minutes. What was the world
coming to?
“Of course, the Gestapo men can run into a shelter,” Sarah said.
“So what? Even that doesn’t always help,” Father said. And he was
right. Sarah felt like a German, too, if not so strongly as Father did.
But she had trouble believing any German would cry if a bunch of
Gestapo men got blown up.

German artillery crashed down on the French position. Luc Harcourt
dug as hard as he could, trying to carve a cave into the front wall of

his foxhole. If he could manage that, fragments would have a hard
time biting him…barring a direct hit, of course. He wished he hadn’t
had that last thought, but it did make him dig faster than ever.
The ground was muddy—almost too muddy to let him make the
shelter he wanted. A cave-in could kill him, too, and much more
ignominiously than a shell would have. But artillery was a worse risk.
Five months of war had taught Luc to fear artillery more than
anything but tanks. And what were tanks but artillery on tracks?
Luc almost had the hole he wanted when the shelling let up as
suddenly as it had begun. He knew what that meant. His
entrenching tool went back on his belt. He grabbed his rifle.
“They’ll be coming any second!” Sergeant Demange yelled from a
trench near the foxhole, for the raw replacements and the idiots in
his section. “Make ‘em pay for it, that’s all. We don’t have a hell of a
lot of room to back up in.”
“Your sergeant is right.” That was Lieutenant Marquet—Luc thought
that was his name, anyhow. He’d replaced the previous company
commander a few days earlier, after Captain Rémond stopped some
shrapnel with his chest. He’d been alive when he went off to the aid
station. Now, who could say? The lieutenant seemed brave enough.
He did like to hear himself talk, though: “Three times in a lifetime,
the Boches have attacked Paris. They took it once, to our shame.
We held them the last time, to our everlasting glory. Which would
you rather have now, my friends?”
All Luc wanted was to come through alive and in once piece. The
only shame he worried about was letting his buddies down. They
mattered to him. Paris? Next to the dirty, smelly, frightened men
alongside of whom he fought, Paris wasn’t so much of a much.

Small-arms fire picked up. The Germans knew what was going on
as well as the Frenchmen they were trying to murder. They wanted
to get into the French fieldworks as fast as they could, while the
poilus were still woozy from the barrage.
If they do that, I’m dead. The thought was enough to make Luc stick
his head up and bring his rifle to his shoulder. A bullet cracked past,
too close for comfort. He wouldn’t have had to worry about that if
he’d stayed all nicely huddled in his young cave.
No, but then he would have had to worry about other things. Sure
as hell, the Germans were loping forward. The men who ran straight
up and down had less experience than the ones who folded
themselves as small as they could. Most of the Boches did know
enough to hit the dirt or dive behind something when French
machine guns started chattering.
The Germans never got to Meaux the last time around. That meant
all the damage in town was brand new. The thirteenth-century
cathedral lay in ruins a couple of kilometers behind Luc. Guns and
Stukas cared nothing for antiquities—and the French weren’t shy
about placing observers in the steeples. If the bastards in field-gray
kept pressing forward, pretty soon French guns would start shelling
Meaux—and the Boches would have put men with binoculars up in
high places.
As if thinking of French guns had called them up, several batteries
of quick-firing 75s started banging away at the Germans. They’d
slaughtered the Boches by the thousands in 1914, and all through
the last war. Things were tougher now. German 105s outranged
them and delivered bigger shells. The enemy knew better than to
advance in tight-packed ranks, too. But when you needed to drop a
lot of artillery on some unlucky place in a hurry, 75s were still hard
to beat.

German medics in Red Cross smocks and armbands ran around
gathering up the wounded. Luc left them alone as much as he
could. War was tough enough without making it worse.
He thought so, anyhow. A medic fell, and then another one. Another
German wearing the Red Cross emblem pointed angrily toward the
French line…right about toward where Sergeant Demange was
lurking. A moment later, that medic ducked, which meant a bullet
hadn’t missed him by much. He could take a hint—he dove behind a
battered stone wall.
“Naughty, Sergeant,” Luc called.
“So’s your mother,” Demange answered, which wasn’t exactly a
ringing denial of anything.
Luc was in no position to tell him what to do. He had other things on
his mind, anyway: “Have we got any tanks in the neighborhood? Do
they?”
“Sure haven’t seen any of ours,” the sergeant said.
Since Luc hadn’t, either, he asked the next important question:
“Have we got any antitank guns?”
“Sure as hell hope so,” Demange answered. That was also less
encouraging than Luc wished it were.
Meaux lay in a loop of the Marne. Maybe the Germans were having
trouble getting their armor across the river. They’d managed farther
east with far fewer problems than he wished they’d had—probably
far fewer than they should have had. With luck, the Allies were
figuring out how to make those crossings tougher. Without luck, the
Boches were feinting here so they could knock the crap out of the

French and English defenders somewhere else.
Even without tanks, they hadn’t given up in front of Meaux. More
artillery came in, this barrage precisely aimed at the French forward
positions. Luc cowered in his hole while hell fell all around him.
“Up!” Sergeant Demange screamed. “Up, you gutless assholes!
They’re coming!”
Luc didn’t want to come up. Shell fragments did dreadful things. But
he didn’t want to get shot or bayoneted in his foxhole, either. The
Germans aimed to make the French keep their heads down so
they’d make easy meat. The French couldn’t let them impose their
will on the combat…Luc supposed.
He came up firing. A German had crawled to no more than thirty
meters away. He had a potato-masher grenade in his right hand.
Luc shot him before he could fling it. “Heilige Scheisse!” screamed
the soldier in the coal-scuttle helmet. He clutched at himself. He
must not have pulled the grenade’s fuse cord, because it didn’t go
off after he dropped it.
Then French machine guns opened up, one of them from a spot
where Luc hadn’t known his side had a machine gun. The Boches
hadn’t known it was there, either. Several of them fell. Others ran
back toward the river. Luc would have done the same thing in their
boots. Flesh and blood had limits, and facing machine-gun fire out
in the open went beyond them.
The German Luc had shot lay where he’d gone down. He wasn’t
dead; he kept thrashing around and yelling and swearing.
“Make him shut up,” Sergeant Demange called. “Either blow his
head off or go out there and bring him back.”

Neither possibility appealed to Luc. Killing a wounded man in cold
blood felt like murder. If he were lying there wounded, he wouldn’t
want the Germans taking pot shots at him.
But if he went out there to get the Boche, other soldiers in field-gray
might nail him. He knew he had only a few seconds to make up his
mind. Demange wouldn’t hesitate longer than that before shooting
the German himself. He wouldn’t have second thoughts about it
afterward, either.
“Je suis dans le merde,” Luc muttered. Up shit creek or not, he had
to do something. He climbed out of the foxhole and crawled toward
the wounded Boche.
Firing had slacked off. That could end any second, as he knew too
well. None of the few rounds flying about came close—the Germans
weren’t aiming at him, anyway.
“I’ll take you in,” he called to the soldier in field-gray, hoping the
fellow understood French. “We’ll fix you up if we can.”
“Merci,” the man answered in gutturally accented French. “Hurts.”
“I bet,” Luc said. The bullet had torn up the German’s left leg. “Can
you climb up on top of me?”
“I’ll try.” The Boche did it. He felt as if the fellow weighed a tonne
—he was a bigger man than Luc, and weighted down with boots and
helmet and equipment. Slowly—the only way he could—Luc crawled
back toward the French line. Seeing what he was doing, the
Germans paid him the courtesy of aiming away from him.
Other hands reached out to pull the wounded man off him. The
German groaned as they got him down into the trenches. Luc had
never been so glad to get under cover again himself. “Whew!” he

said. “I felt naked out there.”
“You did good, kid,” Sergeant Demange said, and handed him a
Gitane.
“Thanks.” Luc leaned close for a light.
“You didn’t go out there pretty damn quick, I was gonna plug the
motherfucker,” Demange said.
“Yeah, I figured. That’s why I went.” Luc’s cheeks hollowed as he
sucked in harsh smoke.
“Maybe they’ll learn something off him,” the noncom said. “He’ll sing
like a goddamn canary, and sergeants, they know stuff.” Not without
pride, he tapped his own chest.
“Was he a sergeant? I didn’t notice,” Luc said. Demange rolled his
eyes. Grinning, Luc added, “If I’d known that, I would’ve shot him for
sure.”
“Funny man,” Demange said scornfully. “You got that crappy hash
mark on your sleeve, so you think you’re entitled to be a goddamn
funny man.”
“Sergeant, if it meant I’d come through the war without getting shot,
I’d never make another joke the rest of my life,” Luc promised.
“Oh, yeah?” Sergeant Demange said. Luc’s head bobbed up and
down as if it were on springs. Demange spat out a tiny butt, crushed
it underfoot, and lit a fresh Gitane. Then he returned to the
business at hand: “Well, you don’t need to worry about that, on
account of it doesn’t.” Luc already knew as much. All the same, he
wished Demange hadn’t spelled it out.

ANASTAS MOURADIAN WAS DRUNK. Yes, a blizzard howled
outside. Even so, a proper Soviet officer wasn’t supposed to do any
such thing. Sergei Yaroslavsky knew that perfect well. He would
have been angrier at Mouradian if he weren’t drunk himself.
They couldn’t fly. They had plenty of vodka. What were they going
to do—not drink it? Try as he would, Sergei couldn’t come up with a
good reason for leaving it alone.
Ivan Kuchkov was bound to be drinking with his fellow enlisted men.
If the Chimp got smashed, the rest of the aircrew should, too. It
showed solidarity between enlisted men and officers. It also showed
that neither enlisted men nor officers had anything better to do
when they couldn’t get an SB-2 off the ground to save their lives.
“If Hitlerite bombers show up now, if we have to take shelter outside,
we’ve got plenty of antifreeze in our blood,” Sergei said.
“Never mind Hitlerite bombers. What about Hitlerite soldiers?” When
Mouradian was sober, he spoke excellent Russian. He stayed fluent
when he got drunk, but his Armenian accent turned thick enough to
slice.
Sergei laughed and laughed. When he got drunk, everything was
funny. “Where would Hitlerite soldiers come from?”
“Out of the sky. With parachutes. Like they did in Holland and
Belgium.” Anastas looked around the inside of the tent, his eyes big
and round like an owl’s: he might have expect Nazi parachutists to
pop up any minute now.
That owlish stare only made Sergei laugh harder than ever. He
looked around the inside of the tent, too. Enough of the wind

outside got in to make the flame from the kerosene lamp flicker.
That wasn’t why his wide, high-cheekboned face registered dismay.
“We’re out of pelmeni! And pickled mushrooms! Where’d they go?”
Mouradian patted his stomach. “Good. Not spicy enough, but good.”
Being a southerner, he liked everything full of fire. As far as Sergei
was concerned, the mushrooms and the meat dumplings were fine
this way. Russians had all kinds of snacks that went with vodka.
Even a half-skilled cook at a forward airstrip could do a decent job
with some of them.
“We had a big plate of them,” Sergei said sadly. The plate was still
there. But for a couple of crumbs from the pelmeni, it was bare.
Sergei sighed. He pointed at Anastas. “Not even the fucking
Germans would be crazy enough to drop parachutists in this
weather.”
“God shouldn’t have been crazy enough to make this weather.”
Mouradian must have been very drunk, or he wouldn’t have talked
about God so seriously. It gave Sergei a hold on him, which wasn’t
something anybody in the USSR wanted to give anyone else. Of
course, there was something close to an even-money chance
neither of them would remember anything about this come morning.
Even without dumplings or mushrooms, Sergei raised his tumbler.
“Za Stalina!”
“To Stalin!” Anastas echoed. They both drank. The vodka was no
better than it had to be. It went down as if Sergei were swallowing
the lighted kerosene lamp. The really good stuff slid down your
throat smooth as a kiss, then exploded in your stomach like a 500kg
bomb. But this got you there, smooth or not.
Sergei sighed. If it was harsh now, he’d feel it worse in the morning.
The good stuff didn’t make you think elephants in hobnailed boots

The good stuff didn’t make you think elephants in hobnailed boots
were marching on top of your skull.
“We have aspirins?” he asked.
“Somewhere,” Mouradian said vaguely. Then he brightened. “We’ll
have more vodka.”
“Da.” That cheered Sergei up, too: at least a little. Another dose of
what made you feel bad could make you feel better. He reached for
the bottle again. If he drank it now, he’d feel better right away.
“Leave me some,” Anastas said.
“Leave me some, sir,” Sergei said. The drunker you got, the more
important military discipline seemed…unless, of course, it didn’t. He
passed Mouradian the bottle. They drank till there was very little left
to drink. They would have drunk till nothing was left to drink, but
they both fell asleep first.
Getting up in the morning was as bad as Yaroslavsky had known it
would be, or maybe a little worse. The first thing he did was drink
half the remaining vodka. He would have drunk all of it, but Anastas
snatched the bottle out of his hands. “To each according to his
needs,” the Armenian croaked, and no one in the USSR, no matter
how hung over, dared quarrel with unadulterated Marx.
Fortunately, the aspirins turned up. Sergei dry-swallowed three of
them. Mouradian took four. As sour as Sergei’s stomach already
was, the aspirins felt like a flamethrower in there. If he belched, he
figured he could incinerate the whole airstrip.
Mouradian didn’t look or sound much happier. “Breakfast,” he said.
The mere thought made Sergei groan. Then Anastas added,
“They’ll have tea—coffee, too, maybe.”

“Well, maybe.” Sergei peeled back the tent flap and looked out. The
sun shone brilliantly off snow. He squinted at the alarming
landscape. “Don’t want to bleed to death through my eyeballs,” he
muttered.
“Tell me about it!” Mouradian said fervently.
Both being brave men, they made it to the field kitchen.
Shchi—cabbage soup—seemed safe enough to Sergei. Anastas
stuck to plain brown bread. The cooks had one battered samovar
full of tea, another full of coffee. After getting outside of some of that
—and after the aspirins took hold—Sergei decided he’d live.
Eventually, he would decide he wanted to.
The radio blared out music. Mouradian turned it down. Sergei would
have loved to turn it off, but he didn’t dare. People might think you
didn’t want to listen to the news. If you didn’t want to listen to the
splendid achievements of the glorious Soviet state, people would
wonder why not. Some of the people who wondered would have
NKVD connections, too. And you’d be heading for a camp faster
than you could blink.
Nobody complained about turning down the radio, though. Several
other men eating breakfast had red-tracked eyes, sallow skin, and a
hangdog expression. When it was snowing at an isolated airstrip,
what were you going to do besides drink?
The song ended. An announcer gabbled about the overfulfillment of
production norms at factories in Smolensk, Magnitogorsk, and
Vladivostok. Not easy to imagine three more widely separated
places. “Thus, despite the efforts of Fascists and other
reactionaries, prosperity spreads throughout this great bulwark of
the proletariat!” the announcer said.

Sergei had nothing against the bulwark of the proletariat. In his
present fragile state, though, he didn’t much want to hear about it.
He made himself seem attentive even so, as he would have during a
dull lecture in school. The penalty for obvious boredom then would
have been a rap on the knuckles, or maybe a swat on the backside.
He might pay more now.
Music returned. He didn’t have to seem to be listening to that so
closely. He couldn’t ignore it altogether, however, or show he didn’t
like it. It wouldn’t have gone out without some commissar’s approval:
without the state’s approval, in other words. And if the state
approved, citizens who knew what was good for them needed to do
the same.
At the top of the hour, a different announcer came on the air. This
fellow sounded better educated than the joker who’d been bragging
about production norms. “And now the news!” the man said.
Several people with Red Air Force light blue on their collar tabs
perked up. News from around the world mattered. “Soviet forces
continue to punish the Polish reactionaries and the Nazi bandits
who support them,” the announcer crowed. “Over the past several
days, Soviet infantrymen have driven another twenty kilometers
deeper into Poland. Knowledgeable officers report that enemy
resistance is beginning to crumble.”
Nobody said anything. Nobody even raised an eyebrow. Sergei
didn’t think anyone actually fighting the Poles and Germans
believed their resistance was crumbling. He knew damn well he
didn’t. That particular item had to be aimed at bucking up civilian
morale hundreds if not thousands of kilometers from the front.
“Foreign Commissar Litvinov has protested to the Japanese
government about its troop buildup between puppet Manchukuo

and progressive Siberia,” the announcer went on.
Hearing that made Sergei’s headache get worse. This borderland
between the USSR and Poland was nowhere in particular. He tried
to imagine fighting a war at the eastern edge of Siberia. That was
Nowhere in Particular with capital N and P. The only reason either
the Soviet Union or Japan cared about it was because of strategy.
Other than that, the whole area could go hang.
Vladivostok was the USSR’s window on the Pacific. It was a window
frozen shut several months a year, but never mind that. Vladivostok
also sat on the end of the world’s longest supply line: it was the
place where the Trans-Siberian Railroad finally stopped. It wasn’t a
million kilometers from Moscow—it only seemed that way.
What would happen if the little yellow monkeys who lived in Japan
tried to seize the railroad and cut the town’s lifeline? How long
before Vladivostok withered? How long before the Japanese could
just walk in? Sergei was too young to remember the siege of Port
Arthur and the Russo-Japanese War as a whole, but he knew about
them. Few Soviet citizens didn’t. Even though the Tsar’s corrupt
regime was to blame for the Russian defeat, it still rankled.
Brooding about it made him read some of what the radio newscaster
was saying. When he started paying attention again, the man was
saying, “And the French government has declared that the front is
Paris. The French say they are determined to fight in the capital
itself, and to fight on beyond it even if it falls. They did not have to
do this during the last war. Whether they will live up to their
promises, only time will tell.”
“If they’d done better by Czechoslovakia when the war started, they
might not be in this mess now,” Anastas Mouradian said. “They’ll
probably expect us to pull their chestnuts off the fire for them, too.”

“Too fucking bad if they do. We’ve got enough worries of our own,”
Sergei said.
“German radio reports that Adolf Hitler has indignantly denied any
military coup was attempted against him,” the announcer said.
“Reliable sources inside Germany report that at least four
prominent German generals have not been seen for several weeks,
however.”
No one eating breakfast said anything to that. No one imagined
anything could be safe to say. No one even wanted to look at
anyone else. The look on your face could betray you, too.
Soviet generals—far more than four of them—started disappearing
in 1937. Like some of the Old Bolsheviks who started getting it in
the neck at the same time, a few confessed to treason in show trials
before they were executed. Others were simply put to death, or
vanished into the camps, or just…disappeared.
It wasn’t only generals, either. Officers of all ranks were purged. So
were bureaucrats of all ranks, and so were doctors and professors
and anyone who seemed dangerous to anyone else.
Now the same thing was happening in Germany? Sergei had
sometimes thought that Communists and Nazis were mirror images
of each other, one side’s left being the other’s right and conversely.
He’d never shared that thought with anyone; had he tried, he would
put his life in the other person’s hands. He wished the idea had
never crossed his mind. Just having certain notions was deadly
dangerous. They might show up on your face without your even
realizing it. And if they did, you were dead.
Or maybe worse.

So did the enemy have to worry about the kinds of things that had
convulsed the Soviet Union for the past couple of years? Good,
Sergei thought. If both sides were screwed up the same way, the
one he was on looked to have a better chance.

LUDWIG ROTHE LIT A GITANE he’d got from a German infantryman
who’d taken a pack from a dead French soldier. It was strong as the
devil, but it tasted like real tobacco, not the hay and ersatz that went
into German cigarettes these days.
“Have another one of those, Sergeant?” Fritz Bittenfeld asked
plaintively.
“You look like a hungry baby blackbird trying to get a worm from its
mama,” Ludwig said. Fritz opened his mouth very wide, as if he
really were a nestling. Laughing, Ludwig gave the panzer driver a
Gitane.
“Chirp!” Theo Hossbach said, flapping his arms. “Chirp!” He got a
cigarette, too.
They’d all smoked them down to tiny butts when a blackshirt who’d
been prowling around the panzer park finally got to them. “Can I talk
to you boys for a minute?” he asked, a little too casually.
His shoulder straps were plain gray, with two gold pips. That made
him the SS equivalent of a captain. How could you say no? You
couldn’t. “What’s up, sir?” Ludwig tried to keep his voice as normal
as he could.
“You men have served under Major Koral for some time—isn’t that
so?” the SS man said.

“Ja,” Ludwig said. Fritz and Theo both nodded. No harm in admitting
that, not when the blackshirt could check their records and find out
for himself that Koral had led the panzer battalion since the war
started.
“All right,” the SS man said, in now-we’re-getting-somewhere tones.
“How often have you heard him express disloyalty toward the Führer
and the Reich?”
“Disloyalty?” Ludwig echoed. He had trouble believing his ears. But
the SS man nodded importantly. He seemed as full of his own
righteousness as the more disagreeable kind of preacher. Picking
his words with care, Ludwig said, “Sir, you do know, don’t you, that
Major Koral’s already been wounded in action twice?”
“Yes, yes.” The SS man nodded impatiently, as if that were of no
account. To him, it probably wasn’t. He went on, “I’m not talking
about his military behavior. I’m talking about his political behavior.”
You idiot, his gaze added. You’re supposed to know things like that
without being told.
Sergeant Rothe bristled at so obviously being thought a moron. But
then he chuckled to himself. If the blackshirt figured him for a
Dummkopf, a Dummkopf he would be, by God. “Sir, the major just
gives me orders. He doesn’t waste his time talking politics with
noncoms.”
“What’s going on, anyway?” Theo sounded as innocent as an unweaned baby. His dreamy features let him get away with that more
easily than Ludwig could have.
The SS man didn’t hesitate before answering, “You will have heard
that certain Wehrmacht generals betrayed their country by viciously
plotting against the Führer?”

Ludwig had heard that, all right, from Hitler’s own lips. Telling the SS
man as much struck him as the very worst of bad ideas. “Gott im
Himmel!” he exclaimed, as if it were a complete surprise. “I heard it,
ja, but I thought it was only enemy propaganda.” Beside him, Theo
and Fritz nodded.
“It’s true, all right,” the blackshirt said. “They were disgraces to the
uniform they wore, disgraces to the Volk, disgraces to the Reich.
And so we must purify the army of all their associates and of
everyone who might have shared their vicious views. Now do you
understand why I am inquiring about Major Koral?”
“He wouldn’t do anything like that,” Fritz said. “He wouldn’t put up
with anybody else who did, either.”
Theo nodded again. “That’s right.”
“I think so, too,” Ludwig said.
“You might be surprised. You might be very surprised indeed,” the
SS man said. “We’ve found treason in some places where no one
would have thought to look for it if these generals hadn’t disgraced
themselves.”
If Ludwig hadn’t heard it from the Führer, he would have wondered
what that meant. He did wonder what the SS and the Gestapo were
up to now. Had they sniffed out more real treason, or had they
“discovered” it regardless of whether it was really there? He didn’t
ask this fellow that kind of question. That it could occur to him might
be plenty to mark him as disloyal.
He did ask, “Why do you think Major Koral might be mixed up in this
…this Scheisse?”
“Scheisse it is,” the SS man agreed. He pulled a scrap of paper

from the right beast pocket of his tunic. “He has…let me see…a
long history of association with General Fritsche, and also with
General Halder. He may have been a Social Democrat before 1933
—the record is not completely clear about that, but it is worrisome.
And one of his cousins was formerly married to a Jew.”
If Fritsche and Halder were two of the generals who’d tried to
overthrow the Führer, that might mean something. Or, of course, it
might not. Ludwig had a long history of association with his cats, but
he’d never wanted to eat mice himself. The rest didn’t seem to
mean much. The Social Democrats had been the biggest party in
Germany during the Weimar Republic. They were about as
exclusive as a blizzard. Ludwig had no great use for Jews, but he
thought one of his cousins was married to one, too. He hoped to
God the SS would never dig that out and use it against him.
“Sorry not to be more help, sir,” he said insincerely.
“Like the sergeant said, Major Koral’s always been brave in
combat,” Theo added. “Didn’t he win the Iron Cross First Class?
Didn’t they put him up for the Ritterkreuz?”
The Iron Cross First Class—just like the Führer, Ludwig thought
—one more thing he knew better than to say out loud. But the two
awards weren’t really comparable. Lots of officers got the Iron Cross
First Class now. For a common soldier in the Kaiser’s army to have
won it the last time around was much more remarkable. Even the
Knight’s Cross in this war wasn’t the same.
The SS man looked unhappy enough at Theo’s mild questions.
“That has nothing to do with anything,” he said stiffly. “If you recall
anything suspicious about him, report it to your superiors at once.
At once, do you hear?” He tramped off, his back ramrod straight.

“Jesus Christ on roller skates!” Fritz said. “I think I’d sooner go to
the dentist than get another little visit like that.”
“You can spread that on toast and call it butter,” Theo agreed.
Ludwig supposed it was agreement, anyhow. The radioman came
out with the strangest things sometimes.
Fritz Bittenfeld found a new question: “Should we go tell the major
he’s got hounds sniffing on his trail?”
“If we see him in the field, sure,” Ludwig said. “But those fucking
goons’ve got to be keeping an eye on him. If we go blab, what
happens to us? We stick our dicks in the sausage grinder, that’s
what?”
“Oh, that smarts!” Theo said in shrill falsetto. Ludwig and Fritz both
laughed. Better to laugh than to grab at yourself, which was what
Ludwig’s figure of speech made him want to do. Assuming it was a
figure of speech, of course. With the SS, you could never be sure.
And if they did it for real…Ludwig wanted to grab at himself again.
Bitterly, Fritz said, “It’s a hell of a note when you find out combat’s
not the worst thing that can happen to you.”
“Yeah, it’s a hell of a note, all right,” Ludwig said. “You going to tell
me it isn’t true? I can deal with the Czechs and the French and the
English. I can even deal with the Russians if I have to. My old man
fought in the East the last time around. Yeah, I can cope with that
—bet your ass I can. But heaven help me if I’ve got to try and
handle the cocksuckers who think they’re on my side.”
He kept his voice down. No one but his buddies could possibly have
heard him. Only after the words were out of his mouth did he
wonder if he could trust Fritz and Theo. They all trusted one
another with their lives on the battlefield. But political matters were

different—and, as Fritz had said, worse.
If he and the driver and the radioman couldn’t trust one another
…Ludwig swore under his breath. This was the nastiest thing the SS
did, right here. If you weren’t sure you could count on people who’d
already saved your bacon more times than you could remember,
then what?
You were screwed, that was what.
“We’re as bad as the Russians, you know?” Theo said, which was
too close for comfort to what Ludwig was thinking. The radio
operator went on, “Pretty soon I’m going to start praying for cloudy
weather.”
“What the hell is that supposed to mean?” Ludwig demanded.
“Well, if my shadow isn’t there, I don’t have to worry that it’ll betray
me to the Gestapo when I’m not looking,” Theo answered. That
either made no sense at all or altogether too much.
“Maybe it isn’t there because it’s off betraying you to the Gestapo.”
Later, Ludwig wondered about himself. At the time, what he said
seemed logical enough—to him, anyhow.
It didn’t faze Theo, either. “Nothing would surprise me any more,” he
said. “Shadows aren’t to be trusted. No matter how much you feed
‘em, they never get any fatter than you do. And have you ever seen
one that wasn’t as dark as a nigger, even when it was walking on a
snowbank?”
Fritz looked from one of his crewmates to the other. “I think you’ve
both gone round the bend,” he declared.
“Zu befehl,” Theo said—at your service. He clicked his heels, as if

he were a Prussian grandee or an Austrian gentleman with more
noble blood than he knew what to do with.
A battery of French 75s near Meaux started shelling the panzer
park at extreme long range. Only a few shells came close enough to
drive the Germans into the holes they’d dug. They had dug holes,
of course; whenever they stopped for more than a few minutes, they
dug. Anyone would have thought Wehrmacht men—and their
French and English counterparts—descended from moles rather
than monkeys.
“Wonder if the SS shithead has enough sense to take cover,” Fritz
remarked.
“Nobody’ll miss him if he doesn’t,” Ludwig said. “With a little luck,
even the Frenchmen won’t miss him.” Fritz and Theo both groaned.
Neither tried to tell him he was wrong.
After a while, when the French guns didn’t blow up any ammunition
dumps or show other tangible evidence of success, they eased off.
The panzer crews came up above ground. And there was the
blackshirt, a pistol in hand, leading Major Koral to a waiting auto
with a swastika flag flying above its right fender. Face pale and set,
the major got in. The car sped away, back toward Germany.
“What is this world coming to?” Ludwig wondered out loud.
“Nothing good,” Fritz answered. “Dammit, we’ve still got a war to
fight.”
“So does Major Koral,” Theo added. Koral would likely lose his. And
who would get the blame if the Wehrmacht also lost its?

Paris in wartime. Alistair Walsh had seen the City of Light in 1918,
too. Then, though, it had been pretty clear that the Kaiser’s troops
wouldn’t make it this far. Bombers were only nuisances in those
fondly remembered days.
Things were different now, not quite twenty-one years later. Maybe
1914 had felt like this: the sense of the field-gray Juggernaut’s car
bearing down on the city, with all the people in it wondering whether
to run away or to grab what amusement they could before
everything disappeared.
British money went a long way in France. Walsh remembered that
from the last time around, and it still seemed true. He’d got buzzed
at a bar where the fellow serving drinks—a man no more than a
couple of years older than he was—had a patch over his left eye
and walked with a limp. “You here before, Tommy?” the Frenchman
asked in fair English.
“Oh, yes.” Alistair brushed his wounded leg with one hand. “I caught
a packet, too—not so bad as yours, but that’s just bloody luck one
way or the other.”

“Yes. We could both be dead,” the bartender agreed, handing him
his whiskey and soda. “And you—you have another chance.”
“Right.” Walsh didn’t like thinking about that, however true it was.
“So do you, pal, come to that. Damned Germans bomb Paris every
chance they get.”
The Frenchman called his eastern neighbors several things unlikely
to appear in dictionaries. Walsh hadn’t learned a lot of French in his
two stays on the Continent, but what he had learned was of that
sort. “You bet,” he said, and slid a shilling across the zinc-topped
bar. “Here. Buy yourself one, too.”
“Merci.” The barman made the silver coin vanish.
“Damn shame about the Eiffel Tower, too,” Walsh added awkwardly.
“When the top part falls off—fell off—it should fall on the
government’s head,” the French veteran said. “Then maybe it do
some good. After we beat the Boches, we build it again.”
“There you go.” Alistair started to suggest that the Germans could
pay for it, but he swallowed that. Reparations had been nothing but
a farce after the last war. Why expect anything better this time
around?
“Drink up, mon ami,” the Frenchman said. “You will look for other
sport, eh? Night still comes too soon, especially with blackout.”
“Too right it does.” Walsh realized the barman really liked him.
Otherwise, the fellow would have tried to keep him in there forever.
But the man must have realized he’d do all right from his other
customers. Soldiers wearing several different uniforms packed the
place. As long as none of them was in German kit…

Walsh had to push through double blackout curtains to get out onto
the street. A little light leaked out despite the curtains. A flic blew his
whistle and shouted something irate. Since Alistair didn’t understand
it, he didn’t have to answer. That was how he felt, anyhow. And it
was already dark enough to let him fade into the crowd before the
copper could get a good look at him.
He knew where he was going, or thought he did. The house was
supposed to be around the corner and a couple of streets up. He
figured it would be easy to find even in the dark: places like that
always had queues—or, given French carelessness about such
things, crowds—of horny soldiers outside waiting their turn for a go
with one of the girls.
But he missed it. Maybe he walked past the corner in the gloom, or
maybe the place wasn’t where he thought it was. He wandered
around, bumping into people and having others bump into him.
“Excuse me,” he said, and, “Pardon.” It wasn’t curfew time yet, and
Paris kept going regardless of such tiresome regulations.
Cars honked like maniacs as they rattled along. They had
headlamps masked with black paper or cloth so only a tiny slit of
light came out: with luck, not enough to see from 20,000 feet. The
faint glow wasn’t enough to let drivers see much, either. Every so
often, the sound of crunching bumpers and frantic cursing
punctuated the night.
Another couple of steps and Alistair bumped into somebody else.
“Excuse me,” he repeated resignedly.

“Pardon,” said his victim: a woman.
They both stepped forward again, trying to go around each other,
and bumped once more. “Bloody hell,” Walsh said. You could be as
foul-mouthed as you pleased in a country where most people didn’t
know what you were talking about.
But the woman laughed. “I was thinking the same thing,” she said,
her English better than the barman’s.
“Sorry,” Alistair mumbled.
“Don’t worry,” she answered. “My husband would say that when he
was alive. He was a soldier from the last war.”
“You were married to a Tommy?” Walsh asked.
“That’s right,” she said. “My father was a butcher. My brother got
killed at Verdun, and so Fred took over the business. Better than he
could have done in England, he always said. But he died five years
ago…and now we have war again.”
“Too right we do.” Walsh wondered what the hell to say next. Verdun
was gone, lost, this time around, though not with the titanic
bloodbath of 1916. He couldn’t very well ask a woman where the
maison de tolerance was. He wondered if he could talk her into
taking him home with her. If she was used to British soldiers (though
he was no damned Englishman—by the way she sounded, her Fred
had come from Yorkshire or thereabouts)…
Before he could find anything, she said, “Maybe you should go left
at the next corner. It’s not far at all—only a few meters. Good luck,
Tommy.” Then she was nothing but fading footsteps on the street:
this time, she stepped around him nimbly as a dancer.

Alistair laughed at himself. So she wasn’t a widow who needed
consoling—not from him, anyhow. “Too damned bad,” he muttered.
“She’d be better than what I could pay for.” And then, thoughtfully,
“Left, is it?”
He didn’t think in meters, but he could make sense of them. You had
to if you were going to fight on the Continent. He found the corner
by stepping off the curb. He didn’t fall on his face, which proved
God loved drunks. He didn’t get run over crossing the street, either
—no thanks to the French drivers, most of whom tooled along as if
they could see for miles, not six inches past their noses if they were
lucky.
A long block down the street, he bumped into somebody else. “‘Ere,
myte, watch yourself,” growled an unmistakable Cockney.
“Oh, keep your hair on,” Walsh retorted, not only showing he was
from Britain himself but suggesting he had the bulge to deal with
any ordinary soldier. He paused. He still couldn’t see much, but his
ears told him a long file of men stood here breathing and muttering
and shuffling their feet. A light went on in his head, even if it
illuminated nothing out here. “Is this the queue for—?”
“You fink Oi’d wyte loike this for anyfing else?” the Cockney
answered.
“I suppose not,” Walsh said. Fred’s widow knew soldiers, all right,
and knew what they’d be looking for. If she knew he also wouldn’t
have minded looking for her…well, that was how the cards came
down. She might have been better, but this wouldn’t be bad—not
while it was going on, anyhow. Later, he’d likely wonder why he
wasted his money on some tart who’d forget him as soon as he got
off her.

But that would be later. The queue lurched forward a few feet.
Somebody joined it behind Alistair, and then somebody else. He
wished he could light a cigarette, but that was against the blackout
rules, too. One more thing he’d have to wait for. Well, it wouldn’t be
long.

BREAKFAST AT THE AIRSTRIP WAS rolls and strong coffee. HansUlrich Rudel longed for milk. By the way a lot of the Stuka pilots and
rear gunners went on, they longed for schnapps or whiskey. He
didn’t care what they drank, as long as it didn’t hurt what they did in
the air. They sassed him unmercifully. He’d got used to that—by all
the signs, he was the only teetotaler in the Luftwaffe. He didn’t much
like it, but he couldn’t fight everybody all the time.
And then someone said something different to him: “What do you
think of the new wing commander?”
“Colonel Steinbrenner?” Rudel shrugged. “He seems like a good
enough officer—and I’m sure he’s a good German patriot.”
“Do you think Colonel Greim wasn’t?” asked the other pilot, a new
fish. Was he Maxi or Moritz? Moritz, that was it.
Hans-Ulrich shrugged again. “He’d still be in charge of the wing if
the powers that be thought he was. Me, I say ‘Heil Hitler!’ and I go
about my business. What else can you do?”
Moritz started to say something, stopped, and then tried again: “The
war hasn’t gone the way everybody hoped it would when it started.”
“And so?” Rudel gulped coffee. He needed help prying his eyelids
open—like most flyers these days, he was chronically short on
sleep. And this brew would do the trick, too, which meant it had to

come from captured stock. But he could see some things even with
his eyes closed. “How many wars do go just the way one side thinks
they will beforehand? Do we toss out the Führer because things
aren’t perfect?”
“Of course not,” Moritz said quickly.
“Of course not,” Hans-Ulrich agreed. He hadn’t expected his
colleague to say anything else. That the other man might not dare
say anything else never crossed his mind. He believed in Führer
and Party at least as strongly as he believed in his father’s stern
Lutheran God. Till the latest political upheavals, he’d assumed
everybody else felt the same way. “This foolishness isn’t doing the
war effort any good.”
Moritz looked down into his coffee mug. Then he eyed Hans-Ulrich
again. “Which foolishness?” he asked quietly. “The coup, or what’s
happening now to anybody who might have known anything about
it?”
“Why, the coup, of course.” Rudel’s answer was as automatic as the
mechanism that pulled a Stuka out of a dive. Only after it came out
did he fully realize what the other man had said. “I could report you
for that!” he exclaimed. He almost said, I should report you for that!
“Ja. I know,” Moritz answered. “But think first. Would I go up there to
get my ass shot off if I weren’t loyal to the Vaterland?”
Nobody without a death wish would fly a Stuka if he weren’t doing it
for his country. Even so, Hans-Ulrich said, “You can’t be loyal to the
Vaterland if you’re not loyal to the Führer. We’d lose for sure if
anyone else tried to run the war, or if we bugged out of it. We’d stab
ourselves in the back, the same way we did in 1918.”
“No doubt,” the other pilot said. Was that agreement, or was he just

trying to get Hans-Ulrich out of his hair? Hans-Ulrich knew which way
he’d bet. He didn’t know what to do next. Anyone who wondered
about vengeance was less loyal to the Party and the Führer than he
should have been. But if you were a brave pilot, and you hurt the
French and British every time you flew…
Rudel was still chewing on that when he headed off to hear Colonel
Steinbrenner’s morning briefing with the rest of the pilots. His ankle
still hurt, but he could walk on it and use the Stuka’s aileron
controls. That was all that counted.
“If we can break through north of Paris, we have them,”
Steinbrenner declared. “Then we wheel around behind the city, the
way we would have done it in 1914 if von Kluck hadn’t run short of
men and turned too soon.”
He was in his forties—old enough to remember von Kluck’s turn,
maybe old enough to have been one of the footsloggers who made
it and then got hurled back from the Marne. By the way he spoke,
he still took it personally a generation later.
“We’ve done better this time than we did in 1914,” he went on.
“Thanks to the panzers and to you boys, we’ve got most of the
French Channel ports. That makes it harder for England to send
men and machines to the Continent. And who’s to thank for the
panzers and the Stukas and the rest of our toys? The Führer, that’s
who.”
Hans-Ulrich nodded vigorously. So did most of the other men in the
wing. He judged that some of them, like him, meant it from the
bottom of their hearts. Others wanted to be seen nodding so the
new wing commander would have no reason to doubt their loyalty.
Whited sepulchers, he thought scornfully. His father had plenty of
things to say about parishioners who acted pious in church but

behaved like animals as soon as they got outside again.
And a few stubborn souls, Moritz among them, just sat there
listening as if Colonel Steinbrenner were going on about the
weather. Maybe they had the courage of their convictions. Some
men did fight for Voter-land rather than Führer. Rudel didn’t think
the two were separable. He was willing to bet Germany’s foes didn’t,
either.
After a moment, Steinbrenner resumed: “Your target is Chaumont.
There’s a railway viaduct there—it’s more than six hundred meters
long, and it crosses the Suize. Artillery hasn’t been able to knock it
out, and the enemy keeps sending men and matériel across it. Time
to put a stop to that, by God!”
Now everybody nodded. Give the Luftwaffe a purely military
problem, and it would handle things just fine. Even Hans-Ulrich was
relieved that he wouldn’t have to think about politics while he was
flying. If any of the other men felt differently, he would have been
very surprised.
Groundcrew men were already bombing up his Stuka and fueling it
when he went out to the revetment. Sergeant Dieselhorst was
grabbing a premission cigarette a safe distance away. “What’s on
the plate?” Dieselhorst asked.
“Chaumont. Railroad bridge,” Hans-Ulrich said.
“Ach, so.” The sergeant’s cheeks hollowed as he took one last drag.
He crushed the butt underfoot. “Flak’ll be thick enough to walk on,”
he said mournfully. “They know what those bridges are worth.”
“You can always bow out,” Hans-Ulrich said. The rear gunner sent
him a reproachful look. Rudel gestured toward the Ju-87. “Well,
come on, then. Heil Hitler!”

“Heil!” Dieselhorst echoed. Whatever he thought of the rumored
coup, he didn’t say much. He just did his job. That wasn’t the worst
attitude for a noncom—or anyone else—to have.
Inside the plane’s cabin, he and Hans-Ulrich went through their
preflight checks. Everything came up green. With all the flying the
planes were doing, the groundcrews had to work miracles to keep
so many of them airborne. So far, the mechanics and armorers
seemed up to it.
A groundcrew man spun the prop. Hans-Ulrich fired up the engine.
Another groundcrew man sat on the wing to help guide him as he
taxied out of the revetment and onto the airstrip’s chewed-up grass.
The ground crewman hopped off with a wave. Rudel gave him one,
too. When he got the takeoff signal, he gunned the Stuka. It
bounced down the runway and lurched into the air. It might not have
been pretty, but it flew, all right.
Chaumont wasn’t far on the map, but it was far enough: farther than
the Kaiser’s army had ever got. “We have company,” Sergeant
Dieselhorst said, distracting Rudel.
He looked around, making sure he’d read the noncom’s tone the
right way. Yes, those were Messerschmitts flying with the Stukas, not
Hurricanes or French fighters streaking in to attack them. Chaumont
was important, then. Flights over France, unlike those across the
Channel, didn’t always get escorts laid on.
Hans-Ulrich saw the flak well before he reached the target. It did
look thick enough to walk on. Yes, the enemy also knew how
important Chaumont was. Hans-Ulrich muttered to himself, but didn’t
say anything out loud. He didn’t want Dieselhorst worrying any more
than necessary. Worrying as much as proved necessary would

likely be bad enough.
Hurricanes streaked at the Stukas maybe a minute and a half later.
The 109s zoomed away to meet the British fighters. Hans-Ulrich had
seen over England that that was the best way to hold off enemy
planes. Sticking too close to the bombers you were escorting gave
attackers a big edge.
Sometimes the enemy got through no matter what you did.
Sergeant Dieselhorst’s machine gun chattered. Rudel saw a couple
of Stukas diving for the deck, hoping to outrun the Hurricanes on
their tails. He wished them luck, and feared they’d need it.
He started his own dive for the railroad bridge sooner than he’d
intended to, which also meant it had to be shallower. That gave the
antiaircraft gunners plenty of time to fire at him. Shells burst all
around his Stuka. He hung on to the stick as tight as he could—it
was like driving a car on a badly rutted dirt road. Puffs of evil black
smoke came closer and closer. A few bits of shrapnel rattled off the
plane or tore into it—luckily, only a few.
Trying not to think about anything else, Hans-Ulrich bored in on the
bridge. The viaduct had three levels, towering more than fifty
meters above the river it overleaped. Some plump, pipe-smoking,
mustachioed French engineer of the last century must have been
proud of himself for designing it. Rudel yanked at the bomb-release
lever. With a little luck, he’d make that Frenchman’s grandchildren
unhappy.
As soon as the bombs fell free, the Stuka got faster and friskier.
More flak burst behind it, in front of it, all around it. And Sergeant
Dieselhorst’s voice rang tinnily through the speaking tube: “You
nailed the fucking bridge! It’s going down!”

“Danken Gott dafür!” Rudel said. He sped back toward the east,
keeping his gauges at the edge of the red till he was sure he’d
made it to German-held territory. If one of the Hurricanes had
chosen to chase him, red-lining the gauges wouldn’t have done
much good. The Stuka made a fine dive-bomber, but a poor tired
donkey in a sprint on the flat.
He got down. To his surprise, Colonel Steinbrenner trotted up
before his prop stopped spinning. “Rudel!” the colonel said. “They
swore you’d got shot down again. They said nobody could go into
that kind of fire and come out the other side in one piece.”
They, whoever they were, hadn’t tried it themselves. Hans-Ulrich
shrugged. He hadn’t thought—much—about going down. All he’d
thought about was doing his job. Letting the other get in the way
would have distracted him. It might have given him cold feet. Now
that he’d made it through, he wondered why the devil it hadn’t.
Shrugging again, he said, “I’m here. The bridge is down.”
“There’s an Iron Cross First Class!” Steinbrenner said.
Medals weren’t the biggest thing on Rudel’s mind—nowhere close.
He did say, “Make sure Dieselhorst gets one, too. He kept the
enemy fighters off my back.”
“He’ll be taken care of,” the wing commander promised. Hans-Ulrich
believed him. Back in the last war, enlisted men always got the shitty
end of the stick. The Führer understood that—he’d seen it for
himself, in four years at the front. He’d sworn things would be
different this time around, and he’d meant it. Some of the vons left
over from the last round might not like it, but too bad for them.
Hans-Ulrich climbed out of the cockpit. Behind him, Sergeant
Dieselhorst was coming out, too. “Made it,” the noncom said with a

wry grin.
“Ja.” Hans-Ulrich nodded. “And do you know what we won? Besides
the Eisenkreuz, I mean?”
“What’s that?” Dieselhorst asked.
“A chance to have just as much fun again tomorrow, or maybe later
on today,” Rudel answered.
The rear gunner and radioman made a wry face. “Hot damn!” he
said.

JOAQU IN DELGADILLO LOOKED ACROSS THE Straits of Gibraltar
to Africa. That was better than looking at Gibraltar itself. The British
had fought like fourteen different kinds of demon to hold on to the
Rock. In the end, it didn’t do them a peseta’s worth of good. Spain’s
gold and scarlet flew over Gibraltar for the first time in more than
two hundred years.
Posters slapped onto walls or fences still standing boasted of the
return to Spanish sovereignty. OURS AGAIN! they shouted, and
GOOD-BYE TO ENGLAND! Glum British POWs moped behind
barbed wire. The people who’d lived in Gibraltar were mostly
Spaniards. The ones left alive after the fight seemed just as
disheartened as the enemy soldiers. General Sanjurjo’s men were
making them sorry they’d backed the Union Jack.
A couple of Condor Legion German airmen walked by, gabbing in
their incomprehensible guttural language. Delgadillo wondered why
they didn’t choke to death every time they opened their mouths.
One of them nodded to him and said, “Buenos días.” Sound by
sound, the words were in Spanish, but no one who heard them

would have dreamt they came from a Spaniard’s throat.
“Buenos días,” Delgadillo answered politely. Even if they did talk as
if their mouths were full of glue, they’d done Marshal Sanjurjo a lot
of good. German bombers had helped flatten the British defenses
here, for instance, and made British battleships keep their distance.
That thought made Joaquin look west instead of south. If the Royal
Navy wanted to cause trouble, it still could. And it might: not only to
pay Spain back for reclaiming Gibraltar but to keep the Straits open
so British and French ships could pass into and out of the
Mediterranean.
He’d faced fire from big naval guns before German planes pounded
them into silence. If he never had to do that again, he’d light a
grateful candle in church. Once was twice too often. They were
much, much worse than land-based artillery—and that was more
than bad enough.
The Condor Legion men were looking out to sea, too. One of them
—not the one who’d spoken before—asked, “Where is your
engineering officer?” He spoke better—not well, but better.
Delgadillo pointed north. “That way, about a kilometer and a half.
Why do you need him?” He would never have asked that of one of
his own officers. Spanish common soldiers didn’t ask their officers
anything. They existed to do as they were told. But the Germans
were so foreign, so exotic, they might not know that.
Sure enough, this one answered readily enough: “We need spare
parts to discuss. Since the big war in Europe began, we have from a
shortage of them suffered.”
Why didn’t he put his verbs where they would do him some good?
Did he hide them in his own language, too? He must have, or he

wouldn’t have done it in Spanish.
“I don’t know if he’ll be able to help you, Señor.” Delgadillo was
polite. He didn’t tell the Condor Legion men the engineering officer
didn’t have a chance in hell of doing them any good. Lieutenant
Lopez tried hard. Sometimes he could come up with a new bolt or a
spring for a rifle. He’d done yeoman’s duty repairing the broken axle
on a horse-drawn wagon. But he knew no more about airplane parts
than a goat knew about the miracle of transubstantiation.
“Well, we will out find. Many thanks. Much obliged,” the German
said. He and his pal headed north. A Spaniard, on a mission bound
to be futile, would have taken his time. The Germans marched away
as if they were on a parade ground. Why anybody would be so
diligent without some superior’s eye on him was more than
Delgadillo could fathom. He shrugged. The foreigners might be a
little bit crazy, but they were good at what they did, and they were
on his side.
He looked west again. No British battleships. No smoke in the
distance. No enormous shells crashing down like the end of the
world. Nothing but one Spanish soldier with the jitters.
Well, no. That wasn’t quite true. A couple of hundred meters away,
an officer with enormous, tripod-mounted binoculars scanned the
horizon. Delgadillo knew there were observation posts up on the
heights of the Rock, too. They could see farther from there.
If the battleships came and those Germans didn’t have their spare
parts…What would happen then? The same thing that would
happen if there were no airplanes. The ships would pound the
stuffing out of Gibraltar.
He laughed at himself. What could he do about it any which way?

Jump into the closest foxhole, work his rosary for all it was worth,
and pray to the Virgin to keep the guns from blowing him to
dogmeat. A common soldier’s life wasn’t easy, but most of the time it
was pretty simple.
Any common soldier, no matter whose army he belonged to, learned
to look busy, even—often especially—when he wasn’t. Sergeant
Carrasquel turned his basilisk stare on Joaquin, but didn’t put him to
work. If you had a rag and a brush, you could look as if you were
cleaning your rifle. No underofficer ever complained if he caught
you doing that. And if you weren’t so diligent as you might have
been…well, how could a sergeant tell?
Having successfully evaded any real duty most of the day,
Delgadillo queued up for supper with no small feeling of
accomplishment. Food on the Rock was pretty good. Not the
smallest reason was that much of it came from captured British
supplies. The enemy had done his best to destroy what he could
before Gibraltar fell, but the Spaniards took the place before he
could ruin it all. Joaquin had heard that the Tommies scorned bully
beef, but it beat the devil out of going empty.
Pride went before a fall. He got nabbed for kitchen police. Washing
and drying and scrubbing weren’t dangerous, but they weren’t any
fun, either. Pepe Rivera, the boss cook, was a top sergeant, and an
evil-tempered son of a whore, too. No matter what Joaquin did, it
wasn’t good enough to suit him.
Delgadillo had just gone to bed when antiaircraft guns woke him up.
He grabbed his helmet—a Spanish copy of the German model from
the last war—and ran for the closest trench. “God damn the French
to hell!” he said as he scrambled down into it.
“He will. He does,” another soldier said. It wasn’t the first time

French bombers had crossed from Morocco to hit Gibraltar. They
were only nuisance raids—nothing like the pounding the papers
said the Germans were giving to London and Paris. But you could
get killed in a nuisance raid, too, if you were careless or unlucky.
Bombs whistled down. They exploded, none of them especially
close. The drone of aircraft engines overhead faded away. The
antiaircraft guns kept hammering for another ten or fifteen minutes.
Then they seemed satisfied and shut up.
“Gracias a Dios y su Madre,” Joaquin said, climbing out of the
trench. He yawned enormously. Maybe he could grab some sleep at
last.

OUT ON THE STREETS OF MÜNSTER, away from any possible
microphones, Sarah Goldman said, “I wish we’d get another letter.”
Even here, she named no names and gave no details. You never
could tell who was listening. If people in Germany had learned
anything since 1933, that was it.
Her mother nodded. “So do I. But we were lucky to get one, and
Frau Breisach put herself in danger to bring it to us.”
“I know. It was kind of her. Brave of her, too,” Sarah said.
Propaganda posters sprouted like mold on walls and fences and
tree trunks. Some showed jut-jawed, blue-eyed men in coal-scuttle
helmets: recruiting posters for the Wehrmacht and the Waffen-SS.
Sarah didn’t mind those so much. Germany was at war, after all.
Father and Saul would have joined if the country had let them. In
spite of everything, Saul had joined.
There’d been more Waffen-SS posters lately, especially since the

coup against Hitler failed. Sarah didn’t like that, but she didn’t know
what she could do about it. No. Actually, she did know. She couldn’t
do a thing.
Other posters showed hook-nosed, flabby-lipped Jews pulling the
strings on puppets of Chamberlain and Daladier, or a capitalist Jew
in a morning coat and top hat shaking hands with a Communist Jew
in overalls and a flat cloth cap above a woman’s corpse labeled
GERMANY. Still others carried a stark, simple message: THE JEWS
ARE OUR MISFORTUNE.
“Why do they hate us so much?” Sarah whispered. The poison
made her want to hate herself.
“I only wish I knew,” Mother answered. “Then maybe I could do
something about it.” She sighed. Her breath smoked. Spring was
supposed to be on the way, but it hadn’t got here yet. “Or maybe
knowing wouldn’t make any difference. Sometimes things just are
what they are, that’s all.”
“That’s what I was afraid of,” Sarah said. “If it made sense,
though…” She shook her head in frustration. “If it had to make
sense, the goyim wouldn’t do it.”
“They might. Sometimes people don’t care what they do.” Mother
paused, then added, “And look at the name you just called them. If
you could, you’d do worse than call them names, wouldn’t you?”
“I wouldn’t start anything,” Sarah said. “But after all they’ve done to
us, shouldn’t we get even if we can?”
“An eye for an eye. A tooth for a tooth. And after a while everyone’s
blind and nobody has any teeth,” Mother said sadly.
Laborers were still repairing British bomb damage and hauling away

rubble one wheelbarrow at a time. The RAF wanted to make sure
Germany had no eyes or teeth. Sarah had always thought of herself
as a German, at least till the Nazis wouldn’t let her any more, and
the enemy bomber crews were trying to kill her, too. All the same,
she wouldn’t have shed a tear if one of their bombs blew up Hitler
and Hess and Goebbels and Göring.
The laborers paused when Sarah and her mother went by. Sarah
felt their eyes on her—and maybe on Mother, too. She tried to
pretend the sweaty men in overalls weren’t there: that was one
more complication she didn’t need.
And looking at them would have reminded her of Saul working in a
gang just like this one…and of his shovel caving in the gang boss’
skull. She wished she could forget she’d ever seen that. She wished
she could forget she’d ever heard it, too.
“Hey, sweetheart!” one of the workmen called. He rocked his hips
forward and back. His buddies laughed.
Sarah just kept walking. “They don’t know we’re Jews,” she said in a
low voice.
“A good thing, too. They’d be worse if they did,” her mother
answered. “I keep hearing they’re going to make us put yellow stars
on our clothes. Thank God it hasn’t happened yet—that’s all I can
say.”
“Like the ghetto in the old days.” Sarah shivered.
“Not quite,” Mother said. Sarah raised a questioning eyebrow. The
older woman explained: “In the old days, they wouldn’t have
charged us ration points for the cloth we need to make the stars.”
“Where did you hear that?” Sarah’s heart sank. It had the ring of

truth: exactly the kind of thing the Nazis, with their often maniacal
drive for efficiency, would think of.
“I forget who told me. Maybe I don’t want to remember.” Mother’s
face twisted. “It sounds too much like something they’d do.”
“I was thinking the same thing,” Sarah said. “I was hoping you’d tell
me I was crazy.” She said verrückt, the proper German term. Back
before the Nazis took over, or back at home even now, she would
more likely have said meshuggeh. It was a friendlier, more
comfortable word. But she didn’t want to speak any Yiddish where
Aryans might overhear.
Aryans! Her father had had several instructive things to say on that
score. He tore Mein Kampfs claims to little pieces and then stomped
on the pieces. He really knew what he was talking about, where the
half-educated Hitler cobbled together bits and pieces from
pamphlets and political tracts and lying, outdated books he’d read.
Hitler reassembled them into his own mosaic, which had precious
little connection to real history.
Samuel Goldman was scholar enough to know as much. He could
prove it, citing chapter and verse. All of which, of course, did him no
good whatever. He wasn’t going to change the Nazis’ minds.
Knowing how much of the Party’s antisemitism was built on lie atop
lie only gave him a sour stomach and heart palpitations.
With an effort, Sarah dragged her mind away from Father’s
frustrations. She had plenty of her own to dwell on. The most
immediate came out: “I hope we’ll be able to get what we need. I
hope we’ll be able to get anything.”
“Well, we haven’t starved yet,” Mother said, which was true but less
than encouraging. With Jews able to shop only as things were about
to close, and with their being unwelcome in so many shops anyhow,

to close, and with their being unwelcome in so many shops anyhow,
staying fed and clothed was even harder for them than for their
German neighbors.
One clever Jew in Hamburg had given her family’s ration coupons to
a gentile friend, who used them to shop for her. The friend could
have used the coupons for her own kin, but she hadn’t done that.
She’d played square—till someone betrayed them. The Jewish
family got it in the neck for evading rationing regulations. And the
gentiles got it in the neck for helping Jews.
For all Sarah knew, they had side-by-side bunks in the Dachau
camp. Or maybe they’d all been shot. She wouldn’t have been
surprised. If you were a German Jew—or an Aryan rash enough to
remember you were also a human being—you couldn’t win.
A trolley rattled by. The motorman ignored Sarah and her mother,
as they ignored him. Jews weren’t supposed to ride streetcars,
either, except going off to the work gangs in the morning or coming
back from them at night. No, you couldn’t win.
“I hope our soles will last,” her mother said. Leather and even
synthetics for shoe repairs were impossible to come by. Sarah
nodded. She hoped her soul would last, too.

Victory will come soon. So the official from the German department
in charge of interned neutrals had assured Peggy Druce. Konrad
Hoppe, that was the bastard’s name. Well, Herr Hoppe wasn’t as
smart as he thought he was. Here it was a month later, and
Germany was still fighting hard.
Here it is, a month later, Peggy thought. More than a month. Pretty
soon it’ll be spring. And here I am, still stuck in goddamn Berlin.
The RAF had come over several times. French planes had dropped
bombs once or twice. Even the Russians had shown up, flying all
the way across Poland and eastern Germany in bombers said to be
bigger than anybody else’s.
None of that had done a hell of a lot of actual damage. Berlin was a
long way off for enemy planes—a long way off from anywhere
civilized, in Peggy’s biased opinion. The bombers had to carry extra
fuel, which meant they couldn’t carry so many bombs.
German searchlights ceaselessly probed the night sky, hunting
marauders. German antiaircraft fire was like a million Fourths of July
all folded into one. It didn’t do much good, though.
That had to be part of why Berlin seemed so jumpy to Peggy These
days, Berliners talked about Hermann Call Me Meyer Göring as
Hermann the Kike—but in low voices, to friends they trusted, in
places where the Gestapo was unlikely to overhear. They were less
discreet than they might have been, though. Peggy wouldn’t have

heard—and chuckled about—Hermann the Kike if they weren’t.
But she was careful where she chuckled, too. She judged that most
of Berlin’s Angst came simply from victory deferred. Had the
Wehrmacht paraded through Paris when Herr Hoppe thought it
would, chances were the generals wouldn’t have tried whatever they
tried. Or had that happened earlier? Nobody officially admitted
anything. After whatever it was didn’t work, Peggy stopped hearing
so many juicy jokes. Passing them on didn’t just land you in trouble
any more. You could, with the greatest of ease, end up dead.
SS men in black uniforms and soldiers in field-gray seemed to
compete with one another in arresting people and hauling them off
God knew where to do God knew what to them. Peggy had never
been so glad she carried an American passport. It was sword and
shield at the same time. You couldn’t walk more than a block without
somebody snapping, “Your papers!” at you.
And when you showed them, what a relief it was to pull out the
leatherette folder stamped in gold with the gold old American eagle
and olive branch rather than the German one holding a swastika in
its claws. “Here you are,” Peggy would say, and show off the
passport with all the pride—and all the relief—she felt.
So far, the talisman had never failed. Whether she displayed it to
SS man, Abwehr official, or ordinary Berlin cop, it always made him
back off. “Oh,” he would say, whoever he happened to be this time
around. Sometimes the German would salute after that; sometimes
he’d just turn away in disappointment, or maybe disgust. But he
would always let her go on.
Then, three blocks farther along, some other jumped-up kraut
reveling in his petty authority would growl, “Your papers!” The whole
stupid farce would play out again.

Once, a particularly reptilian SS man—again, in Peggy’s biased
opinion—tried out his English on her, demanding, “What is an
American doing in Berlin?”
“Trying to get out, pal. Nothing else but,” Peggy answered from the
bottom of her heart. “You want to send me home, I’ll kiss your shiny
boots.” And were they ever. She could have put on her makeup
using the highly polished black leather for a mirror.
For some reason, the SS man didn’t like that, either. “It is a privilege
to come to the capital of the Reich,” he spluttered.
“I’m sure the RAF thinks so, too,” Peggy said sweetly.
The SS man was a fine, fair Aryan, which only made his flush more
obvious. “Air pirates!” he said, proving he not only read but
believed Goebbels’ newspapers. “They murder innocent civilians
—women and children.”
“Sure,” Peggy said, and then, incautiously, “What do you think your
own bombers are doing?”
“We strike only military targets,” the SS man insisted. The scary
thing was, he plainly believed that, too.
Peggy wanted to yank off his high-crowned cap and beat him over
the head with it, in the hope of knocking some sense into him. But
she held back—it was bound to be a lost cause. If you were the kind
of jerk who joined the SS, you had to be immune to sense. She
contented herself with, “Can I go now?”
“‘May.’ It should be ‘may.’” Proud of winning a battle in her language,
the SS man handed back her passport and waved her on.
She turned a corner—and walked straight into a police checkpoint.

“Your papers—at once!” a beer-bellied cop shouted. Peggy
produced the American passport. The policeman recoiled like Bela
Lugosi not seeing his reflection in a mirror. As the SS man had
before him, he barked, “What are you doing in Berlin?”
And, as she had before, Peggy answered truthfully: “Trying to get
out.” Only later did she wonder about taking a big chance twice
running. How many chances had she taken? Too damned many
—she was sure of that. Hadn’t she been proud of acting more
mature? She sure couldn’t prove it today.
But she got by with it one more time. “Pass,” the cop said, writing a
note on a sheet clipped to a flat board. Any Gestapo official who
examined all the reports various Berlin security officials compiled
could figure out everywhere she went. For all she knew, some
Gestapo goon did that every day. If she were a spy, it might have
meant something. But she was only an interned tourist with a big
mouth.
She couldn’t even have fun shopping. Window displays had nothing
to do with what you could actually buy. And everything you could
buy required ration coupons of one kind or another. She got
enough for food to keep her going. For almost everything else, the
Germans didn’t seem to feel obligated to take care of her.
And, after the Athenia went down, she couldn’t get out. She’d tried
to arrange another train ticket to Copenhagen. She’d tried to
arrange a plane ticket to Stockholm. Once she was in Scandinavia,
she could get to England. Once she was in England, she could get
to the States…if the Germans didn’t torpedo her on the way. And if
they did, well, going down with her ship sometimes seemed more
appealing than staying in Berlin.
But they wouldn’t let her out. She got “Your papers!” when she tried

to buy her tickets, too. And when she flashed her passport then, it
wasn’t magic. It was more like poison. They would frown. They would
check a list. Then they would say, “I am very sorry, but this is
verboten.” They liked saying verboten. Telling people no was much
more fun than saying yes would have been. You got to watch your
victims throw the most delightful tantrums.
Peggy refused to give them the satisfaction. She just walked away
both times. After failing to get the plane ticket, she hied herself off to
the U.S. embassy. If she couldn’t get help there, she figured, she
couldn’t get help anywhere.
By all the signs, she couldn’t get help anywhere. The embassy
personnel spoke English, not German, but they might as well have
clicked their heels and intoned, “Verboten.” What they did say
amounted to, “Sorry, but we can’t make the German government get
off the dime.”
“Why not?” Peggy snarled at an undersecretary—she’d made
herself obnoxious enough at the embassy that the clerks had
booted her upstairs to get rid of her. “Denmark’s neutral. Sweden’s
neutral. We’re neutral, for crying out loud. Why won’t the Nazis let
me out of this loony bin?”
The undersecretary—Jenkins, his name was, Constantine Jenkins
—had shiny fingernails—painted with clear polish?—and a soft,
well-modulated voice. Peggy guessed he was a fairy, not that that
should have had anything to do with the price of beer. “Well, Mrs.
Druce, the long answer is that the Germans say they’re at war and
they fear espionage,” he replied. “That weakens any arguments we
might make, because it means they can tell us, ‘Sorry, emergency
—we don’t have to listen to you.’”
“Espionage, my ass!” Peggy blurted, which made the faggy

undersecretary blink. She went on, “The only thing I’ve seen is what
a horrible, run-down dump this place is.”
“That is information the Germans would rather keep to themselves,”
Jenkins said seriously. “And besides, the short answer is, the
Germans are just being Germans—sometimes they enjoy being
difficult. And when they do, you can shout till you’re blue in the face
for all the good it does you.”
“Being pissy, you mean. Shit,” Peggy said. That made much more
sense than she wished it did. She also made the American diplomat
blink again, which was the most fun she’d had all day. She went on,
“Can’t I just sneak over the border somewhere? All I want to do is go
home.”
“I would not recommend it,” he said seriously. “We can be of no
assistance to anyone caught violating the regulations of the country
in which she happens to find herself, and whether those regulations
are just or humane is, I’m afraid, beside the point.”
“Shit,” she said again, and walked out of the embassy. A man
standing across the street wrote something down. Were the Nazis
keeping tabs on her in particular or on everybody who went in and
out? What difference did it make, really?
They wouldn’t let her go to Sweden. They wouldn’t let her go to
Denmark. They wouldn’t let her go to Norway or Finland, either
—she’d also found out that Oslo and Helsinki were off limits. The
bastards wouldn’t let her go anywhere decent, damn them to hell.
She thought about Warsaw. Regretfully, she didn’t think about it
long. Maybe she could get to Scandinavia or Romania from there,
but she feared the odds weren’t good. The Russians had pushed
Poland right into bed with Germany. The Poles probably didn’t want
to land there, but what choice did they have when the Red Army

to land there, but what choice did they have when the Red Army
jumped them? She wished Stalin such a horrible case of mange, it
would make his soup-strainer mustache fall out. That’d teach him!
Then she had a brainstorm—or she hoped it was, anyway. She
turned around and went back to the American embassy. The guy
across the street scribbled some more. Maybe the Gestapo would
have to issue him another pencil.
This time, Peggy didn’t have to be so difficult to get to see the
queer undersecretary. Constantine Jenkins eyed her as if she had a
case of the mange. “What can I do for you now, Mrs. Druce?” he
asked warily.
“Can you help me get to Budapest?” Peggy asked. Hungary wasn’t
exactly a nice place these days. Admiral Horthy’s government (and
wasn’t that a kick in the ass? a landlocked country run by an
admiral) was a hyena skulking along behind the German lion,
feeding on scraps from the bigger beast’s kill. When the Hungarian
army helped Hitler dismantle Czechoslovakia, England and France
promptly broke relations. So did Russia. But she didn’t think any of
them had gone and declared war on the Horthy regime. And if they
hadn’t…something might be arranged.
“Well,” Jenkins said. “That’s interesting, isn’t it?”
“I hope so.” Peggy sent him a reproachful stare. “Why didn’t you
think of it yourself?”
For his part, he looked affronted. “Because chances are the
Germans won’t let you go, even if Hungary is an ally. Because
getting to Budapest doesn’t mean all your troubles are over, or
even that any of them are.”
“If I can get into Hungary, I bet I can get out,” Peggy said.

“Romania—”
“Don’t get your hopes up,” the undersecretary warned. “Romanians
and Hungarians like each other about as much as Frenchmen and
Germans, and for most of the same reasons. Romanians spite
Hungarians for the fun of it, and vice versa. But if you’re trying to
get out of Hungary, you need to worry about Marshal Antonescu’s
goons, not Admiral Horthy’s.”
“Oh.” Peggy knew she sounded deflated. Hell, she felt deflated. She
paused to visualize a map of southeastern Europe. “Well, if I could
get into Yugoslavia, that would do the trick, too. Anywhere but this
Nazi snake pit would.”
“I don’t suppose you want to hear that the Hungarians have
territorial claims against Yugoslavia, too,” Jenkins said.
“Jesus! Is there anybody the Hungarians don’t have territorial claims
against?” Peggy exclaimed.
“Iceland, possibly.” Jenkins didn’t sound as if he was joking. He
explained why: “If you think Hitler hates the Treaty of Versailles—”
“I’m right,” Peggy broke in.
“Yes. You are,” he agreed. “But Horthy and the Hungarians hate the
Treaty of Trianon even more—and with some reason, because
Trianon cost them more territory than Versailles cost Germany. A lot
of it wasn’t territory where Hungarians lived, but some of it was
…and they want the rest back, too. They aren’t fussy, not about
that.”
“I’m sure.” Peggy sighed. “People couldn’t have screwed up the
treaties at the end of the war much worse than they did, could they?
”

“Never imagine things can’t be screwed up worse than they are
already,” Constantine Jenkins replied. “But, that said, in this
particular case I have trouble imagining how they could be.”
“Right.” Peggy sighed. She got to her feet. “Well, I’m going to give it
a shot. What have I got to lose?”
“Good luck.” For a wonder, the American diplomat didn’t sound as if
he meant And the horse you rode in on, lady.
So Peggy went off to the train station to try to get a ticket to
Budapest. When she displayed her passport, the clerk said, “You
will need an entry visa from the Hungarian embassy and an exit visa
from the Foreign Ministry. I regret this, but it is strictly verboten
”—that word again!—“to sell tickets without proper and complete
documentation.”
“Crap,” she muttered in English, which made the clerk scratch his
bald head. “It’s a technical term,” she explained helpfully, “meaning,
well, crap.”
“I see,” he said. By his tone, he didn’t.
Peggy did, all too well. She went off to the Hungarian embassy at 8
Cornelius-Strasse. “Ah, yes—an interesting case,” said the minor
official who dealt with her. His native language gave his German a
musical accent. Had he spoken English, she supposed he would
have sounded like a vampire. Maybe, for once, German was better.
He relieved her of fifty Deutschmarks and stamped her passport. So
she was almost good to go.
Last stop, the Foreign Ministry. Nobody wanted to come right out
and tell her no, but nobody wanted to give her an exit visa, either.
And nobody did. Finally, one of Ribbentrop’s flunkies sighed and

squared his shoulders and said, “It is not practical at this time.”
“Why the devil not?” Peggy blazed. “I’d think you’d be glad to get rid
of me.”
The man shrugged “My orders say this visa is not to be issued. I
must, of course, follow them.”
By the way he talked, it wasn’t that something very bad would
happen to him if he didn’t—though something probably would. But
not following an order was as dreadful to him as desecrating the
sacrament would have been to a devout Catholic.
“Aw, shit,” Peggy said, and that pretty much summed things up.

VACLAV JEZEK HAD NEVER LIKED quartermaster sergeants. As far
as he was concerned, most of them were fat pricks. This miserable
Frenchman was sure wide through the seat of his pants. And he
was acting like a prick, all right. He thought he personally owned
everything in the depot near the village of Hary.
Vaclav had been arguing with him through Benjamin Halévy,
because he still hadn’t picked up much French himself. Since that
wasn’t getting him anywhere, he fixed the French sergeant with a
glare and asked him, “Sprechen Sie Deutsch?”
He got exactly what he hoped for: indignant sputters. Then the
Frenchman spoke to the Jewish noncom doing the translating: “He
wants to know why you think he should speak the enemy’s
language.”
“Does he?” Vaclav pounced: “Tell the son of a bitch I figured he
would because he’s doing more to help the Nazis by sitting on his

ammo till it hatches than he could any other way.”
“Are you sure you want me to say that?” Halévy asked. “He really
won’t help you if I do.”
“Fuck him. He’s not helping me now. He’s got rounds for my antitank
rifle, and he won’t turn them loose,” Jezek said.
“All right. I’ll try. I just wanted to make sure you knew what you were
doing.” In the Jew’s French, Vaclav’s insult sounded less nasty than
it would have in Czech or German—French was better for kissing
ass than for telling somebody off. No matter what it sounded like,
the crack got home. The quartermaster went as hot—and as red
—as iron in the forge. He said several things that sounded heartfelt.
“What’s all that mean?” Vaclav asked with clinical curiosity.
“You’d break your piece over his head if you knew,” Halévy said.
Vaclav laughed. “Not this goddamn thing.” Antitank rifles were huge,
heavy brutes. The heavier the weapon was, the less it kicked when
it spat one of its honking big bullets. Jezek approved of that. As
things were, his shoulder was sore all the time. You could stop an
elephant with an antitank rifle. Sometimes, you could even stop a
tank. Elephants couldn’t grow more armor. Tanks, unfortunately,
could. The rifle would be obsolete pretty soon, and you’d need a
field gun to deal with enemy armor.
In the meantime, Vaclav wished he had a field gun to deal with this
goddamn quartermaster sergeant. The Frenchman and the Jew
went back and forth. Halévy chuckled. “He doesn’t like you, Jezek.”
“Suits me—in that case, we’re even,” Vaclav said. “I’m trying to
defend his lousy country. It’s more than he’s doing, Christ knows.
You can translate that, too.”

Halévy did. The French sergeant didn’t just sputter—he bleated.
Then he sprang up from his folding chair. Vaclav thought the fellow
was going to try and slug him. Monsieur le Français would get a
dreadful surprise if he did; Jezek promised himself that.
But the quartermaster sergeant spun on his heel and stormed away.
The view from the rear was no more appetizing than the one from
the front. “If he’s going after military policemen to haul you off—”
Halévy began.
“They’ll grab you, too, ‘cause you’re the one who said it in French,”
Vaclav said happily. The Jew seemed less delighted. Too bad for
him, Vaclav thought. Just to be helpful, he added, “It’s called
shooting the messenger.”
In Yiddish, French, and Czech, Halévy told him what he could do
with a messenger. To listen to him, shooting was the least of it.
Vaclav listened in admiration. He didn’t understand everything
Halévy said, but he wanted to remember some of what he did
understand.
The quartermaster sergeant came back. A thunderstorm clouded
his brow. He said several pungent things of his own. French might
lack the guttural power of Czech or German when it came to
swearing, but the sergeant did his damnedest. Vaclav hardly cared.
At the same time as the Frenchman was cussing him out, he was
also handing over half a dozen five-round clips of long, fat antitankrifle cartridges.
“Tell him thanks,” Jezek said to Benjamin Halévy.
“Sure.” The Jew eyed him. “It won’t do you any good, you know.” He
spoke in French. The quartermaster replied. Halévy translated for
Vaclav: “He says you can shove a round up your ass and then hit

yourself in the butt with a golf club to touch it off.”
“A golf club?” Vaclav had to laugh. “Well, that’s something different
—fuck me if it’s not.”
“He’d say fuck you anyway,” Halévy replied. “Let’s get out of here
before he decides he really does have to shaft us, just on general
principles.”
That seemed like good advice. Vaclav took it. The quartermaster
offered a couple of poignant parting shots. Vaclav glanced toward
Halévy. The polyglot Jew declined to translate. That was bound to
be just as well.
Civilians streamed away from the front. They didn’t want to get
caught by bombs and shells and machine-gun bullets. Well, who in
their right minds would have? Vaclav didn’t, either. But when you put
on a uniform, that was the chance you took.
Some of the Frenchmen and-women eyed the Czechs suspiciously.
They weren’t poilus. They weren’t Tommies, either. British soldiers
were familiar sights in France. The damnfool locals probably
thought they were Germans—it wasn’t as if that hadn’t happened
before farther east. Vaclav would have thought German uniforms
were plenty familiar here, too. Maybe he was wrong.
Soldiers came back with the civilians. The ones who clutched
wounds, pale and tight-lipped, were simply part of what war did. The
ones who didn’t seem hurt worried Vaclav more. He’d watched the
Czech army fight till it couldn’t fight any more. Then, when the Nazis
kept the pressure on, the Czechs went to pieces.
Would the same thing happen here? As far as Vaclav could see,
France was in better shape than Czechoslovakia had been. The
country seemed united in its fight against the Nazis. Czechoslovakia

sure hadn’t been. Half the Slovaks—maybe more than half—wanted
the state to come to pieces. Their precious Slovakia was supposed
to be independent these days, but Hitler pulled the strings and
made Father Tiso dance.
As for the Sudeten Germans, the miserable bastards who’d touched
off the war…Vaclav muttered something foul. The Czechs had been
pulling them out of the army because they were unreliable. He
muttered something else. Too little, too late. Back right after the last
war ended, Czechoslovakia should have shipped all those
shitheads back to Germany. If they wanted to join the Reich so
much, well, fine. So long.
It hadn’t happened. Too goddamn bad.
A French captain spotted the enormous rifle Vaclav had slung over
his left shoulder. He said something in his own language. Vaclav
only shrugged and looked blank. “Do you want me to understand
him?” Halévy asked—in Czech.
Vaclav didn’t even have to think about it. “Nah,” he said. “He’ll pull
me off to do something stupid that’ll probably get me killed. I’d
rather go on back to camp.”
“Makes sense,” the Jew agreed. Like Vaclav, he stared at the
French officer as if he had no idea the fellow was talking to them.
The Frenchman said something else. Vaclav and Halévy went right
on impersonating idiots. The captain tried bad German. Jezek
understood that. He also understood the captain did have
something dangerous for him to try. He didn’t let on that he
understood one damn thing. He was willing to risk his life: as he’d
thought before, that was why he wore the uniform. But he wasn’t
willing to get himself killed without much chance of hurting the
enemy.

“Ah, screw you both,” the captain said in German when the Czechs
wouldn’t admit they followed him. They went right on feigning
ignorance. The Frenchman gave up. Vaclav had his ammo, and he
didn’t have to try anything idiotic. As far as he was concerned, the
day was a victory so far.

ONCE UPON A TIME—probably not very long ago—the froggies
had had themselves a big old supply dump outside a place called
Hary Willi Dernen eyed what was left of it with something not far
from disgust. The Frenchmen had hauled away whatever they still
had a use for, then poured gasoline on the rest and set fire to it.
The stink of stale smoke was sour in his nostrils.
“Come on. Get moving,” Arno Baatz growled. “Nothing worth
grabbing in this miserable place.”
“Right, Corporal,” Willi said. Whenever Baatz talked to him these
days, he had to fight like a son of a bitch to keep from giggling.
Every once in a while, that showed in the way he sounded. The
underofficer favored him with his best glare. “Did I say something
funny?”
“No, Corporal,” Willi answered hastily, and bit down hard on the
inside of his cheek so the pain would drive mirth from his voice.
Awful Arno remembered getting slugged in the tavern back in
Watigny. He knew it had happened, anyway—you couldn’t very well
not know when you woke up with an enormous bruise on your chin
and a knot on the back of your head.
But Baatz showed no sign of remembering that Willi and Wolfgang
Storch had been in there to see his piteous overthrow. He also

didn’t remember he’d been jealous because Michelle brought drinks
to them but not to him. He’d stopped a good one, all right. And that
was highly convenient. Since he didn’t remember, he didn’t blame
them for the damaged state of his skull.
Lieutenant Erich Krantz had replaced Lieutenant Gross the same
way Gross had replaced Neustadt. Gross had kept his arm after all;
he might even come back to duty one day. Neustadt hadn’t been so
lucky. Krantz was here now—at least till he stopped something.
Junior lieutenants seemed to have an unfortunate knack for doing
that.
And, if the enemy didn’t get them, they were liable to do themselves
in. Krantz stooped and started to pick up a charred board. “Sir, you
might want to be careful with that,” Willi said, getting ready to shove
the officer aside if Krantz didn’t feel like listening.
But the lieutenant did hesitate. “What? Why?” he asked.
Corporal Baatz butted in: “Sir, Dernen’s right.” He didn’t say that
every day, so Willi let him go on: “The French pulled out of here just
a little while ago. That’s the kind of thing they might booby-trap.”
“Is it?” Krantz looked surprised and intrigued. “Well, how about that?
All right, I won’t mess with it.”
“That’s a good idea, sir,” Baatz said. His narrow, rather piggy eyes
said Krantz should have figured this out for himself. Luckily for him,
it wasn’t easy to gig a man—especially a noncom—on account of
the look on his face. And Baatz looked mean and scornful most of
the time, so maybe the lieutenant didn’t notice anything strange.
Krantz was looking south and west. “Now that we’ve driven the
French out of here, we should be able to go on to Laon without
much trouble.”

We? As in you and your tapeworm? Willi thought. The way it looked
to him, the froggies had hung on so hard at Hary because it
shielded Laon. They were probably digging in a little closer to the
city even now—as well as anyone could in this miserable freezing
weather.
Krantz was an officer. Wasn’t he supposed to know stuff like that
because he was an officer? He didn’t have much experience,
obviously. And if he kept poking around in a gutted supply dump, he
wouldn’t live long enough to get any, either. Willi didn’t want to be
standing close by when something Krantz was playing with went
boom.
He couldn’t say anything like that to the lieutenant. Yes, the Führef’s
Wehrmacht was a much more democratic, easygoing place than the
Kaiser’s army had been. Old sweats who’d put in their time in the
trenches in the last war all said so. Of course, Hitler was an old
sweat himself. He’d fought almost from first to last without getting
seriously wounded. The way things were on the Western Front from
1914 to 1918, that was either amazing luck or proof of the Gott mit
uns on a Landser’s belt buckle. (But that was just the Prussian
buckle the last time around, not the national one. Hitler had served
in a Bavarian regiment, and would have had a different motto in
front of his belly button.)
Yes, the Wehrmacht was more democratic now. Still, a private
couldn’t explain the facts of life to an officer. Not even Corporal
Baatz could. A grizzled Feldwebel might have done it. But Sergeant
Pieck was wounded, too, and hadn’t been replaced. Krantz would
have to learn on his own—if he lasted.
As if to show the platoon commander he wasn’t ready for General
Staff Lampassen on the outer seams of his trouser legs, the French

put in a counterattack later that afternoon. Whether Krantz had or
not, Willi’d been fearing one. He was no General Staff officer, either,
but he could see what a long southern flank the Germans held. The
Wehrmacht had gone around the Maginot Line to the north, not
through it. Evidently, the generals had counted on keeping the
enemy too busy up there to worry about down here. Unfortunately,
what you counted on wasn’t always what you got.
By the time the 75s started whistling in, Willi already had himself a
foxhole. It had belonged to a poilu, who’d dug himself a cave in the
northern wall to protect himself from German shells coming in from
that direction. Willi hacked and scraped at the nearly frozen dirt in
the southern wall of the hole with his entrenching tool to try to make
himself the same kind of shelter from French artillery.
No splinters flayed his flesh or broke his bones, so he supposed
he’d done well enough. No shells burst especially close to him, so
he couldn’t prove a thing. But proof didn’t matter. All that mattered
was, he didn’t get hurt.
He wasn’t sorry to let the Frenchmen come at him for a change.
Sometimes—mostly when there were panzers around—attackers
had the edge. More often, defenders crouched in the best shelter
they could find or make and tried to murder the fellows coming at
them.
His mouth went dry. He recognized that creaking, clanking rumble.
As far as he knew, the Germans didn’t have any panzers in the
neighborhood. If the French did, it wasn’t such a good day to
crouch in a foxhole.
Boom! The report behind him was one of the sweetest sounds he’d
ever heard. A split second later, he heard another one. That
unmusical Clang! was an antitank round slamming into a French

panzer. And the smaller pops and blams that followed marked
ammunition cooking off inside the stricken machine. Willi wouldn’t
have wanted to be a French panzer crewman, not right then, not for
anything.
He stood up and fired at the foot soldiers loping along with the
hastily whitewashed French panzers. The poilus threw themselves
flat and shot back at him. Boom! The 37mm antitank gun had found
another target—found it and missed it. Behind their steel shield, the
German artillerymen frantically reaimed and reloaded. Meanwhile,
the French panzer’s turret swung inexorably toward them.
Both guns spoke together, as near as made no difference. The
enemy panzer slewed sideways and stopped with a track shot off.
But its highexplosive shell ruined the German gunners. Their shield
did some good against small-arms fire. If a shell burst behind it
…well, tough luck.
But then another antitank gun off to the left fired two quick rounds.
The crippled French panzer started to burn in earnest. Behind the
line, German artillery woke up. Shells started raining down on the
ground south of Hary. Willi ducked back into his hole. Some of those
shells would fall short. Your own side could kill you, too—one more
lesson he wondered whether Lieutenant Krantz had learned.
Before long, the French attack petered out. The froggies didn’t
seem to have had their hearts in it, not that that helped the crew of
the antitank gun. Willi knew more than a little sympathy for the sorry
bastards in Adrian helmets and worn khaki uniforms. Like him, they
were at the mercy of officers who sent them forward and hoped
something grand would come of it.
He lit a cigarette and stuck his head out for another look around.
The two killed French panzers in front of him would burn for a long

time. A few khaki-clad bodies lay on the snow-streaked ground. A
raven glided down out of the sky and pecked at one. Scavengers
never waited long.
And there was Lieutenant Krantz, peeking out of his own hole in the
ground like a Feldgrau marmot. He’d come through another scrap.
A few more and he’d start having an idea of what was going on out
here. As much as I do, anyway, Willi thought. As much as anybody
does. He took another drag and blew out a long, happy plume of
smoke. He’d made it again.

THEO HOSSBACH WAS MESSING WITH the Panzer II’s radio set
again, methodically taking out one tube after another, replacing
each with a fresh one, and trying the radio again. “How’s it going?”
Ludwig Rothe asked him.
Since Theo was wearing earphones, it wasn’t surprising that he
didn’t follow. It also wasn’t surprising that he didn’t take them off so
he could. Ludwig had often thought that Theo cared more about the
radio than about either of his crewmates.
Direct action, then. Ludwig yanked the earphones off Theo’s head.
The radio operator gave him a wounded look. “What did you go and
do that for?” he asked.
“So I could talk to you?” Ludwig suggested.
By the way Theo blinked, that hadn’t occurred to him. “Are you a
goddamn blackshirt, so you have to interrogate me right this fucking
minute?”
“Gott im Himmel!” Ludwig’s head might have been on a swivel as he
looked around the panzer park. Nobody seemed to be paying

attention to his panzer, for which he was duly grateful. “Are you out
of your mind, Theo? Do you want them to haul you away?”
“Nah. If I did, I would’ve—” But even Theo stopped short, swallowing
whatever he’d been about to come out with. He was definitely an
idiot, but maybe—just maybe—he wasn’t quite an imbecile.
Would’ve done what? Ludwig wondered. The first thing that sprang
to mind was would’ve plugged the Führer when I had the chance.
Ludwig didn’t ask him if that was what he meant. For one thing, he
feared Theo would say yes. For another, letting Theo know such a
thought had crossed his own mind would give the radioman a hold
on him.
And so Ludwig pointed to the set Theo was working on and asked
his original question over again: “How’s it going?”
“Haven’t found the new bad tube yet.” As Theo spoke, he extracted
another one. “They give out faster when we bang all over the
landscape, you know.”
“Sure, but what am I supposed to do about it? Keep working. We’re
as deaf as the damned Frenchmen till you do.” Ludwig had
examined quite a few knocked-out French panzers. Most of them
had no radios at all. French panzer leaders signaled their
subordinates with wigwag disks. The Germans carried them, too,
but only for emergencies. They worked well enough on the practice
field. In real combat, with dust and dirt flying, they were much harder
to make out. And, of course, a panzer commander who stood up in
the cupola to semaphore with wigwag disks was as likely to get shot
as any other suicidal damn fool.
Theo grunted and forgot about Ludwig. He put the earphones back
on. After a moment, he nodded, not to Rothe but to the radio set.
“You finally find the dead one?” Ludwig asked hopefully.

“You finally find the dead one?” Ludwig asked hopefully.
A moment later, he remembered Theo couldn’t hear him any more.
He didn’t want to tear the earphones off the radioman’s head again;
that was pushing things, even for a sergeant.
For a wonder, Hossbach doffed the earphones of his own accord.
“We’re back in business,” he reported.
“Outstanding!” Because Ludwig had given him a hard time before,
he made himself sound enthusiastic now. Yes, Theo lived in his old
little world and visited the real one as seldom as he could get away
with, but he did his job pretty well anyhow. Ludwig had heard plenty
of other panzer commanders bitch about their radiomen and drivers
in terms that horrified him. All in all, he was more lucky than not.
French artillery came down about half a kilometer in front of the
panzer park. Somebody was getting it in the neck—probably a
bunch of poor, damned infantrymen, as usual—but the precious
panzers stayed out of range of enemy guns when not actually
fighting.
Planes buzzed by overhead. Ludwig looked up, more curious than
worried. Sure enough, Stukas and Messerschmitts flew west to
punish the French and the English. The enemy didn’t use planes
against German forces anywhere near so much. Ludwig was
damned glad of it, too. He’d seen what air power could do to
soldiers. He didn’t want anybody doing that to him.
German 105s opened up. Maybe they were shooting at the French
guns. Maybe they were softening up the poilus so the next German
thrust could finally break through them instead of just pushing them
back. Maybe…Ludwig laughed at himself. Not for the first time, he
was pretending he’d joined the General Staff. No Lampassen on the
legs of his black coveralls.

legs of his black coveralls.
Something off in the distance blew up with a hell of a bang. Even
Theo noticed. “Ammunition dump?” he said.
“Christ, I hope so,” Ludwig answered. “Damned Frenchmen have
already thrown more shit at us than we ever thought they had. The
more we can get rid of, the less they’re liable to hit us with.”
Theo blinked in owlish surprise. “I hadn’t thought of it like that.”
“You’re always off in Radioland,” Ludwig said. “Half the time, I don’t
think you even remember there’s a war on.”
“Oh, I remember,” Theo said. “I’d be doing something better than
this if they hadn’t stuck a uniform on me. So would you.” He still
looked like an owl, but a challenging owl now.
Getting that much of a rise out of him took Ludwig by surprise.
“Watch your mouth!” the panzer commander said again. “The way
things are, if anybody in the other blackshirts hears you go on like
that, you’re down the shitter.” He was proud of those panzer
coveralls, but wished the SS didn’t wear the same color.
Theo nodded slowly. He seemed much more…engaged with the real
world than he often did. He even looked around to make sure
nobody was eavesdropping before he said, “Well, you’re right about
that, too. And things shouldn’t work that way, either. You know damn
well they shouldn’t.”
“We’ll fix it after the war,” Ludwig said. “We can’t waste time worrying
about it now. If France and England beat us again, we’re screwed.
Remember how it was when we were kids, when they occupied us
and we needed a bushel of marks to get a bushel of turnips? Do
you want to see those days back again?”

“Who would? Only a crazy man.” But Theo looked around again.
Softly, he added, “The other thing I don’t want is, I don’t want our
own side fucking us over. And that’s what we’ve got.”
He’d just put his life in Ludwig’s hands. If Ludwig reported him the
way a dutiful sergeant was supposed to, he’d have a new radioman
in short order. What would happen to Theo after that was none of
his business. He would be better off not wondering about such
things. Theo wouldn’t, but he would.
But he didn’t want a new radioman. Theo spent too much time in his
own little world, but most days he did a good job. If he doubted
whether Germany was always wise…well, so did Ludwig. Gruffly, the
sergeant clapped the other man on the shoulder. “We’ll take care of
that after the war, too. They’ll have to listen to us then.”
“Nobody has to do anything.” Theo spoke with unwonted conviction.
But then he must have realized he’d taken things as far as they
could go, or more likely a few centimeters farther. He seemed to
shrink back into himself. “Well, we’d better worry about the
Frenchies right this minute, eh?”
“Now you’re talking!” Relief filled Ludwig’s voice. Something else on
—he hoped—the French side of the line went up with a hell of a
bang. That relieved him, too. He knew how hideously vulnerable to
antitank rounds the Panzer II was. As with the previous bang, the
fewer of them the enemy could aim at him, the better.
The panzers rattled forward an hour or so later. Foot soldiers in
Feldgrau loped along with the armor. One of them waved to Ludwig,
who stood head and shoulders out of the cupola. He nodded back.
Panzers could do things the infantry only dreamt about. Everybody
knew that, and had known it all along. But the war had taught a
different lesson: that panzers needed infantrymen, too. Without

them, enemy soldiers could get in close and raise all kinds of hell
with grenades and bottles full of blazing gasoline and whatever
other lethal little toys they happened to carry.
Stukas screamed down out of the sky. Fire and smoke and dirt rose
into the air a few hundred meters ahead. Even at that distance,
blast from the big bombs rattled Ludwig’s teeth. What it was doing to
the bastards in khaki on whom the bombs fell…Ludwig felt a curious
mixture of sympathy and hope that nobody up ahead was in any
shape to fight any more.
A forlorn hope, and he knew it. Some of them would be dead. Some
would be maimed, or too shellshocked to know sausage from
Saturday. But there were always some lucky, stubborn assholes
who’d…He hadn’t even finished the thought before a French
machine gun started banging away.
A Landser toppled, clutching at his chest. Other German foot
soldiers hit the dirt. Ludwig was back inside the turret a split second
before several bullets rattled off the panzer’s armor. Small-arms
ammo couldn’t get through. That never stopped machine gunners
from trying.
“Scheisse,” Fritz said. Like Ludwig, the driver must have hoped the
Stukas would do all their work for them.
Ludwig swung the turret toward the closest French machine gun. He
fired back, hot 20mm cartridge cases clattering down onto the
fighting compartment’s floor. The enemy Hotchkiss fell silent. The
panzer pushed on.

Meaux was gone. Luc Harcourt could see the smoke in the east,
much of which came from the lost town. Maybe the Boches were
celebrating by burning everything they couldn’t steal. Or maybe
French engineers had planted charges under everything they didn’t
want the enemy to use. German prisoners who spoke French had
nothing but admiration for the engineers.
As far as Luc was concerned, who torched or blew up what hardly
mattered any more. No matter who did it, France caught hell. All he
cared about was staying in one piece till the war ended.
No guarantee of that. Sergeant Demange was commanding the
company. No replacement officer had come forward since
Lieutenant Marquet stopped an antitank round with his stomach. It
cut him in half. The top half lived, and screamed, much longer than
Luc wished it would have.
Luc had a squad himself. A private first class wasn’t much of a noncom, but he’d gone this far without getting hit. That put him several
long steps ahead of the scared conscripts he led.
The sergeant came by, his red-tracked eyes missing nothing. The
Gitane in the corner of his mouth twitched as he snapped, “Don’t let
‘em lay there with their thumbs up their asses, Harcourt. Set the

sorry sods to digging. They’ll hate you now, but they’ll thank you as
soon as the Germans start shelling us again.”
“Right, Sergeant,” Luc said wearily. He knew Demange was right,
too, but he wanted nothing more than to lie there himself, and who
cared where his thumb went? With a sigh, he hauled himself to his
feet. “Come on, you miserable lugs. You can rest once you’ve got
foxholes to rest in.”
They groaned. Some of them didn’t even have hard hands yet; their
palms blistered and bled when they used shovels or entrenching
tools. But they’d seen dead men—both bloodied and astonished
after meeting death unexpectedly and bloated and stinking from
lying in the fields four or five days unburied. They didn’t want
anyone else seeing them like that: worse than getting caught
naked. They weren’t eager, but they dug.
So did Luc. He already had a scrape of sorts. He improved it as fast
as he could. There seemed to be a lull now, but how long would it
last? Another twenty minutes? Another twenty seconds? No time at
all?
“Don’t throw the dirt every which way!” he said in something not far
from horror. “Sweet suffering Jesus, pile it in front of you! Don’t they
teach you anything in basic these days?”
“They teach us how to march and how to shoot,” one of the new fish
said. He had bloody hands and a pale, unweathered face. “From
what they tell us, there isn’t anything else—or if there is, we can
pick it up at the front.”
“They’re sending you out to get slaughtered. They ought to see the
Boches face-to-face themselves. That’d teach them something—the
ones who come back from it,” Luc said savagely.

Sure as hell, the shooting picked up before the soldiers finished
their foxholes. They might be raw, but they weren’t complete idiots.
They knew enough to jump into the holes and keep on digging while
inside them. Luc didn’t think anybody got hit. He thanked the God in
Whom he had more and more trouble believing.
He also thanked that God Who might or might not be there for
sending nothing worse than small-arms fire his way. German
machine guns fired faster than their French counterparts. Sergeant
Demange said the same thing had been true the last time around,
though both sides used different models now. Why couldn’t the
French have caught up with their longtime foes, especially since the
Germans hadn’t been allowed to mess with machine guns till they
started laughing at the Treaty of Versailles?
Luc knew the answer to that. France hadn’t wanted to believe
another war would come. The Germans, by contrast, embraced
battle the way a man embraced his girl…although fire from the flank
could send them running, too. But they had the better tools with
which to do their job.
“Is that a tank?” one of the rookies asked fearfully.
“No, my dear,” Luc said after listening for a moment. “That’s a truck
—one of our trucks, by God. Maybe we’ve got reinforcements
moving in. We could sure use some—I’ll tell you that.
He almost shot one of the newcomers before he recognized the
khaki greatcoat and the crested Adrian helmet. The French uniform
had been modernized after 1918. It still looked old-fashioned next to
what the Germans wore. The Boches seemed…streamlined, almost
like oncoming diesel locomotives.
“Where are they?” shouted a corporal who sounded a hell of a lot

like Sergeant Demange.
Demange himself gave an answer that was almost useful: “Look in
the direction the bullets are coming from, mon vieux. You’ll find the
Germans, I promise.”
“Funny,” the corporal said. “You see? I laugh.” And, having laughed
a laugh that could have come straight off the cow on the label of a
popular brand of cheese, he sent several shots toward the Boches.
A loop of the Marne—whose course was complicated in these parts
—curled up toward the French position from the south. The enemy
would have to cross the river twice to get in behind Luc and his
comrades. As he’d seen to his sorrow, they were good at such
things, but he could hope they would think two crossings were too
much trouble here.
He popped up out of his hole to fire at an oncoming gray shape in a
coal-scuttle helmet. The shape went down. Luc ducked before he
could decide whether he’d hit it or not. Thinking of it as a shape, a
target, meant not thinking of it as a human being he might just have
killed. If he didn’t think of it as a human being, he didn’t have to
think so much about what he was doing in this damned foxhole.
And ducking in a hurry meant that none of the other shapes in fieldgray had the chance to draw a bead on a khaki shape and wonder
whether he’d hit it. Luc didn’t want some nice German young man to
have him on his conscience.
The Nazis must also have decided that fording the Marne twice was
more trouble than it was worth. But that didn’t mean they stopped
coming. If they couldn’t go around the French here, they seemed
determined to plow through them.
Sergeant Demange screamed for his men to hold fast till he realized

they would all get killed or captured if they tried. One reason he
made a good company commander was his aversion to dying. Luc
shared the feeling. He wondered whether that would do him any
good.
After fighting for a while in some woods, the French fell back into
one of the riverside villages. Luc didn’t know which one it was.
There were lots of them, each Something-sur-Marne. The soldiers
had fun with that, calling them things like Ammo-Dump-sur-Marne
and Blowjob-sur-Marne. A blowjob on the Marne would have been a
hell of a lot more fun than what Luc was going through.
Most of the locals had long since bugged out. Luc would have, were
he still a civilian. Nobody was paying those poor slobs to get shot at,
and they didn’t have the weapons to shoot back.
But a few stubborn souls always stuck around. He wished one of
them would have been a teenage girl with legs up to there, but no
such luck. Most were grizzled men who’d done their bit the last time
around and weren’t about to let a little gunfire drive them away from
their stone houses and shops and farms. They were plenty tough.
Their wives were even scarier, at least to Luc.
Several locals had varmint guns. They were ready to turn them
against the Boches. “Big rats, but still gray,” one of them said with a
raspy chuckle.
Sergeant Demange didn’t want them. “Dumb assholes won’t take
orders,” he muttered to Luc. He was a little more polite to the
embattled villagers and peasants, but only a little: “Let us do the
job. You know what happens if the Germans catch a franc-tireur?
The guy gets it, and then they shoot a bunch of hostages to remind
everybody else to play by the rules.”

“They shot my cousin like that in 1914,” said another rifle-toting
villager.
“Don’t you think you paid ‘em back after that?” Demange asked with
surprising gentleness. The local had two fingers missing from his
left hand and walked with a limp.
“Not enough,” he said. “Never enough.”
Demange could have argued with him. Instead, at his unobtrusive
gesture, three soldiers sidled up to the man and forcibly disarmed
him. The other locals muttered, which bothered the sergeant not a
bit. “I told you—let us do the job,” Demange said.
They might have squawked some more, but incoming artillery made
everybody scramble for cover. A house that took a direct hit fell in
on itself. A woman swore horribly. As soon as Luc saw that the
house wouldn’t catch fire, he ran for the ruins. You couldn’t ask for
better cover—and maybe, like lightning, 105s wouldn’t strike the
same place twice.
Here came the Germans. They must have had some new guys
among them. Seeing a village that had just got shelled, they figured
nobody would be waiting for them in there. One of them got close
enough for Luc to see how surprised—and offended—he looked
when he got shot. It was almost funny, although no doubt not to the
poor Boche. Well, too bad for him.
His buddies, the ones who hadn’t caught packets themselves, hit
the dirt and started moving up the way they’d learned in training.
Luc wished for a battery of 75s to tear them to pieces. Wishing
didn’t produce any French guns. Small-arms fire, then.
But damned if a couple of French tanks didn’t show up a few
minutes later. They were Renaults left over from the last war, without

much armor and without much speed. Still, each one had a cannon
and a machine gun, and there didn’t seem to be any German armor
around. The Boches didn’t like getting shot up while unable to reply
any better than anyone else would have. Luc would have bugged
out, and so did the Germans.
“I’ll be fucked,” Sergeant Demange said. “Wasn’t sure we’d get away
with it this time. Well, I’d rather be lucky than good.”
He was good, which meant he could afford to talk like that. But luck
counted, too. If a shell came down on your hole, how good you were
didn’t matter. Luc shivered inside his own foxhole. He was still here.
Maybe it was only fool luck, but he’d take it any which way.

SPRING SEEMED TO BE COMING early to eastern Poland and
western Byelorussia. As far as Sergei Yaroslavsky was concerned,
that was a mixed blessing. The warmer, clearer weather meant he
could fly more often against the Poles and Germans. But it also
meant the thaw would start pretty soon. And when it did, all the dirt
airstrips in this part of the world would turn to mud. Nobody would
do much flying till the ground dried out and hardened up again.
Rasputitsa. The mud time. Russian had a word for it. It came in both
fall and spring; in fall because of rain, in spring from melting snow.
The spring rasputitsa was worse, and lasted longer. Not just
airplanes would be grounded. Armies would slow to a crawl, if they
moved at all.
Sergei didn’t think the Soviet generals had intended to keep on
fighting the Poles till the rasputitsa came. He didn’t think they’d
intended to draw the Nazis in on the Poles’ side, either.
He did keep what he thought to himself. If he said something like

that out loud, he’d end up in a place where the spring thaw started
in June…if it ever did. The USSR had plenty of places like that, and
plenty of people had found out more about them than they ever
wanted to know.
He had the feeling he wasn’t the only one in his squadron thinking
thoughts the NKVD wouldn’t like. Meals became oddly constrained.
Men seemed to be chewing on more than sausage and black bread,
swallowing more than tea and vodka. You couldn’t ask another pilot
or navigator what was on his mind. If he told you, he proved himself
a fool with a death wish. He was much more likely to say something
innocuous and peg you for an informer. Sergei knew he didn’t trust
a couple of his fellow pilots. You had to watch out. If the enemy
didn’t get you, your own side would.
His bombardier had a simple solution. “Fuck ‘em all,” Ivan Kuchkov
declared. “Fuck their mothers. Fuck their grannies, too, the filthy old
cunts.” To him, that wasn’t mat. It was the way he talked. Maybe he
didn’t know where ordinary Russian stopped and mat started.
Maybe he just didn’t care.
“Some of these people you have to be careful around,” Sergei said
…carefully.
“I suppose,” Kuchkov said with a noncom’s sigh about the foibles of
his superiors. “The guys who think they have big dicks are the guys
who’re big pricks, all right.”
“Right.” Yaroslavsky wondered why he bothered. He stood a better
chance of talking a thunderstorm into changing its ways than he did
of persuading Ivan.
But not even the NKVD could send a thunderstorm to a camp in
Siberia. Ivan Kuchkov wasn’t so lucky. The blocky bombardier

amazed Sergei by winking at him. “Don’t get your tit in a wringer,
Captain,” he said. “They never come after the likes of me. I’m not
worth bothering with.”
“How many other people have thought the same thing?” Sergei
said. “How many of them turned out to be wrong?”
“Poor sorry fuckers,” Kuchkov said. Sergei started to nod, then
caught himself. He’d already said more to Ivan than to any of his
fellow officers, even Anastas Mouradian. If Ivan was a fellow with a
pipeline to the NKVD, he’d said more than enough to hang himself.
He eyed the bombardier’s broad, rather stupid face. Ivan Kuchkov
was a Russian peasant of purest ray serene. Surely he didn’t have
the brains to inform on anybody…did he?
You never could tell. That was the first rule. There was that ironjawed commissar who looked even more like a village pig butcher
than Kuchkov did. What was his name? Khrushchev, that was it.
Yes, he sure seemed the type who’d take off his shoe and pound it
on the bar if he got into an argument. And if that didn’t work, he’d
pound it on your head.
But, regardless of what he looked like, he was nobody’s fool. He’d
lived through the purges, after all, when so many hadn’t. So maybe
dear Ivan wasn’t as dumb as he let on, either.
Their SB-2 got off the ground to fly a mission against a Luftwaffe
airstrip in eastern Poland. As Sergei guided the bomber into
formation with the others, he wondered when the rasputitsa would
close down operations. Muck had flown from the Tupolev’s tires as it
roared down the strip, but it got airborne. Make the mud a little
thicker, a little gooier, and it wouldn’t.
One way to deal with the problem would have been to pave

runways. That never crossed Yaroslavsky’s mind. Soviet authorities
didn’t pave highways between towns, not least because invaders
could have used paved roads, too. But if the highways weren’t
paved, airstrips weren’t likely to be, either.
“Here’s hoping we give the Nazis a nice surprise,” Anastas
Mouradian said.
“That would be good,” Sergei agreed.
“Better than good,” his copilot said. “If we don’t surprise them,
they’re liable to surprise us, and getting surprised by a bunch of
Germans doesn’t sound like a whole lot of fun.”
“Er—right.” Sergei gave the Armenian a funny look. Did Mouradian
talk that way because he was making a joke or because his Russian
was slipping? Maybe it was both together; Anastas did like to make
jokes, but they didn’t always come out the way he wanted.
Maybe that was why Stalin and Beria and Mikoyan and the other
formidable fellows from the Caucasus cut such a swath through
Soviet politics—the Russians who were trying to deal with them
couldn’t figure out what the devil they were talking about till too late.
Yaroslavsky didn’t say that to Anastas. One more time—you never
could tell. If the Armenian took it wrong, it might end up as a oneway ticket to a labor camp.
And then Sergei forgot about it. Me-109s tore into the Soviet
bombers. The plane just in front of his spun down toward the
dappled ground trailing flame from its left engine. Another SB-2,
fortunately farther away, blew up in midair. That felt worse than a
near miss from an antiaircraft shell; Sergei’s bomber staggered as if
bouncing off a wall.
One of the rear machine guns chattered. Kuchkov’s voice came

through the voice tube: “These pricks are all over everywhere like
crabs on cunt hair! Do something about it, for Christ’s sake!”
Off to Sergei’s left, a Soviet bomber dropped its load over nothing in
particular, broke formation, and scooted for Byelorussia. That
looked like cowardice. Another SB-2 went down, and then another.
However the Fascists had found out about this attack, they were all
over it. What had seemed cowardice a moment before began to
look more and more like good sense.
Sergei fired the forward machine gun at a 109. Tracers didn’t come
close. The German fighter flipped away with almost contemptuous
ease. During the Spanish Civil War, the SB-2 outran and outclimbed
Nationalist fighters. Everybody said so. But those German and
Italian biplanes must have been mighty clumsy. As Yaroslavsky had
first seen in Czechoslovakia, the bomber was no match for a
Messerschmitt.
One more SB-2 tumbled in flames. That was enough—no, too much
—for Sergei. “Dump the bombs, Ivan!” he yelled into the speaking
tube. “We’re heading for home!”
“Now you’re talking, boss!” Kuchkov said. Grating metallic noises
said he was opening the bay and pulling release levers as fast as
he could. Half a dozen 220kg bombs whistled toward the ground.
“They’re bound to come down on some mother’s head,” Kuchkov
called cheerfully.
He wasn’t even wrong; Sergei could console himself with that
thought. He hauled the SB-2 around and roared east at full throttle.
Maybe it could outrun an Italian Fiat. Next to a 109, he might have
been piloting a garbage scow. The airspeed indicator said he was
making better than 400 kilometers an hour. All the same, he felt
nailed in place in the sky. When a Messerschmitt could get up over

550, how could anybody blame him, either?
Kuchkov’s ventral machine gun barked again. The bombardier let
out a shout of triumph—or was it surprise? “Nailed the fucker!” he
roared.
“Damned if he didn’t.” Anastas Mouradian certainly sounded
surprised. As bomb-aimer, he had a better view below than Sergei
did. “The pilot managed to get out and hit the silk.”
“Too bad. Only means he’ll be flying against us again before too
long,” Sergei said. He tried to look every which way at once,
including in his rearview mirror. German fighters were bad enough
when you knew they were around. If they took you by surprise, you
were dead. It was about that simple.
He flew over the Poles and Russians. Soldiers from both sides fired
at the SB-2. That always happened. They weren’t likely to hit
anything.
“Won’t it be wonderful,” Mouradian said in his Armenian-accented
Russian, “if we lead the Fascists to our airstrip and they shoot us up
after we land?”
“Fucking wonderful,” Sergei half-agreed. His superiors wouldn’t love
him for leading the Luftwaffe back to the field. But what could you
do? His only other choice was putting down on the first open ground
he saw. And if it was rough or muddy—and odds were it would be
one or the other if not both—he was asking to go nose-up or dig a
prop or a wingtip into the dirt. His superiors wouldn’t love him for
that, either.
There was the airstrip. Groundcrew men could get the plane under
cover in a hurry. Sergei landed in a hurry, too—as much a
controlled crash as a proper descent. His teeth clicked together

when the landing gear smacked the ground. He tasted blood—he’d
bitten his tongue. Anastas said something flavorful in Armenian that
he didn’t translate.
“You all right, Ivan?” Sergei asked the bombardier.
“I’m here, anyway,” Kuchkov answered darkly.
That would do. Right now, anything would. They scrambled out of
the plane. The groundcrew men hauled it towards a revetment.
They’d drape camouflage netting over it. In minutes, it would be next
to impossible to spot from the air. No 109s circled overhead or
swooped low. All the same, Sergei decided he could hardly wait for
the rasputitsa to kick in full bore.

THE FRONT WAS PARIS. Alistair Walsh would have known as much
even if papers didn’t scream it, even if posters weren’t pasted to
everything that didn’t try to pick you up. Bomb craters and, now,
shell hits from Nazi heavy artillery told their own story. When the
105s started reaching the City of Light, that would be real trouble.
No, Walsh thought. When the Boches drive their tanks down the
Champs-Élysées, that’s real trouble. Till it happened, he’d damn
well enjoy Paris instead of fighting in it.
Or he hoped he would. This time, he didn’t exactly have leave. His
unit had fallen back into the eastern outskirts of town. Maybe they
were supposed to be setting up somewhere, getting ready to hold
back the next German push. If they were, though, nobody’d
bothered to tell him about it.
In a way, that wasn’t so good. It said orders from on high weren’t
getting where they needed to go. He would have been more upset

were he less surprised. If the Germans kept pushing everybody else
back, of course things would go to hell every so often. God only
knew they had in 1918.
A lot of Parisians had already run away. On the other hand, a lot of
provincials from the north and west had fled into Paris one step
ahead of the invaders. You couldn’t be sure whether the face that
peered out a window at you belonged to a homeowner or a squatter
who’d picked a lock or broken a window. If you were a Tommy, what
the hell difference did it make, anyhow?
Plenty of bars stayed open. Most of the men who filled them were
soldiers—French, English, or from heaven knew where. Walsh had
run into Czechs before. Maybe the hard-drinking fellows who spat
incomprehensible consonants at one another were more from that
lot. Or maybe they were Yugoslav adventurers or White Russians or
…But what the hell difference did that make, either?
One of the poilus had a concertina. When he started playing it,
several other Frenchmen sang with more enthusiasm than tune.
Walsh knew just enough of the language to recognize a dirty word
or two every line. The barmaids pretended to be shocked. Their
acting might have been even worse than the soldiers’ singing.
Half a dozen military policemen stormed into the joint. The
concertina squalled to a stop. The French MPs started hauling
poilus out into the street. Then they grabbed one of the maybeCzechs. He was in French uniform. He said something to them. It
didn’t help—they dragged him toward the door. Then he hit one of
them in the face. The Frenchman went down with a groan. His
buddy, unperturbed, hauled out a blackjack and coshed the Slav,
who also crumpled. He might not have wanted to go wherever they
were taking people, but he would.

Walsh’s hand tightened on his mug of piss-sour, piss-thin beer.
They wouldn’t haul him off without a fight.
They didn’t haul him off. One of them nodded his way, shrugged
Gallically, and said, “Eh bien, Monsieur le Anglais?” He pointed to
the flattened MP and soldier, as if to say, Well, what can you do?
“Just leave me alone, that’s all.” Walsh didn’t loosen his grip on the
mug. He didn’t want to provoke the military police, but he also didn’t
want them taking him anywhere.
By the time they got through, they’d more than half emptied the
dive. “Wot’ll it be, mate?” the barman asked Walsh in English he
might have picked up from an Australian in the last war.
“Another mug of the same.” For what Walsh felt like spending, the
wine would be urine, too, and the whiskey or brandy loaded with
enough fusel oil in them to make him wish he were dead come
morning.
“Right y’are.” The barman was opening a bottle when Walsh heard
the scream of a big shell in the air. Two wars’ worth of reflexes threw
him flat on the floor a split second before the shell burst in the
street outside.
Plywood covered the plate-glass windows. But how much did that
help when a 150—maybe even a 170—blew up far too close? Blast
shoved in the plywood—and brought down part of the roof. Fistsized chunks of jagged metal slammed through wood and glass. Not
so many knifelike glass splinters spun through the air as would have
without the plywood, but one as long as a pencil buried itself in the
side of the bar about three inches in front of Walsh’s nose.
More shells screamed in. He rolled himself into a ball, not that that
would do him any good if his luck was out. Maybe it wasn’t. None of

the others hit close enough to do the tavern any more harm. After
an eternity of ten or fifteen minutes, the bombardment stopped.
Walsh had to make himself unroll. He felt like a sowbug that had just
escaped an elephant. As he dazedly picked himself up, he realized
not everybody in the little bar had been so lucky. If he wanted that
beer, he would have to get it himself. The barman’s blood splashed
broken bottles behind the bar. The stink of the spilled potables
almost drowned the butcher-shop odor of blood.
Other soldiers were down, too. Walsh did what he could for them,
which mostly consisted of pulling tables and chairs off them and
using their wound dressings. He hoped he helped a little.
The door had been blasted open. The door, not to put too fine a
point on it, had been blasted off its hinges, and lay in the middle of
the floor. He stepped over it and out into the street, which now had
a crater big enough to hold a horse. It was filling up with water from
a broken main.
Staggering away, Walsh realized one thing was absolutely true
—and absolutely terrifying. The front was Paris.
• • •

THE FRONT WAS THE USSURI RIVER. Northeastern Manchukuo
was about as different from the Mongolian border region as
anything Sergeant Hideki Fujita could imagine. Gone were waterless
wastes with camels and wild asses running through them. Great
forests of pine towered toward the sky here. Rain—and sometimes
snow—poured down out of the sky. Japanese soldiers who’d been
here longer than Fujita said tigers prowled these woods. He didn’t
know about that. He’d seen no sign of them himself. But he wouldn’t

have been surprised.
He did know there were Russians on the far side of the Ussuri. That
was the same here as it had been 800 kilometers to the west.
Not far east of the Ussuri, the Russians’ Trans-Siberian Railroad ran
south toward Vladivostok. If Japan could get astride the railroad, the
USSR’s eastern port would fall into Japanese hands like a ripe fruit.
Fujita crouched in a log-roofed dugout artistically camouflaged with
dirt and pine boughs and, now, the latest snowfall. He peered
across the Ussuri toward the Red Army positions on the far bank.
He couldn’t see as much as he would have liked. The other side of
the border was as thickly wooded as this one—and the Russians,
damn them, were at least as good as his own people at hiding what
they were up to.
“What do you see, Sergeant?” Lieutenant Kenji Hanafusa asked.
“Trees, sir. Snow,” Fujita answered. “Not much else. No tigers. No
Russians, either.”
“They’re there,” the lieutenant said.
“Oh, yes, sir,” Fujita agreed. “They’re everywhere. The Mongols
would have fallen over years ago if the Russians weren’t propping
them up.”
“No, the Russians are really everywhere,” Hanafusa said. “A quarter
of the way around the world, they’re fighting the Poles and the
Germans. And that’s why we’re here. When things get cooking on
this front, they’ll be too busy in the west to do anything about it.”
“Yes, sir,” Fujita said resignedly. Japanese officers always figured
enlisted men were hayseeds. The sergeant had figured out why his

unit was transferring from the Mongolian border to the northeast as
soon as it got the order. He knew what a map looked like. And if he’d
never slept in a bed with a frame and legs till he got conscripted
…Lieutenant Hanafusa didn’t need to know that.
“As soon as the weather warms up and the snow melts, I think we’ll
move,” Hanafusa said.
“Sounds good to me, sir,” Fujita said. You needed as many clothes
here in the winter as you did in Mongolia, and that was saying
something.
Something buzzed by high overhead: an airplane. “Is that one of
ours or one of theirs?” Hanafusa asked.
“Let me see, sir.” Fujita raised the field glasses. The plane was too
far off to let him make out whether it bore the Rising Sun or the
Soviet red star. But he recognized the outline, and spoke
confidently: “It’s one of ours, sir.”
“Well, good,” Hanafusa said. Both sides sent up reconnaissance
planes: each wanted to see what the other was up to. Every so
often, one side would send up fighters to chase off the spies or
shoot them down. Sometimes the other side would send up fighters
of its own. Then the men on the ground could watch dogfights and
cheer on the planes they thought were theirs.
Sergeant Fujita hoped the Russians would open up with their
antiaircraft guns. He didn’t want them hitting the Japanese plane
—that was the last thing he had in mind. But if they started shooting
at it, his side could see where they’d positioned their guns. That
would be worth knowing when the big fight started.
He wasn’t much surprised when the guns stayed silent. The
Russians were better at hiding their artillery till they really needed it

than he’d imagined anyone could be. If you didn’t think they had
any guns nearby, half a dozen batteries were zeroed in on you. If
you thought you knew about those half a dozen batteries, four
wouldn’t be where you expected them to be and you’d missed
another half a dozen. You wouldn’t find out about them, either, not
till the Russians needed to show them to you.
He said as much to Lieutenant Hanafusa. Not all of the Kwantung
Army had as much experience with the Russians as the men who’d
fought them in Mongolia did. These fellows who’d been on the
Ussuri or over by the Amur…well, what did they know? Not much,
not so far as Fujita could see.
But Hanafusa nodded. “Thank you, Sergeant,” he said. “We’ve
seen that ourselves. There have been skirmishes along this frontier,
too, you know. Even the Korean Army got into the act—but they had
to ask us for help when the Russians turned out to have more than
they expected.”
“All right, sir.” Fujita wasn’t sure it was, but what could he say?
He did share Hanafusa’s scorn for the Korean Army. The Kwantung
Army was a power unto itself. It dictated policy for Japan as often as
Tokyo told it what to do. The Kwantung Army had masterminded and
spearheaded the Japanese thrust deep into China. Some people
said there were men in the Cabinet back in Japan who didn’t like
that and wanted to pull back. If there were, those people were
keeping their mouths shut and walking softly. Army officers had
assassinated Cabinet ministers before. They could again, and
everybody knew it.
The only force that had any chance of restraining the Kwantung
Army wasn’t the Cabinet. It was the Navy. Generals here saw the
Russians looming over Manchukuo like the bears cartoonists drew

them as. The admirals looked across the ocean and babbled about
America—and, sometimes, England.
“Can the Americans give us trouble, sir?” Fujita blurted.
“What? Here on the Ussuri?” Lieutenant Hanafusa stared. “Don’t be
ridiculous.”
Fujita’s cheeks heated in spite of the chilly wind wailing down from
Siberia. “No, sir, I didn’t mean that. I meant, well, anywhere.”
“Oh. I see.” The lieutenant relaxed. “Mm, they won’t jump in and pull
the Russians’ chestnuts out of the fire, the way they did in the
Russo-Japanese War. I’m sure of that. The Communists don’t have
any friends. England and France are fighting Germany, too, but the
two wars might as well be one on the moon, the other on the sun.
They don’t like Stalin any better than we do, and neither do the
Americans.”
“Yes, sir.” That did help ease Fujita’s mind. All the same, he went
on, “I’ve talked to some guys who served in Peking. They say the
United States doesn’t like what we’re doing in China.”
“Who are these people?” Hanafusa asked softly.
Sergeant Fujita beat a hasty retreat: “I don’t know their names, sir.
Just some guys I was talking with waiting in line for comfort women.”
That wasn’t exactly true, but Lieutenant Hanafusa would never
prove it. You didn’t rat on your friends.
“I see.” The lieutenant had to know it was a lie, but he also had to
know he wouldn’t get anything more. His snort sent steam jetting
from his nostrils. “Your brothel buddies aren’t too smart—that’s all
I’ve got to say. The Americans go right on selling us fuel oil and
scrap metal, no matter what’s happening in China. As long as they

keep doing that, they don’t much care—right?”
“Oh, yes, sir.” Fujita knew he wasn’t the smartest guy ever born. But
he wasn’t dumb enough to get into an argument with an officer. If
you were that dumb…He shook his head. He couldn’t imagine
anybody that dumb, not in the Japanese Army.

Julius Lemp scowled at U-30. “What the hell have you done to my
boat?” he demanded of the engineering officer standing with him on
the quay at Kiel.
“It’s a Dutch invention,” that worthy answered. “We captured several
of their subs that use it. We’re calling it a snorkel—well, some of the
guys who install it call it a snort, but you know how mechanics are.”
“Ugliest goddamn thing I’ve ever seen,” Lemp said. “It looks like the
boat’s got a hard-on.”
The engineering officer chuckled. “Well, I’ve never heard that one
before.”

He couldn’t appease Lemp so easily. “All you have to do is put it on.
I’m the poor son of a bitch who has to take it to sea. Why the hell
did you pick on me?”
“I couldn’t say anything about that. I got my orders and I carried
them out,” the engineering officer replied. He wasn’t chuckling any
more. “If you’ve really got your tits in a wringer about it, go talk to
Admiral Dönitz.”
That shut Lemp up with a snap. He’d done more talking with the
head of the U-boat force than he ever wanted to, and about less
pleasant subjects. Sinking an American liner when the Reich wasn’t
at war with the USA would do that to you. German propaganda
loudly insisted England had lowered the boom on the Athenia. Lemp
and Dönitz both knew better.
And despite all that, it could have been worse. Lemp hadn’t got
demoted. He did have that reprimand sitting in his promotion jacket
like a big, stinking turd, but nobody’d said a word about putting him
on the beach and letting him fill out forms for the rest of the war. A
good thing, too, because he wanted nothing more than to go to sea.
But…The Kriegsmarine had its ways of showing it was unhappy with
an officer, all right. Loading down his boat with experimental
equipment was one of them. You didn’t want a skipper you really
cared about to play the guinea pig. Oh, no. In that case, you’d lose
somebody you wanted to keep if the—the goddamn snort, that’s
what it was—didn’t work as advertised. But if that happened in U-30
…
Poor old Lemp, people in the know would say. First the liner and
now this. He wasn’t lucky, was he?
Poor old Lemp, poor old Lemp thought. He was stuck with it, all
right. “I don’t need to talk to the admiral,” he mumbled after a long

right. “I don’t need to talk to the admiral,” he mumbled after a long
silence.
“No? Good.” The engineering officer paused in the middle of
lighting a cigarette. A chilly breeze blew off the Baltic, but it didn’t
faze him. He was one of those people who could keep a match alive
in any weather with no more than his cupped hands. It was a useful
knack for submariners, who had to come up onto the conning tower
to smoke. Some guys had it and some didn’t; that was all there was
to it. Happily puffing away, the engineering officer went on, “You’ll
take two engineers to sea with you this cruise.”
“Wunderbar,” Lemp said. A U-boat needed a second engineer the
way a fighter plane needed an extra prop in its tail. The only reason
you took one was to train him so he could become the engineer on
a new boat his next time out.
Or so Lemp thought, till the engineering officer told him, “Leutnant
Beilharz is an expert on using the snorkel.” Lemp would have liked
that better if he hadn’t tempered it with, “If anybody is, of course.”
Still, maybe it meant the powers that be didn’t actively hope he’d
sink. Maybe.
Gerhart Beilharz proved improbably young and improbably
enthusiastic. He also proved improbably tall: within a centimeter
either way of two meters. Type VII boats—hell, all submarines—were
cramped enough if you were short. With all the pipes and conduits
running along just above the level of most people’s heads…“You’re
asking to get your skull split,” Lemp said.
“I know,” Beilharz said. He pulled an infantryman’s Stahlhelm out of
his duffel bag. “I got this from my cousin. He’s somewhere in France
right now. I’m pretty good at remembering to duck, but maybe the
helmet’ll keep me from knocking my brains out when I forget.”

“That’d be nice,” Lemp agreed dryly. “Try not to smash up the
valves and such when you go blundering through the boat, if you
don’t mind.”
“Jawohl!” Gerhart Beilharz said—he really was an eager puppy.
And he knew things worth knowing. Or he was supposed to,
anyhow. “Tell me about the snort,” Lemp urged.
“You’ve heard that, sir, have you? Good,” the young engineer said.
“It’s a wonderful gizmo, honest to God it is. You can charge your
batteries without surfacing. That’s what the Dutch were mostly using
it for. But you can cruise along submerged, too, and you’re much
harder to spot than you would be on the surface.”
“But how am I supposed to spot targets if I do that?” Lemp asked. “If
I’m puttering along at three or four knots—”
“You can do eight easily, sir,” Beilharz broke in. “You can get up to
thirteen, but that sets up vibrations you’d rather not have.”
“Can I get the periscope up high enough to look out with it while I’m
running with the snorkel on?” Lemp asked.
“Aber natürlich!” Beilharz sounded offended that he could doubt.
True believers always sounded offended when you doubted. They
sounded that way because they were. That was what made them
true believers. Lemp was also a true believer, in his way. He
believed in going out and sinking as many ships bound for England
as he could. Anything that could help him sink those ships, he
approved of. Anything that didn’t…He eyed the ungainly snorkel
one more time.
“Well, we’ll give it a try,” he said. “The North Sea is rough. Will the

snort suck all the air out of the boat if the nozzle goes under water?”
“That’s not supposed to happen,” Leutnant Beilharz said stiffly.
Lemp concluded that it could, whether it was supposed to or not.
What happened then? Did it vent exhaust back into the boat? That
might not be much fun. He wished he’d never set eyes on the
miserable Athenia. Then they’d have fitted the goddamn
experimental whatsit onto somebody else’s U-boat.
Well, he was stuck with it. He tried it out before the U-30 left the
calm waters of Kiel Bay. It worked as advertised. The diesels
chugged along with the whole boat—but for the tip of the snorkel
tube—submerged. Gerhart Beilharz seemed as proud as a new
papa showing off his firstborn son.
What happens when the little bugger pisses in your eye after you
take his diaper off to change him? Lemp wondered sourly. He
stayed surfaced through the Kiel Canal and out into the North Sea.
Away from the sheltered bay, the ocean showed some of what it
could do. Several sailors went a delicate green. Puke in the bilges
would remind the crew it was there all through the cruise.
“Ride’s smoother down below,” Beilharz suggested.
“Nein.” Lemp shook his head. “I’ll use the snort when I have to, but
not for this. I want to get out there and go hunting, dammit. Even
eight knots is only half what I can make on the surface, so we’ll stay
up here.” The second engineer looked aggrieved, but that was all
he could do. Lemp had the power to bind and to loose, to rise and
to sink.
He cruised along at fifteen knots, heading up toward the gap
between Scotland and Norway. The Royal Navy patrolled the gap, of
course—they didn’t want subs getting loose in the Atlantic. They laid

minefields in the North Sea, too. A lot of U-boat skippers stuck close
to the Norwegian coast. Some even—most unofficially—ducked into
Norwegian territorial waters to stay away from the Royal Navy.
Sometimes—also most unofficially—the limeys steamed into
Norwegian waters after them.
Lemp steered straight for the narrower gap between the Orkneys
and the Shetlands. As far as he was concerned, the Norwegian
dogleg only wasted fuel. He prided himself on being a hardcharging skipper. (Sometimes, these days, he wondered how proud
he should be. Would he have torpedoed the Athenia if he’d waited
longer to make sure of what she was? But he couldn’t dwell on that,
not if he wanted to do his job.) And the North Sea was plenty wide.
Chances were he wouldn’t hit a mine or get spotted by a destroyer.
And if he did get spotted, he told himself, it was at least as much the
destroyer’s worry as his.
He kept four men up on the conning tower all the time during the
day. Their Zeiss binoculars scanned from side to side and went
higher up into the sky to make sure the watchmen spotted a plane
before it saw the U-boat. Leutnant Beilharz took his turn up there.
Why not? It was the only time when he could stand up straight.
His disapproval of the way Lemp used—or rather, didn’t use—the
snorkel stuck out like a hedgehog’s spines. Finally, Lemp pulled him
into his own tiny cabin. Only a sheet of canvas separated it from the
main passageway, but it gave him more privacy than anyone else
on the sub enjoyed.
Quietly, he said, “We have the gadget. If we need it, we know what
to do with it. Till then, I don’t intend to break routine. Have you got
that?”
“Yes, sir,” Gerhart Beilharz answered sourly. U-boat discipline was

on the easygoing side—enough to threaten to give officers from the
surface navy a stroke. That formal response felt like, and was, a
reproach.
Where the conversation would have gone from there was anybody’s
guess. Downhill was Lemp’s. But somebody yelled, “Smoke on the
horizon!”
“It’ll keep,” Lemp said as he jumped to his feet.
“Ja.” Beilharz sprang up, too. He wore his cousin’s helmet all the
time inside the U-boat—and needed it, too. It scraped on something
overhead as he trotted along behind Lemp. He might make a
submariner yet, even if he was oversized. Lemp would have thought
hard about chucking him overboard had he tried to waste time.
The big, pole-mounted field glasses were aimed northwest when
Lemp stepped out onto the top of the conning tower. “What is it?”
he demanded.
“Looks like a light cruiser, skipper,” the bosun answered.
“Well, well,” Lemp muttered, peering through the powerful
binoculars. It was indeed a warship: maybe a cruiser, maybe only a
destroyer. He would rather have seen a fat freighter out there, but
…Before he did anything else, he scanned the horizon himself. If it
was a cruiser, it was likely to have destroyers escorting it. Ignoring
them while making a run at the bigger ship could prove
embarrassing, to say the least.
“Shall we stalk it?” Beilharz asked, all but panting at the chance. “It’ll
give you a chance to try the snort in action.”
Lemp didn’t answer right away. Only after he’d gone through 360
degrees without spotting any more smoke or another hull did he

slowly nod. “Ja,” he said. “We’ll do it.” He heard the odd reluctance
in his own voice, whether the junior engineer did or not. Beilharz
could afford to be eager. To him, this was like playing with toys. But
Lemp had to be careful. U-30 and the crew were all on his
shoulders, a burden that sometimes felt heavier than the one Atlas
bore. He muttered something the wind blew away. Then he clapped
Beilharz on the shoulder. “Let’s go below. We’ll see what we can do
with your precious gadget.”
He didn’t submerge right away. He still wanted to get as close as he
could on the surface, where he had the best turn of speed. When
he did go under, he could still make the eight knots Beilharz had
promised, and he would have been down to half that on battery
power. The extra speed helped him maneuver into a good firing
position.
He launched two torpedoes at the cruiser—he still thought it was
one—from a little more than 800 meters. The British warship never
changed course, which meant no one aboard saw them at all. One
hit up near the bow, the other just abaft of amidship. Like a man
bludgeoned from behind, the ship never knew what hit it. It
shuddered to a stop, rolled steeply to starboard, and sank inside of
fifteen minutes.
Cheers dinned through the long, hollow steel cigar of the U-30’s
hull. Lemp went to his tiny cabin and pulled out the bottle of
schnapps he used to congratulate sailors on a job well done. He
thrust it at Leutnant Beilharz. “Here you go, Gerhart. Take a big
slug,” he said. “You’ve earned it, you and your snort.”
Beilharz drank and then coughed; Lemp got the idea the young
man didn’t take undiluted spirits very often. Well, if he stayed in Uboats long, he would. After a sailor pounded Beilharz on the back,
he said, “Pretty soon, I bet every boat in the Kriegsmarine will mount

a snorkel. But us, we’ve got ours now!” Everybody cheered some
more. Why not? They’d just given the Royal Navy a damn good shot
in the teeth.

STAFF SERGEANT ALISTAIR WALSH SHIVERED inside a house
that once upon a time had kept an upper-middle-class French
family warm and dry and snug. That family was gone now. So were
the glass from the windows, a wall and a half, and most of the roof.
What was left of the two-story house gave Walsh and several other
British soldiers a good firing position from which to try to stop the
Germans pushing down from the northeast.
He wasn’t sure whether he was technically in Paris or in one of the
French capital’s countless suburbs. They blended smoothly into
one another. Maybe the fine details mattered to a Frenchman.
Walsh didn’t much care.
All he cared about right now was whether the side that mostly wore
khaki could hold off the side in field-gray If the French were
determined to fight, Paris could swallow up an army. Seizing the
place block by block, house by house…Walsh wouldn’t have wanted
to try it. And he would have bet the Germans weren’t what anyone
would call keen on the notion, either.
If they got around Paris to the north and came in behind it, the jig
was up. They’d tried that in the last war, but hadn’t quite brought it
off. They were trying it again now. Walsh worried that they would
make it this time. But he couldn’t do anything about that. All he
could do was make life as rough as he could for any Boches who
got within a few hundred yards of him.
More Boches were trying to do that than he would have liked.
Germans had always been aggressive soldiers; he’d seen that the

Germans had always been aggressive soldiers; he’d seen that the
last time around, and it hadn’t changed a bit in the generation
since. And they had their peckers up now, the way they hadn’t in
1918. They thought they were winning, and they wanted to keep
right on doing it.
The Tommies who huddled with Walsh weren’t so sure how their
side was doing. They’d all started out in different regiments, but
here they were, thrown together by the fortunes or misfortunes of
war. One of them—Walsh thought his name was Bill—said, “Where
do we go if we have to fall back from here, Sergeant?”
“Beats me,” Walsh answered, more cheerfully than he felt. “They
want us to hold where we are, so we’ll do that as long as we can.”
He peered out through a hole that had been a window. The bomb
that had mashed this house had leveled three on the far side of the
street. As far as Walsh was concerned, that was all to the good: it let
him see farther than he could have if they still stood. Some British
infantrymen were setting up a Bren gun over there, using the rubble
to conceal and strengthen their position. That wouldn’t protect them
from artillery the way a concrete emplacement would, but it was a
damn sight better than nothing.
And Walsh liked having machine guns around. They stretched an
ordinary rifleman’s life expectancy. Not only did they chew up enemy
foot soldiers, they also drew fire, which meant the Germans wouldn’t
be shooting anywhere else so much—say, at the precious and
irreplaceable carcass of one Staff Sergeant Alistair Walsh.
Artillery probably based somewhere inside of Paris thundered
behind the British position. The shells came down a few hundred
yards in front of Walsh. A short round burst much too close to the
Bren gunners. One of them turned and shook his fist in the direction

of his own gunners.
Walsh would have done the same thing. Artillerymen and foot
soldiers often brawled when they came together in taverns behind
the line. The artillerymen seemed to wonder why. Not the infantry.
They knew, all right.
“Can’t win, can you, Sergeant?” a different private said. His name
was Nigel, and he talked like an educated man.
“Oh, I don’t know. Look at it the right way and we’re all winners so
far,” Walsh replied.
Nigel looked puzzled. “How’s that? This isn’t a holiday on the fucking
Riviera.” His wave encompassed the shattered house and the
wreckage all around.
“Too bloody right it’s not,” Walsh agreed. “But you’re still here to
piss and moan about it, eh? They haven’t thrown you in a hole in
the ground with your rifle and tin hat for a headstone. They haven’t
taken your leg off with a strap to bite on ‘cause they ran out of ether
with the last poor bloke. If you’re not a winner on account of that,
chum, what would you call it?”
“Heh.” Nigel chuckled sheepishly. “Put it like that and you’ve got
something, all right. Taken all in all, though, I do believe I’d sooner
win the Irish Sweepstakes.” He lit a Navy Cut and passed around
the packet. He might talk like a toff, but he didn’t act like one.
With one of Nigel’s fags in his mouth, Walsh didn’t feel like arguing
any more. Sure as hell, a cigarette was better than a soft answer for
turning away wrath. Then the German artillery woke up, and he
forgot about everything else.
He hoped the Fritzes were sending back counterbattery fire. If they

wanted to drop some on his own gunners’ heads, he didn’t mind
…too much. But no such luck. The first shells burst a little closer to
his position than the German rounds had. Then they walked west.
“Christ, we’re for it this time!” he shouted, and dove under the
dining-room table. It was the best shelter around. The other
Tommies knew what they were doing, too. They all ended up in a
mad tangle under there. That table, a great, solid hunk of oak, had
to date back to the last century. It would keep the rest of the roof
and the ceiling from coming down on their heads if anything could.
If anything could. That table wouldn’t stop a shell burst on the
house or right outside of it from filling them with fragments. Walsh
knew that painfully well—and, with somebody’s boot in his eye,
somebody else’s elbow in his stomach, and somebody else
altogether squashing him flat, painfully was le môt juste.

An explosion to the right. Another to the left. Two more behind the
house. Bits and pieces of things came down. Something about the
size of a football thumped on top of the table and banged away.
Another chunk of the ceiling? Whatever it was, Walsh wouldn’t have
wanted it landing on him. But it didn’t. That table might have let a
tank run over him, not that he was anxious to find out by
experiment.
The bombardment pressed on, deeper into the Allied position. It was
almost like the walking barrages the British had used in the last go.
That memory galvanized Walsh. “Up!” he shouted urgently, lifting his
face from the small of—he thought—Nigel’s back. “Get up! We’ll be
arse-deep in Boches any second now!”
Getting out from under the table was more complicated than getting
in there had been. They’d packed themselves in too tightly. After
mighty wrigglings and much bad language, they got loose. Bill had a
gash on his left leg. It might have come from broken glass on the
floor or a graze by a fragment. In civilian times, Walsh would have
thought it was nasty. Neither he nor Bill got excited about it now.
Walsh ran up to the top floor. Sure as dammit, here came the
Fritzes. Their storm troops had submachine guns and lots of
grenades. They’d learned that stunt in 1918. They’d bring real
machine guns along, too. The current models were more portable
than Maxims had been back then. And they were Fritzes. That alone
gave Walsh a healthy respect for their talents.
He took a quick look at the Bren-gun position across the street. It
didn’t seem to have taken a hit, but the gun stayed quiet. With luck,
the crew was playing possum, luring the Boches forward to be mown
down. Without luck, somebody else would have to get over there—if
he could—and use the Bren.

An unwary German (yes, there were such things: just not enough of
them) showed himself for rather too long. Walsh’s Enfield jumped to
his shoulder almost of its own accord. The stock slammed him when
he pulled the trigger. The German went down. By the boneless way
he fell, Walsh didn’t think he’d get up again.
“Now they know we’re here,” Nigel called from downstairs. He didn’t
sound critical—he was reminding Walsh of something he needed to
remember.
“We couldn’t have kept it secret much longer,” the veteran noncom
answered. “As long as they haven’t got any tanks, winkling us out’ll
take a bit of work.” He hadn’t seen any mechanical monsters right
around here. They did less well in built-up places than out in the
open. They grew vulnerable to grenades and flaming bottles of
petrol and other dirty tricks.
A machine gun started barking from most of a mile away. Bullets
slammed into the east-facing stone wall. It wasn’t aimed fire, but it
made the Englishmen keep their heads down. A rifle could hit at that
range only by luck. The machine gun stayed dangerous not
because it was more accurate but because it spat so many rounds.
German infantry advanced under cover of that machine-gun fire.
Walsh had been sure the Boches would. They knew what was what.
And then, like the cavalry riding to the rescue in an American
Western, the Bren gun in the wreckage across the street opened
up. Walsh heard the Fritzes shout in dismay as they dove for cover.
This wouldn’t be so easy as they’d thought.
The machine gun that had been firing at Walsh and his chums
forgot about them and went after the more dangerous Bren gun.
The Germans didn’t use light machine guns in this war. They had a
general-purpose weapon that filled both the light and heavy roles. It

wasn’t ideal for either. But, being belt-fed, it could go longer than a
box-fed Bren.
Not that that did the advancing Landsers much good. The Bren-gun
position was secure against small-arms fire. The Tommies manning
it ignored the other machine gun and kept the foot soldiers in fieldgray at a respectful distance.
And Walsh and his pals and the other riflemen in the half-wrecked
suburb made the Germans pay whenever they stuck their heads up.
The only thing he dreaded was that the German artillery would
come back. It didn’t. After half an hour or so, the attack petered out.
The Fritzes had taken a good many casualties, and Walsh couldn’t
see that they’d gained an inch of ground.
Nigel passed around the packet of Navy Cuts again. Bill found a
bottle of wine the French family had forgotten. They passed that
around, too. It didn’t take long to empty. Once it ran dry, Walsh set it
aside. If he got the chance, he’d make a petrol bomb out of it. He
opened a tin of steak-and-kidney pudding—the best ration the Army
made. A smoke, some wine, a tin of food…He was happy as a
sheep in clover. A soldier could be satisfied with next to nothing, and
often was.
• • •

WHEN MILT WOLFF WENT DOWN, Harvey Jacoby took command
of the Abraham Lincoln Battalion. He’d been a labor organizer in
Seattle before he came to Spain. Chaim Weinberg thought he was a
pretty good guy. He was brave and smart. But nobody would ever
call him anything like El Lobo. He had neither the name nor the

personality for it—he ran things with brains and common sense.
He came back from a meeting of International Brigade officers
muttering to himself. “They’re going to pull us out of the line here,”
he announced, his tone declaring that it wasn’t his idea and he
didn’t like it for hell, but he couldn’t do anything about it.
He must have known the news would bring a storm of protest, and it
did. “What for?” Chaim yelped, his voice one among many. “We can
hold the Ebro line forever! ¡No pasarán!”
“The Republic is going to transfer the International Brigades to
where they need us more,” Jacoby said, picking his words with
obvious care.
That only made the Abe Lincolns hotter than ever. Next to Chaim,
Mike Carroll called, “They can’t do that! The Party wouldn’t like it!”
Again, he was far from the only man with the same thought.
“They can. They are.” Jacoby held up a hand, which slowed but
didn’t stop the torrent of vituperation. At last, something resembling
quiet except for being much noisier prevailed. It was enough to
satisfy Jacoby, anyhow. “Listen to me,” he said, and then again,
louder, “Listen to me, goddammit! Things aren’t the way they used
to be, and we’d better get used to it.”
“What’s so different?” Chaim challenged.
“Here’s what—the Republic doesn’t have to worry about the Party
line any more,” Jacoby answered. “Back when we were getting most
of our stuff from the Soviets, the government had to pay attention to
what the Party wanted. But when’s the last time a Russian ship tied
up in Barcelona?”
Chaim knew the answer to that: just before the big European war

started. Since then, that supply line had dried up. All the supply
lines for both sides had dried up. Nationalists and Republicans were
fighting with what they had left from before and with what they could
make for themselves. That that might affect policy hadn’t occurred
to him up till now.
But it did. “The Party isn’t the tail that wags the dog any more,”
Harvey Jacoby said regretfully. “Russian officers can’t tell the
Spaniards what to do and how to do things.” His grin was crooked.
“Well, they can, but the Spaniards have quit listening.”
Chaim’s chuckle sounded forced. In his time with the Internationals,
he’d seen that Russians could be as obnoxious and arrogant as
Germans. Firmly convinced they were the wave of the future, they
ordered people around to suit themselves and had as much give as
so many snapping turtles. Somebody—Chaim had forgotten who
—had said, “If the fuckers weren’t on our side, there’d be a bounty
on ‘em.” That about summed things up.
“We’re tougher’n any outfit the Republic has,” someone told Jacoby.
“If we don’t want to move, they can’t make us.”
“They want us to move because we’re tough,” the new leader said.
“Way it sounds to me is, they’re going to push the Fascists back
from Madrid, and they want troops who know what they’re doing.”
A different kind of murmur ran through the troops who’d volunteered
to come to Spain. There was a time, early in the civil war, when
Marshal Sanjurjo could have taken Madrid easily. But he chose
instead to rescue Colonel Moscardó, besieged in the fortress at
Toledo with a small garrison. He succeeded, but he gave the
Republic time to fortify the capital. The Internationals had taken
gruesome casualties keeping it in Republican hands. Getting on
toward three years later, it still was.

Mike turned to Chaim. “Think we can move the bastards?”
“Damned if I know—depends on just where we go and what we’ve
gotta do,” Chaim answered. “Even getting there’ll be a bitch kitty
—know what I mean?”
“Fuck! I don’t want to think about that,” Mike said with feeling. The
Republic’s railway net had more holes than a cheap sock. The
roads might have been in worse shape yet, even assuming the
quartermasters could scrape together enough trucks to move all the
Internationals and enough gas to keep them moving. Chaim wanted
to march from the Ebro to Madrid like he wanted a hole in the head.
He’d signed up to give Sanjurjo a black eye, not to walk his own legs
off.
“Madrid!” Jacoby said again, as if the name carried magic all by
itself. And damned if it didn’t. He went on, “Do you want to keep on
fighting for chicken coops and frozen hills here, or do you want to
fight for a place that really counts?”
Madrid had magic, yes. Another thoughtful murmur rose from the
Abe Lincolns. But even magic was worth only so much to veterans.
“Cut the crap, Harvey!” said a guy who could only have come from
New York City. “Fighting’s fighting. It’s all shitty, no matter where you
do it.”
“You can cry if you want to,” Jacoby said. “You can go home if you
want to—and if the commissars and border guards let you get away
with it. But if you stick with the Abe Lincolns, you’re damn well going
to Madrid. So what’ll it be, Izzy?”
“Oh, I’ll go,” Izzy answered. “I still want to kick these Fascist
assholes around the block, same like the rest of us. But you got to
let us blow off steam first.”

“What do you think I’m doing?” Jacoby said. “I know how hot the
boilers run on some of you guys.”
Chaim found himself nodding. The new CO’d hit that nail right on
the head. A meeting of the Abe Lincolns—a meeting of any group
from the International Brigades—was more like a workers’ soviet
than a typical military gathering. Or such meetings always had been
like that, anyway. Not everybody who came to Spain to fight for the
International Brigades was a Red, but most of the men were. And
the Reds had always dominated the way things went.
They had, yes. How long could they keep on doing it? As Jacoby
had said, the Party’s stock was down. Chaim snorted. There was a
capitalist figure of speech for you! Well, everybody else’s stock in
Spain was down, too. The war still mattered to the people who had
to fight it. The rest of the world cared only for what was happening
near Paris.
Spanish anarchist militiamen came forward to take the International
Brigades’ place on the Ebro line. They had a sprinkling of
foreigners with them, too; as Chaim trudged toward the railhead
down in Tortosa, he exchanged nods with a tall, pale, skinny fellow
with a dark mustache and hair who had to come from England or
Ireland.
The Internationals were a raggedy bunch: Americans (many of them
Jews), anti-Nazi Germans, anti-Fascist Italians, Frenchmen who
remembered the ideals of the Revolution, Englishmen, Magyars who
hated Horthy, and Poles and Romanians and Greeks and God knew
who all else who couldn’t stand their local strongmen. There were
even a couple of Chinamen and a Jap. They were raggedy, all right,
but they could fight.
Bombs cratered the approaches to the bridge across the Ebro.

Plenty of bombs must have gone into the river, too. But the bridge
still stood. Aerial bombardment was no fun, but it wasn’t the warwinning monster people had feared it would be. There weren’t
enough bombs, and the planes couldn’t place them accurately
enough to do everything the generals wanted.
The train that chuffed into Tortosa for the fighters had seen better
days, better years, better decades. The locomotive wheezed
asthmatically The cars seemed to be missing half their windows.
Once Chaim squeezed inside, he discovered the compartments had
nothing but hard benches. He was lucky to get to sit down at all; the
Internationals were packed in tight as sardines, without the benefit
of olive oil to grease the spaces between them.
“Boy, this is fun,” he said to nobody in particular.
“Scheisse,” declared the tall, skinny, blond German wedged in
beside him. “My ass.” The guy looked as if he ought to belong in the
SS, but his heart was in the right place. He took a pack of Gitanes
from his breast pocket and offered it to Chaim. “Zigarette?”
“Thanks,” Chaim said. He shared the red wine in his canteen with
the young blond fellow. They talked in a weird mixture of English,
German, Yiddish, and Spanish. The German’s name was Wladimir
—he insisted on the W at the front, even if it sounded like a V
—Diehl. Chaim could think of only one reason why a German his
age would be called Wladimir. “Your folks name you for Lenin?”
“You betcha,” Diehl answered, a phrase he must have picked up
from an American. “They tried to help the Red revolution in Bavaria.
My father, I think, was lucky to live. They fought Hitler’s goons in the
streets when the Nazis were new and no one thought they would
ever amount to anything. My father and mother have been fighting
the Nazis longer than almost anyone.” He spoke with somber pride.

And well he might: among the Internationals, that was something to
be proud of.
If anything, the locomotive seemed even wheezier pulling out of
Tortosa than it had coming in. Chaim knew why: it was pulling all
these cars stuffed with soldiers. And it had to take the long way to
Madrid. If the Republicans hadn’t recaptured the corridor to the sea
from the Nationalists, there would have been no direct route
through their territory from the upper Ebro to the city. They would
have had to go to Barcelona, take ship, land in Valencia or some
other port, and then head west from there. And they probably would
have arrived just too late to do the cause any good.
Nobody bothered to feed the Internationals on the train. Along with
the wine in his canteen, Chaim had enough bread and garlicky
sausage to keep from getting too hungry for a couple of days. He’d
been in Spain long enough to assume inefficiency would rear up
and try to bite him in the ass. Wladimir carried stewed beans and
smoked herrings instead. They swapped some of their iron rations.
What Chaim got was no better than what he gave away, but at least
it was different.
They didn’t go very fast. Again, he was anything but surprised. It
wasn’t all the poor spavined engine’s fault. The Spanish railroad net
had been ramshackle to begin with, at least by American standards
(and German ones—what Wladimir had to say put out more highpressure steam than the locomotive’s boiler; Harvey Jacoby’d
known what he was talking about, all right). Two and a half years of
war, two and a half years of bad maintenance—often of no
maintenance—did nothing to improve matters.
Everybody had to get out and walk a couple of miles outside the
little town of Villar. Jacoby and other International Brigade big shots
promised that another train would be waiting at the depot. Chaim

marched past a break in the track. Fascist saboteurs? Or just an
ancient railroad line coming apart at the seams? He couldn’t tell. He
wasn’t sure it mattered. Any which way, the line was fucked up.
And sleepy Villar might never have seen a train since the beginning
of time. A few small boys stared at the Internationals as they
slogged up to the yawningly empty depot. None of the other locals
seemed to want to show their faces. Chaim would have been
angrier had he believed the officers’ promises to begin with. He’d
been in Spain too long to trust anybody or anything any more.
The train did show up…fourteen hours later, in the middle of the
night. The locals had emerged by then, to offer food and drink at
inflated prices. The Internationals proposed a different bargain: if
they got fed, they wouldn’t sack the town. Upon hasty consideration,
the people of Villar agreed. “God protect us from our friends,”
Wladimir said, and Chaim nodded.
When somebody shook him awake, he didn’t want to get up. He
really didn’t want to get on another train. As usual, nobody cared
what he wanted. He managed to snag another seat. It was hard and
cramped and uncomfortable, but inside of ten minutes he was
snoring again.
He dozed till an hour past sunup. Not even artillery bursts around
the station as the Internationals disembarked in Madrid got him very
excited. It was a big city, and it already looked like hell. The
Nationalists had battered it with guns and bombs ever since the war
was young.
But the International Brigades were here to do what they’d done
before—to help make sure Madrid stayed with the Republic. And,
somewhere, Chaim would find a warm place to sleep.

Joaquin Delgadillo didn’t know what to make of Major Bernardo
Uribe. His new battalion commander was recklessly brave. You had
to be, to keep going forward into the shelling the British laid down in
their defense of Gibraltar. Uribe hadn’t hung back. He’d even won
Sergeant Carrasquel’s grudging respect—and Carrasquel gave no
other kind.
But if the major wasn’t a maricón, Joaquin had never seen anybody
who was. Uribe smelled of rose water regardless of the hour. He was
always shaved smooth as a woman—this among soldiers for whom
scruffiness was a mark of pride. And he exaggerated the Castilian
lisp into something beyond both effeminacy and self-parody.
If he ever tries rubbing up against me, I’ll break my rifle over his
head, by God! Delgadillo thought. But Uribe never did. Virile
machismo virtually defined the Nationalist cause. Major Uribe cared
nothing for machismo—unless it made him hot—but in his own
strange way he was worth more to Marshal Sanjurjo than a lot of
hard-drinking, hardwenching officers.

“We are going back to Madrid,” he told his soldiers, flouncing atop a
kitchen table he was using for a podium. “We are. We’ll take it away
from the Republican beasts once and for all this time. And do you
know what I’ve heard? Have you got any idea, my dears?” He waited
expectantly, one hand cupped behind his ear.
“What is it, Señor?” the soldiers chorused, Joaquin loud among
them.
“I’ve heard the International Brigades are back in Madrid. Isn’t that
jolly?” the major shrilled.
“No, por Dios,” Sergeant Carrasquel muttered beside Joaquin.
“They may be a bunch of fucking Reds, but they can fight. I ran up
against those cocksuckers in ‘36, and once was plenty, thank you
very much.”
Up on his rickety platform, Uribe turned the sergeant’s argument
upside down and inside out: “People say they make good soldiers,
and I guess that’s true. But they’re a pack of filthy, godless
Communists. They kill priests and they rape nuns for the fun of it.
The sooner we kill every one of them, the sooner we make Spain a
clean place to live again.”
Some of the Nationalist soldiers cheered. Most of those, Joaquin
saw, were men new to the battalion. How much did they know about
hard fighting? Sergeant Carrasquel, who knew as much as anybody
in the world these days, did some more muttering: “That’s all great,
but how many of us are those assholes going to kill?”
“Victory will be ours,” Major Uribe insisted. “Ours! Spain’s! Germany
and Italy have other scores to settle. But we—the honest people of
Spain, the pious people of Spain—we will give the Red Republic
what it deserves. ¡Muerte a la República! ¡Viva la muerte!”

“¡Viva la muerte!” the troops shouted back. Long live death!—the
battle cry of the Spanish Foreign Legion—sounded ferocious when
they yelled it. In Major Uribe’s full-lipped mouth, it seemed more like
an endearment.
Uribe, of course, was not speaking for himself alone. He was
passing on orders he’d got from the officers above him. If those
officers said the battalion was going to Madrid, to Madrid it would
go. The only other choice was desertion. And if Marshal Sanjurjo’s
men caught you after you sneaked away or—ever so much worse
—went over to the Republic…They wouldn’t waste a cigarette on
you before they stood you against the closest wall. They might not
even waste a firing squad’s worth of bullets on you. Why should
they, when they could bash in your skull with a brick or hang you
upside down, cut your throat, and bleed you like a stuck pig?
Joaquin didn’t want to go over to the Republic. He hated
Communists and anarchists and freethinkers, and he had a low
opinion of Catalans, too. Even if he hadn’t hated all those people
when the war started, all the fighting he’d done would have turned
his heart to stone against them. And deserting was too risky. A
healthy man of military age, without papers to prove he really ought
to be a civilian, wouldn’t last long.
And so, resignedly, Delgadillo climbed aboard a beat-up train with
the rest of the men in the battalion and clattered north from
Gibraltar. Sergeant Carrasquel checked the soldiers off one by one
as they got on in front of him. Trying to skedaddle with the
sergeant’s beady black eyes on you was worse than hopeless. If
you started thinking about getting out of line, Carrasquel knew it
before you did.
Hillsides were starting to turn green. Down in the south, spring came
early. The calendar insisted it was still winter. Up on the far side of

the Pyrenees—maybe even up in Madrid—it would be. But the warm
breezes blowing up from Africa made the southern coast of Spain
almost tropical.
“You wait,” somebody said. “When we get over the mountains, it’ll
be raining.” Sure as the devil, it was—and a cold, nasty rain at that.
Yes, winter still ruled most of Europe.
The closer they got to Madrid, the more Sergeant Carrasquel
fidgeted. “Damned Russian planes shot us up last time I was here,”
he said. “They shot us and bombed us, and not a fucking thing we
could do about it but pray.”
“Will they do it again?” Joaquin asked. Getting attacked from the air
was even more terrifying than moving up under artillery fire. He
thought so while no one was shelling him, anyhow.
Sergeant Carrasquel only shrugged and lit a Canaria. Like
everything else, the local brand wasn’t what it had been before the
war. He blew out a stream of smoke before answering, “I’m sure God
knows, amigo, but He hasn’t told me yet. When He does, I promise
I’ll pass it along.”
Ears burning, Joaquin shut up. The train rattled along. One good
thing about the rain: those gray clouds scudding along overhead
meant enemy aircraft couldn’t get off the ground no matter how
much their pilots might want to. They also meant Marshal Sanjurjo’s
planes couldn’t fly, but that didn’t worry Joaquin so much.
The train came in after dark, so it got closer to the city—closer to
the Promised Land, so to speak—than he’d thought it could. Rain
still pattered down, but it wasn’t the only reason he couldn’t see the
great city he’d come to take. Both sides observed a stringent
blackout. If anyone showed a light, someone else would fire at it.

Even in the absence of light, the Republicans’ artillery lobbed a few
shells at the train. Somebody asked Carrasquel how they could
know where it was. He gave the poor naïve fellow the horse laugh.
“Did your mamacita tell you where babies come from?” he jeered.
“They’ve got spies, same as we do. Sometimes I think every fourth
guy in Spain is a spy for one side or the other—or maybe both.”
He was kidding on the square. When the civil war broke out, how
many Spaniards had ended up stuck behind the lines in a part of
the country ruled by the faction they despised? Millions, surely. And
lots of them would do what they could for their side when they found
the chance. Early on, General Mola had bragged that he had four
columns moving on Madrid and a fifth inside the city ready to help
as soon as the Nationalist troops got closer. The same held true all
over the country. When the Republicans advanced, as they
sometimes did, they could find traitors to help them, too.
General Mola’s four columns hadn’t taken Madrid. The fifth column
inside hadn’t given enough help. And the Reds who held the city
had massacred all the Nationalist sympathizers they could get their
hands on—thousands of them, people said. It wasn’t as if the
Nationalist martyrs hadn’t been avenged, either.
Marshal Sanjurjo’s authorities here must have known
reinforcements were coming up from the south. Odds were the
reinforcements had come because authorities here asked for them.
Joaquin was no marshal, but he could see that plain as day. He’d
figured the authorities would have barracks ready for the
newcomers, or at least tents pitched in a field.
The muddy field was here. So was the dripping night. Along with all
his buddies, Joaquin got to wrap himself in a blanket and try to stay
dry. “This is an embarrassment,” Major Uribe said angrily. “On
behalf of my superiors, men, I apologize to you.”

He apologized because his superiors never would. Joaquin could
see that, too. Sergeant Carrasquel said, “This is the kind of shit that
makes people go over to the other side. They ought to whale the
stuffing out of whoever couldn’t be bothered to take care of us.”
Joaquin whistled softly. Anybody who opened his mouth that wide
was liable to fall right in. Carrasquel had to know as much, too. But
he didn’t keep quiet. You had to admire him for that.
Rain or no rain, mud or no mud, Joaquin fell asleep. When he woke
up, the clouds had blown away and the sun was shining brightly.
And he could see Madrid. He took a good look…and winced, and
turned away. It was too much like looking at the half-rotted corpse of
what had been a beautiful woman. Two and a half years of bombing
and shelling left Madrid a skeletal wreck of its former self.
Guns boomed, there in the ruins. A salvo of shells screamed toward
the Nationalists’ miserable encampment. They burst well short, but
even so…Madrid might not be alive any more, but, like some movie
monster, it wasn’t dead, either. Marshal Sanjurjo’s men had to take it
and drive a stake through its heart. If they could…

SAMUEL GOLDMAN STARED MOROSELY AT the bandages across
the palms of his hands. He was a wounded war veteran. He walked
with a limp because he was a wounded war veteran. Except during
the last war, he’d never done hard physical labor.
None of that mattered to the Nazis who ran Münster. Jews went into
work gangs. That was what they were for. It was so mean, so unfair,
it made Sarah Goldman want to grind her teeth and scream at the
same time.

You couldn’t scream very well while you were grinding your teeth,
but that was beside the point. Instead of letting out a shriek that
would have brought the neighbors and the police, she asked, “Do
you want to put on more ointment, Papa?”
He shook his head. “No. I need to toughen up my hands. Pretty
soon, they’ll have calluses. Then everything will be all right.”
“No, it won’t!” Sarah exclaimed.
Her father’s chuckle was also a wheeze. “Well, you’re right,
sweetheart. But it will as far as that goes, anyhow. I can’t do
anything about the rest.”
“Somebody should be able to,” she said.
“What do you want me to do?” Samuel Goldman asked. “Write a
letter to the Führer?”
“Why not? What have you got to lose? You were a front-line soldier,
just like him. Maybe he’d listen to you. You’ve said it yourself: things
aren’t as bad for veterans as they are for other Jews.”
“Mm…That’s true.” For a moment, Sarah thought her father would
pull out a piece of paper and start writing. But he shook his head
instead. He looked even older and more tired than he had when he
first came home from the labor gang. “What have I got to lose? If I
were just any Jewish veteran, I think I would send him a letter,
because I wouldn’t have anything. But with Saul…With Saul, I would
do better not to remind the authorities about us. Or do you think I’m
wrong?”
He meant the question seriously. Sarah respected him for that. If
she could find a reason to make him change his mind, he would.
She respected him for that, too. But she saw at once that she

couldn’t find a reason like that. “No. I just wish I did,” she said sadly.
“Everything’s gone wrong, and we can’t do anything about it.”
“Not everything,” her father said. “We’re all still here, and three of
us are together. And if Saul isn’t, he isn’t anywhere the Nazis are
likely to look for him, either. I’ll tell you something else, too.”
“What?”
“The Führer isn’t the first ruler who hardened his heart against the
Jews. Pharaoh did the same thing in Egypt more than three
thousand years ago, and look what it got him. Pesach isn’t far away,
you know.”
Sarah eyed him in something not far from astonishment. She didn’t
think she’d ever heard him call the holiday Pesach before; when he
said anything, he said Passover. And it wasn’t as if they were a
religious or an observant family. They ate pork. They’d never
bothered with matzoh during Passover. They didn’t go to the
synagogue even on the High Holy Days.
Her surprise must have shown. Samuel Goldman laughed softly.
“You’re right,” he said. “I never cared much about being a Jew
before. So I was Jewish and Friedrich Lauterbach was Lutheran. So
what? We were both Germans, weren’t we?”
“As a matter of fact, no,” Sarah said.
“As a matter of fact, yes. As a matter of policy, no.” Even now,
Father was relentlessly precise. “But if, as a matter of policy, the
Nazis won’t let me be a German, what else can I be? Only a Jew.
And do you know what else?”
“What?” Sarah whispered again, fascinated and intrigued.

Her father smiled a sad, crooked smile. “I find I rather like it, that’s
what. I wish I’d been more of a Jew when I had more of a choice. I
wish we’d raised you and Saul more in the faith. Hitler made me less
assimilated than I thought I was, and part of me wants to thank him
for it. Isn’t that funny?”
Sarah bent down and kissed him on the cheek. He needed a shave;
his beard was rough under her lips. “Oh, good!” she exclaimed.
“Good?” He looked at her over the tops of his spectacles. “Why?”
“Because that means I’m not the only one who feels the same way,”
she said.
“Very often, you don’t understand what something is worth till you
run into someone who tries to tell you it isn’t worth anything,”
Samuel Goldman said. “And, very often, that turns out to be too
late. I can only hope it won’t here. If I thought it would do any good, I
would pray, but”—he spread his hands in apology to her, or
perhaps to God—“I still can’t make myself imagine it helps.”
“Make yourself believe it helps,” Sarah corrected.
He smiled again, more broadly this time. “Make myself believe it
helps,” he agreed. “That’s what I meant to say. I believe I am a Jew,
all right. Whether I can believe I am a believing Jew…I am the kind
of Jew who enjoys making paradoxes like that, which is probably not
the kind of Jew God had in mind when He made us.”
“Well, why did He make us the way we are, then? Why did He make
so many of us like that?”
“Stubborn and cross-grained, you mean?” Now Father was grinning
from ear to ear, something he hardly ever did. “He made us in His
own image, didn’t He? No wonder we’re this way.”

“You’re having more fun playing with this than you ever did with the
Greeks and Romans.” Sarah made it half an accusation.
And her father, to her astonishment, went from grinning to blushing
like a schoolgirl. “I sure am,” he said. “I didn’t know it showed so
much. I’ve even started brushing up my Hebrew, and I haven’t cared
a pfennig for it since my father and mother made me get barmitzvahed. Know what I’m thinking of trying next?”
“Tell me,” Sarah urged. She was fascinated in spite of herself, and
had the feeling her father felt the same way.
“Aramaic,” Samuel Goldman said in a low voice. He might have
been someone who dabbled in drugs confessing that he planned to
start shooting morphine into his veins.
All Sarah knew about Aramaic was that it was an ancient language.
Growing up in a family that prided itself on its secularism, on its
Germanness, she hadn’t learned much more about Hebrew. Maybe
that was why she blurted, “Teach me!”
“Teach…you?” her father echoed. The idea might never have
occurred to him before. No, no might about it: plainly, the idea never
had occurred to him before.
But she nodded. “I’m not a blockhead, you know. I could learn it.
And you taught from the end of the last war till the Nazis wouldn’t let
you do it any more. You liked doing it, too, and everybody always
said you were good at it.”
“What on earth would you do with Aramaic, dear?” Samuel Goldman
asked. “Or even Hebrew, come to that?”
“Beats me,” Sarah said cheerfully. “What’ll you do with them?”

Father blinked. Then he started to laugh. “To tell you the truth, I
don’t know, either. I just thought learning something new would help
me pass the time. Of course, pick-and-shovel work is liable to take
care of that.”
Sarah nodded. “If you’re able to go on with it yourself. If you’re not
too tired.”
“A bargain.” Her father held out one abused hand. She solemnly
clasped it. He hesitated, then went on, “I have found one possible
use for all this.”
“Oh?” Sarah couldn’t see any, not at first. Then she thought she
did: “You mean going to Palestine, if we ever got the chance?”
“Mm, that, too, for Hebrew—if we ever got the chance.” By the way
Father sounded, he didn’t think they would. “But that isn’t what I
meant. I was thinking that, if I asked God in one of His own
languages why He was doing this to us, I might possibly get an
answer.” With a sigh of regret—or exhaustion—he shook his head.
“Too much to hope for, isn’t it?”
She wished she could tell him no. But, almost of its own accord, her
head bobbed up and down. “I’m sorry, but I’m afraid it is.”

PETE MCGILL LISTENED TO MAX WEINSTEIN spit out singsong
syllables at Wang. Wang answered; damned if he didn’t. McGill
stared at Max. Like most of the Marines at the American Legation in
Peking, he’d picked up a few Chinese words and phrases himself,
most of them foul. But he’d never imagined he’d be able to sling the
lingo the way Max did. He’d never imagined he would want to, either.
“What are you going back and forth with him about?” he asked.

“Has he got a nice, clean sister?”
“Shit, McGill, drag your mind out of the gutter, why doncha?” Max
said. “Me and Wang, we were talking about Mao Tse-tung.”
“About who? About what?” For a second, the name was just another
singsong noise in Pete’s ears. Then it rang a bell. He looked
disgusted. He sounded that way, too, as he went on, “Jesus Christ
on a fuckin’ pogo stick! You go to all the trouble of learning that
dumb language, and what do you want to talk about? A lousy Red!
My aching back, man! Worry about the important stuff first.” As far
as he was a concerned, women and food topped the list, with
weapons running a strong third. He was a Marine’s Marine.
Nobody ever said Max couldn’t hold his own in brawling and
drinking. He wasn’t big, but he didn’t back away from anybody.
“Mao’s no lousy Red,” he said. “Mao’s the straight goods. If
anybody in this crappy country can give the Japs grief, Mao’s the
guy.”
“Chiang Kai-shek—” Pete McGill began.
“My ass,” Weinstein said, and then, “‘Scuse me. My ass, Corporal.
See, the difference is, Chiang’s all about Chiang, first, last, and
always. Mao’s about China instead. Ain’t that right, Wang?”
“What you say?” Wang wasn’t about to admit he understood
enough English to make sense of that. But Max started spouting
Chinese and waving his arms. Even in his own language, Wang
answered cautiously. Pete knew why: if Wang sounded like a Red,
he’d lose his cushy post at the Legation. He’d have to try to make
an honest living instead, if there was any such thing in China these
days.
“He’s not telling me everything he’s thinking,” Max complained.

“He’s smarter’n you are, that’s why,” Pete said, and explained his
own reasoning.
“Oh.” Max grunted. “Yeah, I bet you’re right. That’s just how the
reactionaries who run the Corps would respond to constructive,
class-centered criticism.”
“Give it a rest, willya?” Pete said, rolling his eyes. “I bet you even
sound like a Communist recruiting pamphlet when you’re getting
laid.” He did his best to imitate a pompous Red proselytizer: “The
triumph of the waddayacallit, the proletariat, cannot be denied—and
wiggle your tongue a little over to the left, sweetheart.”
He laughed himself silly. He thought that was funny whether Max did
or not. After a second, the Jewish Marine laughed, too. “Ah, fuck
you, McGill,” he said between chuckles. Then he got serious again.
“You ever hear of a hooker in the States or here who wasn’t from
the proletariat? Gals who can find any other way to make a living
…well, they do.”
“You get an extra charge out of feeling guilty when you screw ‘em?”
McGill asked. Max couldn’t claim he didn’t lay Chinese whores. If he
tried, Pete would call him a liar to his face, even if that started a
fight. Weinstein was one of the horniest Marines in Peking, and that
was saying something.
He gave Pete the finger. Aside from that, he didn’t try to answer.
Wang said something in Chinese. Max replied in the same
language. Pete didn’t know just what he said, but it sounded like a
phrase that was definitely raunchy. Whatever it was, Wang giggled.
Then he said something that set Max snickering.
“C’mon, man—give,” Pete urged.

“He says Mao’s the really horny son of a bitch,” Max answered.
“Mao’s gotta be up near fifty, but he likes his broads young
—eighteen, twenty, twenty-two, like that. Wang says he likes a
bunch of ‘em in bed with him all at the same time, too.”
“What a dirty old man!” Pete said. It wasn’t that that didn’t sound like
fun, and it wasn’t that he didn’t like young women, either. But he was
young himself. Imagining a Chinaman old enough to be his father in
the middle of an orgy made him want to puke, or at least to trade
places. After a few seconds, he asked, “Does Captain Horner know
about this shit?” Then he started laughing again, this time on
account of the captain’s name.
“Well, I never told him—I know that,” Max got out between snickers
of his own. He went back and forth with Wang in Chinese again.
“Wang says he never talked about it with any other round-eye. I
believe him. He doesn’t know enough English to do it, and how
many leathernecks speak Chinese?”
“You make one, and everybody knows you’re a queer duck,” McGill
said. Max flipped him off again. Ignoring that, Pete went on, “You
really ought to pass this stuff to the captain. He picks up as much
intelligence as he can on the Chinese and the Japs.”
“Yeah, yeah,” Max said.
Pete knew what that meant, or thought he did. “Listen, I don’t care if
you don’t feel like telling ‘cause it’ll make one of your precious Red
heroes look bad. But I don’t give a shit about that, so if you don’t
pass it on, I damn well will.”
“All right, already. Shut up,” Weinstein said.
Shut up Pete did—then. Three days later, he quietly went up to
Captain Horner. The officer listened, then nodded. “I heard some of

this from Weinstein, but not all of it,” he said. “It’s interesting. I’m not
sure what I can do with it—hell, I’m not sure what the United States
can do with it, assuming it’s true—but it is interesting.”
“Yes, sir.” Pete had hoped to get a bigger rise out of him. Maybe
what Horner had already heard from Max took the edge off of it.
And maybe the captain had other things on his mind. That didn’t
occur to Pete till the following Wednesday, when a bombshell hit the
American Legation: more than half the Marines in the garrison
would be transferred to Shanghai, effective immediately.
“There are many more foreigners—not just Americans, but also
Europeans—in Shanghai than in Peking,” Horner told the
assembled leathernecks. “We can be more useful there. Also,
Shanghai is a port, with direct connections to the United States.” He
paused, looking unhappy. “If the war between Japan and China
keeps getting worse, moving our men between here and the coast
may prove neither easy nor safe. Better to reduce our presence in
Peking now, when we don’t lose face by doing it under duress.”
That sounded to Pete as if the United States had to react to what
was going on around it—as if the country had little choice. He would
rather the USA dictated circumstances and didn’t have to respond
to them. Sometimes, though, you had to play the hand you were
dealt even if it was a bad one.
Captain Horner displayed a couple of typewritten sheets of names,
several columns’ worth on each. “I shall post these as soon as we
finish here,” he said. “If your name is on the list, pack your kit and
be ready to move tomorrow. The Japanese authorities have
promised there will be no difficulties as we march to the train
station.” He looked as if he were biting down on something nasty as
he spoke. That American Marines should need Japanese

permission to move through Peking—! But they did. At least they
had it. “Questions?” the captain asked.
Nobody had any. If the other Marines were anything like McGill, their
only question was whether their name had made the list. As soon as
Captain Horner posted it, everybody swarmed forward to see.
Pete’s was there. So were those of most of his buddies. “Misery
loves company,” he said, and he wasn’t joking. He had a day to boil
everything he’d picked up in Peking into a duffel’s worth of stuff.
Some of the residue he could mail back to his folks: jade and
enamelwork and the like. The rest…He set it out for the Marines
who were staying behind. “Take whatever you want and pitch the
rest,” he told them. He wasn’t the only guy saying that, either—not
even close. Somebody who stayed in Peking would hit the jackpot
with what other Marines thought was junk. Whether he’d get the
chance to enjoy it might be a different question.
Japanese and Chinese stared at the leathernecks marching
through the city. Some of the Chinamen pointed and exclaimed. The
Japs showed better discipline. “Eyes—front!” Sergeant Larry Koenig
bawled. McGill’s head went to the front. He kept looking around,
though. Koenig wouldn’t catch him at it—and he didn’t.
The train flew American flags and had the Stars and Stripes painted
on, and on top of, every car. No one wanted another incident like
the gunboat Panay’s misfortune. Pete knew damn well he didn’t. He
climbed onto the train. His corporal’s stripes assured him of a seat.
The whistle screeched. The train started to roll. In a day or so
…Shanghai. Well, it’ll be different, anyhow, Pete thought, and lit up
an Old Gold.

HIDEKI FUJITA WOULD HAVE LIKED to see better weather before
Japan unleashed its attack along the Ussuri. Other sergeants who’d
been stationed along this stretch of the border between Manchukuo
and the Soviet Union longer than he had laughed at him for saying
so. He would have bet even privates who’d been stationed here a
while laughed at him. They knew better than to do it where he could
catch them, though. He would have made them sorry. He couldn’t
thump other sergeants. As long as he didn’t do anything permanent,
he could knock privates around as he pleased.
The hell of it was, the laughing sergeants and even the laughing
privates might be right. This was the kind of place that had about
twenty minutes of summer every year, with a half hour of spring to
warn you it was coming and another half hour of fall to warn you it
was going. If the army waited for perfect weather in which to strike, it
might still be waiting in 1943.
This weather was a lot of things. Perfect it wasn’t, not unless you
were a polar bear. One blizzard after another howled down from
Siberia. The swirling snow did let the Japanese hide the men and
matériel they brought forward for the attack. Of course, it also made
bringing troops and guns and munitions forward that much harder.
But if you complained about every little thing…
Sergeant Fujita did wonder whether the horrible weather also let the
Russians bring up reinforcements and guns. When he mentioned
that to Lieutenant Hanafusa, the platoon commander indulged in
what seemed to be everybody’s favorite sport: he laughed at Fujita.
“Not likely, Sergeant!” Hanafusa said. “The Russians are too busy
fighting the Poles and the Germans to even worry about us.”
“Yes, sir,” Fujita said woodenly, and dropped the subject like a live
grenade. He wasn’t an educated man or anything. He couldn’t hold
his own in an argument against somebody who was. But he knew

his own country was up to its armpits in China. That didn’t keep
anybody from starting this new adventure. Russia was bigger than
Japan, a hell of a lot bigger. Why shouldn’t it also be able to pat its
head and rub its stomach at the same time?
After a while, snow started melting faster than it fell. More and more
bare ground appeared; white no longer cloaked the pines and firs
and spruces on both sides of the Ussuri. Here and there, flowers
started blooming. They sprouted with what struck Fujita as frantic
haste, as if they knew they wouldn’t have long to do whatever they
did. He wouldn’t have called this spring in Japan, but it looked to be
as much as the Ussuri country had to offer.
Lieutenant Hanafusa seemed delighted. “Spring comes early this
year!” he exclaimed. “Even the weather kami are on our side.”
No one told him he was wrong. Fujita only hoped the spirits in
charge of the weather knew what they were doing. No, not only. He
hoped the people in charge of the Kwantung Army knew what they
were doing, too.
Whenever he got the chance, he peered across the Ussuri with field
glasses. He rarely glimpsed Russians. Whatever the Red Army had
over there, it was concealed. The Japanese would find out when
they crossed the river—no sooner.
He kept hoping the people in charge of things would change their
minds. Hope was cheap—no, free. And one of the big reasons it
was free was that it was so unreliable. Men and guns kept right on
moving up toward the Ussuri. Fujita presumed planes did, too, but
the airstrips were farther back, so he didn’t see them.
Superior Private Shinjiro Hayashi said, “Please excuse me,
Sergeant-san, but do our superiors believe the Russians don’t know
we’re preparing an attack?” His education didn’t keep him from

we’re preparing an attack?” His education didn’t keep him from
seeing what also looked all too obvious to Fujita.
“If you think our superiors tell me what they believe, Hayashi, you’re
dumber than I give you credit for, and that isn’t easy,” Fujita
snapped. He quashed the university student without showing how
worried he was himself. He hoped he didn’t show it, anyhow. If
Hayashi had suspicions, he also had the common sense to keep
quiet about them.
The Japanese got a start hour—0530 on 1 April 1939. The last
couple of days dragged along. Everybody got ready and did his
best to make sure the Red Army went on thinking everything was
normal…if that was what the Red Army thought.
“When we detach Vladivostok from the Communists, the Emperor
will be proud of us,” Lieutenant Hanafusa told his platoon as they
waited for the barrage to begin. Sergeant Fujita imagined marching
into Vladivostok. He imagined the Emperor pinning a medal on him
with his own divine hand. He imagined his heart bursting in his chest
from pride.
The shelling opened right on time. The noise was titanic. The
Kwantung Army was firing everything it had, and firing as fast as it
could—so it seemed to Fujita, anyhow.
Hanafusa’s whistle shrilled. “Let’s go!” he said. They raced out of
the dugouts and ran for the boats waiting on the river. As soon as
they got in, got over, and got out, they could start fighting a more
ordinary kind of war.
Russian shells were already dropping on the Japanese side of the
Ussuri. The barrage hadn’t stunned all the Reds, then. Too bad,
even if Fujita hadn’t really believed it would. The Russians were just
too good at covering up and digging in. Well, no help for it. He

too good at covering up and digging in. Well, no help for it. He
jumped into his assigned boat. The whole squad made it in. He cut
the rope that tied the boat to the riverbank. “Come on!” he yelled,
and started paddling like a man possessed. The rest of the soldiers
paddled with him.
He didn’t want to go into the river. With the heavy pack on his back,
he’d sink like a stone. And the water that splashed up onto him said
it was bitterly cold even now. Russian machine guns on the far bank
yammered out death. Tracers snarled past the boat. Bullets kicked
up rows of splashes in the stream. One holed the boat, miraculously
without hitting anybody. Water jetted in.
“Stuff something into that!” Fujita shouted to the closest soldier. The
man did. Fujita didn’t see what. He didn’t care. As long as the leak
slowed, nobody would.
Mud grated under the boat’s keel. The Japanese soldiers jumped
out. They ran toward the closest machine-gun nest. The sooner
they knocked out those deadly toys, the longer they were likely to
live. One of them exploded into red mist fifty meters from the enemy
strongpoint. “Mines!” everybody else yelled. Fujita wanted to run
very fast and to stand very still, both at the same time. He might
have guessed the Russians would use mines to protect their
positions, but he didn’t have to like it.
A couple of more men went down before the Japanese chucked
grenades into the dugout through the firing slit. Even that didn’t do
for all the Russians. One fellow staggered out all bloody, his uniform
shredded. He raised his hands over his head. “Tovarishchi!” he
choked out. Fujita had heard that in Mongolia. Comrades!, it meant.
He shot the Russian in the face. “You can’t shoot at us and then
quit, bastard,” he said. From everything he’d heard, machine

gunners everywhere had a hard time giving up. And he might even
have done the Russian a favor. He was inclined to think so. What
greater disgrace than surrender was there?
Japanese soldiers stormed into the woods. They soon discovered
their artillery hadn’t done everything it might have. The Russians
had more machine guns farther back from the Ussuri. They had
snipers in camouflage smocks high up in the trees. They’d hidden
more mines to slow and to channel the Japanese advance. And they
had riflemen waiting in rear-facing foxholes invisible from the front,
men who stayed quiet till the Japanese went by and then shot them
in the back. Those fellows had as much trouble surrendering as
machine gunners did.
Airplanes dueled overhead. In among the trees, Fujita couldn’t see
how the aerial combat went. When bombs fell on the Red Army
positions ahead, he felt like cheering. When explosions came too
close to his own men, he swore. He thought the Russians were
taking more punishment than they were giving out, but he wasn’t
sure. Maybe he was just rooting for his own team.
Halfway through that mad afternoon, a runner told him, “You’re in
command of the platoon.”
“Huh?” he said. “What happened to Lieutenant Hanafusa?”
“He caught two in the chest,” the other soldier answered. “Maybe
he’ll make it, but…” A shrug said the odds were bad.
Fujita sure wouldn’t have wanted to catch two in the chest, or even
one in the toe. But if the platoon was his—at least till another officer
showed up—he had to do his best with it. They were still at least a
kilometer from the day’s planned stop line. He needed to find out
what was up with the other squads, too. “Forward!” he called. That
was never wrong.

was never wrong.

“M.oscow speaking,” the radio announced. It was 060 0. Sergei
Yaroslavsky drank a glass of sugared tea, hot from the samovar.
Pilots and navigators jammed the ready room at the Byelorussian
airstrip. A Stuka could have taken out the whole squadron with a
well-aimed bomb. The Nazis were sleeping late—or later, anyhow.
The Soviet flyers hungered for news, not least because it might tell
them what they would be doing next.
Smoke from almost as many papirosi as there were Red Air Force
officers in the ready room blued the air. Somebody got up and
made the radio louder. When he sat down, someone else patted
him on the back, as if to say Good job! Yes, they were all jumpy this
early morning.
“Comrades! Soviet citizens! Our motherland has been invaded!” the
news reader said solemnly. “Without provocation, without warning,
the Empire of Japan has launched a multipronged attack against
the Siberian districts of the Russian Federated Soviet Socialist

Republic of the peace-loving USSR. Severe fighting is reported in
several areas. All drives against the Trans-Siberian Railroad have
already been blunted or soon will be—so Red Army commanders in
the field have assured General Secretary Stalin. Under his
leadership, victory of the Soviet workers and peasants is assured.”
Sergei nodded. So did almost everybody else in the ready room.
Some officers, he was sure, had no doubts that what was coming
out of the radio was the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth. And if you did have doubts, looking as if you didn’t was even
more important. People couldn’t suspect what they didn’t see.
The announcer went on and on about towns bombed from the air,
atrocities on the ground, and numbers of Japanese soldiers killed.
Except for civilians, he said not a word about Soviet casualties.
There must have been some; chances were they were heavy.
Sergei was sure he wasn’t the only one to notice the omission.
Notice or not, the Red Air Force officers went right on nodding.
“Foreign Commissar Litvinov has pledged that this war against the
Japanese will have a result different from that of the Tsar’s corrupt
regime in 1905,” the newsreader finished. Sergei cheered and
clapped his hands. So did everyone else. Nobody could be proud of
Russia’s performance in the Russo-Japanese War.
After a pause, the announcer talked about fighting in the Soviet
west. “The rasputitsa has made movement difficult for both sides,”
he admitted. That wasn’t the smallest understatement Sergei had
ever heard. Eastern Poland and western Byelorussia were
somewhere between swamp and bog. The Germans still
occasionally flew off paved runways. The Red Air Force was
grounded.
“In western Europe, the fighting in France has reached what the

Germans call a decisive phase,” the fellow went on. “The French
government denies German claims that there is fighting inside the
Paris city limits. The French and English admit heavy fighting
continues east and northeast and even north of the French capital.
They state they still hope to halt and eventually repel the latest
German thrust, however.”
He spoke with an air of prissy disapproval, like an important man’s
plump wife talking about the facts of life. As far as the USSR was
concerned, the imperialists were hardly better than the Fascists. But
the Soviet Union and England and France had the same enemies at
the moment. Expedience could trump ideology.
And, sure enough, the newsreader sounded a little warmer when he
said, “British and French bombing of German territory seems to be
picking up—judging, at least, by the outraged bleats emanating
from Hen Goebbels. If one listens to the Germans, their opponents
take care to bomb only schoolhouses, orphanages, and hospitals.”
Sergei chuckled. Then he wondered why he was laughing. Yes,
German propaganda was pretty ham-fisted. But wasn’t what poured
out of Soviet radios just as clumsy?
That was something a good Soviet citizen wasn’t supposed to
notice. After all, didn’t Pravda mean Truth? Maybe only someone
who was serving in the military—maybe only someone serving in the
military who’d spent some time in a foreign country—would notice
the discrepancies. Once you spotted a few lies, though, you started
wondering what else you heard was malarkey.
Across the table, Anastas Mouradian sat there smoking papirosi
one after another. Did irony fill his liquid black eyes, or was that only
Sergei’s imagination? Anastas was going to get in trouble one of
these days. Anybody who looked ironic in the middle of the morning

news was bound to get noticed. The only surprise was, it had
already taken this long.
When the announcer shifted to increased production and
overfulfillment of the Five-Year Plan’s norms, the officers started to
relax. This was only fluff; they’d already got the meat from the news.
If you were careful, you could smile about this stuff without risking
too much.
At last, music replaced the news. “Two fronts,” remarked the flyer
from Siberia, the guy who came from a thousand kilometers north of
Irkutsk and laughed at the cold weather here. Quickly, Bogdan
Koroteyev added, “It’s not what we wanted, of course, but it’s what
we’ve got.”
“We’ll win anyhow,” Anastas Mouradian said. Sergei nodded
vigorously. He grinned at his crewmate. That was how you were
supposed to talk! He had his doubts whether Anastas meant it, but
what did that have to do with anything? The picture you showed the
outside world was more important (to your survival, anyhow) than
whatever you carried deep inside your heart.
“You’d better believe we will,” Lieutenant Colonel Borisov boomed.
“We can whip the little yellow monkeys with one hand tied behind
our back, and as soon as things are dry here we’ll show the Nazis
and Poles what we can do.”
No one argued with the squadron commander. For one thing, he
was the squadron commander. For another, what he said was
bound to be the Party line. Russia hadn’t beaten the Japanese the
last time around, but it was easy to blame that on Tsarist corruption,
as the radio announcer had. The Red Army had performed well in
recent border clashes.

Well, it had if you believed the news. Sergei wished he hadn’t
started wondering about what he heard on the radio and read in the
papers. It made him wonder about everything. Oh, well. What could
you do? Doubting the official stories might give you a better notion
of what was really going on. What was the phrase in the Bible? You
saw through a glass, darkly—that was it. In the USSR, that was likely
to be your closest approach to truth.
No enemy planes came overhead. If German or Polish bombers had
taken off from paved runways, they were harassing other Soviet
fields. And the SB-2s here couldn’t fly even if the pilots wanted to.
As with the winter blizzards, the flyers had nothing to do but sit
around and wait.
Somebody pulled out a bottle of vodka. It was early to start drinking.
Sergei thought so, anyhow. By the way Bogdan Koroteyev tilted
back the bottle, he started at this heathen hour all the time—or
maybe he hadn’t stopped from the night before. Sergei took a swig,
too, when the bottle came his way. Why not? You didn’t want to look
like a wet blanket or anything.

NEWSBOYS HAWKED THE VÖLKISCHER BEOBACHTER on every
street corner in Berlin. “Decisive battle in France!” they yelled.
DECISIVE BATTLE IN FRANCE! the newspaper headline shouted in
what had to be 144-point type. The photo under the headline
showed three Wehrmacht men, rifles in hand, leaping over some
obstacle in unison. Except for the weapons and helmets, they might
have been Olympic hurdlers. NOTHING CAN STOP OUR
INFANTRY! the subhead boasted.
“Paper, lady?” asked a towheaded kid of about fourteen. If the war
lasted long enough, he’d put on the same uniform the soldiers on

the front page were wearing.
See how you like it then, you little son of a bitch, Peggy Druce
thought. Aloud, all she said was, “Nein, danke.” In another block or
two, she knew she’d have to do it again.
Boys, old men, women…The only men of military age were cops,
soldiers and sailors on leave, and middle-aged fellows who’d been
too badly wounded in the last war to have to wear the uniform this
time around. She supposed some farmers and doctors and factory
workers were also exempt, but she didn’t see them. Whatever jobs
they had, they were busy doing them.
Another newsboy cried a different headline: “Soviet Russia now
encircled in a ring of steel!” Several people stopped to pay a few
pfennigs for his paper. The Germans like that idea. When they
thought about it, they didn’t have to think that the Reich was fighting
a two-front war.
Peggy wouldn’t have called a half-assed fight over here and what
might be a bigger, more serious one way the hell over there a ring
of steel. A ring with gaps so big would fall off your finger pretty damn
quick. But the Goebbels school of newspaper writing had
perpetrated far worse atrocities. Even a Hearst headline man might
have come up with this one.
A big, beefy cop came out of his tavern. He was in his fifties, with a
big mustache he’d probably grown before the last war and never
bothered to shave off. At the moment, he was using a prehensile
lower lip to suck beer foam out of it. He saw Peggy watching him do
it. To cover his embarrassment, he did just what she’d known he
would: he held out his hand and said, “Papieren, bitte!”
Out came her American passport. “Here,” she said. “I’m a neutral,
as you see.”

as you see.”
He scowled at the passport, and at her. “In the struggle against
Bolshevism and world Jewry, there can be no neutrals,” he
declared. Some Germans really did talk that way, the same as some
Communists really did parrot the Moscow line. Then he said, “Come
to the station with me, so my captain can decide what to do with
you.”
“To the station?” Peggy yelped. “You’ve got no right!”
“I am an officer of police,” the cop said importantly. “Of course I
have the right.” In Hitler’s Germany, he damn well did, too. He
touched the billy club on his belt. “Do you defy my authority?” I’ll
bust your head open if you do.
“No,” she said. “But let me see your papers, please. I will complain
to my embassy, and I want to know who you are.”
“Ha! Much good it will do you!” He showed her his ID willingly
enough. His name was Lorenz Müller. Peggy wrote it down. She
didn’t think the embassy would be able to do anything, either, but it
was the only card she had, so she played it with as much panache
as she could.
The station was only a couple of blocks away. Except for his uniform
and haircut, the desk sergeant looked like a desk sergeant back in
the States: fat and bored but wary, in other words. Müller spewed
out a stream of German, too fast for Peggy to follow it. The
sergeant listened, then turned to her. “What happened?” he asked.
“I said I was a neutral, and I am—I’m an American. And he got angry
at me and brought me here,” Peggy answered.
“An American? Let me see your passport, please.” When the desk

sergeant said please, he sounded as if he meant it. Peggy handed
him the passport. After studying it, he gave it back. “Yes, it is in
order. Danke schön. You may go.”
“What?” Lorenz Müller spluttered furiously—for about a second and
a half. Then, without raising his voice, the desk sergeant gave him
the most thorough reaming out Peggy had ever heard. She
understood maybe one word in three, but that was plenty. Müller
would’ve needed to get plopped into a specimen jar as soon as he
was born to be as congenitally idiotic as the sergeant claimed, and
he would have had to be 165 years old to have acquired all the
vices the sergeant imputed to him. By the time the man got done,
nothing was left of Müller but a demoralized puddle of goo on the
floor. So it seemed to Peggy, anyhow.
“I am sorry you ran into this…individual,” the desk sergeant told her.
She’d never dreamt the word could sound so filthy. “By all means
visit your embassy. A formal complaint will go into his record, which
is good.”
By then, she didn’t want to. She found herself pitying Müller, which
she wouldn’t have dreamt possible a few minutes earlier. As she
walked out of the station, the sergeant tore into the cop again
—something about getting the Reich in bad with an important
neutral power. Let’s hear it for the Red, White, and Blue, Peggy
thought. Yeah! Let’s!
In the end, she did go by the embassy. The underlings quickly
shunted her up to Constantine Jenkins, whose job probably
included dealing with obstreperous tourists. He heard her out and
then said, “Sounds like the sergeant did worse to this fellow than we
could manage in a month of Sundays.”
“Ain’t it the truth!” she said. “All the same, I do want you to make a

formal complaint.”
“Just remember that the official head of the Prussian police is
Hermann Göring,” Jenkins said. “He won’t listen. If he does listen, he
won’t care.”
“I understand all that,” Peggy said. “I still want to get it on the
record.”
“Okay. I’ll do it,” Jenkins promised. “Maybe it’ll keep some other
American from getting dragged to a police station because he runs
into a cop in a lousy mood.”
“That’d be good,” Peggy said. “See? I’m a public benefactor.” She’d
been a lot of things in her time, but that was a new one.
Undersecretary Jenkins gave her a look that would have been fishy
if not for the half-hidden amusement she spotted. “What you are is
a troublemaker,” he said accurately. “And you enjoy making trouble
for the Third Reich, too.”
“Who, me?” Peggy couldn’t possibly have been as innocent as she
sounded. And, as a matter of fact, she wasn’t.

HANS-ULRICH RUDEL GULPED FROM a big mug of steaming black
coffee. Plenty of pilots in the squadron were keeping themselves
going with benzedrine. Hans-Ulrich thought pills were even more
unnatural than alcohol. He didn’t want to use them. If he had to,
though, if it meant victory for the Reich…
And any one mission might. He knew that. They were so close, so
close. The radio kept going on about the Battle of France, the
decisive battle. If they could break through the enemy’s lines, he’d

never be able to form new ones. Maybe nobody in the whole battle
could see that as well as the flyers who went after the French
strongpoints.
He wondered whether the Allied fighter pilots had that same sense
of seeing the whole chessboard at once when they looked down
from five or six thousand meters. Or were they just trying to spot the
Stukas before the German dive-bombers roared down and blasted
another bridge or train or battery of 75s to hell and gone?
He shrugged. He had more immediate things to worry about. The
German attack had accomplished a lot. It had knocked the Low
Countries out of the war. It had pushed French and English ground
forces back from the middle of Belgium to the outskirts of Paris. The
enemy was on the ropes.
But he wasn’t out, worse luck. And, while German supply lines had
got longer and thinner, those of the Allies had contracted. The irony
facing the Germans was that success made further success harder.
Nobody on the other side could be in much doubt about what the
Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe had in mind any more, either. That
made planning easier for the forces in khaki.
Which didn’t mean the forces in Feldgrau couldn’t still win. HansUlrich was flying off an airstrip in northern France. Not long before,
it had been a French strip. A couple of smashed French fighters still
lay alongside the runway. German technicians had cannibalized
them for usable parts—they were just scrap metal now.
Off in the distance, artillery rumbled. Rudel hoped it came from his
own side, giving the Allies hell. Otherwise, French and English guns
would be pounding the Landsers. He thanked God he was no foot
soldier. He slept soft, and in a real bed—a cot, anyway. He ate well.
Most of the time, he was in no danger. The enemy could still kill him.

That came with any kind of military life. But he wouldn’t be hungry
and filthy and lousy when it happened, if it happened. He wasn’t
scared all the time, either.
Of course, when he was, he was about as scared as any human
being could be. That also held true for the infantry, though. It was
true for the ground pounders a lot more often than it was for him,
too.
Sergeant Dieselhorst came by, a cigarette dangling from the corner
of his mouth. He sketched a salute and asked, “Have they told you
what we’re doing next?”
“Not yet.” Hans-Ulrich pointed toward Major Bleyle’s tent. “As soon
as the boss lets me know, I’ll tell you.”
“If they haven’t hauled him off in the middle of the night,”
Dieselhorst remarked.
Hans-Ulrich looked around in all directions. Nobody stood close to
them, and nobody seemed to be paying any attention to what they
were saying. Even so, he wagged a finger at the rear gunner. “If you
aren’t careful, they’ll haul you off in the middle of the night,” he
warned.
“Yeah, I know.” Dieselhorst made a sour face. “That’s not what I
signed up for, dammit.”
“Neither did I,” Rudel said. “Who would have dreamt so many
traitors to the Vaterland were still running around loose?”
“Yeah. Who?” Dieselhorst said tonelessly. The cigarette twitched as
he eyed Hans-Ulrich. At last, almost against his better judgment, he
went on, “Who knows how many of them really are traitors, too?”

“What else would they be, if the government arrested them?” HansUlrich exclaimed.
Sergeant Dieselhorst’s cigarette jerked again. “That’s right. You’re
the milk drinker.” He might have been reminding himself.
“Sometimes people get arrested because they tell friends the truth.
Sometimes they get arrested because somebody with pull doesn’t
like them. And sometimes, by God, they get arrested for no reason
at all.”
“Dirty traitors tried to overthrow the Führer and stab us in the back
again!” Rudel said hotly. “Where would we be if they’d got away with
it?”
“Better off?” Albert Dieselhorst suggested. Then he held up his
hand. “And if you don’t care for that, go tell one of the pigdogs in a
black shirt about it. You’ll have a new gunner faster than you can
fart.”
“I don’t want a new gunner. I want—”
Before Hans-Ulrich could say what he wanted, Dieselhorst did it for
him: “You want a good little boy who never makes trouble and never
looks past the end of his nose unless he’s aiming at the enemy. You
want somebody just like you. I wish I were, Lieutenant—you can bet
your ass it’d make my life simpler. But I’ve got pals—better Germans
than I’ll ever be—in concentration camps or dead because those SS
bastards hauled ‘em out of bed in the middle of the night. This isn’t
Russia, dammit. This is a civilized country, or it’s supposed to be.”
Had a flyer Rudel didn’t know well said anything like that, he would
have reported the man to the SS without the least hesitation. But he
was alive not least because Sergeant Dieselhorst was good at what
he did. By any reasonable definition, Dieselhorst was a good
German, a patriotic German. If he was talking this way…

German, a patriotic German. If he was talking this way…
“You’re upset. You’re not yourself,” Hans-Ulrich said.
Dieselhorst stamped out the cigarette. “I’m not crazy, if that’s what
you’re trying to say. This whole war is a lot more fucked up than
you’ve figured out yet. And some of the people who’re running it—”
“Don’t say any more. I don’t want to listen to it,” Rudel said. “All I
have to do is fly. The same with you, too.”
“Christ, Lieutenant, flying is the easy part—any jerk with an airplane
can do that,” Dieselhorst said. “Trying to steer clear of the shit that
pours down from on high, that’s where the going gets tough.”
“Well, let’s see what we have to do, that’s all.” Hans-Ulrich was
grateful for the chance to turn away. As far as Sergeant Dieselhorst
was concerned, he was part of the shit that poured down from on
high. They’d gone through much too much together for Hans-Ulrich
to feel easy about turning in the sergeant now. He’d keep his mouth
shut—for the moment, anyway.
“Gisors,” Major Bleyle said a few minutes later. “They’re pushing
supplies through there to the front near Beauvais.” He whacked a
map with a pointer. “Gisors is about seventy kilometers northwest of
Paris. You’ll recognize it by the castle and the cathedral. Here are
some photos.” He passed around the reconnaissance shots.
“Railroad and highway. Pick your targets when we get there. We’ll
try to knock out both routes. Questions?” He waited. Nobody raised
a hand. “All right, then. Good luck, everybody.”
Rudel and Dieselhorst stuck to business as the pilot taxied the
Stuka out of the revetment and got it into the air. Hans-Ulrich felt
bruised by their earlier encounter. He wondered if Dieselhorst did,
too. One more thing he couldn’t ask…

Messerschmitt 109s accompanied the Ju-87s as they flew west.
Hans-Ulrich hadn’t seen a 110 for quite a while. The two-engined
fighters hadn’t lived up to expectations over the North Sea and
England. Maybe they’d gone back to the shop for retooling. Or
maybe the idea wasn’t as good as the high foreheads in the design
bureau thought it would be.
Antiaircraft fire came up as soon as they crossed the front. It was
heavy and alarmingly accurate. The Allies had more and more guns
shooting at the Luftwaffe. They knew what was at stake here as well
as the Germans did. French and British fighters attacked, too. The
109s darted away to take them on. Then more fighters jumped the
dive-bombers.
They were French machines, not too fast and not too heavily
armed. The 109s outclassed them. Stukas, unfortunately, didn’t.
Hans-Ulrich threw his all over the sky, trying to dodge the enemy
fighters. It was like trying to make a rhinoceros dance. Even when
you did it, the result was none too graceful. Sergeant Dieselhorst’s
machine gun chattered again and again.
“How you doing back there?” Rudel asked him.
“They haven’t shot me yet. That’s something, anyway,” the rear
gunner answered. “How are we doing?”
It was a fair question—several bullets had hit the Stuka. “Everything
shows green,” Hans-Ulrich said. A Ju-87 could take a lot of
punishment. The war had shown that the dive-bomber needed to.
Rudel’s head might have been on a swivel. “Now which way is
Gisors?” He’d done so much frantic jinking, he didn’t know north
from sauerkraut.
He spotted what he thought was the cathedral steeple a moment

before Major Bleyle’s voice dinned in his earphones: “Abort! Break
off! We’re losing too many planes!”
“Devil take me if I will,” Hans-Ulrich muttered to himself. To Sergeant
Dieselhorst, he added, “I have the target. I’m going into my dive.”
“What about Bleyle’s orders?”
“What about ‘em?” Rudel shoved the control column forward. The
Stuka’s nose went down. Acceleration slammed him back against
the armored seat. Damned if that wasn’t a truck column on the road.
Even if this wasn’t Gisors after all—plenty of little French towns had
cathedrals—he’d do some damage. He yanked at the bomb-release
lever, then pulled up for all he was worth.
In the rear seat, Sergeant Dieselhorst whooped. “What a fireworks
show! They must have been hauling ammo!”
“Gut. Sehr gut,” Hans-Ulrich said. “Officially, of course, I never heard
the major’s order to withdraw.”
“What order was that, sir?” Dieselhorst said innocently. Rudel
laughed, then grimaced. Ignoring orders, disobeying orders…Once
such things started, where did they stop? With trying to overthrow
the Führer?
But I helped the Reich more than I would have by obeying, he
thought. Maybe the conspirators had felt the same way. He
shrugged. He was loyal. He knew it. His superiors did, too.
Pretty soon, they’d refill the Stuka’s gas tank and bomb her up
again, and he and Dieselhorst would go off and try this again. And,
if they came back from that run, they’d do it one more time, and one
more after that, till the war was won and they didn’t have to worry
about it any more. As long as you looked at things the right way,

they were pretty simple.

SOMEBODY KICKED WILLI DERNEN IN the ribs. He grunted and
folded up on himself and tried to go back to sleep. After a few
seconds, the German marching boot thudded into him again. He
grunted once more, louder this time. Reluctantly, his eyes opened.
“There you go,” Corporal Baatz said. “Time to get moving again.”
“Your mother, Arno,” Dernen said. With great determination, he
screwed his eyes shut again.
Arno Baatz kicked him yet again, this time with real malice. He knew
just where to put a boot to make it hurt most. Willi wondered how he
knew. Had he learned in noncom school along with other bastardry,
or maybe from an SS interrogator? Or was it just natural talent? It
worked the same any which way. Willi sat up, clutching at the injured
part. As with Macbeth, Baatz had murdered sleep. “Get it in gear,”
he snapped. “Nobody put you on leave.”
Willi staggered to the bushes to take a leak. He was still yawning
when he came back. No one who hadn’t been through a campaign
had the faintest notion of how exhausting war was. Some men could
get kicked almost to death without waking up, let alone marching.
The mechanism simply wore down. Willi wasn’t there yet, but he
wasn’t far from that dreadful place.
Maybe breakfast would help. Then again, maybe it wouldn’t. He took
out his mess tin and advanced on the field kitchen. The cooks
spooned the tin full of slop. They called it porridge, but that gave it
too much credit. They took everything remotely edible they could
find and boiled it all together in a giant kettle. It ended up tasting the
way library paste smelled.

The coffee, by contrast was pretty good. That was because it wasn’t
Wehrmacht issue. Like the cigarettes the Landsers smoked, it was
the good stuff, foraged from French farms and villages—and, no
doubt, corpses. Wolfgang Storch already had a tin cup’s worth.
“You know you’re beat to shit when even this stuff won’t make your
heart turn over,” he said sadly.
“Tell me about it,” Willi agreed. He gulped the coffee anyway. He
certainly didn’t move slower with it inside him. If he moved any
slower, he’d be dead. The stink that fouled what should have been
a fine spring morning reminded him how easy dying was these days.
The Wehrmacht was still pushing forward, so what he smelled were
mostly dead Frenchmen. Dead Germans were no sweeter to the
nose, though.
Lieutenant Krantz took advantage of having most of his men
gathered together. “We have to get through,” the platoon
commander said earnestly. “We aren’t as far along as we ought to
be. The more we fall behind schedule, the better the chance we
give the enemy. If he stops us here, he can reinforce his positions
north of Paris. That wouldn’t be good—not a bit.”
A few of the soldiers eating breakfast and smoking managed weary
nods. Willi didn’t have the energy. He knew too damned well why
they hadn’t come farther or gone faster. Anybody with a gram of
sense did. The terrain in the Ardennes sucked, and they didn’t have
enough panzers along to punch through the Frenchmen and their
friends blocking the way west. Most of the goodies—and most of the
air support—went to the right wing, the one punching ahead
somewhere to the northwest. The plan had almost worked in the last
war. The High Command had decided it just needed to make the fist
a little bigger this time around.

And maybe the High Command knew what it was doing, and maybe
it had its head up it ass. One reason you fought wars was to find out
things like that.
Willi washed out his mess tin and stowed it on his belt. He put on his
helmet and picked up his Mauser. The rifle was just over four kilos;
it only seemed to weigh a tonne. He couldn’t even sling it. He had to
carry it instead—the French were too damned close.
As if to remind him of that, a Hotchkiss machine gun stuttered
awake. The malign rattle made his asshole pucker. Somewhere up
ahead lay Laon, which the Germans had been bombing and
shelling for days. How many French soldiers still crouched in the
ruins with rifles and machine guns and grenades—waiting?
“Come on,” Lieutenant Krantz said. “We’ve got to move up, and that
damned gun is in the way.”
Well, I’m awake now, Willi thought as he heaved himself to his feet.
Raw terror burned away exhaustion. And anybody who had to stalk
a well-sited machine gun—and this one would be, because the
Frenchies knew how to play the game, too—made an intimate
acquaintance with terror.
Farms in these parts were small. Stone fences separated one from
another. Poilus lurked behind the fences. Every so often, one of
them would pop up and shoot. Or a mortar team would lob a couple
of bombs from God knew where. Willi hated mortars. You couldn’t
hear the rounds coming till they got right on top of you, which was
just exactly too late.
“There!” Wolfgang pointed. The machine gun was firing from a
stone farmhouse’s window narrowed to a slit with more building
stones. Willi swore under his breath. This one would be a bitch and
a half to get rid of. The position was shielded against anything this

a half to get rid of. The position was shielded against anything this
side of an antitank gun.
Or maybe it wasn’t. Lieutenant Krantz spoke into the radio set a
lance-corporal got to lug. Fifteen minutes later, a fellow with a
couple of tanks on his back and a sinister-looking nozzle in his hand
came forward. Everyone shied away from him. He didn’t seem to
care, or maybe he was used to the response by now.
“Keep them busy, all right?” he said. The German soldiers nodded.
You wanted a flamethrower man on your side to succeed, but you
felt faintly guilty when he did. Nobody mourned a flamethrower man
who got roasted by his own hellish device, either. And Willi had
never heard of anyone who managed to surrender with that
apparatus on his back.
But that wasn’t his worry, except at one remove. He raised up from
behind a boulder and took a shot at the machine gun’s firing slit. He
ducked back down as soon as he’d pulled the trigger—and a good
thing, too, because the Hotchkiss promptly spat lead his way. The
froggies in the farmhouse were mighty alert. Willi hoped the
miserable bastard with the flamethrower had his life insurance paid
up.
One of his buddies groaned. Somebody else yelled for a medic. If
you poked a bear in its den, you were liable to get clawed. The last
thing Willi wanted was to rise up again and shoot at the slit. He did it
anyway, which proved what a strong thing Wehrmacht training was
—and, even more, how powerful was his fear of looking bad in front
of his squadmates. Without that fundamental fear, nobody could
have fought a war.
When he rose up one more time, the muzzle of the Hotchkiss was
pointing straight at him. Before the Frenchies could shoot him,

though, the flamethrower man used his toy. Foomp! Even across
several hundred meters, Willi heard the man-made dragon’s noise.
Fire engulfed the machine gun and the firing slit—and whoever had
the bad luck to be right behind them.
German soldiers whooped. Even so, nobody seemed especially
eager to show himself. Maybe more Frenchmen had dragged their
charred friends away from the trigger and were waiting to give
optimists or fools—assuming there was a difference—a nasty
surprise.
The flamethrower man solved that problem. He crawled right up to
the farmhouse, stuck his nozzle into the firing slit, and…Foomp! He
cocked his head to one side, as if listening. Then he waved. No
more trouble here, the gesture said.
Willi still wasn’t enthusiastic about standing up, but he did. The
soldiers trotted forward as smoke rose from the farmhouse. The
breeze came out of the west, as it commonly did. Willi’s nose
wrinkled. Along with woodsmoke, he caught the reek of burnt meat.
The flamethrower had done its job, all right.
Even so, nobody wanted much to do with the fellow who carried it.
He stood there, a little more smoke trailing from the snout of his
infernal machine. Again, he didn’t seem particularly surprised or
disappointed. Well, why would he? How many times had he seen
this same response by now?
Lieutenant Krantz pointed toward Laon. His officer’s whistle
squealed. “Come on!” he yelled. “Not far now! Follow me!”
An officer who said that made his troops want to do it. All the same,
the infantrymen hesitated. That rattling clatter out of the east,
getting louder now…“Panzers!” Willi said in delight. “Our panzers!”
He hadn’t seen many of them.

He hadn’t seen many of them.
These two little Panzer Is were no more than mobile machine-gun
nests. Better than a poke in the eye with a carrot, though. Both
panzer commanders stood up in their turrets. They waved to the
foot soldiers, who returned the compliment. “Come with us,” one of
the men in black coveralls shouted over engine noise. “Keep the
French pigdogs away.”
“And you keep them away from us,” Lieutenant Krantz said. The
panzer commander who’d spoken before nodded. Everybody
needed help now and then.
Willi loped along to the left of the panzers. A French machine gun
fired at them, which was stupid. Its bullets couldn’t hurt them. One of
the panzers crushed the sandbagged position, turning back and
forth and round and round on top of it to make sure nothing in there
survived.
Then a rifle of a sort Willi hadn’t heard before went off—a big boom
that would have set anyone’s teeth on edge. What followed wasn’t
the ping of a ricochet, either. That round punched clear on through
the baby panzer’s thin frontal armor. The machine kept going in a
straight line till it rammed a big oak and stopped. Driver’s hit, Willi
realized. German had antitank rifles, too, but you didn’t expect to
run up against one right after you’d finally picked up some armor.
War wasn’t what you expected. It was what you got. What the
surviving panzer got was out of there. Its crew knew that antitank
rifle could do for them, too. And it did. Two rounds into the engine
compartment turned the panzer into an immobile machine-gun nest.
“We go on regardless,” Lieutenant Krantz declared. Willi was still
willing to advance. Able? He’d just have to see.

Vaclav Jezek sprawled behind a chunk of chimney that a shell hit
had detached from a nearby house. He chambered another round
in his antitank rifle and waited. The crew of that disabled Panzer I
wouldn’t stay inside long. A hit from any kind of artillery would
mangle them and torch them at the same time. A couple of more hits
from the antitank rifle might set the tank on fire.
Sure enough, the commander clambered out of the turret. The
Czech was ready. Despite a muzzle brake and a padded stock, the
antitank rifle slammed his shoulder when he pulled the trigger. He’d
already seen that, although these 13mm armor-piercing rounds
weren’t designed to kill mere human beings, they did one hell of a
job. The German in black coveralls never knew what hit him. He
tumbled off the tank and lay still.
The driver was sneakier, or maybe smarter. He scuttled out and
kept the tank’s carcass between him and Jezek till he bolted for
some trees. Jezek shot at him, too, but missed. “Shit!” he said in
disgust.

Sergeant Halévy had dug himself a foxhole a few meters away, and
fronted it with bricks and stones from the ruined house. “Don’t get
yourself in an uproar,” he said. “You did what you were supposed to
do. Neither one of those tanks’ll bother us any more.”
“Fuck it,” Vaclav said. “I should have finished the other cocksucker,
too.”
“You can’t kill all of them by yourself,” the Jew said. “Remember,
you’ve got to leave some for me.”
“Heh,” Jezek said. Before the shooting started, he’d had doubts
about how well Jews would fight. Yeah, Hitler was giving them a hard
time, but they were still Jews, weren’t they? Once they had rifles in
their hands, they seemed to do just fine.
“You’d better dig in,” Halévy said. “If the tanks couldn’t do for us,
they’ll see how the artillery works.”
Without raising his head, Vaclav pulled the entrenching tool off his
belt and started scraping out a foxhole of his own. Halévy knew how
the Germans operated, all right. Even now, some junior officer with
a radio or a field telephone was probably talking to his regimental
HQ, telling the gunners at which map square the trouble lay. Fifteen
minutes of 105 fire ought to soften things up, he’d say.
And he’d get that artillery fire, too. The Germans were mighty damn
slick about such things. Vaclav had seen as much in
Czechoslovakia and here in France. They wouldn’t have been half
so dangerous if they weren’t so blasted good at what they did.
He wondered how good the defenders were. Czechs, Frenchmen,
Belgians driven back from their own country, Englishmen, Negro
troops from some colony or other…Whatever the French marshals
didn’t urgently need somewhere else seemed to be jammed into a

military sausage around Laon. Now if the casing didn’t split and spill
soldiers all over everywhere…
Sure as hell, here came the guns. Huddling in his scrape, Vaclav
wished it were twice as deep, or even four times. He hated artillery
more than anything else. German infantry made a fair fight. You
could even face panzers. His monster rifle helped even the odds.
But what could you do with artillerymen? Hope your own side’s guns
slaughtered them—that was all. It didn’t seem enough.
Most of the shells were long—not very long, but Jezek took
whatever he could get. If the troops a little farther back had hell
coming down on their heads, he didn’t. He could think of plenty of
times when the Nazis’ artillery had been right on target.
As soon as the shelling stopped, he came up out of his trench
ready to fight. The Germans counted on stunning their opponents,
at least for a little while. He kept an eye on the tank whose driver
he’d shot, the one that had slammed into the oak. If the Germans
could get the other driver into the machine, it might come back to
life. He wouldn’t have wanted to sit down on a seat soaked with his
predecessor’s blood, but war made you do all kinds of things you
didn’t want to.
“We can do it!” Sergeant Halévy shouted in Czech. Then he said
what was probably the same thing in French. In Czech, he went on,
“They’ve got to be at the end of their tether. If we stop them, they’re
really stopped.”
How could he know that? Nobody in the middle of a battle knew a
damn thing. It sure sounded good, though.
The Germans came forward. Vaclav had known they would. They
were bastards, but they were brave bastards. And they exposed

themselves as little as they could, which made them smart bastards.
No new panzers rolled up, for which he thanked the God in Whom
he had more and more trouble believing. He wasn’t thrilled about
using the antitank rifle as an oversized sniper’s piece—the fight with
the French quartermaster sergeant lingered painfully in his memory
—but he wasn’t thrilled about getting killed in his hole, either.
He could, literally, have killed elephants with this rifle. Knocking over
a few Nazis while they were still a long way off would make the rest
go to ground and not move forward so fast. It would also make him
wish some quartermaster sergeant could issue him a new shoulder,
but that was one more thing he’d worry about later.
It worked out just the way he’d hoped. That stood out, because it
happened so rarely in this war. He hit two Germans with four shots,
which slowed the rest of them down to an amazing degree. Then, of
course, the antitank rifle’s loud roar and big blast of fire from every
round drew the enemy’s concentrated attention. Ordinary Mausers
weren’t especially accurate out close to a kilometer off, but they
made him keep down. And he could have done without the machine
gun probing for him.
He really could have done without the mortar bombs that started
raining down on the Allied front. They did their best to make up for
the artillery’s poor performance. If one of them landed in your hole,
you were dead, because you couldn’t do anything about it.
But then, for a wonder, Allied—probably French—mortars closer to
Laon opened up on the Germans. So did a couple of batteries of
75s that had stayed quiet and hidden up till now. Those 75s were
weapons from the last war, and outclassed these days—which didn’t
mean they couldn’t kill you if they got the chance.

The German mortars quit firing, quite suddenly. Thus encouraged,
Vaclav stuck his head up—and plugged a soldier in field-gray who’d
made the mistake of coming out from behind the dead cow he’d
been using for cover. Jezek ducked down again right away. A good
thing, too, because nothing had taken out that German machine
gun. It sent a long, angry burst after him.
“Fuck me!” Sergeant Halévy called from his nearby hole. “Maybe we
really will stop these assholes.” He hadn’t believed it before, then.
Well, who could blame him? Vaclav hadn’t believed it, either. He still
wasn’t sure he did.
More French troops came up to join the ragtag and bobtail on the
front line. They wore khaki instead of the last war’s horizon blue, but
their uniforms still looked old-fashioned next to those the enemy
wore. Still and all, Jezek wasn’t inclined to fuss. Old-fashioned or
not, they were here and they were shooting at the Germans. What
more could you want?
And the Germans themselves weren’t what they had been when the
war broke out. They remained consummate professionals, and he’d
remembered a moment before how brave they were. But they were
also flesh and blood. They were every bit as worn out and ragged
as the Allied troops they faced. It was like the later rounds of a
championship prize fight. Both sides were bloodied, both half out on
their feet, but they kept slugging away. The prize here was even
sweeter than money. This fight was for power.
Damned if one of the German mortars didn’t start up again. Several
of the Frenchmen who’d just come up screamed like damned souls.
The butcher’s bill rose again. Thus encouraged, the men in fieldgray put in another attack.
Vaclav blew the head right off one of them with the antitank rifle.

And those Frenchmen had brought along several machine guns.
The German weapon might be better, but the Hotchkiss sufficed for
all ordinary purposes of slaughter. No infantry, no matter how good,
could advance in the face of fire like that. Sullenly, taking as many
of their wounded with them as they could, the Germans drew back.
When Vaclav reached for another clip, he discovered he’d run dry.
Well, he had a pistol, and at least one of those Frenchmen didn’t
need his rifle any more. Any which way, it didn’t look as if the
Wehrmacht could break into Laon.

ALISTAIR WALSH GAVE THE JUNIOR LIEUTENANT who brought the
order a hard look. He wanted to pretend he hadn’t heard it, or at
least hadn’t understood it. “We’re going to do what…sir?” he said.
Normally, that tone from a staff sergeant old enough to be his father
would have wilted a subaltern. But this youngster, just up to the
front from somewhere to let him keep his uniform clean and even
pressed, was strengthened by the Holy Writ from Headquarters.
“We’re going to counterattack,” he repeated brightly. “Can’t very
well let the Boches have their own way all the time, eh?”
“Counterattack with what?” Walsh demanded. “Christ on His cross,
it’s everything we can do”—and a little more besides, he added
silently—“to hang on where we are.”
“Forces to be committed include—” The subaltern rattled off several
regiments, British and French. “Those should be plenty to shift the
Germans hereabouts, don’t you think?”
“Well, they would be,” Walsh said.
He finally got a frown from the young officer. “What do you mean?

Aren’t they in this vicinity? This is where they are reported to be.”
“Oh, bloody hell,” Walsh muttered. He did his best to explain the
facts of life: “Well, sir, pieces of them are, you might say. What’s left
of them after the Boches spent these past weeks banging on them
with hammers and rocks.”
“What is your estimate of their relative combat effectiveness?” the
subaltern asked.
“Sir, I’m just a sergeant,” Walsh said. A staff sergeant who’d served
in the last war wasn’t just a sergeant. Walsh wondered whether the
second lieutenant understood that. About even money, he guessed.
With a mental sigh, he went on, “The only reason we haven’t come
to pieces, near as I can see, is that the Germans have it about as
bad as we do.” He had much more sympathy for the Fritzes in the
front line—poor bloody infantry just like him—than he did for the
starched, gormless creature standing before him now. No matter
what you thought, a single pip on each shoulder strap didn’t turn
you into God’s anointed.
“I…see,” the subaltern said slowly. Maybe he did have some notion
of Walsh’s station after all. Or maybe not: “I am here to deliver these
orders, not to adjust them. The attack will go in. Is that clear?”
“Sir, it’s bleeding madness,” Walsh said. The lieutenant only waited.
Walsh sighed and swore. God’s anointed or not, those pips meant
the youngster could break him like a rotten stick…after which the
attack would go in anyway. Sure as hell, sometimes the real enemy
wore the same uniform as you. A precise salute. “Yes, sir. I’ll tell the
men”: an equally precise reproach.
The subaltern’s cheeks reddened, as if he’d been slapped. He felt
that, all right. “I should be honored to go forward with you,” he said.

“Never mind, sir,” Walsh said wearily. “It’s not your fault. It’s just war.”
When Bill got the word, he grimaced and shrugged. “Well, we’re
fucked now.” In his broad northern accent, it came out fooked,
which only added to the point.
“It’s bloody murder, is what it is,” Nigel said. “I thought Field Marshal
Haig did his worst in the last war.” He had an education, all right—he
hadn’t been born when Haig was doing his worst.
Walsh, who’d lost a slightly older cousin in the mud at
Passchendaele, was inclined to agree. What could he do, though?
Not a damned thing except go forward as long as the German guns
let him. “No help for it,” he said. “Maybe the Germans really are on
the ropes.”
“Maybe babies really do come from under cabbage leaves, too,”
Nigel said. “Not likely, though.”
“We wouldn’t have so much fun makin’ ‘em if they did,” Bill said.
Walsh laughed at that. “Barrage should start at 1500. It’s”—he
paused to look at his watch—“1310 now. As soon as the guns let
up, we go forward—and may God go with us.”
On the Western Front in the last war, barrages sometimes lasted a
week. They were supposed to kill all the enemy soldiers and flatten
all the wire between the side doing the bombarding and a
breakthrough. Well, theory was wonderful. Long barrages warned
an attack was coming. They didn’t kill enough defenders, and the
ones who lived always got to their machine guns before the
attackers reached their line. One reason was that bombardments
didn’t flatten enough wire, but did tear up the ground so attacking
troops couldn’t move fast even when they most needed to.

Short and sweet worked better. Even in 1918, they’d figured that
out. Enough to shock, enough to wound, not enough to throw away
surprise. And then the infantry—and the tanks, when there were
tanks—would go in and clean up the mess. They had driven the
Germans back…in 1918.
Bill had a flask of applejack. He passed it around. Walsh took a nip
with the other waiting British soldiers. A little Dutch courage never
hurt anybody.
At 1500 on the dot, guns back in Paris opened up on the Germans
in the suburbs. German counterbattery fire started right away.
Walsh didn’t mind. As long as those 105s were shooting at the Allied
guns, they weren’t pounding the front lines.
After not quite half an hour, the bombardment stopped. Up and
down the front, officers’ whistles screeched. Walsh’s heart thuttered
in his chest. He was probably pale as paste. He told himself it
wouldn’t be so bad as going over the top. But he’d been a kid then.
Now he knew all the nasty things that could happen to you. He didn’t
want to get shot again. But he didn’t want to seem a coward in front
of his men, either.
“Let’s go,” he said hoarsely, and they went.
He’d barely crossed the street before a Mauser round cracked past
him. No, the bombardment hadn’t got everybody. How many Fritzes
waited in foxholes and shattered buildings? Too damned many—he
was sure of that.
He almost stumbled over a German crouching behind some rubble.
The man was trying to bandage one hand with the other. He threw
up both of them and bleated, “Kamerad!” when he saw Walsh.
Who would take care of prisoners? Anybody? Or would people

behind the lines shoot them to save themselves the bother? Walsh
knew such things happened. He bent down and threw the wounded
German’s rifle into some bushes. Gesturing with his own weapon,
he said, “Go on, go on.” What happened later wasn’t his worry.
“Danke!” the Fritz said. Off he went, both hands still above his head.
Walsh forgot about him as soon as he was gone. Plenty of other
Germans ahead, and not all the bastards would be bleeding. He
was glad to hear Bren guns banging away. They brought real
firepower right up to the front. You could carry one and fire from the
hip, or even from the shoulder.
You couldn’t move forward fast, not in this smashed suburb.
Wreckage slowed you down too much. Stubborn Germans lurking in
the wreckage were liable to slow you down for good. But the enemy
seemed less stubborn than usual. Maybe the counterattack had
surprised and dismayed them as much as it had Walsh. Stranger
things must have happened, though he couldn’t come up with one
offhand.
Something warned him to throw himself down behind a burnt-out
Citroën. Only a few seconds after he did, two Germans with
Schmeissers came out of what was left of a house. Walsh pulled the
pin on a grenade and rose up onto his knees to send it flying. A soft
thump, a guttural cry of alarm, and a bang, all packed close
together. Shrieks followed. Both Fritzes were down. Walsh shot them
one after the other to make sure they didn’t get up again. He
scurried forward and grabbed a submachine gun and as many clips
as the Germans carried. He slung his rifle so he could go forward
carrying the Schmeisser. At close quarters, he wanted to be able to
spray a lot of lead around.
Nigel came up and took the other German weapon. Walsh shared

ammunition with him. “This is going better than I expected,” the
youngster remarked.
“I was thinking the same thing.” In lieu of knocking wood, Walsh
rapped his knuckles on his own tin hat. Nigel managed a haggard
grin. Walsh gave him a Gitane—what he had—lit one of his own,
and tramped ahead again.
He found one German fast asleep on what had been some French
merchant’s bed. The artillery hadn’t wakened him; neither had the
Allied infantry assault. Walsh knew just how the poor bugger felt:
he’d felt that way himself. He carried away the German’s Mauser
and dropped it in the mud. He left the man alone. Without a
weapon, the fellow was no threat to anybody. And this would be
Allied ground by the time he woke up.
“Damned if it won’t,” Walsh said in tones of wonder. Maybe the
generals and even that snot-nosed subaltern knew what they were
up to after all. And if they did, wasn’t that the strangest thing of all?
Schmeisser at the ready, Walsh pressed on.

GERHARD ELSNER STRODE OVER TO Ludwig Rothe, who was
adding oil to his panzer’s crankcase. “Still running all right?” the
company CO asked anxiously—there’d been a lot of wear and tear
in the drive across the Low Countries and France.
But Rothe answered, “You bet, Captain.”
“Good. That’s what I want to hear,” Elsner said. “Tomorrow morning
we smash them. We go through south of Beauvais—between there
and a village called Alonne. Three or four kilometers of open
ground. We won’t have to fight in built-up places. That’s what they
tell me, anyhow.”

“Here’s hoping they’re right—whoever they are. That gets
expensive fast,” Rothe said. He turned to his driver and radioman.
“But we’ll be ready, right?”
Fritz Bittenfeld and Theo Hossbach both nodded. Then Theo
yawned. Everybody was beat. Ludwig was running on looted French
coffee and on pills he’d got from a medic. The pills were supposed
to keep a dead man going for a day and a half. Ludwig still wanted
to hole up somewhere and go to sleep, so he figured he was about
two steps worse off than dead.
“This is the breakthrough—the breakthrough,” Captain Elsner said.
He ignored the yawn. He was running on nerves and maybe drugs,
too, same as everyone else. “We crack the line, we pour through,
we wheel around behind Paris, and we make every old fart who
remembers 1914 sick-jealous of us. We can do it. We can, and we
will. Heil Hitler!” His right arm shot up and out.
“Heil Hitler!” Ludwig echoed. He imitated the Party salute. So did
Fritz and Theo. If Theo was a beat late—and he was—Captain
Elsner pretended not to see that, too. He was a good officer. He cut
some slack for any man who was good in the field, and Theo was.
As far as Ludwig was concerned, all the Heil-ing was a bunch of
Quatsch. But you’d get your head handed to you if you said that out
loud. The failed coup against the Führer left everybody jumpy.
Then Theo stopped being dreamy and asked a sharp question:
“When we go in, will we have infantry support?”
“As much of it as there is,” Captain Elsner answered.
Panzegrenadiers in half-tracks and trucks could keep up with armor.
Ordinary ground-pounders couldn’t. The panzers were supposed to
pierce the enemy lines and let the foot-bound infantry pour through

after them. Panzers helped infantry enormously. What they’d found
out in Czechoslovakia and here in the west, though, was that
infantry support also helped panzers. Foot soldiers moving up along
with the armor stopped plenty of unpleasant surprises.
The attack was scheduled for 0530. Morning gave attackers the
most daylight in which to do what they could. And morning also let
the Germans come out of the rising sun, which made them tougher
targets. Ludwig approved of that. He knew better than most people
how vulnerable his steel chariot was.
As in the attack on Czechoslovakia and the one that launched this
campaign, white tapes guided the panzers to their start line in the
dark. But this operation wouldn’t be anywhere near so strong.
Establishment strength for a panzer company was thirty-two
machines. They’d been pretty much up to snuff before. After this
grinding campaign across the Low Countries and France, Captain
Elsner’s company had thirteen runners, and it was in better shape
than a lot of others.
Well, the enemy’s taken his licks, too, Ludwig thought. All through
the advance, he’d driven past Dutch and Belgian and French and
British wreckage. He’d breathed air thick with the smells of death
and burnt rubber and scorched paint and hot iron. That stench was
in his coveralls now. Not even washing—not that he’d had much
chance to wash—got rid of it.
Behind them, the sky lightened. Gray and then blue spread west.
Rothe checked his watch. He’d synchronized it with the captain’s
before they moved up. Any second now…Now! The eastern horizon
blazed with light: not the sun, but muzzle flashes from the artillery
pounding the poilus and Tommies up ahead.
“Get a move on, Fritz!” Ludwig shouted into the speaking tube.

“Right you are, boss!” Bittenfeld put the panzer in gear. Tracks
rattling and clanking, it growled forward. Because of the crew’s
experience, they took point for their platoon. Ludwig could have
done without the honor. The point man commonly discovered
trouble by smashing his face against it.
French 75s and occasional 105s answered the German barrage.
Ludwig didn’t want to duck down into the turret so soon—he couldn’t
see out nearly so well. But, with fragments sparking off the panzer’s
side armor, he didn’t want to get sliced up, either. You acquired
experience by not getting killed.
“They’re alert today,” Fritz remarked.
“They would be,” Ludwig agreed gloomily.
“I’m going to miss the waitress at that estaminet in Fouquerolles.”
The driver cheerfully mangled the French word and the name of the
village where they’d stayed not long before. “Limber as an eel, she
was.”
“Can’t you think of anything but pussy?” Ludwig asked, knowing the
answer was no.
Machine-gun bullets clattered off the right side of the turret. “Guten
Morgen!” Theo said from his seat in the back of the fighting
compartment.
“I’ll give them a good morning, by God!” Rothe said, and then, to
Bittenfeld, “Panzer halt!”
“Halting,” Fritz responded, and the Panzer II shuddered to a stop.
Ludwig traversed the turret. There was the gun, still spitting bullets.
Machine gunners never learned. You could fire at a panzer till
everything turned blue, and you still wouldn’t penetrate the armor.

Of course, each crew that made the mistake lived to regret it—but
rarely for long.
Ludwig fired several rounds from the 20mm cannon. Those would
punch through whatever sandbags protected the machine gun.
They’d punch through the soldiers serving the gun, too. Sure as
hell, it shut up. Maybe the crew was lying low. More likely, those men
wouldn’t fire that piece again, not at a panzer and not at horribly
vulnerable infantrymen, either.
But Ludwig also saw a burning Panzer II a few hundred meters
away. A machine gun couldn’t do for one, but anything bigger damn
well could. And if an antitank-gun crew was drawing a bead on this
stopped panzer…“Get moving!” Ludwig yipped into the speaking
tube.
A 135-horsepower engine wasn’t supposed to be able to throw
8,900 kilos of steel around like a Bugatti at Le Mans. All the same,
when Fritz hit the gas the panzer jumped like one of the many
barmaids he’d goosed. Ludwig almost got thrown out of his seat.
He spied armored shapes up ahead. Their lines were rounder than
those of Germany’s slab-sided panzers. “Get on the horn, Theo,”
he said. “Tell the captain the enemy’s got armor in the
neighborhood.”
“I’m doing it,” Hossbach said, “but I bet he already knows.”
Elsner hadn’t known when he briefed the company. Maybe one of
those French machines had taken out the other Panzer II. They had
more armor and bigger guns than most German panzers—they
were easily a match for the Czechs’ tanks.
Well, we beat those, Rothe thought. The next interesting question
was what French armor was doing right at the Schwerpunkt here.

Was it dumb luck, or had the enemy guessed much too right? If the
breakthrough was going to happen, it would have to be a
breakthrough indeed. “Panzer halt!” Rothe commanded again.
He fired at the closest enemy panzer. Yes, he was outgunned, but
the 20mm could break a French char’s armored carapace. The
enemy machine caught fire. The crew bailed out. He gunned them
down with the coaxial machine gun as they ran for cover. An
ordinary machine gun was plenty to kill ordinary soldiers.
“Step on it, Fritz!” he said—not a command in the manual, but also
not one easy to mistake. Again, the driver did his best to pretend he
was at the Grand Prix.
That might have been why the antitank round slammed into the
engine and not the fighting compartment. All three crewmen
screamed “Scheisse!” at the same time. The panzer stopped. It
wouldn’t go anywhere again.
“Get out!” Ludwig yelled. The French or British gunners were bound
to be reloading. When they did…He didn’t want to be there.
Theo opened the hatch behind the turret. Then he slammed it shut
again. “Fire!” he said.
“Follow me out, then,” Rothe told him. He jumped out the turret
hatch on the side away from that deadly round.
Theo and Fritz both made it out after him. Bullets cracking past
them said out wasn’t the best place to be, not when it was in the
middle of a horribly bare field. Ludwig pointed to some bushes a
couple of hundred meters away. Crouching low, zigzagging, the
panzer crewmen ran for them. Not much of a hope, but some.
Ludwig didn’t understand why he crashed to the ground. Then he

did, because it started to hurt. He shrieked and clutched at himself.
It was a bad one. He knew that right away. Then he groaned again,
because Fritz went down, too. Damned if Theo didn’t make it to the
bushes. Sometimes you’d rather be lucky than good.
“Medic!” Ludwig cried. “Med—” Another bullet caught him, and he
didn’t hurt at all after that.

LUC HARCOURT CROUCHED IN A FOXHOLE. ALL around him,
French and German tanks blazed away at one another—and at any
poor damned infantrymen their crews happened to spot. He felt like
a tiny ratlike ancient mammal stuck in the middle of a horde of
battling dinosaurs. They might kill him without even realizing he was
there.
Well, he’d had at least some small share of revenge. When a
Panzer II started burning, the crew tried to make it out. They
escaped the tank, but he shot one of them before the bastard could
find a hole and pull it in after himself.
“How many of us did you get, you fucker?” he muttered as he
slapped a fresh clip onto his rifle. “You won’t get any more.”
He wanted to huddle there, not moving, not looking up, rolled into a
ball like a pillbug so he made as small a target as he could. He
wanted to, but he didn’t. If the Boches got this far, they’d kill him as
easily as if they were squashing a pillbug. What they said in training
turned out to be true: your best chance of living was acting like a
soldier. He’d thought it was a bunch of patriotic crap when he heard
it the first time, but no.
Speaking of crap, his drawers were clean—well, not dirty on
account of that, even if he couldn’t remember the last time he

changed them. He knew the modest pride of going through fear and
coming out the other side. He’d fouled himself before, yes, but not
now. Like Sergeant Demange, he was past that…till the next time
things got even worse than this, anyhow.
A French tank stopped not far from his hole. The commander
popped out of the cupola like a jack-in-the-box. He pointed at the
Germans. “Advance!” he yelled. “If we stop them here, we can
break them!” He disappeared again. The tank fired its cannon at,
well, something. Luc didn’t pop up himself to see what. The noise all
around was worse than loud. It made his brain want to explode out
through his ears.
The tank fired again. The machine gun in its bow also banged away
—again, Luc couldn’t see what it was shooting at. Then the tank
rumbled forward. The commander hadn’t urged him to do anything
the man wasn’t willing to try himself. Of course, he had twenty or
thirty millimeters of hardened steel shielding him from the
unpleasant outside world. But, to be fair, he also had worse things
aimed at him than foot soldiers were likely to face.
Still…Advance? It almost seemed a word in a foreign language. The
French Army and the BEF had got booted out of Belgium and
beaten back across northern France. They’d given up more ground
than their fathers (or, more often, their mourned uncles who hadn’t
lived to sire children) did in 1914. The Channel ports were lost,
which meant the Tommies would have a harder time getting into the
fight. Advance? After all that?
If they kept retreating, the Boches would win. Luc hated that
thought. The Germans were good at what they did. On the whole,
they fought clean—or no dirtier than the French. But so what? They
were still Boches.

He popped up and fired at some Germans. They dove for cover.
That was all he’d wanted—they were too far off for him to have
much chance of hitting them. But if they were hiding behind trees or
digging new scrapes for themselves, they weren’t advancing against
the defenders here.
Defenders? That wasn’t one tank commanded by a homicidal—or
suicidal—maniac. More French armor was going forward against the
troops in field-gray A crew of artillerymen manhandled a 37mm
antitank gun into a position a couple of hundred meters farther east
than it had held before. Even khaki-clad infantrymen—no great
swarm of them, but some—were climbing out of their holes and
trenches and moving toward the Boches.
Maybe twenty meters away, Sergeant Demange was watching the
show from his foxhole. He looked as astonished as Luc felt. He
looked almost astonished enough to let the Gitane fall out of his
mouth: almost, but not quite. He caught Luc’s eye. “This is
something you don’t see every day,” he shouted. He had to say it
two or three times before Luc understood.
“It sure is,” Luc answered. “Do you want to join the party?” Were he
a new fish, he would have waved—and given a German sniper or
machine gunner something to draw a bead on. He knew better now.
“Do I look that fucking stupid?” Demange said. Luc wanted to tell
him yes, but didn’t have the nerve. Sure as the devil, a sergeant
who scared you more than the Boches did wasn’t the worst thing to
have around. Then the veteran didn’t just surprise Luc: he
flabbergasted him. He scrambled from his foxhole and scurried
toward a crater a bursting 105 had dug. As soon as he got there, he
called, “Somebody’s got to do it, right?”
No doubt somebody did. Luc wondered whether one of the

somebodies had to be him. Regretfully, he decided he couldn’t hang
back when even a cold-blooded pragmatist like Demange was
advancing.
Coming up out of a hole felt like a snail shedding its shell and
turning into a slug. Luc grimaced and shook his head as he ran for
a crater of his own. No, he didn’t want to think about slugs, not when
the lead variety were snarling all over the place.
His dive into the shell hole would have won no worse than a bronze
at the last Olympics. Luc shook his head again. Those were Hitler’s
games, and to hell with him.
Time for another look around. German and French tanks burned
nearby. The thick black smoke that rose from them hid the field as
well as any barrage of smoke shells German artillery laid down.
Luc fired at another Boche. Again, he had no idea whether he hit
him. In a way, that wasn’t so bad. One less fellow on his conscience.
He wished that particular organ had a switch he could flick or a plug
he could pull. He didn’t like to think about all the things he’d done,
but sometimes they bubbled up whether he wanted them to or not.
“Come on!” Sergeant Demange rasped. “What did that American
Marine say in the last war? ‘Do you want to live forever?’”
Airplanes swooped low over the battlefield, machine guns
yammering. Luc had started to move, but froze again, not that that
would do him any good if those probing bullets found him.
They didn’t. The fighters weren’t Messerschmitts. They were English
Hurricanes, the roundels on their broad wings looking inside out to
Luc because the red was in the center instead of the blue. And they
were shooting up the Germans.

“See how you like it, cochons, salauds!” he whooped joyously. He’d
been on the other end of strafing too many times. Here as so many
other places in war, it was better to give than to receive. Now…Did
the English have anything like the Stuka, so they could really give
the Germans what-for?
They didn’t seem to, but maybe what they did have was enough.
The Boches enjoyed air attack no more than anybody else. Only a
few of them ran—they were good troops. But it took the starch out
of them just the same. And, a moment after the Hurricanes roared
away, a French tank knocked out what had to be the enemy’s
command vehicle. From then on, the few German tanks still moving
didn’t work together so smoothly any more.
“Come on!” Sergeant Demange said again, more urgently this time.
“It was like this in the summer of ‘18, too. If we hit ‘em a good lick,
we’ll get ‘em.” We’ll get ‘em—on les aura. The slogan from the last
war should have seemed as dated as ground-scraping skirts.
Somehow, it didn’t.
Luc scrambled out of the shell hole and trotted forward. Sure as
hell, the Germans were pulling back. Yes, they were pros. They had
rear guards with machine guns to make sure nobody chased them
hard. But they were pulling back. They weren’t breaking through.
They wouldn’t break through. And if they wouldn’t, they wouldn’t win
the war in a hurry. What would happen once they saw that, too? Luc
lit a Gauloise. That was their worry, not his. He kept on advancing.

About the Author

HARRY TURTLEDOVE is the award-winning author of the alternatehistory works The Man with the Iron Heart; The Guns of the South;
How Few Remain (winner of the Sidewise Award for Best Novel); the
Worldwar saga: In the Balance, Tilting the Balance, Upsetting the
Balance, and Striking the Balance; the Colonization books: Second
Contact, Down to Earth, and Aftershocks; the Great War epics:
American Front, Walk in Hell, and Breakthroughs; the American
Empire novels: Blood & Iron, The Center Cannot Hold, and
Victorious Opposition; and the Settling Accounts series: Return
Engagement, Drive to the East, The Grapple, and In at the Death.
Turtledove is married to fellow novelist Laura Frankos. They have
three daughters: Alison, Rachel, and Rebecca.

Hitler’s War is a work of fiction. All incidents and dialogue, and all
characters with the exception of some well-known historical and
public figures, are products of the author’s imagination and are not
to be construed as real. Where real-life historical or public figures
appear, the situations, incidents, and dialogues concerning those
persons are entirely fictional and are not intended to depict actual
events or to change the entirely fictional nature of the work. In all
other respects, any resemblance to persons living or dead is
entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2009 by Harry Turtledove

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Del Rey Books, an imprint of The
Random House Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc.,
New York.

DEL REY is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a
trademark of Random House, Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Turtledove, Harry.
Hitler’s war / Harry Turtledove.
p. cm.
eISBN: 978-0-345-51565-0
1. World War, 1939-1945—Fiction. I. Title.
PS3570.U76H58 2009
813’.54—dc22

2009021287

[http://www.delreybooks.com] www.delreybooks.com

v3.0

